JAMES ISLAND, SOUTH CAROLINA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-15 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2025-10, passed 11-20-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
OFFICIALS
Mayor and Council
Mayor - Frances “Brook” Lyon
Daniel Boles
Cynthia Mignano
Lewis Dodson
Darren “Troy” Mullinax
Town Administrator - Vacant
Town Clerk - Frances Simmons
Town Attorney - Brian Quisenberry
 
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
11.   ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Short titles
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of construction
   
10.07   Construction of revised ordinances
   
10.08   Conflicting provisions
   
10.09   Severability
   
10.10   Reference to other sections
   
10.11   Reference to offices
   
10.12   Errors and omissions
   
10.13   Official time
   
10.14   Ordinances repealed
   
10.15   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.16   Ordinances saved
   
10.17   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.18   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.19   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.20   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.21   Violations of rules, regulations, and orders
   
10.22   Liability of corporations and agents for violations
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 SHORT TITLES.
   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the municipality
as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters, and sections shall be known and designated as the
James Island Code, for which designation “codified ordinances” or “code” may be
substituted. Code, title, chapter, and section headings do not constitute any
part of the law as contained in the code.
   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters, and sections are to such
components of the code unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be
referred to and cited by its name, such as the “traffic code.” Sections may be
referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by the number, such as “§
10.01.”
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AND. May be read “or,” and “or” may be read “and,” if the sense requires it.
   ANOTHER. When used to designate the owner of property which is the subject
of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other owner of
property.
   CITY, TOWN, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, or MUNICIPALITY. When used in this code
shall denote the Town of James Island irrespective of its population or legal
classification.
   COUNCIL. The legislative authority of the municipality.
   COUNTY. County of Charleston, South Carolina.
   GOVERNOR. The Governor of South Carolina.
   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by themselves or
as a servant, agent, or employee.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   MUNICIPALITY. The Town of James Island, South Carolina.
   OATH. Includes affirmation and SWEAR includes affirm.
   OFFICERS OF MUNICIPALITY and OFFICIALS OF MUNICIPALITY. The officials,
boards, commissions, and departments of the municipality.
   OWNER. When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner, or
tenant in common of the whole or part of such property.
   PERSON. Includes an individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership, and association.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes money, goods, chattels, things in action, and
evidence of debt.
(S.C. Code § 15-1-40)
   PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
   PROPERTY. Includes both real and personal property.
(S.C. Code § 15-1-50)
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Includes boards of education; the municipal, county,
state, or federal government, its officers or an agency thereof; or any duly
authorized public official.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard,
body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place for the
sale of merchandise, public accommodation, or amusement.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
(S.C. Code § 15-1-30)
   REGISTERED MAIL. Includes certified mail, and CERTIFIED MAIL includes
registered mail.
   ROADWAY. That portion of a street improved, designed, or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel.
   S.C. CODE. The Code of Laws of South Carolina.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of the street between the curb line, or the lateral
lines of a roadway where there is no curb, and the adjacent property line
intended for the use of pedestrians.
   STATE. The State of South Carolina.
   STREET. Includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, highways,
viaducts, and all other public thoroughfares within the municipality.
   SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in
the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding a
written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of such
premises, alone or with others.
   WEEK. Seven consecutive days.
   WHOEVER. Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners; principals,
agents, and employees; and all officials, public or private.
   WRITTEN, or IN WRITING. Includes printing and any representation of words,
letters, symbols, or figures. When the written signature of any person is
required, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he
or she is unable to write, his or her proper mark.
   YEAR. Twelve consecutive months.
§ 10.06 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Generally. Words and phrases shall be read in context and construed
according to the rules of grammar and common usage. Words and phrases that have
acquired a technical or particular meaning, whether by legislative definition
or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.
   (B)   Number; gender; time. As used in the code, unless the context
otherwise requires:
      (1)   The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the
singular;
      (2)   Words of one gender include the other genders; and
      (3)   Words in the present tense include the future.
   (C)   Calendar; computation of time.
      (1)   The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by
excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day be Sunday, it
shall be excluded.
(SCRCP (6)(a))
      (2)   In all cases where the law requires any act to be done in a
reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, such REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall mean the time as only may be necessary for the prompt performance
of such duty or compliance with such notice.
   (D)   Authority. When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as
well be done by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be
construed to include such acts when done by an authorized agent.
   (E)   Joint authority. All words purporting to give joint authority to three
or more municipal officers or to other persons shall be construed as giving
such authority to a majority of the officers or other persons, unless it is
otherwise expressly declared in the law giving the authority or inconsistent
with state statute or other provisions.
   (F)   Exceptions. The rules of construction shall not apply to any law which
contains any express provision excluding such construction, or when the subject
matter or context of such law may be repugnant thereto.
§ 10.07 CONSTRUCTION OF REVISED ORDINANCES.
   The provisions of this code, so far as they are consistent with any prior
ordinances, shall be construed as continuations of the prior provisions and not
as new enactments.
§ 10.08 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   If the provisions of different codes, chapters, or sections of the codified
ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions bearing the
latest passage date shall prevail. If the conflicting provisions bear the same
passage date, the conflict shall be construed so as to be consistent with the
meaning or legal effect of the subject matter taken as a whole.
§ 10.09 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of a section of these codified ordinances or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of the section or
related sections which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end the provisions are severable.
§ 10.10 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
section or an inclusive group of sections, such reference shall be construed to
mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections included in such
reference.
   (B)   References in the code to action taken or authorized under designated
sections of the code include, in every case, action taken or authorized under
the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by this code.
   (C)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
such reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered, unless the subject
matter be changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.11 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of the town exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.12 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and such word
or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
such error.
§ 10.13 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be
the official time within this municipality for the transaction of all municipal
business.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.15 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.
§ 10.16 ORDINANCES SAVED.
   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the
legislative body, or a certain municipal officer or employee, to make
additional ordinances or regulations for the purpose of carrying out the intent
of the ordinance, all ordinances and regulations of a similar nature serving
such purpose effected prior to the codification and not inconsistent thereto,
shall remain in effect and are saved.
§ 10.17 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from
their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.18 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   The repeal of an ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any
provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued, any offense
committed, any penalty or punishment incurred, or any proceeding commenced
before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired.
   (B)   When an ordinance which repealed another shall itself be repealed, the
previous ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect.
§ 10.19 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   Any chapter, section, or division amended or added to this code by
ordinances passed subsequent to this code may be numbered in accordance with
the numbering system of this code and printed for inclusion herein. Any
chapter, section, or division repealed by subsequent ordinances may be excluded
from this code by omission from reprinted pages. Subsequent ordinances as
printed or omitted shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances
until the legislative body of the municipality shall adopt a new code of
ordinances.
   (B)   The following language should be used by the municipality to amend,
add, or repeal a chapter, section, or division:
      (1)   Section amended. “Section        of the James Island Code of
Ordinances is amended to read as follows: ...”
      (2)   Section added. “Section       , which reads as follows, is added to
and amends the James Island Code of Ordinances: ...”
      (3)   Section repealed. “Section        of the James Island Code of
Ordinances, which reads as follows, is repealed: ...”
§ 10.20 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section.
Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed
1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (S.C. Code § 16-11-700) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Ord. 20, passed 1-
1-1985).
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information.
Example:
§ 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
   This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
   Statutory reference:
      For provisions concerning the inspection of public records, see S.C. Code
§§ 30-1-10 et seq.
§ 10.21 VIOLATIONS OF RULES, REGULATIONS, AND ORDERS.
   Except as otherwise provided in this code, the violation of any rules,
regulations, or orders promulgated by any officer or agency of the municipality
under authority vested in him, her, or it by law, by the provisions of this
code, or by any ordinance or resolution, shall be unlawful.
§ 10.22 LIABILITY OF CORPORATIONS AND AGENTS FOR VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Any violation of this code by any officer, agent, or other person
acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or
organization while acting within the scope of his or her office or employment,
shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by such corporation,
association, or organization.
   (B)   Any officer, agent, or other person acting for, or employed by, any
corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and
liable to punishment as well as such corporation or unincorporated association
or organization for the violation by it of any provision of this code, where
such violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act, omission, or
order of any such person.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Where an act or omission is prohibited or declared unlawful in this
code of ordinances, and no penalty of fine or imprisonment is otherwise
provided, the offender shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned for not
more than 30 days. However, no penalty shall exceed the penalty provided by
state law for similar offenses. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day that a violation occurs or continues.
   (B)   In addition to the penalties provided in division (A) above, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this code shall be deemed a public nuisance, and may be abated by the
municipality as provided by law.
Statutory reference:
   Maximum penalty under state law, see S.C. Code § 5-7-30
CHAPTER 11: ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION
Section
   
11.01   Certificate of incorporation
§ 11.01 Certificate of incorporation
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/cbb4cb52629993459358aebd28fe6c3dee2bdafa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-868.png]
 
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   TOWN COUNCIL; MAYOR
      
31.   LAW ENFORCEMENT
      
32.   PURCHASING
      
33.   FINANCE, FEES AND TAXATION
CHAPTER 30: TOWN COUNCIL; MAYOR
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Compensation
   
30.02   Emergency powers of Mayor
Council Meetings
   
30.15   Purpose
   
30.16   Rules of order; quorum
   
30.17   Presiding officer
   
30.18   Council meetings; location; notice
   
30.19   Order of business; agenda
   
30.20   Communications
   
30.21   Electronic meetings during state of emergency
Elections
   
30.35   Election method
   
30.36   Terms of office
   
30.37   Nonpartisan election procedure
   
30.38   Board of Elections and Voter Registration
   
30.39   Regular and special elections; date; notice
   
30.40   Filing notice of candidacy
   
30.41   Filing fees
   
30.42   Time of taking office
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 COMPENSATION.
   (A)   The annual salary of the Mayor and the annual salary for each Council
member shall be as set by Council.
   (B)   No ordinance changing such salary shall become effective until the
date of the commencement of the terms of Council members elected at the next
general election following the change.
   (C)   The Mayor and Council members may also receive payment for actual
expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties.
   (D)   This section becomes effective upon adoption, but the Mayor and
members of Council shall only commence accruing salary after the municipal
election of July 29, 2014.
(Ord. 2014-02, passed 4-17-2014; Am. Ord. 2021- 03, passed 8-19-2021)
§ 30.02 EMERGENCY POWERS OF MAYOR.
   (A)   (1)   Upon the probable happening of any one or more of the following
events:
         (a)   The formation of any unruly mob;
         (b)   The existence of a state of war, whether declared or not, or of
any insurrection;
         (c)   The occurring of any tornado, hurricane, and cyclone, major
fire, earthquake, flood, or any other act of God or force which disrupts or
threatens to disrupt the normal activities of the community;
         (d)   The occurrence of multiple acts of arson or of any acts which
unduly alarm and/or threaten the public;
         (e)   The occurrence of a nuclear accident; and/or
         (f)   Any other threatening event designated as an emergency by
Council.
      (2)   The Mayor, or in his or her absence, the Mayor Pro Tem, may declare
a state of emergency to exist within the corporate limits of the town. The
state of emergency shall be declared by proclamation signed by the Mayor and
posted on the town’s official bulletin board(s) and shall be legally effective
immediately upon posting. The proclamation shall be in substantially the
following language:
         “It has been determined that (here state the event giving rise to the
emergency) has occurred within the corporate limits of the Town of James
Island, South Carolina, and that, accordingly, a state of emergency does, in
fact, exist. I, therefore, proclaim a state of emergency and invoke the
emergency powers of Mayor as defined by Ordinance 2015-03”.
   (B)   In the event a state of emergency is declared by the Mayor under the
provisions of division (A) of this section, the Mayor shall become vested with
the extraordinary powers listed below.
      (1)   To establish curfew to be effective, within the corporate limits;
      (2)   To prohibit the sale of gasoline, explosives, dynamite and/or any
other type of inflammable or explosive materials, firearms, or any other
materials or supplies or any component parts thereof which could readily be
utilized as weapons;
      (3)   To mobilize and deputize the emergency safety task force under the
command of the Mayor (or Mayor Pro Tem);
      (4)   To disperse assemblies or congregations of people;
      (5)   To suspend issuance of permits;
      (6)   To order evacuation of the town;
      (7)   To designate off-limit areas;
      (8)   To commandeer boats and vehicles;
      (9)   To restrict trade/commerce (tourism); and/or
      (10)   To make emergency purchases.
   (C)   If the Mayor is unavailable, the Mayor Pro-tem is vested in with the
extraordinary powers listed in division (B) of this section. If the Mayor and
the Mayor Pro-Tem are unavailable, then Council members shall be vested with
the extraordinary powers listed in division (B) of this section. The line of
succession is to be determined by the Mayor. In the absence of the official
line of succession, it is to be determined alphabetically according to each
member of Council’s last name.
(Ord. 2015-04, passed 3-19-2015)
COUNCIL MEETINGS
§ 30.15 PURPOSE.
   This subchapter establishes policies and procedures for the government and
administration of the town.
(Ord. 2012-07, passed 9-20-2012)
§ 30.16 RULES OF ORDER; QUORUM.
   (A)   Robert’s Rules adopted. Unless otherwise provided by law or modified
by these rules, the procedure of Council meetings shall be governed by Robert’s
Rules of Order. The Council has an obligation to the citizens to be clear and
simple in its procedures and in the consideration of the questions coming
before it.
   (B)   Quorum. With the current Town Council membership, a quorum shall be
three members. A simple majority shall be required to pass motions.
   (C)   Disclaimer. This adoption in no way obligates the town to enter into
an agreement with any parliamentary organization or “Robert’s Rules of Order”
businesses that may claim copyright and may offer rulings on procedural
questions.
(Ord. 2012-07, passed 9-20-2012)
§ 30.17 PRESIDING OFFICER.
   (A)   Mayor. The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Council and
shall be the recognized head of the town for all ceremonial purposes. The Mayor
shall have all duties and privileges of any Council member, and shall not be
denied any right or privilege by reason of the Mayor’s position as presiding
officer.
   (B)   Mayor Pro Tempore. At the first Council meeting following the election
of town officials, whenever a general municipal town election may occur, Town
Council shall elect one of their body as Mayor Pro Tempore to serve as such for
one year. Election of Mayor Pro Tempore will be held thereafter at a meeting of
Town Council annually or as soon as practicable after one has served as Mayor
Pro tempore for a one-year period, or at each November meeting of Council.
Mayor Pro Tempore shall act as Mayor during the absence or disability of the
Mayor; and if a vacancy occurs shall act as Mayor until a successor is duly
elected and qualified.
   (C)   Temporary Chair. In the event of the absence of the Mayor and the
Mayor Pro Tempore, the Town Clerk shall call the Council to order and call the
roll of the members. If a quorum is present, those Town Council present shall
elect, by majority vote, a Temporary Chair for that meeting. Should the Mayor
or Mayor Pro Tempore arrive, the Temporary Chair shall relinquish the chair
immediately upon the conclusion of the item of business then in consideration
before the Council. The Mayor may pass the gavel to the Mayor Pro Tempore, the
Town Administrator, or the Town Clerk, to facilitate the meeting.
   (D)   Privileges not affected by status. The presiding officer may move,
second, and debate from the chair, subject only to such limitations of debate
as are by these rules imposed on all members, and shall not be deprived of any
of the rights and privileges of a Council member by reason of acting as the
presiding officer.
(Ord. 2012-07, passed 9-20-2012; Am. Ord. 2019-10, passed 12-19-2019)
§ 30.18 COUNCIL MEETINGS; LOCATION; NOTICE.
   (A)   Special meetings and work sessions. Special meetings and work sessions
may be called by the Mayor or by request of any three members of Town Council.
Notice shall be given to each Council member, the Town Clerk and the business
office of each local newspaper, radio and television station which has on file
a written request for notice of special meetings, and may be delivered by mail,
by e-mail, by electronic facsimile (fax), or by personal delivery. Work
sessions should be scheduled at a time convenient for four of five members of
Council.
   (B)   Location of meetings. Council meetings shall be held within the
jurisdictional boundaries of the town. Work sessions may be held outside the
town limits, if no deliberations toward a decision are made. Inter-
jurisdictional meetings may be held outside town limits, but should be as close
to the town as practical. No Council meeting shall be held at any place where
discrimination on the basis of an individual’s race, religion, color, sex,
national origin, ethnicity, marital status, familial status, age, sex
orientation, source of income, or disability, is practiced. For this purpose,
meetings do not include visitations or attendance at any national, regional, or
state association to which the Town Council belongs.
   (C)   Notice of regular meetings, special meetings, work sessions, and
emergency meetings. Advance notice of at least 24 hours shall be provided for
all regular and special meetings, work sessions, and executive sessions. In the
case of an emergency meeting or when a state of emergency has been declared,
notice appropriate to the circumstances shall be provided and reasons
justifying the lack of 24-hour notice shall be included in the minutes of such
meeting. Notice for all meetings shall include written notice to all news media
which requested notice.
   (D)   Public attendance. Except for properly called executive sessions, all
meetings and work sessions shall be open to the public.
(Ord. 2012-07, passed 9-20-2012)
§ 30.19 ORDER OF BUSINESS; AGENDA.
   (A)   Order of business. The order of business for all regular meetings of
the Council shall be as follows; provided, however, that when it appears to be
in the best interest of the public, the order of business may be changed for
any single meeting by two-thirds vote.
      (1)   Opening exercises (includes call to order, prayer, pledge of
allegiance);
      (2)   Presentations by outside agencies ;
      (3)   Public hearings;
      (4)   Public comment;
      (5)   Consent agenda (includes approval of minutes and adoption of
routine resolutions);
      (6)   Special orders of business;
      (7)   Information reports and announcements (items that require no
Council action);
      (8)   Reports of town boards, commissions, and committees;
      (9)   Request for approval by Council;
      (10)   Resolutions;
      (11)   Ordinances receiving first reading;
      (12)   Ordinances receiving second reading;
      (13)   New business;
      (14)   Executive Session; and
      (15)   Announcements/closing comments.
   (B)   Agendas. The Town Clerk shall prepare an agenda for every regular and
special meeting. Agendas and informational material for regular meetings shall
be distributed to the Council and available to the public no later than the
Friday preceding the meeting.
   (C)   Placement of items on the agenda.
      (1)   The Mayor may place routine items and items referred by staff on
the agenda.
      (2)   Any item placed on the consent agenda or matter raised during
public comment may be placed on a subsequent agenda as a “special order of
business” upon majority vote of the Council.
      (3)   Any member of Town Council requesting that an item requiring a vote
or other action by Council, such as an ordinance or resolution, be placed on
the agenda must submit a written request, along with motions needed, not later
than close of business on the Thursday in the week preceding the Council
meeting.
   (D)   Public comment. Citizens of the town and other members of the public
may share their concerns and make comments about town affairs. While questions
may be asked, this is a time for Mayor, Council, and town officials to listen
rather than respond. The total time allotted will be 30 minutes and each
comment should be limited to three minutes. Council may extend these times by
two-thirds vote.
   (E)   Consent agenda. In order to expedite the Council’s business, the
approval of minutes and other routine agenda items shall be placed on the
consent agenda. All items on the consent agenda will be approved by a single
motion, unless the item is pulled for further consideration. Any item on the
consent agenda may be removed for separate consideration by any member of the
Council. For the purposes of this rule, SEPARATE CONSIDERATION means any
proposal to adopt a different course of action than that recommended in the
staff report, or a determination that debate on a proposed course of action is
deemed desirable, any questions to staff on any item, and any item where a
Council member must declare a conflict of interest.
   (F)   Information reports/announcements. The Town Administrator, other town
officials, the Mayor and members of Council may provide reports and make
announcements during this period. Members of Council may ask questions
regarding reports and other town business, including matters raised during
public comment.
   (G)   Special orders of business. Except otherwise required by these rules,
items removed from the consent agenda for separate consideration shall be
considered as a special order of business and part of the next scheduled item
on the agenda.
   (H)   Public hearings. Public hearings shall commence no later than 7:45
p.m., and any pending order of business shall be deferred until such time as
the hearing has concluded. Unless otherwise required by law or Council motion,
public hearings shall be scheduled by the Town Clerk, and may be rescheduled
without further action by the Council.
   (I)   New business. Items added to the agenda by the Town Administrator
after the Friday before the meeting but for which 24-hour public notification
has been provided may be considered by Council upon a majority vote. Items may
be added to the agenda at the meeting for reasons including concerns raised
during public comment or information reports by staff. Items may be added to
the agenda by the Mayor or members of the Council according to the following
rules:
      (1)   If the item is for discussion only and proposes no action by the
town or further vote by the Council at the meeting, it may be added by majority
vote.
      (2)   If the item requires action by the town, but not a final vote, such
that a final vote will occur at a future meeting that provides at least 24-hour
notice and an opportunity for public comment, it may be added by two-thirds
vote of the Council.
      (3)   If the item proposes action by the town and a vote by the Council
such that no further vote by the Council will be taken before the action is
carried out, so that there will be no 24-hour notice and opportunity for public
comment, it may be placed on the agenda by a two-thirds vote. The motion to add
the item to the agenda must state that the Council finds that an emergency or
an exigent circumstance exists if the item is not added to the agenda.
(Ord. 2012-07, passed 9-20-2012; Am. Ord. 2017-10, passed 9-21-2017; Am. Ord.
2019-12, passed 12-19-2019; Am. Ord. 2021-05, passed 8-19-2021)
§ 30.20 COMMUNICATIONS.
   (A)   All requests for staff action by any Council member shall be sent to
the Mayor.
   (B)   No Council member shall contact the Town Attorney to discuss an agenda
item after regular business hours unless an emergency has occurred.
(Ord. 2012-07, passed 9-20-2012)
§ 30.21 ELECTRONIC MEETINGS DURING STATE OF EMERGENCY.
   (A)   This section solely applies during a state of emergency in the Town of
James Island.
   (B)   Standards for electronic meetings. All Town Council, boards,
committees, advisory councils are hereby authorized to conduct public meetings
exclusively in electronic form, provided the medium for such meeting, whether
telephonic, broadcast video, computer-based, or other electronic media, or any
combination of these, and the conduct of the electronic meeting allows for the
following standards and practices to be met:
      (1)   At the beginning of any electronic meeting, the presiding officer
shall poll the members of Council, its boards, committees or advisory councils
to confirm attendance, and any member of the body attending by way of
electronic media shall be considered present for the purposes of constituting a
quorum.
      (2)   Throughout the duration of the electronic meeting, all members of
Council, its boards, committees and advisory councils as well as any officials
or staff required to speak at such meeting, must have the capability to be
heard at all times by a member of Council, boards, committees, advisory
councils, and by the general public.
      (3)   Any vote of Council, its boards, committees, and advisory councils
must be conducted by individual voice vote of the members who shall verbally
indicate their vote on any matter by stating “yea” or “nay.” All individual
votes shall be recorded by the Clerk, secretary, or presiding officers, as
appropriate.
      (4)   Meetings shall be recorded or minutes kept in the same manner as an
in-person meeting as required by the South Carolina Freedom of Information Act,
S.C. Code Title 30, Chapter 4, (the “Act”).
      (5)   All members of Council, boards, committees and advisory councils,
officials, staff, and presenters should identify themselves and be recognized
prior to speaking. Members of Council, boards, committees and advisory councils
shall strictly comply with the rules of Council, its boards, committees and
advisory councils as they relate to procedural matters in order to preserve
order and allow for the effectiveness of electronic meetings.
      (6)   Electronic executive sessions shall be permitted in accordance with
the provisions of the Act and Council, its boards, committees, and advisory
councils shall properly announce its reason for going into any executive
session in conformance with section 30-4-70 of the Act, S.C. Code § 30-4-70.
Upon the entry into any electronic executive session, meeting minutes need not
be kept and the electronic meeting utilized for such executive session may be
held by (i) a separate telephonic, broadcast video, computer-based, or other
electronic media, or any combination of these wherein the public shall not be
permitted to participate, or (ii) on the initial telephonic, broadcast video,
computer-based, or other electronic media, or any combination of these, with
the implementation of necessary participation or listening restrictions,
provided that in either instance all members of Council, its boards, committees
and advisory councils must have the capability to be heard at all times.
      (7)   Members of the public may submit written public comments which
shall be distributed to the members of the body which shall be attached to the
minutes. for regular meetings held electronically, the public should be able to
make public comments electronically when practically feasible. Conditional of
the safety of town staff and the public, members of the public should be able
to provide electronic comments to Town Council or its boards, commissions, and
advisory councils from Town Hall or other specified physical location.
(Ord. E-01-2020, passed 3-19-2020; Am. Ord. E-03-2020, passed 4-1-2020; Am.
Ord. E-03-2020, passed 7-16-2020; Am. Ord. 2020-10, passed 8-20-2020)
ELECTIONS
§ 30.35 ELECTION METHOD.
   Pursuant to S.C. Code § 5-15-20, the Mayor and the Council members shall be
elected in nonpartisan elections from the town at large.
(Ord. 2014-06, passed 5-15-2014)
§ 30.36 TERMS OF OFFICE.
   (A)   The office of Mayor shall be for a term of four years.
   (B)   The office of Town Council shall be for a term of four years.
(Ord. 2014-06, passed 5-15-2014)
§ 30.37 NONPARTISAN ELECTION PROCEDURE.
   All regular and special elections for Mayor and Council members shall be
conducted, and results will be determined, in accordance with the nonpartisan
plurality method authorized by S.C. Code § 5-15-61.
(Ord. 2014-06, passed 5-15-2014)
§ 30.38 BOARD OF ELECTIONS AND VOTER REGISTRATION.
   All regular and special elections shall be conducted by the Board of
Elections and Voter Registration.
(Ord. 2014-06, passed 5-15-2014)
§ 30.39 REGULAR AND SPECIAL ELECTIONS; DATE; NOTICE.
   (A)   After the election to be held on July 29, 2014, all subsequent regular
elections for the offices of Mayor and members of Council shall be held in odd-
numbered years on the first Tuesday in November.
   (B)   In the event of a tie vote for any office, a run-off election shall be
held two weeks following the election pursuant to S.C. Code § 5-15-125.
   (C)   Special elections to fill vacancies shall be held pursuant to S.C.
Code § 7-13-190.
   (D)   Two public notices of a regular or special election shall be given,
which shall include the location of polling places set by the Charleston Board
of Elections and Voters Registration. The first notice shall be given at least
60 days prior to the election. The second notice shall be given no later than
two weeks after the first notice.
(Ord. 2014-06, passed 5-15-2014)
§ 30.40 FILING NOTICE OF CANDIDACY.
   (A)   Each person offering as a candidate for election to any town office
shall do so by filing a notice of candidacy with the Town Clerk on the date 60
days prior to the date of the election in substantially the following form:
      I hereby file notice that I am a candidate for election to the office of
mayor/council member for the Town of James Island in the regular/special
municipal election to be held ___________. I certify that I am a qualified
elector and resident of the Town of James Island.
   (B)   No political affiliation shall be placed on the ballot for any
candidate.
(Ord. 2014-06, passed 5-15-2014)
§ 30.41 FILING FEES.
   (A)   The filing fee for the office of Mayor shall be $100 or 1% of the
salary for the office, whichever is greater.
   (B)   The filing fee for the office of Council member shall be $100 or 1% of
the salary for the office, whichever is greater.
(Ord. 2014-06, passed 5-15-2014)
§ 30.42 TIME OF TAKING OFFICE.
   The Mayor and members of Council who are elected in the general election
shall take office on the second Monday of January following the general
election and serve until the second Monday in January next following the
regularly scheduled general election for the office of the Mayor and for the
members of Council.
(Ord. 2014-06, passed 5-15-2014; Am. Ord. 2019-11, passed 12-19-2019; Am. Ord.
2025-01, passed 2-20-2025)
CHAPTER 31: LAW ENFORCEMENT
Section
   
31.01   Enforcement by County Sheriff
§ 31.01 ENFORCEMENT BY COUNTY SHERIFF.
   The Town Council hereby grants authority to the County Sheriff’s Office to
enforce all of its public safety and welfare ordinances.
(Ord. 2012-15, passed 11-15-2012)
CHAPTER 32: PURCHASING
Section
   
32.01   Equal opportunity policy
   
32.02   Purchasing agent designated; specified duties
   
32.03   Purchasing limitations and authorizations
   
32.04   Procurement levels, limitations, authorizations and process
   
32.05   Award to other than low bidder
   
32.06   Bid security deposits, and performance bonds, and materials testing
   
32.07   Protest procedures
   
32.08   Competitive bidding requirement; exceptions
   
32.09   Leases
   
32.10   Surplus stock
   
32.11   Purchases from petty cash
   
32.12   Gifts and rebates
   
32.13   Financial interest of town officials and employees
   
32.14   Cooperative and intergovernmental purchasing
   
32.15   Ownership and deposition of property
§ 32.01 EQUAL OPPORTUNITY POLICY.
   The town recognizes its responsibility to extend equal opportunity in
purchasing decisions and encompasses all qualified individuals and companies in
protected groups regardless of race, color, creed, religion, association,
national origin, sex, age, or disability. The town makes all purchasing
decisions in full compliance with the laws and regulations of both the United
States and the state. The town makes qualifying purchasing decisions in a
genuine, open, and competitive selection process which complies with equal
opportunity regulations. Qualifying purchasing decisions made by the town shall
be fair and neutral, provide opportunities to all persons or businesses
applying, and strive to prevent and eliminate discriminatory behavior and
practices by encouraging and utilizing nondiscriminatory practices in all
aspects of its decision making.
(Ord. 2012-16, passed 11-15-2012; Am. Ord. 2017-06, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 32.02 PURCHASING AGENT DESIGNATED; SPECIFIED DUTIES.
   (A)   There shall be an employee of the town designated by the Mayor as the
purchasing agent.
   (B)   The purchasing agent shall be responsible for:
      (1)   The purchase of supplies, materials, equipment, and contractual
services required by any office, department, or agency of the town government;
      (2)   Providing for the storage and distribution of supplies, materials,
and equipment purchased by the town and maintaining a perpetual inventory of
appropriate items;
      (3)   Establishing specifications, where deemed necessary and practical,
for such supplies, materials, equipment, and services. Such specifications
shall be as definite and clear as possible and shall encourage competition
wherever practical;
      (4)   Developing and maintaining an up-to-date list of qualified
suppliers, vendors, and service providers, including those who have requested
that their names be placed on a bidders list. The purchasing agent shall have
the authority to remove the names of vendors who have defaulted on their
quotations, attempted to defraud or mislead the town, or who have failed to
meet established requirements, including, but not limited to, established
quotations or delivery dates; and
      (5)   Obtaining the most competitive prices on all purchases, contracts,
and services.
(Ord. 2012-16, passed 11-15-2012; Am. Ord. 2017-06, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 32.03 PURCHASING LIMITATIONS AND AUTHORIZATIONS.
   (A)   To maximize the purchasing value of public funds, all procurements
should be competitive where practicable and serve the best interest of the
town.
   (B)   Upon verification of adequate funds, all supplies, equipment, and
contractual services, except as otherwise provided herein, shall be purchased
by the following methods:
      (1)   For purchases $0–$4,999. Requires no formal procurement, but the
purchaser will ensure that the lowest cost is sought when possible. Purchases
up to $4,999 must be approved by the Mayor, or his or her designee, provided
adequate budgeted funds are available for the purchase;
      (2)   For purchases $5,000–$9,999. Requires that a minimum of two written
competitive quotes be obtained with the award given to the lowest qualified
bidder. A written quote or informal bid can consist of a fax, email, mailings,
or any similar means. Purchases up to $9,999 must be approved by the Mayor, or
his or her designee provided adequate budgeted funds are available for the
purchase;
      (3)   For purchases $10,000–$24,999. Same requirements as in division (B)
(2) above, except purchases up to $24,999 must be approved by the Mayor and
Council, provided adequate budgeted funds are available for the purchase; and
      (4)   For purchases $25,000 and over.  Requires that purchases be made
through competitive sealed bids and advertised through local press
publications, the town’s website, and/or the South Carolina Business
Opportunities (SCBO) publication or other similar publications. Purchases over
$25,000 must be approved by the Mayor and Town Council.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit a higher level, more stringent
procurement method being used if it is determined by the purchaser that the
town’s best interest would be better served.
   (D)   Formal contracts shall be executed by the Mayor.
(Ord. 2019-13, passed 1-16-2020; Am. Ord. 2024-02, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 32.04 PROCUREMENT LEVELS, LIMITATIONS, AUTHORIZATIONS AND PROCESS.
   (A)   Small procurements ($0–$4,999).
      (1)   Small purchases must be approved by the Mayor or his or her
designee or a request may be submitted to the purchasing agent for procurement.
      (2)   Competition is encouraged and recommended to ensure fair and
reasonable pricing. Each purchasing authority shall use professional discretion
and good judgment in an effort to maximize the purchasing value of public
funds.
      (3)   Small procurements of less than $4,999. Requires no formal
procurement, but the purchaser will ensure that the lowest cost is sought when
possible. Small procurements must be approved by the purchasing agent and shall
be accomplished by purchase orders in accordance with town procedures and
forwarded to the Finance Officer, who shall from time to time audit small
procurements to validate that small purchases have been executed in accordance
with this chapter and entered into the town’s purchasing system.
   (B)   Competitive quotes ($5,000–$9,999).
      (1)   Competitive quotes may be obtained by the purchasing agent or his
or her designee, provided adequate budgeted funds are available for the
purchase.
      (2)   Offers shall be requested and obtained from at least two sources
whenever possible for purchases costing $5,000 or more but less than $10,000.
      (3)   All suppliers solicited shall be afforded a complete description
and requirements of the goods
and services being sought, including any special conditions of the expected
procurement.
      (4)   All suppliers solicited shall be afforded time considered
reasonable by the purchaser to provide written quotes. Written responses shall
be accepted by fax, email, mailings, or other similar means.
      (5)   All responses received shall be evaluated for price, quality,
acceptability as specified, availability of goods or services, past
performance, transportation, or any other special cost or factors which may
apply, including any special conditions or exceptions which the vendor may have
stipulated.
      (6)   In all cases, any discussions with vendors after responses have
been received shall be limited to clarification purposes. No discussion or
disclosure is permissible with any vendors in regard to offers received from
others.
      (7)   Negotiation is generally not applicable to competitive quotes
although negotiations may be conducted; however, should any negotiations result
in the change of the vendor’s ranking, then like negotiations shall be afforded
other vendors that have submitted a quote.
      (8)   Award shall be made to the most responsive, responsible vendor
whose response has been evaluated and determined to meet the requirements and
to be in the best interest of the town. The town shall reserve the right to
award to the most responsive, responsible vendor by units or projects,
whichever is in the best interest of the town.
      (9)   All such information received shall be considered confidential and
shall not be disclosed to any vendor prior to an award decision. If all offers
exceed the acceptable limits and it is determined that the goods or services
shall be reprocessed, then all offers shall be rejected and no cost or pricing
information shall be disclosed to any vendor for any reason.
      (10)   Procurements $5,000 or more but less than $10,000 shall be
accomplished by purchase orders in accordance with departmental procedures with
supporting quote documents and source justification and/or written rationale as
to why the procurement may be considered under other procurement methods as
provided elsewhere within this chapter, or more specifically, considered as a
sole source procurement, sensitive procurement, emergency procurement,
procurement through the state or one of its agencies, the county, or
procurement through an existing town contract. Supporting documentation should
include written quotes submitted by vendors and contain a clear, concise
statement as to the services and/or goods offered for the town’s consideration.
At a minimum, comparative pricing should be obtained from two sources whenever
possible which provide like or similar goods and/or services. Purchase orders
$5,000 or more but less than $10,000 must be approved by the Mayor or his or
her designee.
   (C)   Competitive quotes ($10,000–$24,999). All requirements outlined in
above division (B) apply to this purchasing level except that purchase orders
require approval by the Mayor and Town Council and a minimum of two written
quotes is required.
   (D)   Competitive sealed bids ($25,000 and over). 
      (1)   Purchases and/or contracts valued at $25,000 or greater shall be
awarded by competitive, sealed bidding, except as may be provided elsewhere in
this chapter.
      (2)   Full specifications and proposed vendors shall be provided to the
purchasing agent to solicit competitive sealed bids.
      (3)   An invitation for bids shall be advertised through local press
publications, the town’s website, and/or the South Carolina Business
Opportunities (SCBO) publication or other similar publications, not less than
ten days prior to the date set forth therein for the opening of bids.
      (4)   If necessary, all prospective bidders will be invited to a pre-bid
meeting with the purchasing agent to discuss the bid.
      (5)   All bids received prior to the opening shall be kept secure and
unopened. All bids, hand delivered, shall be initialed, indicating date and
time received. Any bids not properly identified and opened in error by the town
shall be resealed immediately and initialed by the recipient.
      (6)   Bids shall be opened publicly in the presence of one or more
witnesses at the time and place designated in the invitation for bids. The
amount of each bid and such other relevant information as may be specified in
the invitation, together with the name of each bidder, shall be tabulated. The
tabulation shall be open to public inspection at that time.
      (7)   It shall be the responsibility of all bidders to provide adequate
means whereby their bids, whether mailed or hand carried, shall be received by
the town no later than the day and time as stated in the invitation. Late bids
will not be accepted.
      (8)   Bids shall be accepted unconditionally without alteration or
correction, except as may be otherwise authorized in this chapter. The
invitation for bids shall set forth the evaluation criteria to be used. No
criteria may be used in the bid evaluation that is not set forth in the
invitation for bids.
      (9)   The town shall evaluate the bids solely using the information as
supplied by the bidder. However, it is sometimes determined that, for
clarification and more professional evaluation, additional information is
desirable and often necessary. Therefore, the town reserves the right to hold
discussions, review the specifications as believed offered, and request
clarification or any additional technical information which may provide a fair
and impartial evaluation by the town. All discussions shall be limited to the
bidder’s products, goods, or services, and no discussion shall be permitted
regarding bids by others.
      (10)   Corrections or withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids before
bid opening, withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids after award, or
cancellation of awards or contracts based on such bid mistakes may be permitted
by the town where appropriate.
      (11)   Any bidder may, by requesting in writing, withdraw his or her bid
for any reason prior to the scheduled bid opening.
      (12)   After bid opening, no changes in bid prices or other provisions or
bids prejudicial to the interest of the town or fair competition shall be
permitted.
      (13)   Properly worded and directed changes or corrections which do not
disclose the total amount may be made by any bidder if submitted to the town in
writing and received prior to bid opening. These changes or corrections may be
hand carried, mailed, emailed, or sent via fax transmission as follows.
         (a)   To increase or decrease a previously submitted lump sum amount,
the bidder shall instruct the town in the amount that his or her bid is to be
increased or decreased by.
         (b)   In case of a bid which contains multiple items, the bidder shall
instruct the town in the amount that he or she desires a given item to be
increased or reduced, thereby requesting that his or her total bid be increased
or decreased in an equal amount. Changes shall only reflect the amount of
adjustment. Changes received which indicate or divulge openly the total amount
bid shall not be accepted.
      (14)   The bid shall be awarded with reasonable promptness by notice to
the most responsible bidder whose bid meets the requirements and specifications
and any other award criteria set forth in the invitation for bids, and in the
best interest of the town. The town reserves the right to reject any or all
submittals.
      (15)   The Mayor may authorize the purchasing agent, in situations where
the town’s best interest precludes re-solicitation of work, goods, or services
of a reduced scope, to negotiate an adjustment in the bid price, including
change in the requirements, with the low, responsive, and responsible bidder.
      (16)   In the event that negotiations are unsuccessful in reaching a
price or scope of work or services which would be agreeable, the town, at its
discretion, may terminate all negotiations with the lowest bidder, and enter
new negotiations with the next lowest bidder, and likewise the third and
sequential bidder should negotiations not be productive with the second lowest
offerer.
      (17)   Should subsequent negotiations be conducted, all negotiations
shall be conducted in like manner as with the first bidder. No changes or
reductions in scope of work or services shall be permitted during negotiations
with sequential bidders that was not permitted or offered with the negotiations
with previous responsive bidders.
      (18)   In conducting negotiations, there must be no disclosure of any
information derived from bids submitted by competing bidders.
      (19)   Procurements costing more than $25,000 shall be accomplished by
purchase orders in accordance with departmental procedures with supporting bid
award documents and source justification and/or written rationale as to why the
procurement may be considered under other procurement methods as provided
elsewhere within this chapter, or more specifically, considered as a sole
source procurement, sensitive procurement, emergency procurement, procurement
through the state or one of its agencies, the county, or procurement through an
existing town contract. Supporting bid award documents should include bid
tabulation and a concise statement as to the reasons for the bid award
recommendation. Purchase orders more than $25,000 must be approved by the Mayor
and Town Council.
   (E)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit a higher level, more stringent
procurement method being used if it is determined by the purchaser that the
town's best interest would be better served.
   (F)   Written contracts shall be executed by the Mayor.
   (G)   The purchasing agent may also authorize any budgeted expenditure
approved in the current fiscal year’s budget, where the price does not exceed
the budget estimate by more than 10%, if the total expenditure does not exceed
$25,000. The purchasing agent shall submit a report of the expenditure to the
Town Council, which shall be entered in the minutes of Council.
(Ord. 2012-16, passed 11-15-2012; Am. Ord. 2017-06, passed 5-18-2017; Am. Ord.
2019-13, passed 1-16-2020; Am. Ord. 2024-02, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 32.05 AWARD TO OTHER THAN LOW BIDDER.
   (A)   When the award is not given to the lowest responsive bidder, a full
and complete list of the reasons therefor shall be filed with the purchase
order. Local vendor preference shall be given to those vendors who maintain a
principal place of business (owned or rented) within the town, as registered in
official documents filed with the Secretary of State, the Internal Revenue
Service, or State Tax Commission, and hold a valid town business license.
   (B)   In evaluating the price of eligible local vendor bids, the bids shall
be evaluated as though the prices proposed by local bidders were either 5%, 2%,
or 1% lower than actually proposed in accordance with the following schedule:
      (1)   If the local bidder submits a bid costing less than $2,500, the
business or individual shall be evaluated on a 5% reduction basis;
      (2)   If the local bidder submits a bid costing $25,000 or less, the
business or individual shall be evaluated on a 2% reduction basis; and
      (3)   For bids $25,000 or more, the evaluation shall be based on a 1%
reduction basis, but will not exceed a total reduction of more than $2,000.
   (C)   Nothing herein shall be construed as increasing or decreasing the
actual price of a bid and the resulting contract; this section is intended only
to be used for the purposes of comparing and evaluating bids and proposals for
products and services. Nothing within this section shall be construed to create
any private rights claims, or cause of action on behalf of any person,
including but not limited to bidders.
   (D)   The requirements of this section may be waived by the Mayor upon a
formal finding that the best interests of the town would not be served by
adhering to the provisions of this section.
   (E)   This section shall not apply in emergency or sensitive procurement
situations.
   (F)   The town reserves the right to specify brand names based on its
experience, current inventory, and other qualifications specified by the user
department.
(Ord. 2012-16, passed 11-15-2012; Am. Ord. 2017-06, passed 5-18-2017; Am. Ord.
2019-13, passed 1-16-2020; Am. Ord. 2024-02, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 32.06   BID SECURITY DEPOSITS, AND PERFORMANCE BONDS, AND MATERIALS TESTING.
   (A)   Bid security deposits and/or performance bonds, including but not
limited to performance, payment, labor, material, and/or warranty may be
required as described in the invitation to bid as determined by the town.
   (B)   The purchasing agent shall have the authority to require chemical and
physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries, which
are reasonably necessary to determine their quality and conformance with the
specifications. In the performance of such tests, the purchasing agent shall
have the authority to make use of laboratory facilities of any agency of the
town or any outside laboratory. (Ord. 2012-16, passed 11-15-2012; Am. Ord.
2017-06, passed 5-18-2017; Am. Ord. 2019-13, passed 1-16-2020; Am. Ord. 2024-
02, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 32.07 PROTEST PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Any bidder who is aggrieved in connection with the solicitation or
award of a bid shall protest to the purchasing agent within five days from the
time of award of the goods or services being grieved. Such protest must be in
writing and must set forth all specific grounds for the protest in detail and
explain the factual and legal basis for each issue raised. No additional issues
may be raised or will be considered thereafter.
   (B)   The purchasing agent shall conduct all inquiries deemed necessary, and
a hearing may be held at the discretion of the purchasing agent. The purchasing
agent shall issue a decision in writing within ten days. The bid award or
contract shall not be stayed pending any such protest.
   (C)   Any protestant aggrieved by the decision of the purchasing agent may
appeal to Town Council within five days of the purchasing agent’s decision. No
new issues may be raised on such appeal. The Mayor shall issue the decision of
the Town Council within 15 days of their hearing. The decision shall state the
reason for the action taken. A decision rendered under this section shall be
final and conclusive unless fraudulent.
   (D)   The appeal decision of the Mayor and the Town Council is the final
administrative review and the decision of the town, and such decision can be
appealed to the circuit courts of the state.
(Ord. 2012-16, passed 11-15-2012; Am. Ord. 2017-06, passed 5-18-2017; Am. Ord.
2019-13, passed 1-16-2020; Am. Ord. 2024-02, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 32.08 COMPETITIVE BIDDING REQUIREMENT; EXCEPTIONS.
   Competitive quotes or bidding are required on all purchases exceeding$5,000
with the following exceptions.
   (A)   Emergency procurement. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
procedure, the Mayor, or his or her designee, may make an emergency procurement
when there exists a threat to public health, welfare or safety under emergency
conditions or where normal daily operations are affected. The purchasing
limits, as provided for in the informal purchase procedures in division (C) and
(D) of this section, will be suspended during the emergency situation to
prevent an interruption or delay in emergency response. The maximum amount of
the emergency purchase will be limited to $150,000 for such emergency purpose.
Purchases above this amount will require approval by a quorum of Town Council.
   (B)   Procurement without competitive bidding. The state and its agencies,
including South Carolina counties and municipalities, write numerous
indefinite-delivery-type contracts yearly with manufacturers, service
providers, and contractors for regional and/or nationwide items, construction
projects, or services. In all cases, town procurement of equipment, goods, or
services may be made from suppliers which have current contracts in place
through the state or one of its agencies, including South Carolina counties or
municipalities, without seeking competitive bids or proposals. Also, the Mayor,
or his or her designee, may procure from the private or public sector supplies,
services, or construction items whenever such procurement may be obtained at or
below the price established by the state purchasing division for an identical
item.
   (C)   Sole source procurement. The purchase has been classified as sole
source procurement and documentation, approved by the Mayor, or his or her
designee, filed with any quote received by the vendor. As much competition
amongst providers shall be sought when possible. A purchase may be classified
as sole source for one of the following reasons:
      (1)   There is only one vendor that can provide a specific product or
service;
      (2)   A brand or make has been established for conformity, to standardize
equipment, improve maintenance, or other similar reasons; or
      (3)   A specific brand has been established based on reviews, testing,
availability, ability to work with other owned products, or other similar
reasons.
   (D)   Sensitive procurement. When it is determined that unlimited
solicitation may jeopardize sensitive operations, a limited solicitation shall
be authorized, with such competition as practicable under the circumstances.
Unless otherwise authorized by the Mayor, sensitive procurement shall be
limited to legal services, financial services to include financial advisors and
rate consultants, or administrative services. In all such cases, the Mayor must
approve prior to ordering.
   (E)   Professional services (architect/engineering services). It is the
policy of the town to publicly announce all requirements for architect-engineer
and surveying services and to negotiate such contracts based on demonstrated
competence and qualifications at fair and reasonable prices. In the procurement
of architect-engineer and land surveying services, the Mayor or his or her
designee shall request firms to submit a statement of qualifications and
performance data.
      (1)   The Mayor or his or her designee shall conduct discussions with no
less than three firms, except when fewer respond. The firm deemed most
qualified to provide the required services will be selected.
      (2)   The selection shall be made in order of preference, based on
criteria established and published by the purchasing agent. The Mayor or his or
her designee shall negotiate with the highest qualified firm for architect-
engineer or land surveying services at a compensation which is considered to be
fair and reasonable to the town. In making this decision, the Mayor or his or
her designee shall take into account the established value, the scope, the
complexity, and the professional nature of the services to be rendered.
      (3)   If the Mayor or his or her designee is unable to negotiate a
satisfactory contract with the firm considered to be most qualified,
negotiations with that firm shall be formally terminated. The Mayor or his or
her designee and a member of Council shall then undertake negotiations with the
second most qualified firm. Failing accord with the second most qualified firm,
the Mayor or his or her designee shall then undertake negotiations with the
third most qualified firm. If the Mayor or his or her designee is unable to
negotiate a contract with any of the selected firms, the Mayor or his or her
designee may select additional firms in order of their competence and
qualifications, and the Mayor or his or her designee shall continue
negotiations in accordance with this section until an agreement is reached.
   (F)   Professional services. The competitive procurement requirements of
this section shall not apply to the procurement of professional services where
the person employed is customarily employed on a fee basis rather than by
competitive bidding such as legal, medical, consulting, real estate, appraiser,
auditor or accounting services. The Mayor, or his or her designee, may secure
professional services by direct negotiation and selection, taking into account
the type of services required, the proximity (location) of the professional
providing the services, the capability of the professional to produce the
required service within a reasonable time, past performance, and the ability to
meet budget requirements. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit the town
from using competitive procurement procedures for professional services if the
Mayor or his or her designee determines it is in the best interests of the
town.
   (G)   An expenditure may be made without competitive procurement when an
item is required for trial use or testing. The Mayor, or his or her designee,
shall set forth such determination and the basis therefor in a written
statement submitted to Town Council and entered in the minutes of Council.
   (H)   The following types of expenditures are exempt from the competitive
procurement requirements of this section;
      (1)   Utilities including gas, electric, water, and sewer;
      (2)   Information technology;
      (3)   Maintenance and repairs to vehicles, machinery or equipment
necessary in providing an essential town service;
      (4)   Maintenance or service contracts which are made with the
manufacturer or authorized service agent;
      (5)   Replacement parts of existing equipment supplied by the original
equipment manufacturer or authorized dealer;
      (6)   Routine, recurring purchases (e.g., office supplies);
      (7)   Works of art and holiday decorations for public display; and
      (8)   Competitive bidding including, but not limited to, reverse
auctions.
(Ord. 2012-16, passed 11-15-2012; Ord. 2015-03, passed 3-19-2015; Am. Ord.
2017-06, passed 5-18-2017; Am. Ord. 2019-13, passed 1-16-2020; Am. Ord. 2024-
02, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 32.09 LEASES.
   (A)   Lease defined. A LEASE is a contract for the use of equipment or other
supplies, or real property under which title does not pass to the town unless
there is a purchase option where title may pass to the town at some future
time. A lease period shall be restricted to a maximum of 20 years.
   (B)   Entering a lease. A lease may be entered into provided if:
      (1)   It is in the best interest of the town;
      (2)   All conditions for renewal and costs of termination are set forth
in the lease;
      (3)   The lease is not used to circumvent normal procurement procedures;
and
      (4)   The lease contains appropriate non-appropriation language.
   (C)   Lease with purchase option. A purchase option in a lease may be
exercised only if the lease containing the purchase option was awarded under
competitive sealed bidding or competitive sealed proposal, or the leased supply
or facility is the only supply or facility that can meet the town’s
requirements as determined in writing by the purchasing agent.
   (D)   Option provisions. When a contract is to contain an option for
renewal, extension, or purchase, notice of such provision shall be included in
the solicitation. Exercise of the option is always at the town’s discretion
only and not subject to agreement or acceptance by the contractor.
(Ord. 2012-16, passed 11-15-2012; Am. Ord. 2017-06, passed 5-18-2017; Am. Ord.
2019-13, passed 1-16-2020; Am. Ord. 2024-02, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 32.10 SURPLUS STOCK.
   (A)   The Mayor or his or her designee shall have authority to transfer
stock or surplus supplies to other offices, departments, or agencies of the
town.
   (B)   If the Mayor or his or her designee deems it appropriate, surplus
stock and supplies can be given to charity or to another public entity;
provided, however, that prior approval is given by the Town Administrator for
items with an estimated value up to $1,000 and by the Mayor for items with an
estimated value up to $10,000; and by Council for items with an estimated value
over $10,000, but less than $25,000.
   (C)   If deemed appropriate and approved by the Mayor and Town Council,
surplus stock and supplies may be auctioned off to the highest bidder at an
auction that has been noticed in a paper of general circulation. Written bids
will be accepted on all surplus stock and supplies that have been listed in the
auction bulletin. The auction bulletin shall describe each item and its fair
market value. Employees, Council members, and their immediate families are not
eligible to bid on auction items.
   (D)   Surplus stock and supplies with an estimated value exceeding $25,000
shall be sold by formal written contract to the highest responsible bidder,
after due notice inviting proposals.
(Ord. 2012-16, passed 11-15-2012; Am. Ord. 2017-06, passed 5-18-2017; Am. Ord.
2019-13, passed 1-16-2020; Am. Ord. 2024-02, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 32.11 PURCHASES FROM PETTY CASH.
   A purchase of less than $100 may be made from petty cash if approved by the
Mayor or Town Administrator.
(Ord. 2012-16, passed 11-15-2012; Am. Ord. 2017-06, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 32.12 GIFTS AND REBATES.
   The purchasing agent and every officer and employee of the town are
expressly prohibited from accepting, directly or indirectly, from any person,
company, firm, or corporation to which any purchase order or contract is or
might be awarded, any rebate, gift, money, or anything of value whatsoever,
except where given for the use and benefit of the town.
(Ord. 2012-16, passed 11-15-2012; Am. Ord. 2017-06, passed 5-18-2017)
§ 32.13 FINANCIAL INTEREST OF TOWN OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES.
   No member of the Town Council or any officer or employee of the town shall
have a financial interest in any contract or in the sale to the town or to a
contractor supplying the town of any land or rights or interests in any land,
material, supplies, or services; except when a majority of the Town Council
determines such exception is in the best interest of the town, provided that no
Council member whose interest is involved shall vote on the question. Any
violation of this section shall constitute malfeasance in office and any
officer or employee of the town found guilty thereof shall thereby forfeit his
or her office or position. A violation of this section by a person or
corporation contracting with the town shall render the contract voidable by the
Mayor.
(Ord. 2012-16, passed 11-15-2012; Am. Ord. 2017-06, passed 5-18-2017; Am. Ord.
2019-13, passed 1-16-2020; Am. Ord. 2024-02, passed 3-21-2024)
§ 32.14 COOPERATIVE AND INTERGOVERNMENTAL PURCHASING.
   The Mayor or his or her designee shall have the authority to join with other
governmental units in cooperative purchasing plans and to enter into purchase
contracts with other governmental units without the formality of publication
and receiving competitive bids as otherwise required in this chapter when the
best interest of the town would be served thereby. The Mayor or his or her
designee also is given authority to make purchases of supplies and equipment
through the property division of the State Budget and Control Board, without
the formality of publication and receiving competitive bids as otherwise
required in this chapter.
(Ord. 2017-06, passed 5-18-2017; Am. Ord. 2019-13, passed 1-16-2020; Am. Ord.
2024-02, passed 3-21-2024)
32.15 OWNERSHIP AND DEPOSITION OF PROPERTY.
   As prescribed in S.C. Code Section 5-7-40, the town may:
   (A)   Own and possess property within and without the corporate limits,
real, personal or mixed, without limitation, through passing a resolution at a
public meeting; and
   (B)   Sell, alien, convey, lease or otherwise dispose of personal property
and in the case of a sale, alienation, conveyance, lease or other disposition
of real or mixed property, through passing an ordinance at a public meeting.
(Ord. 2017-06, passed 5-18-2017; Am. Ord. 2019-13, passed 1-16-2020; Am. Ord.
2024-02, passed 3-21-2024)
CHAPTER 33: FINANCE, FEES AND TAXATION
Section
Fees
   
33.01   Delinquent debt fee
   
33.02   Pinckney Park Pavilion rental fee
Hospitality Tax
   
33.15   Hospitality tax
   
33.16   Imposition of tax
   
33.17   Exemption
   
33.18   Collection; return
   
33.19   Payment; late payment penalty
   
33.20   Hospitality tax account
   
33.21   Inspections; audits; administration
Taxation Generally
   
33.30   Annual levy and assessment
   
33.31   Liability for taxes
   
33.32   Tax lien on property
   
33.33   To whom taxes are payable; due date
   
33.34   Nonpayment of taxes
 
   
33.99   Penalty
FEES
§ 33.01 DELINQUENT DEBT FEE.
   (A)   The town hereby imposes an administrative fee in the amount of $25 to
defray its internal costs of collection for any delinquent debts that are
sought to be collected pursuant to the provisions of the Setoff Debt Collection
Act, S.C. §§ 12-56-10 et seq. This fee is hereby declared to be a collection
cost that arises by operation of law and shall be added to the delinquent debt
and recovered from the debtor.
   (B)   The town hereby declares that the administrative fee charged by the
Municipal Association of South Carolina is also a collection cost to the town,
which shall also be added to the delinquent debt and recovered from the debtor.
(Ord. 2015-11, passed 10-15-2015)
§ 33.02 PINCKNEY PARK PAVILION RENTAL FEE.
   (A)   Reservations are to be made in half- day, five-hour increments:
      (1)   8:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m.
      (2)   2:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m.
   (B)   Flat fee of $150.
   (C)   Civic/institutional non-profit groups may be waived.
   (D)   Rental fees will be used to cover the cost of cleaning, operating, and
maintaining the facility.
(Ord. 2020-08, passed 7-16-2020)
HOSPITALITY TAX
§ 33.15 HOSPITALITY TAX.
   There is hereby imposed a tax of 2% on the gross proceeds of the sale of
prepared meals and beverages sold in or by establishments in the town, or sales
of prepared meals, food and beverages sold in establishments licensed for on-
premises consumption of alcoholic beverages, beer or wine, and is imposed on
every person engaged in the business of furnishing food and beverage services,
whether dine in or take out, within the town.
(Ord. 2016-02, passed 5-19-2016)
§ 33.16 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   The local hospitality tax shall be imposed on all food and beverages
prepared or modified by restaurants, food trucks, convenience stores, fast food
outlets, grocery stores, catered services, or other establishments within the
town.
(Ord. 2016-02, passed 5-19-2016)
§ 33.17 EXEMPTION.
   The local hospitality tax does not apply to organizations exempt from paying
state sales tax.
(Ord. 2016-02, passed 5-19-2016)
§ 33.18 COLLECTION; RETURN.
   The tax imposed by this subchapter shall be collected from any patron when
he or she tenders payment for his or her meal or beverage and shall be held in
trust for the benefit of the town until the same is paid to Charleston County
as hereinafter provided. Every establishment subject to this hospitality tax
shall, on the date or within the time period hereinafter prescribed, make a
return to Charleston County on forms provided by the office delineating gross
proceeds of sales of prepared meals, food, and beverages for the previous
month, and the amount of the tax due by virtue of this chapter.
(Ord. 2016-02, passed 5-19-2016) Penalty, see §
33.99
§ 33.19 PAYMENT; LATE PAYMENT PENALTY.
   At the time the return is filed, the full amount of any tax due hereunder
shall be remitted. Taxes and required reports shall be submitted to Charleston
County by the twentieth day of the month and shall cover sales of the previous
month. Any taxes not timely remitted and late from one to 30 days shall be
subject to a penalty of 5%. Any taxes not timely remitted and late for more
than 30 days shall be subject to a penalty of 25%. The failure to collect from
patrons the tax imposed by this subchapter shall not relieve any establishment
subject to this subchapter from make the required remittance.
(Ord. 2016-02, passed 5-19-2016)
§ 33.20 HOSPITALITY TAX ACCOUNT.
   There is hereby established a special account, to be known as the
hospitality tax account, into which all monies remitted to the town under this
subchapter shall be deposited. Any and all funds in the hospitality tax
account, including any interest as may accrue thereon, shall be used only for
the purposes as set forth in S.C. Code § 6-1-730, as the same may from time to
time be amended.
(Ord. 2016-02, passed 5-19-2016)
§ 33.21 INSPECTIONS; AUDIT; ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Inspections; audit. For the purposes of enforcing the provisions of
this subchapter, the Business License Official, Code Enforcement Officer, or
other authorized agent of the town is empowered to enter upon the premises of
any person or entity subject to this subchapter and to make inspections, and
examine and audit books and records. It shall be unlawful for any person or
entity to fail or refuse to make available the necessary books and records
during normal business hours upon 24 hours’ written notice. In the event an
audit reveals that false information has been filed by the remitter, the cost
of the audit shall be added to the correct amount of fees determined to be due.
The Business License Official, Code Enforcement Officer, or other authorized
agent of the town may make systematic inspections of all establishments within
the town to ensure compliance with this chapter. Records of inspections shall
not be deemed public records.
   (B)   Administration. The Business License Official shall administer the
provisions of this subchapter and make reasonable regulations relating to its
administration.
(Ord. 2016-02, passed 5-19-2016)
TAXATION GENERALLY
§ 33.30 ANNUAL LEVY AND ASSESSMENT.
   (A)   The Council may levy by budget ordinance an annual millage for the
general purposes of the town. Any increase in the millage from the previous
year shall not exceed the limit permitted by law. Council may levy by budget
ordinance an annual millage for payments for real property purchased using a
lease-purchase agreement and the maintenance of a reserve fund. Council shall
levy such millage as required by law for the paying of interest and principle
for any outstanding general-obligation bonds of the town.
   (B)   Property tax shall be levied by the Council on the property within the
municipality as assessed for taxation for county and state purposes.
(Ord. 2015-06, passed 7-28-2015)
§ 33.31 LIABILITY FOR TAXES.
   (A)   Any person owning real or personal property within the municipality as
of December 31 of any calendar year shall be subject to taxation for the
ensuing calendar year.
   (B)   PERSONAL PROPERTY is defined as vehicles, business personal property,
rental residential personal, marine equipment, stock tax (SCTC), manufacturer,
utilities, railroads, special levy, and airplanes.
(Ord. 2015-06, passed 7-28-2015)
§ 33.32 TAX LIEN ON PROPERTY.
   All ad valorem taxes herein levied and imposed shall constitute a specific
lien on the property taxed for a term of ten years from the time the liability
for the taxes shall accrue, which lien shall be paramount and in preference to
all judgments, mortgages, liens, and pledges, general and specific, except
taxes imposed by the state, and it shall be the duty of the Treasurer of
Charleston County to record in the tax duplicates kept by him or her for this
purpose the amount of the taxes claimed against each piece of property so
taxable, and that each piece of property must be separate and apart, on a line
by itself which record shall show the names of the person in whose name the
piece is returned, an accurate description of the property, and the value of
the property as fixed by the County Board of Assessment Control, and the amount
of the taxes claimed and the cost and penalties accruing thereto, and shall be
open to the public for personal inspection in the office of the Treasurer of
Charleston County.
(Ord. 2015-06, passed 7-28-2015)
§ 33.33 TO WHOM TAXES ARE PAYABLE; DUE DATE.
   All taxes levied in accordance with this chapter shall be paid to the
Treasurer of Charleston County in conformity with all of the rules and
regulations in effect for the collection in Charleston County and shall be
payable at such time as the Treasurer of Charleston County shall prescribe.
(Ord. 2015-06, passed 7-28-2015)
§ 33.34 NONPAYMENT OF TAXES.
   For nonpayment of ad valorem taxes levied at the time at which they are made
payable such penalties, collection costs, and execution costs as are now in the
county shall be added for the nonpayment of such taxes within the prescribed
time.
(Ord. 2015-06, passed 7-28-2015)
§ 33.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   General. Except as otherwise provided herein, any person violating any
provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is provided shall be
subject to the penalty provisions in §
10.99.
   (B)   Hospitality tax.
      (1)   The failure of an establishment subject to §§
33.15 through
33.21 to remit to the town the taxes required by that subchapter, as and when
due, shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500
or imprisonment of up to 30 days, or both.
      (2)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day that a
violation occurs or continues.
      (3)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, any misrepresentation of the
information required by returns as set forth in §
33.18 or the failure to collect or timely remit to the County the taxes imposed
by this subchapter may result in the suspension and/or revocation of the
business license of the offending establishment, as may be determined, after a
hearing by the Town Council. Appeals shall be governed by the requirements of §
110.16.
(Ord. 2016-02, passed 5-19-2016)
Cross-reference:
   Business licenses in general, see
Ch. 110
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   GENERAL UTILITY PROVISIONS
      
51.   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
CHAPTER 50: GENERAL UTILITY PROVISIONS
Section
   
50.01   Electric meters; number restricted
§ 50.01 ELECTRIC METERS; NUMBER RESTRICTED.
   Only one electric meter will be allowed in single- family residential
districts. Any exceptions to this policy will require a variance from the Board
of Zoning Appeals (BZA).
(Ord. 2012-11, passed 11-15-2012)
CHAPTER 51: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Section
Stormwater Management Utility
   
51.001   Subchapter designation and authority
   
51.002   Definitions
   
51.003   Establishment of Stormwater Management Utility; administration; duties
and powers
   
51.004   Boundaries; jurisdiction
   
51.005   Regulation of land disturbing activity
   
51.006   Fees
   
51.007   Investment and reinvestment of funds; borrowing
   
51.008   Billing of fee; delinquency
   
51.009   Written notice of objection
   
51.010   Petition for relief
   
51.011   Enforcement
   
51.012   Liability
Stormwater Management Utility Fees
   
51.025   Fee; classification of property
   
51.026   Determination of amount of fee
   
51.027   Adjustment of fee
   
51.028   Duration of fee
   
51.029   Billing; late charges
Stormwater Management Program (SWMP)
   
51.040   Title
   
51.041   Definitions
   
51.042   Authority
   
51.043   Jurisdiction
   
51.044   Purposes
   
51.045   Construction; scope
   
51.046   Relationship with other laws, regulations, and ordinances
   
51.047   Amendments
   
51.048   SWMP adoption
   
51.049   Coordination with other agencies
   
51.050   Right of entry
   
51.051   Regulations
   
51.052   Prohibitions; exemptions
   
51.053   Design and engineering standards
   
51.054   Construction activity approval process
   
51.055   Stormwater Program Permitting Standards and Procedures Manual
   
51.056   Maintenance; construction; inspection; notice of termination
   
51.057   Watercourse protection
   
51.058   Notification of spills
   
51.059   Illicit connections; illicit discharges; improper disposal
   
51.060   Detection of illicit connections and improper disposal
   
51.061   Waste disposal prohibitions
   
51.062   Discharges in violation of NPDES general permit for stormwater
discharges associated with industrial activity permit
   
51.063   Monitoring
   
51.064   Inspections
   
51.065   Enforcement
   
51.066   Additional legal measures
   
51.067   Corrective action
   
51.068   Stop work order
   
51.069   Approval suspension and revocation
   
51.070   Design criteria
   
51.071   Appeals process
   
51.072   Funding
   
51.073   Connection to conveyances
   
51.074   Plan review
   
51.075   Field inspection
   
51.076   Supplemental Stormwater Design Standards Manual adopted
 
   
51.999   Penalty
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY
§ 51.001 SUBCHAPTER DESIGNATION AND AUTHORITY.
   This subchapter may be cited as the “Stormwater Management Utility
Ordinance” and is adopted pursuant to S.C. Code §§ 5-7-30, 5-31-10 et seq., and
48-14-10 et seq., and S.C. Code Regulations 72-300 et seq.
(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-15-2012)
§ 51.002 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless otherwise stated herein or the context specifically indicates
otherwise, the meaning of words and terms used in this subchapter shall be as
set forth in S.C. Code § 48-14-20 and S.C. Code Regulation 72-301. For the
purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT. A unit of measure which relates a typical
single-family residential property to all other properties.
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS AND FACILITIES.  Those natural and human-made
channels, swales, ditches, swamps, rivers, streams, creeks, branches,
reservoirs, ponds, drainage ways, inlets, catch basins, pipes, head walls,
storm sewers, lakes, and other physical works, properties, and improvements
which transfer, control, convey, or otherwise influence the movement of
stormwater runoff.
   TOWN. The Town of James Island, South Carolina.
   TOWN ADMINISTRATOR. The Town Administrator of the town.
   TOWN COUNCIL. The elected officials of the Town of James Island, South
Carolina.
   UTILITY CUSTOMER. The owner of record of real property.
   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The Zoning Administrator of the town.
(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-15-2012)
§ 51.003 ESTABLISHMENT OF STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY; ADMINISTRATION; DUTIES
AND POWERS.
   (A)   Town Council hereby establishes a Stormwater Management Utility (the
“Utility”) to carry out the purposes, functions and responsibilities set forth
herein.
   (B)   The governing body of the Utility shall be Town Council. The Town
Administrator shall administer the Utility under the town’s Stormwater
Department; provided, however, that Town Council may delegate some or all of
the Town Administrator’s or the Stormwater Manager’s duties hereunder to the
county or its duly authorized representatives pursuant to an intergovernmental
agreement providing for same.
   (C)   The Utility shall have the powers and duties set forth below, which
powers are not necessarily exclusive to the Utility, to wit:
      (1)   Stormwater management planning and preparation of comprehensive
watershed master plans for stormwater management;
      (2)   Regular inspections of public and private stormwater management
facilities and measures and the construction thereof;
      (3)   Maintenance and improvements of stormwater management facilities
that have been accepted by the town for that purpose;
      (4)   Plan review and inspection for sediment control and stormwater
management plans, measures, and practices;
      (5)   Retrofitting designated watersheds to reduce existing flooding
problems or to improve water quality;
      (6)   Acquisition of interests in land, including easements;
      (7)   Design and construction of stormwater management facilities and
measures and acquisition of equipment;
      (8)   Water quantity and water quality management, including monitoring
and surveillance;
      (9)   Billing and collecting a Stormwater Management Utility fee shall be
pursuant to the town’s Stormwater Management Utility Fee Ordinance that sets
forth the amount of the fees;
      (10)   Make reasonable regulations relating to the administration of this
subchapter;
      (11)   Any and all powers and duties delegated or granted to it as a
local government implementing agency under the laws and regulations of the
state and the ordinances of the town; and
      (12)   Entering into inter-governmental agreements with the county to
provide for the county and its duly authorized representatives to assist the
town in the implementation and administration of the Utility, enforcement of
the ordinances or other regulations governed by the Utility, and the
implementation, billing, collection and expenditure of the town’s stormwater
management fees.
(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-15-2012; Ord. 2018-15, passed 12-20-2018)
§ 51.004 BOUNDARIES; JURISDICTION.
   The boundaries and jurisdiction of the Stormwater Management Utility shall
encompass all area contained within the corporate boundaries of the town, as
they may exist from time to time.
(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-15-2012)
§ 51.005 REGULATION OF LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY.
   Town Council shall establish by ordinance a program regulating land
disturbing activities, including, but not limited to, provisions for reviewing
and approving stormwater management and sediment control plans, creating design
requirements for such plans and land disturbing activities; and providing
operational maintenance requirements for stormwater management facilities and
measures.
(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-15-2012)
§ 51.006 FEES.
   (A)   The amounts and classifications of Stormwater Management Utility fees
below shall be implemented to help fund the Utility and its programs and
projects.
   (B)   Town Council shall consider, among other things, the following
criteria in establishing fees.
      (1)   The fee system shall be reasonable and equitable so that users pay
to the extent they contribute to the need from the Utility, and the fee shall
be apportioned with approximate equality and upon a reasonable basis of
equality with due regards for the benefits conferred. Town Council recognizes
that these benefits, while substantial, in many cases cannot be measured
directly.
      (2)   The components of the calculations used to establish fees shall
include, but shall not be limited to, the following cost factors:
         (a)   Stormwater management planning and preparation of comprehensive
watershed master plans for stormwater management;
         (b)   Regular inspections of public and private stormwater management
facilities and measures and the construction thereof;
         (c)   Maintenance and improvements of stormwater management facilities
that have been accepted by the town for that purpose;
         (d)   Plan review and inspection for sediment control and stormwater
management plans, measures, and practices;
         (e)   Retrofitting designated watersheds to reduce existing flooding
problems or to improve water quality;
         (f)   Acquisition of interest of land, including easements;
         (g)   Design and construction of stormwater management facilities and
measures and acquisition of equipment;
         (h)   Administration of enforcement;
         (i)   Water quantity and water quality management, including
monitoring and surveillance; and
         (j)   Debt service and financing costs.
      (3)   The practical difficulties and limitations related to establishing,
calculating, and administering such fees.
      (4)   The components of the calculations used to establish fees shall be
based on an “equivalent residential unit,” to be determined and approved by
Town Council with reasonable general adjustments being made for, but not
limited to, the following factors:
         (a)   Land use;
         (b)   Lot or tract size;
         (c)   The amount of site that is impervious; and
         (d)   Other generally accepted factors relevant to such calculations
based upon the provisions of this subchapter.
   (C)   Pending the adoption of a permanent fee system and rate structure,
Town Council may adopt an interim fee system and rate structure to help fund
the establishment of the Utility, pending the completion and adoption of a
stormwater utility rate study.
Service                                                                             Fee
Master drainage plan review and approval                                            $500
Stormwater permit                                                                    
   (1)   Single family residential and small commercial projects less than 1/2$100
acre
   (2)   Type I - greater than 0.5 but less than 1.0 acres                    $200
                                                                                    $500 for 1
   (3)   Type II - greater than 1.0 but less than 5.0 acres                   to 3 acres
                                                                                    $750 for 3
                                                                                    to 5 acres
                                                                                    $1,000 base
                                                                                    fee plus
                                                                                    $100 per
   (4)   Type III - 5.0 acres or greater                                      additional
                                                                                    acres above
                                                                                    5 acres with
                                                                                    $2,000 max
Stormwater Utility/Linear projects (greater than 0.5 but less than 1.0 acres)       $200
Reinspection (2 inspections are included with the stormwater permit fee)            $75 per
                                                                                    reinspection
 
(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-15-2012; Ord. 2020-09, passed 7-16-2020)
§ 51.007 INVESTMENT AND REINVESTMENT OF FUNDS; BORROWING.
   Funds generated for the Stormwater Management Utility from fees, bond
issues, other borrowing, and other sources shall be utilized only for those
purposes for which the Utility has been established, including but not limited
to: planning; acquisition of interests in land including easements; design and
construction of facilities; maintenance of the stormwater system, billing and
administration; and water quality and water quantity management, including
monitoring, surveillance, private maintenance inspection, construction
inspection, and other activities which are reasonably required. Such funds may
be invested and reinvested pursuant to the same procedures and practices
established by the town for investment and reinvestment of funds. Town Council
may use any form of borrowing authorized by the laws of the state to fund
capital acquisitions or expenditures for the Stormwater Management Utility.
(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-15-2012)
§ 51.008 BILLING OF FEE; DELINQUENCY.
   Town Council shall establish by ordinance the method of billing for the fee,
any late payment fees, and the manner of collecting unpaid fees.
(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-15-2012)
§ 51.009 WRITTEN NOTICE OF OBJECTION.
   (A)   (1)   A Utility customer may request a reconsideration of any
determination or interpretation by the Town Administrator, Stormwater Manager,
or either of their designee in the operation of the Stormwater Management
Utility. Such request must be in writing specifically explaining the grounds
for the request including the following:
         (a)   TMS number for the property;
         (b)   Utility customer information: name, address, and telephone
number;
         (c)   A statement outlining the reasons for the appeal, including any
law or authority, upon which the Utility customer relies;
         (d)   A statement of facts supporting the Utility customer’s position;
and
         (e)   The amount which the Utility customer considers the fair amount
of the fee.
      (2)   The written request is a notice of objection for purposes of the
section. The failure to serve written request within the time period
constitutes a waiver of the Utility customer’s right of protest for that year.
   (B)   Request for reconsideration of the annual fee amounts shall be
submitted within 30 days after the date the fee shall be due and payable.
   (C)   In cases where the applicant believes the fee to be inappropriate
based on the actual impervious area of the property in which he or she has
interest, the applicant should submit technical data such as a site survey of
said property to assist in the evaluation. The survey should be prepared by a
licensed land surveyor in accordance with the minimum state survey standards.
The survey should include the following:
      (1)   Property boundary;
      (2)   Parking areas;
      (3)   Driveway(s);
      (4)   Building(s);
      (5)   Storm drainage facilities;
      (6)   Any other surface improvements;
      (7)   Calculation of total impervious area;
      (8)   Calculation of total pervious area; and
      (9)   Date when the field survey was conducted.
   (D)   The Town Administrator, Stormwater Manager, or their designee shall
render a written decision on the request within 30 business days of the receipt
of the written request for reconsideration.
   (E)   The Utility customer may appeal the decision to the Charleston County
Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals within 30 days after the date of
the decision. The Town Administrator, orStormwater Manager shall provide the
petition form to the Utility customer.
(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-15-2012; Ord. 2018-15, passed 12-20-2018)
§ 51.010 PETITION FOR RELIEF.
   (A)   The petition must be accompanied with a $50 fee that will be used to
partially defray the costs incurred in connection with the administration of
petitions filed pursuant to this section.
   (B)   The Charleston County Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals
shall hear the petition to determine if the annual Stormwater Management
Utility fee does not apportion the fee with approximate equality, based upon a
reasonable basis of classification and with due regard to the benefits
conferred by providing stormwater management services to the Utility customer
and the requirements of public health, safety or welfare. The determination of
the annual fee by the Town Council is entitled to a presumption of correctness,
and the petitioner has the burden of rebutting the presumption of correctness.
   (C)   The Charleston County Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals
shall render a written decision on each petition that is heard, and such
written decision shall be issued within 20 calendar days from the day the Board
heard the petition. The decision of the Charleston County Construction Board of
Adjustment and Appeals shall contain findings of fact and conclusions of law,
and the decision shall be sent to the petitioner by first class mail.
   (D)   The decision of the Charleston County Construction Board of Adjustment
and Appeals shall be final unless the petitioner appeals the decision to the
circuit court in the county within 30 days after the date of the decision of
the Charleston County Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals. Prior to
bringing an action to contest an annual fee, the petitioner shall pay to the
Finance Officer not less than the amount of the annual fee which he or she
admits in good faith is owing. Payment of the fee shall not be deemed an
admission that the annual fee was due and shall not prejudice the petitioner in
bringing an action as provided herein.
(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-15-2012; Ord. 2018-15, passed 12-20-2018)
§ 51.011 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Stormwater Manager, Town Administrator, and such other officials as the
Town Administrator shall designate shall be the enforcement officers to enforce
the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-15-2012; Ord. 2018-15, passed 12-20-2018) Penalty, see
§
51.999
§ 51.012 LIABILITY.
   Nothing in this subchapter and any action or failure to act under this
subchapter shall or may be construed to:
   (A)   Impose any liability on the town, or its departments, agencies,
offices, or employees for the recovery of damages; or
   (B)   Relieve any person engaged in a land disturbing activity of duties,
obligations, responsibilities, or liabilities arising from or incident to
operations associated with such activity or imposed by provisions of this
subchapter or the laws and regulations pursuant to which it was adopted.
(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-15-2012)
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY FEES
§ 51.025 FEE; CLASSIFICATION OF PROPERTY.
   (A)   Property classification. For purposes of determining the fee, all real
property in the town is classified as follows:
      (1)   Single-family residential;
      (2)   Vacant;
      (3)   Agricultural;
      (4)   Commercial.
   (B)   Base rate. The base rate shall be $48 annually. In no case shall a
Utility customer be billed a fee for less than one-half the base rate.
   (C)   Equivalent residential unit (ERU). The commonly accepted rate unit for
stormwater utilities is the equivalent residential unit (ERU). This is a
descriptive value based on the land classification type and the amount of
impervious surface. The ERU is used to relate a rate charged for a typical
residential property and this becomes the common denominator by which
commercial properties are evaluated. The ERU for Charleston County has been
determined to be 3,000 square feet.
   (D)   Annual fees. Annual fees for all property shall be as follows:
      (1)   Single-family residential property. Single-family residential
property shall be charged a fee equal to the base rate times one equivalent
residential unit (ERU), regardless of the size of the parcel or improvements
(impervious area).
      (2)   Agricultural property. Agricultural property shall be charged a fee
equal to the base rate times one equivalent residential unit (ERU), regardless
of the size of the parcel or improvements (impervious area).
      (3)   Vacant property. Vacant property shall be charged a fee equal to
the base rate times one-half equivalent residential unit (ERU), regardless of
the size of the parcel.
      (4)   Commercial property. Commercial property shall be charged the base
rate multiplied by the numerical factor obtained by dividing the total
impervious area of the property, as determined by the Stormwater Manager or an
authorized designee, by one ERU (3,000 square feet). The numerical factor will
be rounded to the nearest tenth of a unit. The minimum fee for any commercial
property shall be the base rate times one-half ERU. Those commercial properties
with impervious area greater than one-half ERU (1,500 square feet) and less
than one ERU (3,000 square feet) shall be charged the base rate times one ERU.
(Ord. 2012-20, passed 11-15-2012; Ord. 2016-07, passed 7-21-2016; Ord. 2018-15,
passed 12-20-2018)
§ 51.026 DETERMINATION OF AMOUNT OF FEE.
   (A)   Computation of Stormwater Management Utility fee for commercial
properties:
      (1)   Determine base rate to assign ERU;
      (2)   Determine the impervious area on the property;
      (3)   Calculate the numerical factor for the property in question by
dividing the impervious area by one ERU (3,000 square feet); and
      (4)   Calculate the annual Stormwater Management Utility fee for
multiplying the numerical factor by the base rate, if the factor is greater
than one.
   (B)   Example calculation. Calculation of monthly fee for a one and one-half
acre commercial property with a determined impervious area of 32,500 square
feet.
      (1)   One ERU = 3,000 square feet.
      (2)   Property impervious area = 32,500 square feet.
      (3)   ERUs for example property = 32,500 square feet of impervious area/
1 ERU of 3,000 square feet = 10.8 ERUs.
      (4)   Utility fee = ERUs x base rate = 1.8 ERUs x example base rat of
$48.00 = $518.40/year.
   (C)   The classification of real property and the identification of the
Utility customer for the purpose of determining fees shall be determined from
the records of the Charleston County Tax Assessor. The Utility customer or
person charged the fee is based on the classification of the real property as
of January 1 of the year of billing and each year subsequently thereafter.
   (D)   Where the tax records are incomplete or ambiguous, a physical
inspection of the real property shall be made to determine the use of the
property. Upon development of the county’s database and review of the real
properties on a case-by-case basis, the classifications from the Charleston
County Tax Assessor do not preclude an adjustment to the data that the county
uses to determine the fee.
(Ord. 2012-20, passed 11-15-2012; Ord. 2016-07, passed 7-21-2016)
§ 51.027 ADJUSTMENT OF FEE.
   (A)   In cases where the Utility customer disputes the fee based on the
actual impervious area of the real property in which he or she has interest, a
notice of objection may be filed with the Stormwater Manager as outlined in the
Stormwater Management Utility subchapter, §
51.009, Written notice of objection; provided, however, that Town Council may
delegate the Stormwater Manager’s responsibilities hereunder to the county or
its duly authorized representatives pursuant to an intergovernmental agreement
providing for same.
   (B)   Where an adjustment of the fee is warranted, the Stormwater Manager
shall recalculate and re-determine the fee using equivalent ERUs that are based
on the total impervious and pervious areas of the real property at issue.
   (C)   Where deemed appropriate and at the discretion of the Stormwater
Manager, the gross acreage of the real property may be adjusted as a means of
recalculating and re-determining the fee. This method is applied in cases where
the property is large and the ratio of pervious area to impervious area is low.
The Stormwater Manager and the Utility customer shall mutually agree on the
general area of improvement. In cases where a mutual agreement cannot be
reached, the Utility customer may file a notice of objection as referenced
above.
(Ord. 2012-20, passed 11-15-2012; Ord. 2016-07, passed 7-21-2016; Ord. 2018-15,
passed 12-20-2018)
§ 51.028 DURATION OF FEE.
   The fees established by this subchapter have been adopted by Town Council.
This fee will be reviewed, evaluated, and amended as necessary in order to
address stormwater program needs/deficiencies and small municipal separate
storm sewer system (SMS4) general permit requirements.
(Ord. 2012-20, passed 11-15-2012; Ord. 2016-07, passed 7-21-2016)
§ 51.029 BILLING; LATE CHARGES.
   (A)   The fee shall not be prorated. No refunds of the fee shall be made
except as set forth in this subchapter. The Utility fee shall be billed
annually with the bill mailed to each owner of record of real property, based
on the classification of property, to the owner of record of the real property,
as of January 1 of each year subsequently thereafter.
   (B)   For non-payment of all or any part of the Utility fee, the monetary
penalty shall be the same penalty set forth in S.C. Code § 12-45-180. If any
fee shall remain unpaid 60 days after the due date, the county may issue a lien
upon the parcel for the Stormwater Utility fee, penalty and costs of collection
and shall proceed to collect in the same manner as prescribed by law for the
collection of other fees and taxes.
(Ord. 2012-20, passed 11-15-2012; Ord. 2016-07, passed 7-21-2016)
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM (SWMP)
§ 51.040 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the “Town of James Island Stormwater
Management Ordinance.”
(Ord. 2012-19, passed 11-15-2012)
§ 51.041 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless otherwise stated herein or the context specifically indicates
otherwise, the meaning of the words and terms used in this subchapter shall be
as set forth in S.C. Code § 48-14-20, as amended, and S.C. Code Regulation 72-
301. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. A person, firm, corporation, limited liability company,
governmental agency, partnership, or any other entity who seeks to obtain
approval under the requirements of this subchapter and who will be responsible
for the land disturbing activity and related maintenance thereof.
   AS-BUILT DRAWINGS. Revised construction drawings that depict the final,
installed location of the new facilities on a project, including the stormwater
system. This term and RECORD DRAWINGS shall be synonymous.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). Any structural or non-structural measures
or facilities used for the control of stormwater runoff, whether for quantity
or quality control. BMPs also include schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, maintenance procedures, treatment requirements, operating
procedures, and other management practices to control site runoff, spillage or
leaks, sludge or waste disposal, drainage from raw material storage, or
otherwise prevent or reduce the pollution of waters of the state.
   CONSTRUCTION or CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Activity involving clearing, grading,
transporting, filling, or any other activity which causes land to be exposed to
the danger of erosion, or which might create an alteration to any existing
drainage way or other component of the town’s stormwater system or facility.
   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY APPLICATION. The application, set of drawings,
specifications, design calculations, SWPPP, and other documents necessary to
demonstrate compliance with this subchapter.
   DEVELOPER. Any person, or others who act in his or her behalf, who is
required to submit an application for approval to disturb land or encroachment
and is thereafter responsible for maintaining compliance with this subchapter
and conditions of the approved application.
   EROSION. The general process by which soils or rock fragments are detached
and moved by the action of wind, water, ice, or gravity.
   EASEMENT. An authorization by a property owner to the general public or a
person or persons for the use of any designated part of his or her property for
a specific purpose.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A temporary rise in the level of water which results in
the inundation of areas not ordinarily covered by water.
   ILLICIT CONNECTION. A connection to a town stormwater management system or
facility which results in a discharge that is not composed entirely of
stormwater runoff except discharges pursuant to an NPDES permit (other than the
NPDES MS4 permit for the town).
   ILLICIT DISCHARGE or ILLEGAL DISCHARGE. Any activity which results in a
discharge into a town stormwater management system or facility or receiving
waters that is not composed entirely of stormwater except:
      (1)   Discharges pursuant to an NPDES permit (other than the NPDES permit
for the town); and
      (2)   Discharges resulting from fire-fighting activities.
   IMPROPER DISPOSAL. Any disposal other than through an illicit connection
that results in an illicit discharge, including, but not limited to, the
disposal of used oil and toxic materials resulting from the improper management
of such substances.
   MAINTENANCE. Any action necessary to preserve any stormwater system
component, including conveyances, facilities, and BMPs in proper working
condition, in order to serve the intended purposes set forth in this subchapter
and to prevent structural failure of such components.
   MS4. A municipal separate storm sewer system and includes all conveyances or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, highways, right-
of-way, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, human-made
channels, storm drains, detention ponds, and other stormwater facilities) which
inlets, transports, stores, or treats stormwater runoff and which is:
      (1)   Owned or operated by the town;
      (2)   Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
      (3)   Not a combined sewer system; and
      (4)   Not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW).
   NEW DEVELOPMENT or RE- DEVELOPMENT. Any of the following actions undertaken
by any person, including, without limitation, any public or private individual
or entity:
      (1)   Division or combination of lots, tracts, or parcels or other
divisions by plat or deed;
      (2)   The construction, installation, or alteration of land, a structure,
impervious surface, or drainage facility;
      (3)   Clearing, scraping, grubbing, or otherwise significantly disturbing
the soil, vegetation, mud, sand, or rock of a site, or changing the physical
drainage characteristics of the site; or
      (4)   Adding, removing, exposing, excavating, leveling, grading, digging,
burrowing, dumping, piling, dredging, or otherwise disturbing the soil,
vegetation, mud, sand, or rock of a site.
   NPDES. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
   NPDES PERMIT. The NPDES permit for stormwater discharges issued by SCDHEC
pursuant to the Clean Water Act and the federal stormwater discharge
regulations that allows for restricting pollutant loads as necessary to meet
water quality standards.
   OPERATOR. The person who has operational control of the real property,
including an operator or person who is in charge of any activity related to
land disturbance, construction, or post-construction stormwater quality or
quantity.
   OUTFALL or DISCHARGE POINT. The point where a town stormwater management
system or facility, or other municipal and private system, discharges into
waters of the state or United States.
   OWNER. A property owner, or any person who acts in his or her behalf, who
submits an application for approval to disturb land or vegetation or for
encroachment, and the person, if so designated by default or on legal
documents, who is the responsible party for maintenance of a stormwater system
(s) or facility(s).
   PERSON. Any and all persons, natural or artificial, and includes any
individual, association, firm, corporation, limited liability company, business
trust, estate, trust, partnership, two or more persons having a joint or common
interest, state or federal agency or an agent or employee thereof, or any other
legal entity.
   POLLUTANT. Anything which may cause or contribute to violation of water
quality standards, including but not limited to sediment, bacteria, nutrients,
dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar
dirt, and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into water.
   PROPERTY OWNER. The record owner of the real property.
   RECEIVING WATERS. Any lakes, bays, sounds, ponds, impounding reservoirs,
springs, wells, rivers, streams, creeks, estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals,
the Atlantic Ocean within the territorial limits of the state, and all other
bodies of surface or underground water, whether natural or artificial, public
or private, inland or coastal, fresh or salt.
   REGULATION. Any regulation, rule, or requirement prepared by or adopted by
Town Council pursuant to this subchapter.
   SPILL. Any accidental or intentional discharge of any pollutants, hazardous
materials, or other substances which are potentially detrimental to the
designated use of receiving water.
   SWMP. The Town of James Island Stormwater Management Program, which may
describe the components to be used by the town to control stormwater
discharges, address flooding, and meet water quality standards.
   STORMWATER. Stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff, and surface runoff and
drainage.
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT. The collection, conveyance, storage, treatment, and
disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner to meet the objectives of this
subchapter and its terms, including, but not limited to, measures that control
the increased volume and rate of stormwater runoff and water quality impacts
caused by human-made changes to the land.
   STORMWATER SYSTEMS AND FACILITIES. Those natural and human-made channels,
swales, ditches, swamps, rivers, streams, creeks, branches, reservoirs, ponds,
drainage ways, inlets, catch basins, pipes, head walls, storm sewers, lakes,
and other physical works, properties, and improvements which transfer, control,
convey, or otherwise influence the movement of stormwater runoff, whether for
quantity or quality control.
   TMDL. The total maximum daily load which is the regulatory value developed
to represent the amount of a pollutant that a water body can incorporate while
maintaining water quality standards. TMDL is further defined as the pollutant
load developed by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and SCDHEC that
designates the permitted amount of discharge allowed to flow into a water body
of this state or the United States.
   VARIANCE. The modification of the minimum stormwater management requirements
contained in this subchapter and the SWMP for specific circumstances where
strict adherence to the requirements would result in unnecessary hardship and
not fulfill the intent of this subchapter.
   WATERCOURSE. A conveyance used to transport runoff from one location to
another.
   WATERSHED. A drainage area or drainage basin contributing to the flow of
stormwater into a receiving watercourse or water body.
   WATER QUALITY. Those characteristics of stormwater runoff that relate to the
physical, chemical, biological, or radiological integrity of water.
   WATER QUANTITY. Those characteristics of stormwater runoff that relate to
the rate and volume of the stormwater runoff.
(Ord. 2012-19, passed 11-15-2012)
§ 51.042 AUTHORITY.
   This subchapter is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred upon the town
by applicable federal and state laws and regulations.
(Ord. 2012-19, passed 11-15-2012)
§ 51.043 JURISDICTION.
   The boundaries and jurisdiction of this subchapter shall encompass the
incorporated area of the town, as it may exist from time to time.
(Ord. 2012-19, passed 11-15-2012)
§ 51.044 PURPOSES.
   (A)   A primary purpose of this subchapter to protect, maintain, and enhance
water quality and the environment of the town and the short-term and long-term
public health, safety, and general welfare of the town’s residents. This
subchapter is also designed to minimize property damage by establishing
requirements and procedures to control the potential adverse effects of
increased stormwater runoff and related pollutant loads associated with both
future development and existing developed land. Proper management of stormwater
runoff will further the purpose of this subchapter to ensure a functional
drainage system, reduce the effects of development on land and stream channel
erosion, attain and maintain water quality standards, enhance the local
environment associated with the drainage system, reduce local flooding,
maintain where necessary pre-developed runoff characteristics of the area in
terms of flow rate, volume, and pollutant concentration, and facilitate
economic development while mitigating associated pollutant, flooding, erosion,
and drainage impacts.
   (B)   Another primary purpose of this subchapter to direct the development
and implementation of a stormwater management program (“SWMP”) and to establish
authority which authorizes or enables the town at a minimum to:
      (1)   Comply with state and federal requirements related to stormwater
management developed pursuant to the Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251
et seq.;
      (2)   Prohibit illicit discharges into the town’s stormwater systems and
facilities and receiving waters;
      (3)   Control to the maximum extent practicable the discharge into the
town’s stormwater systems and facilities and receiving waters of spills,
dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater;
      (4)   Address specific categories of non-stormwater discharges and
similar other incidental non-stormwater discharges listed in the SWMP;
      (5)   Require erosion and sediment controls to protect water quality on
all applicable new and re-development projects both during and after
construction;
      (6)   Where necessary, require stormwater discharge rate and volume
control during and following development, redevelopment, or construction;
      (7)   Define and implement procedures of site plan review and site
inspection of all applicable construction projects within the town;
      (8)   Control the discharge from the town’s stormwater systems and
facilities and receiving waters of pollutants in such quantity that water
quality standards are met or to otherwise address post-construction, long-term
water quality. This includes the necessary means needed to comply with state
and federal regulations regarding stormwater management quantity and quality;
      (9)   Define procedures for addressing resident complaints of stormwater-
related issues within the town;
      (10)   Provide for adequate long-term operation and maintenance of
existing stormwater systems and facilities;
      (11)   Carry out inspection, surveillance, and monitoring procedures
necessary to determine compliance and noncompliance with permit conditions
including the prohibition on illicit discharges to the town’s stormwater system
and receiving waters;
      (12)   Encourage the creation of stream buffers and preservation of
natural spaces to provide areas that may be used for flood storage, stormwater
treatment and control, and recreation. Such areas may be required in special
protection areas needed to protect, maintain, or enhance water quality and
protect property from flooding problems;
      (13)   Develop, implement, and enforce action plans to address pollutant
load reductions required in impaired water bodies and to work towards
compliance with total maximum daily loads (TMDLs) established by EPA or SCDHEC
and to work toward meeting water quality standards; and
      (14)   Enable enforcement of all of the authorizations stated herein.
   (C)   Another purpose of this subchapter to establish review authority for
the town’s Stormwater Manager to provide consistency of construction projects
with the SWMP.
(Ord. 2012-19, passed 11-15-2012; Ord. 2018-15, passed 12-20-2018)
§ 51.045 CONSTRUCTION; SCOPE.
   (A)   The town’s Stormwater Manager shall be primarily responsible for the
coordination and enforcement of the provisions of this subchapter and the SWMP;
provided, however, that Town Council may, from time to time, delegate some or
all of the rights and duties of the Stormwater Manager to the county or its
duly authorized representatives pursuant to an intergovernmental agreement for
same.
   (B)   The application of this subchapter and the provisions and references
expressed herein shall be the minimum stormwater management requirements and
shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other ordinances of the town
or powers granted to the town by the state statutes, including, without
limitation, the power to require additional stormwater management requirements.
If site characteristics on new development, redevelopment, and existing
developments indicate that complying with these minimum requirements will not
provide adequate designs or protection for real property, residents, or the
environment, the property owner, operator, or person responsible for land
disturbing activities is required to provide additional and appropriate
management practices, control techniques, system design, and engineering
methods to attain an adequate level of protection, in accordance with the
town’s Stormwater Program Permitting Standards and Procedures Manual (the
“Manual”).
(Ord. 2012-19, passed 11-15-2012; Ord. 2018-15, passed 12-20-2018)
§ 51.046 RELATIONSHIP WITH OTHER LAWS, REGULATIONS, AND ORDINANCES.
   Whenever the provisions of this subchapter impose more restrictive standards
than are required in or under any other law, regulation, or ordinance, the
requirements contained in the provisions of this subchapter shall prevail.
Whenever the provisions of any other law, regulation, or ordinance impose more
restrictive standards than are required in the provisions of this subchapter,
the requirements of such law, regulation, or ordinance shall prevail.
(Ord. 2012-19, passed 11-15-2012)
§ 51.047 AMENDMENTS.
   Town Council may adopt additional regulations or resolutions to implement
this subchapter, implement the SWMP, or to otherwise further the goal of
protecting the quality of the waters which the town’s stormwater system drains
into.
(Ord. 2012-19, passed 11-15-2012)
§ 51.048 SWMP ADOPTION.
   The stormwater management program (“SWMP”) which has been developed by the
town to implement the purposes of this subchapter shall serve as the basis for
directing the town’s efforts to control stormwater runoff and discharge. The
SWMP is incorporated by reference and is hereby a part of this subchapter. The
SWMP requirements are to be complied with and shall be enforced in accordance
with the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2012-19, passed 11-15-2012)
§ 51.049 COORDINATION WITH OTHER AGENCIES.
   Town Council may coordinate the town’s activities with other federal, state,
and local agencies which manage and perform functions relating to the
protection of receiving waters, through a written agreement with those other
agencies. Authority not expressly reserved for other agencies or restricted by
statute is placed with the Stormwater Manager for the protection and
preservation of receiving waters. The Stormwater Manager should coordinate with
federal, state, and local agencies having jurisdiction of those receiving
waters.
(Ord. 2012-19, passed 11-15-2012; Ord. 2018-15, passed 12-20-2018)
§ 51.050 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   (A)   The Town Administrator, Stormwater Manager, or either of their
designee may with the consent of the property owner enter upon the real
property of any person subject to this subchapter. The Stormwater Manager shall
be provided immediate access to the necessary portion of the real property for
the purposes of inspecting, monitoring, sampling, inventorying, examining and
copying of records, and performing any other duties necessary to determine
compliance with this subchapter.
   (B)   Where the property owner or operator has security measures in place
requiring proper identification and consent before entry upon the real
property, the property owner, operator, or person shall make the necessary
arrangements with the necessary parties so that the Stormwater Manager will be
permitted to enter the property without delay for the purposes of performing
such responsibilities identified in division (A) above.
   (C)   The Stormwater Manager shall seek the consent of the owner before
entry upon the real property. If such consent is denied or unable to be
obtained from the owner, then in addition to any other remedies allowed by law,
the Stormwater Manager shall by affidavit based upon the reasonable suspicion
that a violation exists, obtain an ex-parte order from a court of competent
jurisdiction to enter upon the property for the limited purposes stated in
division (A) above.
(Ord. 2012-19, passed 11-15-2012; Ord. 2018-15, passed 12-20-2018)
§ 51.051 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The Stormwater Manager shall be responsible for the coordination,
implementation, and enforcement of this subchapter and the SWMP, in addition to
the long-term management of the town’s drainage systems.
   (B)   Without limitation, the Stormwater Manager shall have the following
authority:
      (1)   To issue any approval, certification, or license that may be
required to comply with this subchapter;
      (2)   To deny a facility connection to the town’s stormwater systems or
facilities or discharge to waters of the state if state requirements and this
subchapter are not met;
      (3)   To create the Town of James Island Stormwater Program Permitting
Standards and Procedures Manual. The Manual may be used to convey design and
engineering standards, construction management processes and procedures, and
other aspects necessary for compliance with this subchapter. The Mayor is
authorized to approve the adoption and subsequent revisions of the Manual;
      (4)   To require the submittal of an application for all applicable
construction activities that alter any portion of land for development or alter
the storm drainage characteristics of the land. The application shall include
the information required to control stormwater pollutants and other components
in accordance with the Manual;
      (5)   To require the development and enforcement of a stormwater
pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) for all new and re-development projects;
      (6)   To require proper long-term maintenance of stormwater management
systems and facilities through the use of an operating permit or other
applicable measures in accordance with the Manual;
      (7)   To approve construction activities and to require as a condition of
such approval, structural or non-structural controls, practices, devices,
operating procedures, or other mechanisms to protect public and private
property from flooding and erosion and attain TMDL pollutant load reductions
and water quality standards;
      (8)   To require performance bonds as necessary of any owner to secure
the owner’s compliance with approvals, certificates, licenses, or
authorizations issued by the Stormwater Manager pursuant to this subchapter,
the SWMP, and federal and state laws. The Stormwater Manager shall develop a
process that organizes the closure of bonds and construction projects to
accommodate phases of development and the transfer of the ownership of real
property;
      (9)   To conduct all activities necessary to carry out the SWMP and other
requirements included in this subchapter and to pursue the necessary means and
resources required to properly fulfill this responsibility;
      (10)   To require appropriate post construction best management practices
and appropriate continued maintenance of those best management practices;
      (11)   To determine appropriate fees, to impose penalties, and to take
necessary and appropriate actions to enforce this subchapter; and
      (12)   To require encroachment permits as necessary.
(Ord. 2012-19, passed 11-15-2012; Ord. 2018-15, passed 12-20-2018)
§ 51.052 PROHIBITIONS; EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following other than in full compliance
with this subchapter:
      (1)   Develop any land;
      (2)   Engage in any industry or enterprise;
      (3)   Construct, operate, or maintain any landfill, hazardous waste
treatment, disposal, or recovery facility, or any other industrial or related
facility;
      (4)   Dispose of any hazardous material or toxic substance or other
pollutant; or
      (5)   Prevent the transport of sediment and other pollutants associated
with stormwater runoff beyond the real property boundary lines.
   (B)   In instances where an imminent threat to the health, safety, or
general welfare of the public or the environment is suspected, the Stormwater
Manager shall determine if immediate action is necessary. Such action may be
taken with or without the consent of the owner, operator, or other responsible
person. If such consent is denied, the Zoning Administrator shall follow the
provisions for entry upon the real property to remove such threat. In such
instances, the owner, operator, or other responsible person shall reimburse the
town for any and all expenses associated with removal of such threat. If the
owner or operator fails to reimburse the town for such expenses, the town may
recover the expenses from the owner, operator, or other responsible person
through any remedies available at law or in equity. Any fees or costs
associated with any collection effort by the town are in addition to the
recovery of the expenses.
   (C)   The following development activities are exempt from the provisions of
this subchapter.
      (1)   Land disturbing activities undertaken on forest land for the
production and harvesting of timber and timber products and conducted in
accordance with best management practices and minimum erosion protection
measures established by the State Forestry Commission pursuant to S.C. Code §
48-18-70, as amended.
      (2)   Activities undertaken by persons who are otherwise regulated by the
provisions of S.C. Code Title 48, Chapter 20, the State Mining Act. Livestock,
including beef cattle, sheep, swine, horses, ponies, mules, or goats, including
the breeding and grazing of these animals; bees, fur animals, and aquaculture.
The construction of an agricultural structure that requires the disturbance of
one or more acres, such as, but not limited to, broiler houses, machine sheds,
repair shops, coops, barns, and other major buildings shall require the
submittal and approval of an application in accordance with the Manual prior to
the start of the land disturbing activity.
      (3)   Land disturbing activities on agricultural land for production of
plants and animals, including but not limited to: forages and sod crops, grains
and feed crops, tobacco, cotton, and peanuts; dairy animals and dairy products;
poultry and poultry products; livestock, including beef cattle, sheep, swine,
horses, ponies, mules, or goats, including the breeding and grazing of these
animals; bees, fur animals, and aquaculture. The construction of an
agricultural structure that requires the disturbance of one or more acres, such
as, but not limited to, broiler houses, machine sheds, repair shops, coops,
barns, and other major buildings shall require the submittal and approval of a
land disturbance application prior to the start of the land disturbing
activity.
(Ord. 2012-19, passed 11-15-2012; Ord. 2018-15, passed 12-20-2018)  Penalty,
see §
51.999
§ 51.053 DESIGN AND ENGINEERING STANDARDS.
   (A)   Design and engineering standards must define the desired level of
quality and performance for stormwater management systems on all applicable
construction activities in order to meet the purpose of this subchapter. The
standards establish the minimum technical requirements needed to demonstrate
compliance.
   (B)   The Stormwater Manager is authorized to develop and adopt policies,
criteria, specifications, and standards for the proper implementation of the
requirements of this subchapter, federal and state laws, and the SWMP; and to
provide a sound technical basis for the achievement of stormwater management,
including water quality and quantity objectives. These standards may be
provided in the Manual.
   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of the property owner, operator, or
other person responsible for land disturbing activities to provide adequate
controls to meet the design and engineering standards provided in the Manual.
(Ord. 2012-19, passed 11-15-2012; Ord. 2018-15, passed 12-20-2018)
§ 51.054 CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY APPROVAL PROCESS.
   An application for review and approval shall be made for all applicable
construction activities. Applications required under this subchapter shall be
submitted in a format and in such numbers as required by the Stormwater
Manager. Applications may be initiated by the property owner, operator, or
person responsible for construction activities. Applications that meet the
requirements of this subchapter, the SWMP, and state and federal regulations
are considered complete. The application process and requirements to establish
a complete application will be provided in the Manual.
(Ord. 2012-19, passed 11-15-2012; Ord. 2018-15, passed 12-20-2018)
§ 51.055 STORMWATER PROGRAM PERMITTING STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES MANUAL.
   (A)   The Town of James Island Stormwater Program Permitting Standards and
Procedures Manual (“Manual”) may include design standards, procedures, and
criteria for conducting hydrologic, hydraulic, pollutant load evaluations, and
downstream impact for all components of the stormwater management system. It is
the intention of the Manual to establish uniform design practices; however, it
neither replaces the need for engineering judgment nor precludes the use of
information not submitted. Other accepted engineering procedures may be used to
conduct hydrologic, hydraulic, and pollutant load studies if approved by the
Stormwater Manager.
   (B)   The Manual will contain at a minimum the following components:
      (1)   Construction activity application contents and approval procedures;
      (2)   Construction completion and closeout processes;
      (3)   Hydrologic, hydraulic, and water quality design criteria (i.e.,
design standards) for the purposes of controlling the runoff rate, volume, and
pollutant load. Suggested reference material shall be included for guidance in
computations needed to meet the design standards;
      (4)   Information and requirements for new and re-development projects in
special protection areas necessary to address TMDLs, known problem areas and
other areas necessary to protect, maintain, and enhance water quality and the
environment of the town and the public health, safety, and general welfare of
the town’s residents;
      (5)   Construction document requirements;
      (6)   Long-term maintenance and maintenance plan;
      (7)   Minimum easement requirements; and
      (8)   Required and recommended inspection schedules and activities for
all components of the stormwater management system, including construction-
related BMPs.
   (C)   The Manual will be updated periodically to reflect advances in
technology and experience.
(Ord. 2012-19, passed 11-15-2012; Ord. 2018-15, passed 12-20-2018)
§ 51.056 MAINTENANCE; CONSTRUCTION; INSPECTION; NOTICE OF TERMINATION.
   (A)   Maintenance of the stormwater management system is critical for the
achievement of its purpose of controlling stormwater runoff quantity and
quality and providing for the public health, safety, and general welfare of the
residents of the town.
   (B)   In accordance with the Manual, a maintenance plan for the stormwater
management system shall be included in an application to perform a construction
activity to cover activities to be conducted during and after construction. As
part of the maintenance plan, the property owner, operator, or person of such
system or facility shall agree to be responsible for keeping the system and
facility in working order. The Stormwater Manager shall develop procedures to
provide reasonable assurances that maintenance activities are performed in
accordance with the Manual for both town and privately maintained stormwater
systems and facilities. The Stormwater Manager will provide the procedures for
transferring maintenance responsibilities to another entity.
      (1)   The Stormwater Manager will define procedures for conducting site
inspections.
      (2)   As part of any application to perform a construction activity, the
applicant shall submit construction and BMP maintenance and inspection
schedules, and long-term maintenance plan shall be covered by an operating
permit for new stormwater management systems and facilities. Required and
recommended schedules for BMP maintenance and inspection and long-term plans
are provided in the Manual.
      (3)   If the construction is to be phased, no phase of the work, related
to the construction of stormwater management facilities shall commence until
the preceding phase of the work is completed in accordance with an approved
application to perform a construction activity. The procedure for construction
phases beginning and ending and what constitutes such conditions shall be
submitted with the application.
      (4)   The applicant shall notify the Stormwater Manager before commencing
any work, in accordance with the Manual, and upon completion of any phase or
designated component of the site. Notification schedules shall be provided for
in the Manual. All self-inspections, maintenance actions, BMP replacements, and
changes to the approved application shall be documented and presented upon
request to the Stormwater Manager.
      (5)   The notice of termination (NOT) process as identified in the Manual
must be completed by the Stormwater Manager prior to any of the following
actions, as applicable:
         (a)   The use or occupancy of any newly constructed components of the
site;
         (b)   Final acceptance of any road into a public road maintenance
system or designation of road owner and associated stormwater management
system;
         (c)   Release of any bond held by the town, if applicable; and/or
         (d)   Approval or acceptance for recording of map, plat, or drawing,
the intent of which is to cause a division of a single parcel of land into two
or more parcels.
(Ord. 2012-19, passed 11-15-2012; Ord. 2018-15, passed 12-20-2018)
§ 51.057 WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.
   (A)   Every owner, operator, or person responsible for any land disturbance
activity on property through which a watercourse passes shall keep and maintain
that portion of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, and
other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner, operator, or person shall
maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a
watercourse, so that such structures will not interfere with the use, function,
or physical integrity of the watercourse.
   (B)   To assist in the compliance with state and federal laws and
regulations, the Stormwater Manager may develop special protection areas which
require additional control of stormwater quality and quantity than provided by
minimum design standards. Such areas may consist of watersheds corresponding to
adopted TMDLs, known flooding problems and pollution impairments, or other
areas necessary to protect, maintain, and enhance water quality and the
environment of the town and the public health, safety, and general welfare of
the town’s residents. These areas may change with time as development continues
and as federal and state law demands.
   (C)   New stormwater systems created as the result of any new and re-
development project shall be connected in a manner so as not to degrade the
integrity of any existing stormwater system, whether natural or human-made, and
shall have demonstrated this to the Stormwater Manager, in accordance with the
Manual. Discharge points shall be confined to connections with an existing
stormwater system. When stormwater discharges are to flow into collection
systems not owned and maintained by the town, the owners of these systems shall
maintain the right to disapprove new connections to their systems.
(Ord. 2012-19, passed 11-15-2012; Ord. 2018-15, passed 12-20-2018)
§ 51.058 NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS.
   The owner, operator, or person responsible for any land disturbance activity
shall immediately notify the Stormwater Manager of any known or suspected
release of materials or discharges that are currently resulting in or may
result in any illegal discharges of pollutants to an existing stormwater
system.
(Ord. 2012-19, passed 11-15-2012; Ord. 2018-15, passed 12-20-2018)
§ 51.059 ILLICIT CONNECTIONS; ILLICIT DISCHARGES; IMPROPER DISPOSAL.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any owner, operator, or person to connect any pipe,
open channel, or any other conveyance system that discharges anything, except
stormwater or other approved discharges, into the town’s stormwater system or
facility, or waters of the state.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any owner, operator, or person to continue the
operation of any illicit connection regardless of whether the connection was
permissible when constructed. Improper connections in violation of this
subchapter must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to the
satisfaction of the Stormwater Manager in compliance with federal, state, or
local agencies or departments regulating the discharge.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any owner, operator, or person to throw, drain, or
otherwise discharge to any existing stormwater system, the waters of the state,
or to cause, permit, or allow a discharge that is composed of anything except
stormwater or other discharges authorized by the Stormwater Manager.
   (D)   The Stormwater Manager will develop procedures for detecting,
tracking, and eliminating illicit discharges and improper disposals to the
stormwater system.
   (E)   After a reasonable determination is made by the Stormwater Manager
that the discharge is not a significant source of pollution, the Stormwater
Manager may require controls for or exempt from the prohibition provisions in
divisions (A), (B), and (C) above the following:
      (1)   Unpolluted industrial cooling water, but only under the
authorization and direction of the Stormwater Manager and if appropriate
industrial NPDES permit is in place;
      (2)   Water line flushing, diverted stream flows, rising ground waters,
and uncontaminated pumped ground waters, and uncontaminated ground water
infiltration;
      (3)   Discharges from potable water sources, foundation drains, air
conditioning condensation, landscape irrigation, springs, water from crawl
space pumps, footing drains, lawn watering, individual car washing,
dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, flows from riparian habitats and
wetlands, and street wash water; or
      (4)   Discharges or flows from fire fighting.
   (F)   The Stormwater Manager may develop procedures for allowing other non-
stormwater discharges.
(Ord. 2012-19, passed 11-15-2012; Ord. 2018-15, passed 12-20-2018)  Penalty,
see §
51.999
§ 51.060 DETECTION OF ILLICIT CONNECTIONS AND IMPROPER DISPOSAL.
   (A)   The Stormwater Manager will take appropriate steps to detect and
eliminate illicit connections to the town’s stormwater system, including the
adoption of a program to screen illicit discharges and identify their source or
sources, perform inspections, and levy fines if not removed.
   (B)   The Stormwater Manager will take appropriate steps to detect and
eliminate improper discharges. These steps may include programs to screen for
disposal, programs to provide for public education and public information,
inspection, levying fines, and other appropriate activities to facilitate the
proper management and elimination of illicit discharges.
(Ord. 2012-19, passed 11-15-2012; Ord. 2018-15, passed 12-20-2018)
§ 51.061 WASTE DISPOSAL PROHIBITIONS.
   This subchapter prohibits non-authorized discharges, illicit dumping, or
disposal of waste into any stormwater system or waters of this state.
(Ord. 2012-19, passed 11-15-2012) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.062 DISCHARGES IN VIOLATION OF NPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORMWATER
DISCHARGES ASSOCIATED WITH INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY PERMIT.
   Any owner, operator, or person subject to a violation of the NPDES general
permit for stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity permit
(except construction activities) shall comply with all provisions of the
permit. Proof of compliance with the permit will be required in a form
acceptable to the Stormwater Manager prior to or as a condition of the issuance
of approval of an application or a building permit.
(Ord. 2012-19, passed 11-15-2012; Ord. 2018-15, passed 12-20-2018)
§ 51.063 MONITORING.
   The Stormwater Manager may monitor the quantity and concentration of
pollutants in stormwater discharges from the areas or locations designated in
the town’s SWMP.
(Ord. 2012-19, passed 11-15-2012; Ord. 2018-15, passed 12-20-2018)
§ 51.064 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The Stormwater Manager may enter upon and inspect all properties for
regular inspections, periodic investigations, monitoring, observation,
measurement, enforcement, sampling, and testing, to effectuate the provisions
of this subchapter and the SWMP programs.
   (B)   Upon refusal by any property owner, operator, or person to permit an
inspector to enter upon the property or continue an inspection on the property,
the inspector shall terminate the inspection or confine the inspection to
portions of the property to which no objection is raised. The Stormwater
Manager will document the refusal and proceed according to this chapter.
   (C)   In the event that the Stormwater Manager reasonably believes that
discharges from the property into a stormwater system may cause an imminent and
substantial threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public or the
environment, an inspection may be conducted.
   (D)   Inspection reports will be maintained in a permanent file located in
the town’s Building Department.
   (E)   At any time during an inspection or at such other times as the
Stormwater Manager may request information from an owner, operator, or other
responsible person, that owner, operator, or other responsible person may
identify areas of his or her system or facility, any material, processes, or
information that contain or might reveal a trade secret. If the Stormwater
Manager has no reason to question such identification, all material, processes,
and information obtained within such areas shall be conspicuously labeled
“CONFIDENTIAL–TRADE SECRET.” The trade secret designation shall be freely
granted to any material claimed to be such by the owner or representative
unless there is clear and convincing evidence for denying such designation. In
the event the Stormwater Manager does not agree with the trade secret
designation, the material shall be temporarily designated a trade secret and
the owner or representative may appeal the Stormwater Manager’s decision in the
manner in which all such appeals are handled in this subchapter.
(Ord. 2012-19, passed 11-15-2012; Ord. 2018-15, passed 12-20-2018)
§ 51.065 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   If the Stormwater Manager determines that work performed for new
development and re- development fails to conform to the approved application,
or that the work has not been performed, the Stormwater Manager may direct
conformity by sending written notice of violation (NOV) to the property owner,
operator, or other responsible person. Such notice of violation will be in
accordance with the Manual.
      (1)   The actions of the Stormwater Manager may include:
         (a)   Issuing a written order to comply, to suspend work, or to revoke
the approval issued;
         (b)   Withholding or revoking other permits related to the site;
         (c)   Withholding the release of permanent electric power to the site
or certificate of occupancy; and/or
         (d)   Seeking redress through legal action.
      (2)   The NOV shall serve as notice to remove the violation(s). The NOV
shall be provided to the owner, operator, or person responsible for the land
disturbing activities stating the nature of the violation, the amount of time
to correct deficiencies, the date on which an inspection will be made to ensure
that corrective action has been performed, and the applicable penalty or fine
if corrective action is not taken by the inspection date. After the issuance of
the NOV, the Stormwater Manager may issue a uniform summons citation in
accordance with the Manual.
   (B)   When the Stormwater Manager determines that an owner, operator, or
other responsible person has failed to maintain a stormwater system or
facility, the NOV shall be provided to the owner, operator, or other
responsible person stating the nature of the violation, the amount of time in
which to correct deficiencies, the date on which an inspection will be made to
ensure that corrective action has been performed, and the applicable penalty or
fine if corrective action is not taken. It shall be sufficient notification to
deliver the notice in accordance with the Manual.
   (C)   When the Stormwater Manager determines that an owner, operator, or
other responsible person of any property is causing or partially causing
flooding, erosion, or is in noncompliance with water quality standards or this
subchapter, the Stormwater Manager may require the owner, operator, or other
responsible person to remedy the violation and restore the impacted property. A
NOV will be issued in accordance with the Manual.
   (D)   This subchapter may be enforced by any remedy at law or in equity
available to the Stormwater Manager under any federal and state laws and
regulations. The penalties and remedies provided in this subchapter are
cumulative and not exclusive, and may be independently and separately pursued
against the same person for the activity constituting a violation.
(Ord. 2012-19, passed 11-15-2012; Ord. 2018-15, passed 12-20-2018)  Penalty,
see §
51.999
§ 51.066 ADDITIONAL LEGAL MEASURES.
   If the town is fined or subjected to a compliance schedule by the state or
federal government for a violation of its NPDES permit by any owner, operator,
or other person, the owner, operator, or other person shall be liable to the
town for any and all penalties, expenses, fees, and costs of compliance
associated therewith.
(Ord. 2012-19, passed 11-15-2012)
§ 51.067 CORRECTIVE ACTION.
   In the event a violation of this subchapter has not been corrected within
the applicable time period for correction, the town may enter upon the real
property and correct the violation. Any penalties, expenses, fees, and costs
incurred as a result of such action, including but not limited to the
inspection, administration, labor, and equipment costs, shall be forfeited from
any bond issued for the project.
(Ord. 2012-19, passed 11-15-2012)
§ 51.068 STOP WORK ORDER.
   The Stormwater Manager may issue a stop work order if any construction
activity conducted in violation of this subchapter. The stop work order shall
require correction of the NOV. Any owner, operator, or other person in
violation of a stop work order is subject to payment of all fees, bonds, and
penalties prior to the lifting of the stop work order.
(Ord. 2012-19, passed 11-15-2012; Ord. 2018-15, passed 12-20-2018)
§ 51.069 APPROVAL SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   An approved application may be suspended or revoked if one or more of the
following violations have been committed:
   (A)   Violations of the conditions of the approved application;
   (B)   Construction is not in accordance with the letter or intent of the
approved plans;
   (C)   Non-compliance with correction notice(s) or stop work order(s); and/or
   (D)   The existence of an immediate danger to a downstream area.
(Ord. 2012-19, passed 11-15-2012)
§ 51.070 DESIGN CRITERIA.
   (A)   The Stormwater Manager may grant a variance from the requirements of
this subchapter if exceptional circumstances exist such that strict adherence
to the provisions of the subchapter will result in unnecessary hardship to the
owner, operator, or other person and will not fulfill the intent of the
subchapter.
   (B)   A written request for a variance shall be required and shall be
submitted in accordance with the Manual.
(Ord. 2012-19, passed 11-15-2012; Ord. 2018-15, passed 12-20-2018)
§ 51.071 APPEALS PROCESS.
   (A)   An applicant may appeal the decision of the Zoning Administrator to
the Charleston County Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals within 30
days after the date of the Stormwater Manager’s response. The Stormwater
Manager shall provide the petition form to the Utility customer.
   (B)   The petition must be accompanied with a $25 fee that will be used to
partially defray the costs incurred in connection with the administration of
petitions filed pursuant to this section.
   (C)   The Charleston County Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals
shall hear the petition to determine if the annual Stormwater Management
Utility fee does not apportion the fee with approximate equality, based upon a
reasonable basis of classification and with due regard to the benefits
conferred by providing stormwater management services to the Utility customer
and the requirements of public health, safety, or welfare. The determination of
the annual fee by the Charleston County Construction Board of Adjustment and
Appeals is entitled to a presumption of correctness, and the petitioner has the
burden of rebutting the presumption of correctness.
   (D)   The Charleston County Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals
shall render a written decision on each petition that is heard, and such
written decision shall be issued within 20 calendar days from the day the Board
heard the petition. The decision of the Charleston County Construction Board of
Adjustment and Appeals shall contain findings of fact and conclusions of law
and the decision shall be sent to the petitioner by first class mail.
   (E)   The decision of the Charleston County Construction Board of Adjustment
and Appeals shall be final unless the petitioner appeals the decision to the
circuit court in the county within 30 days after the date of the decision of
the Charleston County Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals. Prior to
bringing an action to contest an annual fee, the petitioner shall pay to the
Finance Officer not less than the amount of the annual fee which he or she
admits in good faith is due and owing. Payment of the fee shall not be deemed
an admission that the annual fee was correct and shall not prejudice the
petitioner in bringing an action as provided herein.
(Ord. 2012-19, passed 11-15-2012; Ord. 2018-15, passed 12-20-2018)
§ 51.072 FUNDING.
   In addition to all other charges, fees, and penalties, the town shall have
the right to develop and impose a stormwater service fee to fund implementation
of this subchapter and its associated programs and plans.
(Ord. 2012-19, passed 11-15-2012)
§ 51.073 CONNECTION TO CONVEYANCES.
   The Stormwater Manager shall have the right to establish a schedule of
appropriate fees for any owner, operator, or person establishing a new
discharge to waters of the state within the town. Such fees shall be payable as
part of any application related to the discharge of stormwater runoff.
Application fees shall be established on the basis of facility classes relating
to the quantity and quality of approved discharge. Establishment and revision
of such fees shall be approved by Town Council.
(Ord. 2012-19, passed 11-15-2012; Ord. 2018-15, passed 12-20-2018)
§ 51.074 PLAN REVIEW.
   A fee associated with the plan review of land development construction
documents may be assessed. Establishment and revision of such fees shall be
approved by Town Council.
(Ord. 2012-19, passed 11-15-2012)
§ 51.075 FIELD INSPECTION.
   A fee associated with the field inspection and re-inspections of land
development or construction activities may be assessed. Establishment and
revision of such fees shall be approved by Town Council.
(Ord. 2012-19, passed 11-15-2012)
§ 51.076 SUPPLEMENTAL STORMWATER DESIGN STANDARDS MANUAL ADOPTED.
   The town hereby adopts the Supplemental Stormwater Design Standards Manual,
as thereafter amended, and incorporates the Manual by reference as if fully set
out herein. A copy of the Manual is attached to Ord. 2020-05 as Exhibit A, and
is available for public inspection during normal business hours in the town
offices.
(Ord. 2020-05, passed 5-21-2020; Ord. 2024-07, passed 9-19-2024)
§ 51.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   General. Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is provided shall be subject to the penalty provisions in §
10.99.
   (B)   Stormwater Management Utility.
      (1)   In addition to any other penalties provided in §§
51.001 through
51.012 of this chapter, the town may assess a civil penalty not to exceed
$1,000, against any person violating any provision of §§
51.001 through
51.012. Each day a violation continues constitutes a separate violation that
may be the subject of such a penalty. The enforcement officer shall make a
written demand for payment upon the person responsible for the violation and
set forth in detail the violation for when the penalty has been invoked. If
full payment of the penalty is not made within 30 days after such demand is
made, a civil action may be filed in the circuit court of the county to recover
the amount of the penalty.
      (2)   When the town has reasonable cause to believe that any person is
violating or is threatening to violate the requirements of §§
51.001 through
51.012, it may, either before or after the institution of any other action or
proceeding authorized by §§
51.001 through
51.012, institute a civil action in circuit court for injunctive relief to
restrain the violation or threatened violation. The institution of an action
for injunctive relief under this division does not relieve any party to the
proceeding from any civil penalty prescribed for violations of §§
51.001 through
51.012.
      (3)   The amount of the fee shall be pursuant to the town’s Stormwater
Management Utility Fee Ordinance.
   (C)   Stormwater management program.
      (1)   Civil. Any person violating any provision of §§
51.040 through
51.075 of this chapter shall be subject to a civil penalty of up to $1,000 for
each violation. Each separate day of a violation constitutes a new and separate
violation.
      (2)   Criminal. In addition to any applicable civil penalties, any owner,
operator, or other person who willfully, with wanton disregard, or
intentionally violates any provision of §§
51.040 through
51.075 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished within the
jurisdictional limits of the county’s magistrates court. The Code Enforcement
Officer may issue a uniform summons citation for a violation of §§
51.040 through
51.075. Fines imposed under the NOV may not exceed $500 per violation or 30
days in jail, or both. Each day a violation remains constitutes a separate
offense.
(Ord. 2012-18, passed 11-15-2012; Ord. 2012-19, passed 11-15-2012; Ord. 2018-
15, passed 12-20-2018)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
   
70.01   Speed limits on local residential roads
   
70.02   Town provisions concerning careless driving
   
70.03   Erecting signage
   
70.04   Minimum width of roadway required to be free for traffic; blocking
public or private driveway prohibited
   
70.05   Impounding unoccupied and unattended vehicles
 
   
70.99   Penalty
§ 70.01 SPEED LIMITS ON LOCAL RESIDENTIAL ROADS.
   (A)   The speed limit on local residential neighborhood roads under town
jurisdiction is 25 mph.
   (B)   The County Sheriff’s Office is authorized to enforce this section.
(Ord. 2013-16, passed 11-21-2013)
§ 70.02 TOWN PROVISIONS CONCERNING CARELESS DRIVING.
   (A)   Unlawful. It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle upon a public
way negligently, heedlessly, and without due caution in a manner so as to
endanger any person or property.
   (B)   Exclusion. This offense shall in no way whatsoever be used as an
alternative or lesser charge for driving under the influence of intoxicants,
driving under suspension of driving license, passing a stopped school bus, or
reckless driving.
(Ord. 2012-14, passed 11-15-2012) Penalty, see §
70.99
Editor’s note:
   The regulations set forth in this section and its related penalty are based
on those of Charleston County Code Section 14.5-1, which was adopted by the
town’s Ordinance 2012-14 on November 15, 2012.
§ 70.03 ERECTING SIGNAGE.
   Pursuant to S.C. Code § 56-5-710, Town Council hereby empowers the
Department of Public Works to erect stop signs, no parking signs and other
traffic-control devices on town streets under its jurisdiction as it may deem
necessary to regulate, warn, and guide traffic using such locations and
streets.
(Ord. 2019-03, passed 7-25-2019)
§ 70.04 MINIMUM WIDTH OF ROADWAY REQUIRED TO BE FREE FOR TRAFFIC; BLOCKING
PUBLIC OR PRIVATE DRIVEWAY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street in such
a manner as to leave available less than 15 feet of the width of the roadway
for the free movement of vehicular traffic, except that a driver shall stop
when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals
or a police officer.
   (B)   No person shall stand, stop or park any vehicle in front of a public
or private driveway or within three feet of either side thereof, or on the
opposite side of any public or private driveway in such a manner as to inhibit
the entry or departure from the driveway or block necessary service delivery
(i.e., mail delivery, trash pick-up) and to ensure emergency vehicle access.
Any duly authorized person, prior to issuing a uniform ordinance summons for a
violation of this division (B), shall determine that the vehicle is inhibiting
the entry or departure from such driveway.
(Ord. 2019-03, passed 7-25-2019) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.05 IMPOUNDING UNOCCUPIED AND UNATTENDED VEHICLES.
   Any unoccupied and unattended vehicle found violating the terms of this
chapter may be removed and impounded by any duly authorized person and shall be
surrendered to the duly identified owner thereof only upon payment of cost of
impounding.
(Ord. 2019-03, passed 7-25-2019) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this title for which no specific
penalty is provided shall be subject to the penalty provisions in §
10.99.
   (B)    Any person who violates §§
70.02 through
70.05 shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $200, or
imprisoned for not more than 30 days. However, if the court in its discretion
finds that a fine or imprisonment, or a portion thereof, is inappropriate under
the circumstances, the violator may be sentenced up to 30 days of public
service for the town in lieu of the fine or imprisonment.
(Ord. 2012-14, passed 11-15-2012; Am. Ord. 2019-03, passed 7-25-2019)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   TOWN REGULATIONS CONCERNING LIVABILITY
      
91.   TOWN REGULATIONS CONCERNING WEEDS, RANK VEGETATION, AND SOLID WASTE
      
92.   TOWN REGULATIONS CONCERNING LITTER CONTROL
      
93.   FIREWORKS
CHAPTER 90: TOWN REGULATIONS CONCERNING LIVABILITY
Section
Animals and Fowl
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Seizure and right of entry to protect abandoned, neglected or cruelly
treated animals
   
90.03   Vaccination against rabies
   
90.04   Enforcement of rabies control provisions
   
90.05   Impoundment of pets running at large; disposition
   
90.06   Redemption
   
90.07   Animal care
   
90.08   Impoundment without proper care due to incapacity or involuntary
absence of owner
   
90.09   Designation of animal shelter, disposal of impounded animals
   
90.10   Adoption
   
90.11   Restraint
   
90.12   Duties
   
90.13   Uniform, badges required
   
90.14   Free-roaming cat program
   
90.15   Identification of dogs and cats
   
90.16   Nuisances
   
90.17   Raising/keeping chickens on residential property
Noise Offenses
   
90.30   Definition
   
90.31   Noise; amplified sound from vehicles
   
90.32   Noise; amplified sound in general
   
90.33   Excessive, unnecessary or unreasonable noise
   
90.34   Noise; private action
 
   
90.99   Penalty
Editor's note:
   The regulations set forth in this chapter are based on those of Charleston
County Code, as adopted by county Ord. 1702, passed 10-25-2011.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to provide for public health, safety, police protection and
sanitation, S.C. § 4-9-30(5); authority to provide for control of dogs and
other domestic pets, S.C. § 47-3-20; rabies control, S.C. § 47-5-10 et seq.
ANIMALS AND FOWL
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONMENT. A situation in which an owner of an animal or pet does not
provide for humane disposal of the animal or pet, or does not transfer
ownership to a responsible person, or who does not provide or arrange for
adequate food, water, shelter and care.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICERS. The persons designated by the county sheriff’s
office as the enforcement officers of the provisions of this subchapter.
   ANIMALS. Any live, vertebrate creature, domestic or wild, which shall
include all brute creatures that are owned by persons or kept as pets.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. Any premises designated by the county's governing body for
the purpose of impoundment, care or destruction of animals or pets found in
violation of this subchapter.
   ANIMAL SHELTER OPERATION. An organization charged with the operation of an
animal shelter (i.e., Charleston Animal Society) under an agreement with the
county government.
   AT LARGE. An animal which is off the property and/or premises of the owner
or keeper and not under physical control by owner or keeper by means of a leash
or restraint.
   COUNTY. The unincorporated portions of Charleston County.
   DANGEROUS ANIMAL. An animal which:
      (1)   The owner knows, or reasonably should know, has a propensity,
tendency, or disposition to attack unprovoked, cause injury, or otherwise
endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals;
      (2)   Makes an unprovoked attack that causes bodily injury to a human
being and the attack occurs in a place other than the place where the animal is
confined;
      (3)   Commits unprovoked acts in a place other than the place where the
animal is confined and those acts cause a person to reasonably believe that the
animal will attack and cause bodily injury to a human being; or
      (4)   Is owned or harbored primarily, or in part, for the purpose of
fighting or which is trained for fighting.
   DANGEROUS ANIMAL does not include an animal used exclusively for
agricultural purposes or an animal which attacks a person who is trespassing or
who appears to be trespassing. A trespasser is a person who is not lawfully
upon the property of another.
   INJURY or BODILY INJURY. Broken bones, lacerations, punctures of the skin,
or any physical injury resulting in death.
   LIVESTOCK. Horses, bovine, sheep, goats, and swine.
   OWNER. A person who owns or has custody or control of the animal.
   PET. Any animal which may legally be held as a pet by private citizens
without special permit or permission required; i.e., dogs (Canis familiaris),
cats (Felis catus). With the exception of dogs and cats, items one through six
below are "exotic" pets or wildlife which require special permits.
      (1)   Family Canidae: Coyote, wolves, foxes, dogs.
      (2)   Family Ursidae: Bears.
      (3)   Family Procyonidae: Raccoons and allies.
      (4)   Family Mustelidae: Marten, fisher, weasel, ferret, mink, ermine,
tayra, grison, wolverine, badger, skunk, otter.
      (5)   Family Vevirridae: Mongoose.
      (6)   Family Felidae: Cats and allies.
   RESTRAINT. When a pet or animal is confined to the premises of its owner or
keeper by fence, chain, or other appropriate measure, on the premises of its
owner or keeper, or when a pet is accompanied by owner or keeper and is
physically controlled by a leash or similar physical device.
   STRAY. Any animal running at large without identification.
   VACCINATION AGAINST RABIES. The injection, subcutaneously, intramuscularly
or otherwise, of antirabies vaccine as approved by the department of
agriculture/veterinary biologies division, administered by a licensed
veterinarian.
(Ord. 2012-09, passed 9-20-2012)
§ 90.02 SEIZURE AND RIGHT OF ENTRY TO PROTECT ABANDONED, NEGLECTED OR CRUELLY
TREATED ANIMALS.
   (A)   Any animal control officer may lawfully take charge of any animal
found abandoned, neglected, or cruelly treated or unfit for use, and shall
petition any magistrates court in the jury area wherein the animal is found,
for a hearing which shall be a civil proceeding. The hearing shall be set not
more than ten days from the date of the seizure of the animal to determine
whether the owner, if known, is able to adequately provide for the animal and
is a fit person to own the animal. The animal control officer shall cause to be
served upon the owner, if known and residing within the jurisdiction wherein
the animal is found, written notice at least five days prior to the hearing of
the time and place of the hearing. If the owner is known but residing out of
the jurisdiction where such animal is found, written notice by any method or
service of process as is provided by South Carolina Code of Civil Procedure
shall be given. If the owner is unknown at the time of seizure, it shall be
considered a stray. The animal control officer may provide for such animal
until the owner is adjudged by the court able to adequately provide for such
animal and a fit person to own the animal, in which case the animal shall be
returned to the owner. If the owner is adjudged by the court unable to
adequately provide for the animal or not a fit person to own the animal, then
the court shall order that the animal be placed for adoption in a suitable
home, or humanely destroyed. The court, in determining whether the owner is
able to adequately provide for the animal or is a fit person to own the animal,
may take into consideration, among other things, the owner's past record of
convictions under this subchapter, or one similar thereto, and the owner's
mental and physical condition.
   (B)   If the magistrate's court determines that the owner is unable to care
for any animal or is not a fit person to own such animal, the owner may appeal
that decision to the court of common pleas (nonjury) of the county by serving a
copy of his/her notice of appeal on the magistrate within 30 days following the
decision together with an appeal bond in an amount equal to the contractual
daily rate charged to the county by the Charleston Animal Society, or other
designated animal shelter(s), which rate shall be established by adoption in
the county budget ordinance effective July 1 each year, multiplied by 90 days,
which is the typical time within which an appeal is heard. Should the hearing
on appeal be delayed beyond 90 days, the circuit judge, in his/her discretion,
may impose an additional bond amount on the owner. Should the appeal result in
a reversal of the magistrate's decision or a remand of the matter for a new
hearing, the bond will be returned to the owner. However, if the magistrate's
decision is affirmed, the bond shall be forfeited to the county sheriff’s
office for its use in reimbursing the animal shelter for its costs of care for
the animal. Should the owner appeal from the circuit court's decision,
additional bonds shall be assessed in an amount to be determined by the
appellate court.
   (C)   Nothing in the section shall be construed to prohibit the destruction
of a critically injured or ill animal or an animal identified as carrying or
having an infectious or contagious condition or disease or any unidentified
animal deemed to represent a physical danger to the public, animal control,
shelter staff, or other impounded animals may be humanely euthanized upon
agreement by animal control and shelter staff.
(Ord. 2012-09, passed 9-20-2012)
§ 90.03 VACCINATION AGAINST RABIES.
   (A)   No person shall own, keep, or harbor any dog or cat within the town
unless such pet has been vaccinated against rabies as provided herein. The
provisions of this section shall only apply to dogs or cats over three months
old.
   (B)   All rabies vaccinations (as evidenced by certificate) shall be from a
licensed graduate veterinarian using a vaccine which is good for a period
longer than one year; provided such vaccine has been approved with the longer
period of time specified by the South Carolina Department of Health and
Environmental Control after consultation with the executive committee of the
South Carolina Association of Veterinarians.
   (C)   A South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control
Certificate of Pet Rabies Vaccination will be issued by a licensed graduate
veterinarian for each dog or cat, stating the name and address of owner, the
name, breed, color and markings, age, sex of animal, and the veterinary or
pharmaceutical control number of the vaccination.
   (D)   Coincident with the issuance of the certificate, the licensed graduate
veterinarian shall also furnish a serially numbered metal tag bearing the same
number and year as is on the certificate. The metal license tag shall bear the
name of the veterinarian and shall at all times be attached to a collar or
harness worn by the dog or cat for which the certificate and tag have been
issued. Note: These tags shall be issued in accordance with the recommendation
of the National Association of Public Health Veterinarians as to tag, shape and
color.
   (E)   The owner shall have a valid certificate of rabies vaccination readily
available at all times for inspection by an animal control officer or health
official.
   (F)   In the event that a rabies tag is lost, the owner shall obtain a
duplicate tag within seven working days.
   (G)   A certificate of rabies vaccination issued by a licensed veterinarian
from another state will be accepted as valid evidence of vaccination, provided
it is less than a year from date of issue.
(Ord. 2012-09, passed 9-20-2012)
§ 90.04 ENFORCEMENT OF RABIES CONTROL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this section relating to control of rabies and the
provisions of S.C. §§ 47-5-10 et seq., (Rabies Control Act) shall be enforced
by animal control officers and state health department rabies control officers.
   (B)   Animals found running at large or having no valid rabies inoculation
tags shall be impounded by the animal control officer, and disposed of after
remaining unclaimed for five days.
   (C)   Animals impounded under the provisions of S.C. § 47-5-130 (Rabies
Control Act) may only be redeemed after showing proof of current rabies
inoculation, or payment for rabies inoculation, and payment for daily boarding
cost assessed by animal control.
(Ord. 2012-09, passed 9-20-2012)
§ 90.05 IMPOUNDMENT OF PETS RUNNING AT LARGE; DISPOSITION.
   (A)   Any pet or dangerous pet running at large may be impounded by the
animal control officer or any of the persons empowered to enforce this
subchapter and transported to the county animal shelter, or to any other
nonprofit animal shelter designated by County Council, and there impounded and
confined until redeemed or disposed of as hereinafter provided. If an animal is
transported to an animal shelter other than the county animal shelter, the
redemption fee cited in §
90.06 shall not be collected.
   (B)   Immediately after impounding any properly tagged pet, the animal
control officer and/or animal shelter operator shall make a reasonable effort
to notify the owner in writing or by telephone of its impoundment and to inform
the owner of the conditions whereby he can regain custody of the pet.
   (C)   At-large animals and pets shall be either euthanized after five
working days, or placed for adoption at the discretion of the animal shelter
operator.
   (D)   It shall be the duty of the animal shelter operator to keep accurate
and detailed records of seizures and dispositions of all animals coming into
their custody. Such records must be kept a minimum of two years.
   (E)   Any animal determined by the animal control officer to be abandoned
shall be impounded by the animal control officer.
   (F)   Exempt dogs. No hunting dog is required to be constrained by a leash
while it is actually engaged in hunting game and under supervision. As used in
this section, SUPERVISION means that the owner of the hunting dog or his/his
designee is either in the vicinity of the hunting dog or in the process of
trying to retrieve the hunting dog.
(Ord. 2012-09, passed 9-20-2012)
Statutory reference:
   Hunting, S.C. § 50-11-150
§ 90.06 REDEMPTION.
   (A)   Requirements. The owner shall be entitled to resume possession of a
pet impounded under §
90.05 upon compliance with the rabies vaccination requirement, proper
identification, and the payment of redemption fees herein set forth.
   (B)   Application. The owner of an impounded pet must apply for the
redemption of this pet. The pet may not be released unless authorized by the
animal control officer or animal shelter operator with assurance from the owner
that proper care and custody will be maintained.
   (C)   Redemption fees. The fees set forth herein shall be collected from the
owner by the animal control officer or animal shelter operator and turned over
to the County Treasurer, who shall make monthly accounting of such funds. Such
fees shall go toward defraying the expense of operating the animal shelter. A
redemption fee will be charged for impoundment and payment for daily boarding
costs for animals, excluding livestock, as assessed by the county.
   (D)   Impoundment of livestock. The impoundment fee for livestock will be
$50, plus daily boarding costs as assessed by the county.
   (E)   Prohibitions. It shall be unlawful for any person to release from
impoundment without proper authority any pet, or to resist an animal control
officer engaged in the impoundment of any pet.
   (F)   Sterilization; intact redemption fee. No impounded pet may be redeemed
without:
      (1)   First having been surgically sterilized and a fee paid therefor,
which fee shall not exceed the fee charged by the shelter for the sterilization
of animals prior to adoption; or
      (2)   Paying a redemption fee of $200 to redeem the pet intact. If an
intact pet comes to be impounded for a second or subsequent time in a calendar
year, the intact redemption fee shall be $1,000. These provisions shall only
apply to pets whose owners' residence is within the town.
      (3)   Sterilization under this section may not take place sooner than
after the fifth working day following the pet's placement in the custody of the
shelter, or when the owner appears at the shelter to reclaim the animal,
whichever is sooner.
      (4)   If the owner declines to pay the intact redemption fee, such owner
may arrange for the pet to be sterilized by a veterinarian of the owner's
choosing, and the owner must pay all costs of such sterilization. If an owner
chooses this method, the shelter shall transport the animal to the veterinarian
for sterilization, unless the veterinarian or his/her designee transports the
pet to the veterinary facility. The owner may retrieve the pet from the
veterinarian's office following sterilization.
   (G)   The owner must provide proof of sterilization to the shelter.
   (H)   The shelter must give written notice of the policies and options
regarding redemption and sterilization set forth herein to owners seeking to
redeem their pets.
(Ord. 2012-09, passed 9-20-2012)
§ 90.07 ANIMAL CARE.
   (A)   No person or those owning, or having possession, charge, custody, or
control of any animal, shall cause or fail to provide said animal with
sufficient good and wholesome food, clean water, proper shelter, care and
veterinary treatment when needed.
   (B)   An animal control officer shall issue a summons if there is probable
cause to believe that a violation of any provision of this subchapter has been
violated, including the following violations:
      (1)   Abandon an animal, or cause to be abandoned;
      (2)   Expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or
not, so that the same shall reasonably be expected to be eaten by any animal,
fish, bird, fowl, or reptile; provided that it shall not be unlawful for a
person to expose on his/her own property common rat poison mixed only with
vegetable substances;
      (3)   Cruelly beat, ill-treat, torment, torture, overload, overwork, or
otherwise abuse an animal, or cause, instigate, or permit, any fight, or other
combat between animals, or animal and human;
      (4)   No person, except a licensed veterinarian, shall perform an
operation to crop, notch, or split an animal's ear or tail;
      (5)   Failure to provide treatment or denial of treatment for any
diseased, sick or injured animal;
      (6)   Failure or denial of necessary sustenance, such as food in an
inadequate amount to sustain flesh or permit normal growth, an inadequate
amount of clean water, or water that is sour, filthy, or spoiled;
      (7)   Failure or denial of proper confinement, to remove excrement and
keep shelter or confinement area clean, odor free, and free of ticks, fleas,
flies, or mosquitoes;
      (8)   Tease, bait, or in any way molest any animal not belonging to him
or legally under his/his control;
      (9)   Failure or denial to provide shelter for any animal, fish, bird,
fowl, or reptile of any kind in any manner without shading same from the sun,
any direct light, heat or cold and providing adequate ventilation for their
use;
      (10)   Sell, offer for sale, barter, or give away, any animal, fowl, or
reptile which cannot care for itself, which is unweaned;
      (11)   Allowing animals to run free, break loose, or escape in any
manner;
      (12)   Give away any live animal, fish, bird, fowl, or reptile, as a
prize for, or as an inducement to enter, any contest, game, or other
competition, or as an inducement to enter a place of amusement, or offer such
species as an incentive to enter into any business agreement whereby the offer
was for the purpose of attracting trade.
   (C)   Any person, as the operator of a vehicle, who strikes a dog or cat,
should, if reasonably possible, report the accident to the owner, the animal
control division, or the police department.
(Ord. 2012-09, passed 9-20-2012)
§ 90.08 IMPOUNDMENT WITHOUT PROPER CARE DUE TO INCAPACITY OR INVOLUNTARY
ABSENCE OF OWNER.
   Whenever the animal control officer finds that any animal is or will be
without proper care because of injury, illness, incarceration or other
involuntary absence of the person responsible for the care of such animal, the
animal control officer may impound such animal until reclaimed by its owner, or
transport the animal to a County Council-designated nonprofit animal shelter.
The owner must pay the applicable fees in the same manner as any other owner
would redeem an impounded animal prior to the release of such animal by the
division. In no event shall the animal control officer be required to board an
animal for more than 14 days, or any longer than 48 hours after the condition
which caused the impoundment ceases to exist.
(Ord. 2012-09, passed 9-20-2012)
§ 90.09 DESIGNATION OF ANIMAL SHELTER, DISPOSAL OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.
   It shall be the duty of the animal control officer or his/her authorized
representative under the auspices of a veterinarian to order the humane
destruction, by any animal control officer or authorized representative, of any
animal lawfully taken into the custody of the animal control officer which is
affected with any dangerous or communicable disease, or which is facing death
due to injury.
(Ord. 2012-09, passed 9-20-2012)
§ 90.10 ADOPTION.
   (A)   At the end of the detention periods set forth in §§
90.04(B) or
90.05(C), the ownership of (or title to) a pet impounded under the provisions
of this subchapter shall be transferred to the animal shelter operation
Charleston Animal Society, which may attempt to adopt out the pet to a
responsible new owner. All required fees must be paid at the time of adoption.
   (B)   No animal over three months of age shall be released or adopted until
prepayment is made for vaccination against rabies.
   (C)   All animals adopted by the shelter operator shall be surgically
sterilized or have provisions made for the animal's surgical sterilization
prior to release for adoption.
(Ord. 2012-09, passed 9-20-2012)
§ 90.11 RESTRAINT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or custodian of any animal to
permit same to run at large at any time upon streets or highways or properties
other than his/her own property within the town. Such owner or custodian shall
comply with the definition of RESTRAINT in §
90.01.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to keep a dangerous dog in any manner not allowed
under S.C. §§ 47-3-610 et seq.
   (C)   Every female dog in heat and every female cat in heat shall be
confined in a building or secure enclosure so that the female dog cannot come
into contact with a male dog, nor the female cat come into contact with a male
cat.
(Ord. 2012-09, passed 9-20-2012)
§ 90.12 DUTIES.
   (A)   The division of animal control shall be charged with the
responsibility of:
      (1)   Cooperating with the health officers of the various state
governmental units and assisting in the enforcement of the laws of the state
with regard to the control of animals, and especially with regard to the
vaccination of dogs and cats against rabies;
      (2)   Investigating all complaints with regard to animals covered by this
subchapter;
      (3)   Enforcing within the town all of the state laws, ordinances enacted
by the town, and contracts entered into the town for the care, control and
custody of animals covered by this subchapter;
      (4)   Supervising and being in charge of animals impounded in the
shelter, until such time as ownership of such animals is given to the county's
animal shelter; and
      (5)   Enforcing provisions of state law regarding dangerous animals, S.C.
§ 47-3-710 et seq.
   (B)   The rabies control officer and his/her staff, as employees of the
Division of Rabies Control of South Carolina Department of Health and
Environmental Control (DHEC) are empowered to enforce the provisions of this
subchapter relating to rabies control. The provisions which they may enforce
are specifically in §
90.03 only. The rabies control officer and his/her staff shall:
      (1)   Provide separate summons numbered forms clearly indicating that
they are not officers of county animal control.
      (2)   Coordinate all issuance of summons with magistrates in order to
ensure proper scheduling of cases.
      (3)   Account for all summons issued in the same procedure required of
county animal control officers.
(Ord. 2012-09, passed 9-20-2012)
§ 90.13 UNIFORM, BADGES REQUIRED.
   Each person while performing his/her respective duties shall wear a uniform
and a badge of a size and design to be determined by the sheriff.
(Ord. 2012-09, passed 9-20-2012)
§ 90.14 FREE-ROAMING CAT PROGRAM.
   (A)   Free-roaming cats shall be allowed in the town as long as all of the
following requirements are met:
      (1)   Cat must be spayed or neutered.
      (2)   Cat must be microchipped.
      (3)   Cat must be vaccinated for rabies, feline viral rhinotracheitis,
calicivirus, and panleukopenia.
      (4)   Cat must be ear tipped.
   (B)   The Charleston Animal Society (CAS) shall be the designated shelter
and will work with the Humane Net Collaboration to develop rules and
regulations for the program. CAS shall create and develop rules and regulations
for the program. These rules and regulations shall be reviewed by county
Council and, if approved, adopted by resolution of county Council prior to
implementation of the program.
   (C)   The county may review the program two years after its inception to
assess its functionality and success.
(Ord. 2012-09, passed 9-20-2012)
§ 90.15 IDENTIFICATION OF DOGS AND CATS.
   (A)   Any person who owns or keeps a dog or cat three months of age or older
shall affix and maintain a durable metal or plastic identification tag on the
collar of the animal which has permanently stamped or printed thereon the
owner's address and phone number(s). The tag shall be maintained in such a
condition as to make the stamped or printed information clearly legible.
Microchip technology or tattooing as otherwise provided by law may be used in
lieu of a collar tag, provided that owner identification and contact
information remains current.
   (B)   The provisions of division (A) are not applicable when:
      (1)   The animal is participating in any organized exhibition, field
trial, competition or is in training for these events, or is undergoing
grooming;
      (2)   The dog or cat is confined in a boarding kennel, grooming facility
or veterinary hospital, in which case the identification tag information shall
be recorded and readily available; or
      (3)   When a licensed veterinarian orders in writing that the
identification tag and/or collar be removed for reasons of the animal's health,
in which case the animal shall be confined within an enclosed building, fenced
area or kennel at all times until the veterinarian permits the collar and tag
again to be placed on the animal.
(Ord. 2012-09, passed 9-20-2012)
§ 90.16 NUISANCES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, possess, or maintain
an animal in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance or a nuisance to
neighbors. By way of example and not of limitation, the following acts or
actions of an owner, harborer or possessor of an animal are hereby declared to
be a public nuisance and therefore unlawful:
   (B)   (1)   Having an animal that disturbs the rights of, threatens the
safety of, or damages a member of the general public, or interferes with the
ordinary use and enjoyment of their property, or public property; or
      (2)   Allowing or permitting an animal to damage the property of anyone
other than its owner, including, but not limited to, turning over garbage
containers or damaging gardens, flowers or vegetables, or repeatedly defecating
upon the property of another; or
      (3)   Maintaining animals in an environment of unsanitary conditions or
lack of cleanliness which results in offensive odor or is dangerous to the
public health, welfare or safety, or a failure to maintain a condition of good
order and cleanliness which reduces the probability of transmission of disease;
      (4)   Maintaining property that is offensive, annoying or dangerous to
the public health, safety or welfare of the community because of the number,
type, variety, density or location of the animals on the property;
      (5)   Allowing or permitting an animal to bark, whine or howl in an
excessive, continuous or untimely fashion so as to interfere with the
reasonable use and enjoyment of neighboring premises;
      (6)   Maintaining an animal that is diseased and dangerous to the public
health;
      (7)   Maintaining an animal that habitually or repeatedly chases, snaps
at, threatens, attacks or barks at pedestrians, joggers, dogs walked on a leash
by owners, bicycles, or vehicles; or
      (8)   Failing to confine a female dog or cat, while in season, in a
building or secure enclosure in such a manner that she cannot come into contact
with another dog or cat or creates a nuisance by attracting other animals;
provided this section shall not be construed to prohibit the intentional
breeding of animals within an enclosed, concealed area on the premises of the
owner of an animal which is being bred.
   (C)   In addition to the right of the county to bring an enforcement action
for violations of this section, any individual who is specifically damaged by
any violation may, in addition to other remedies, institute an appropriate
civil action or other proceeding in the magistrate court or circuit court to
abate or prevent the nuisance.
(Ord. 2012-09, passed 9-20-2012)
§ 90.17 RAISING/KEEPING CHICKENS ON RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.
   Chickens may be permitted for personal use only, subject to the following
conditions.
   (A)   One chicken per 2,500 square feet is allowed per parcel, with a total
maximum of 12 chickens allowed per parcel regardless of lot size.
   (B)   Roosters are prohibited.
   (C)   Chickens shall be confined to the back yard of the property and shall
not be allowed to roam off the owner's property. Should a property owner keep
chickens without a pen/coop/enclosure, the area where the chickens are kept
must be fenced. Fences shall comply with all applicable provisions of the
zoning ordinance and may require a permit.
   (D)   Chickens shall be maintained in a healthy and sanitary manner to avoid
potential health hazards or offensive odors.
   (E)   Pens/coops/enclosures shall meet all applicable provisions of the
Zoning and Land Development Regulations Ordinance relating to accessory
structures and shall be at least five feet from any property line. The
structure may require a permit.
   (F)   Nothing in this amendment to this chapter shall be deemed to override
private deed restrictions or homeowner/neighborhood association requirements
that prohibit or regulate chickens or farm animals on the affected property.
(Ord. 2016-10, passed 10-20-2016)
NOISE OFFENSES
§ 90.30 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   As used below, PLAINLY AUDIBLE means any sound that can be detected by a
person using his or her unaided hearing facilities.
(Ord. 2012-09, passed 9-20-2012)
§ 90.31 NOISE; AMPLIFIED SOUND FROM VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to play, operate, or cause to be played
or operated, any radio or other vehicular music or sound amplification or
reproduction equipment in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance
of 50 feet in any direction from the vehicle or plainly audible within the
residential dwelling of another. The detection of the rhythmic bass component
of the music or sound is sufficient to constitute a plainly audible sound.
Prohibitions contained in this section shall not be applicable to emergency or
public safety vehicles for sound emitted during job-related operation.
(Ord. 2012-09, passed 9-20-2012)
§ 90.32 NOISE; AMPLIFIED SOUND IN GENERAL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to play, operate, or cause to be played
or operated, any radio or other music or sound amplification or reproduction
equipment upon real property in such a manner as to be plainly audible within
any residential dwelling of another. The detection of the rhythmic bass
component of the music or sound is sufficient to constitute a plainly audible
sound.
(Ord. 2012-09, passed 9-20-2012)
§ 90.33 EXCESSIVE, UNNECESSARY OR UNREASONABLE NOISE.
   (A)   Any excessive, unnecessary, or unreasonable sound that is plainly
audible as set forth in §§
90.31 and
90.32 of this code which endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or
animals, or annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensibilities is
prohibited.
   (B)   The following shall be exempt from the prohibition contained in
division (A), supra:
      (1)   Church bells or other activities of organized religious services.
      (2)   Any siren, whistle, or bell lawfully used by emergency vehicles or
any other alarm systems used in any emergency situation, provided, however,
that burglar alarms not terminating within 15 minutes after being activated
shall be unlawful.
      (3)   Warning devices required by state or federal regulations.
      (4)   Farming equipment or farming activity.
      (5)   Timber harvesting and milling during daylight hours.
      (6)   Noise from domestic power equipment including, but not limited to,
chain saws, sanders, grinders, lawn and garden tools or similar devices
operated during daylight hours.
      (7)   Noise generated by any construction, demolition equipment, or
mineral extraction (including crushing, screening, or segregating) operated
during daytime hours as per local, state, or federal law or regulation, or as
otherwise provided for by permit or variance, whichever is more restrictive.
      (8)   Emergency maintenance, construction or repair work.
      (9)   Noise created by any government-sponsored events or privately
organized sports, recreation, or athletic events.
      (10)   Emergency or extraordinary situations.
      (11)   A business may use an outside sound system to notify patrons
waiting to pick up an order, obtain a table, or to be able to participate in
the activities of the business, provided that such sound does not create an
excessive, unnecessary or unreasonable noise.
      (12)   Noise from any idling vehicles at a commercial establishment in
the process of loading or unloading merchandise for the establishment, or
waiting for the opportunity to do the same.
(Ord. 2012-09, passed 9-20-2012)
§ 90.34 NOISE; PRIVATE ACTION.
   In addition to the right of the town to bring an enforcement action for
violations of this subchapter, any individual who is specifically damaged by
any violation of this subchapter related to noise may, in addition to other
remedies, institute an appropriate civil action or other proceeding in the
magistrate court or circuit court to abate or prevent the nuisance.
(Ord. 2012-09, passed 9-20-2012)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not more than
$500 or not more than 30 days in jail, or both.
(Ord. 2012-09, passed 9-20-2012)
CHAPTER 91: TOWN REGULATIONS CONCERNING WEEDS,
RANK VEGETATION, AND SOLID WASTE
Section
   
91.01   Accumulation prohibited; duty of owner to cut or remove
   
91.02   Untreated sewage
   
91.03   Privately-owned sewerage systems (septic tanks and septic tank systems)
   
91.04   Declaration of nuisance
   
91.05   Notice to owner to comply
   
91.06   Failure to comply
   
91.07   Abatement of nuisance by town
   
91.08   Appeal; hearing board; procedures
   
91.09   Conflict with other ordinances; severance
 
   
91.99   Penalty
Editor’s note:
   The regulations set forth in this chapter are based on those of Charleston
County Code Chapter 10, Article 1, which was adopted by the town’s Ordinance
2012-10 on October 18, 2012, modified by the town in Ordinance 2012-22 on
January 17, 2013, modified by the town in Ordinance 2015-15 on December 17,
2015, Ordinance 2018-03 on May 17, 2018, and Ordinance 2021-06 on October 21,
2021.
§ 91.01 ACCUMULATION PROHIBITED; DUTY OF OWNER TO CUT OR REMOVE.
   (A)   Improved property. It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of a
business building, single dwelling or multiple dwelling, or any property
improved for residential or commercial use, to allow weeds, grass or similar
vegetation to grow to a height of ten inches or more, and six feet in length
for uncultivated briars, vines, or other similar vegetation. Such height
constitutes a hazard or nuisance, real or potential, for harborage of vermin,
accumulation of litter and debris or other unsightly or injurious conditions.
Any lot which has been improved may not be allowed to revert to unimproved
status. An unimproved lot is a lot upon which clearing and grubbing has not
taken place. The following shall be exempt from this requirement:
      (1)   Any premises or part thereof on which such growth may be reasonably
demonstrated to be for agricultural or horticultural use and which is properly
attended;
      (2)   Wooded portions of rear or side yards where standard mowing
equipment cannot maneuver because of density, except that any 20-foot strip
adjacent to developed property or streets must have weeds, grass and vines
maintained below the height limitation and providing such lot is not otherwise
in violation of the provisions of this chapter; or
      (3)   Unimproved lots on which new permitted construction work is taking
place and during such time as the actual construction is in progress, except
for a ten-foot strip adjacent to any developed property, road or right-of-way.
   (B)   Unimproved property. An unimproved lot less than one acre that is in a
residential neighborhood shall be maintained in accordance with improved
properties outlined in division (A).
   (C)   Nuisances. Notwithstanding divisions (A) and (B) of this section, if
any of the following conditions exist on any portion of a lot or parcel of any
size, improved or unimproved, then such lot or parcel shall be deemed a
nuisance and a detriment to health and safety:
      (1)   The lot contains any accumulation of debris, rubbish, junk, tree
debris, tires or any type of refuse.
      (2)   The lot contains weeds or other growth which encroaches onto a
public sidewalk or roadway within ten feet above the level of the sidewalk or
14 feet above the level of the street.
      (3)   The lot contains evidence of the harboring of unlawful activity.
   (D)   It shall be the duty of the owner of any such lot or parcel in
violation of this section, including abutting owners of alleys in violation
thereof, to abate the unlawful condition. Owners and occupants of properties
which abut an alley shall be responsible up to the center point of such alley.
Owners and occupants of properties which include a public street right-of-way
shall be responsible up to and including the curb and gutter or street line.
(Ord. 2015-15, passed 12-17-2015)
§ 91.02 UNTREATED SEWAGE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to dump untreated sewage on any land or in any
waterway under jurisdiction of the Town of James Island. All untreated sewage
must be disposed using a properly functioning septic system or sewer
connection. Each violation is subject to a $500 fine and each day in which land
remains contaminated shall count as a separate violation.
   (B)   It is the responsibility of a property owner to clean up and properly
dispose of any spill of untreated sewage. Each violation is subject to a $500
fine and each day in which land remains contaminated shall count as a separate
violation.
   (C)   Any dwelling unit is subject to having its water service disconnected
if its sewer service has been disconnected due to lack of payment or any other
reason. It shall be unlawful for anyone to tamper with his or her disconnected
sewer or water connection. Each violation is subject to a $500 fine and each
day of continued violation shall count as a separate violation.
(Ord. 2018-03, passed 5-17-2018)
§ 91.03 PRIVATELY-OWNED SEWERAGE SYSTEMS (SEPTIC TANKS AND SEPTIC TANK SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Application. This section is to be applied and interpreted, and
supplements but does not supplant, those statutes, code sections, ordinances,
and administrative regulations currently in effect, or which may be put into
effect, by the James Island Public Service District (JIPSD) and South Carolina
Department of Health and Environmental Control (SCDHEC), and any successor
governmental entity as such may relate to sewage and waste disposal.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BUILDING DRAIN. The sewer or sewers within a building used to convey
sewage and/or industrial waste to building sewers or laterals, and in this
section shall relate to the point of connection to the building sewer or
laterals.
      BUILDING SEWER LATERAL. The extension of the building drain from the
building to the public sewer or other place of disposal.
      DRAINFIELD. A system of trenches or beds, or other such seepage systems
approved by SCDHEC, designed to disperse septic tank effluent into the soil for
treatment.
      FAILED SYSTEM. Any private sewage system or sewer to a public sewer that
does not adequately convey, treat, and dispose of sewage that consequently
creates a public or private nuisance or threat to public health and/or
environmental quality, as evidenced by, but not limited to, one or more of the
following conditions:
         (a)   Failure to accept sewage;
         (b)   Discharge of sewage to a basement, subsurface drain, surface
drain or surface water unless expressly permitted by SCDHEC;
         (c)   Sewage rising to the surface of the ground over or near any part
of a private sewage system or seeing down-grade from the drainfield at any
change in grade, bank, or road cut;
         (d)   Any deterioration or damage to any private sewage system that
would preclude adequate treatment and disposal of wastewater (for example,
damage from a vehicle driven over the drainfield or septic tank);
         (e)   A septic tank that is not constructed to be watertight (such as
a bottomless tank) as required to hold wastewater for primary treatment prior
to discharging to a drainfield;
         (f)   The presence of a grease trap to which kitchen waste is
discharged and which is not connected to the septic tank or drainfield;
         (g)   Exposure, reduction, or elimination of the drainfield area or
holding tank through erosion;
         (h)   Repeated and prolonged inundation by floodwaters resulting in
leakage of sewage;
         (i)   Water quality testing of adjacent and nearby waters that reveals
a private sewage system as the source of contamination.
      GOOD OPERATING CONDITION. A state in which the private system, upon
inspection, is determined to function in a sanitary manner, prohibits the
discharge of untreated or partially treated sewage onto the ground surface,
into surface water, or into groundwater, and allows building plumbing to
discharge properly.
      GREASE TRAP. An interceptor tank used to trap grease and oils from
kitchen waste. If the tank is not plumbed so that the remaining liquid enters
the septic tank or a drainfield, it is in violation of this section and §
91.02.
      IMPROVED PROPERTY. Any property located within the corporate limits of
the town upon which there is erected a structure or structures intended for
continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals
and from which structure or structures sewage and/or industrial waste shall be,
or may be, discharged and accepted by the JIPSD at any time.
      LICENSED INSPECTOR. An individual who has been approved by SCDHEC to
inspect private sewage systems.
      OWNER. Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole, or
partial, of any improved property.
      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall
include the plural, where indicated by the context.
      PREMISES ACCESSIBLE TO THE SEWERAGE SYSTEM. Any improved property when
the public sewer abuts, bounds or is adjacent to such improved property.
      PRIVATE SEWERAGE SYSTEM. A septic tank and its associated septic and
lateral lines, pipes, vault, and drainfield located in whole or in part on
private property intended to be used for the conveyance, storage, treatment, or
disposal of sewerage, whether an on-site disposal system or engineered
specialized on-site sewage system.
      PROOF OF INSPECTION. A written, whether electronic or physical, dated
statement which include the name, address and findings of a licensed inspector
having performed an inspection under such licenses.
      PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have
equal rights and is controlled by public authority. It shall also include sewer
within or without the town limits, which serve one or more persons and
discharge into the JIPSD sewerage system.
      SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sewage and/or authorized industrial
wastes and to which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally
admitted.
      SEPTIC TANK. A watertight receptacle that receives the discharge of
sewage from a building sewer and is designed and constructed to permit the
deposition of settled solids, the digestion of the matter deposited and the
discharge of the liquid portion into a leaching system (such as a drainfield).
      SEWAGE. Wastewater, or any substance that contains any of the waste
products or excretions of other discharge from the bodies of human beings or
animals.
      SEWER. A pipe conduit for carrying sewage, industrial waste or storm or
surface water.
      SEWERAGE SYSTEM OR SEWERAGE FACILITY. All facilities owned and/or
operated by JIPSD, which are used for collecting, pumping, transporting,
treating, and disposing of sewage and industrial waste.
      TOWN. The Town of James Island, Charleston County, South Carolina.
   (C)   General sanitary regulations.
      (1)   Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the owner of
any premises accessible to the sewerage system located within the town is
required at the owner’s expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein,
and to connect such facilities directly with the sanitary server in accord with
the provisions of this section, JIPSD and SCDHEC.
      (2)   It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to ensure that
the private sewage system is operated and maintained according to its designed
use and capacity.
      (3)   The property owner shall maintain the private sewage system so that
it is accessible for inspection and maintenance.
      (4)   The property owner shall protect all parts of the private sewage
system so that it is protected from vehicular traffic and parking.
      (5)   The property owner shall protect all parts of the private sewage
system from erosion and prolonged inundation.
      (6)   Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
      (7)   When a public sewage system is not available for the premises,
which is defined as beyond 300 feet from the foundation of the building
premises containing a toilet to be so connected, the building sewer shall be
connected to a private sewerage system complying with the provisions of the
regulations imposed by JIPSD and SCDHEC. Any tree removal required for
compliance shall be performed in accordance with Chapter 153 et al. of the town
code.
      (8)   The owner of any improved property shall maintain the private
sewage system in good operating condition and repair as needed; the building
drain, drainfield septic tank, and building sewage lateral connecting lines to
the public sewer, at the owner’s expense, and shall remove all trees, shrubs,
tree and shrub roots and other obstructions to the building drain and sanitary
sewage system. Any tree removal required for compliance shall be performed in
accordance with Chapter 153 et al. of the town code.
         (a)   In the event of a complaint or upon notice by the town, the Town
Code Enforcement Officer may inspect the sanitary sewerage system in its
entirety to determine the need for maintenance, or repair, including the
proximity of the building premises to the public sewer.
         (b)   All private sewerage systems must receive an inspection as
recommended by SCDHEC every three years, and the owner thereof shall provide
documentation of such inspection upon request by the Town Code Enforcement
Officer within ten calendar days of such request. Property owners shall provide
all requested and known information about the private sewage system to the town
and the inspector to facilitate locating and accessing the condition of the
system.
         (c)   Failure to timely provide acceptable documentation of inspection
as referenced in division (C)(8)(b) evidencing a licensed inspection of the
private sewerage system within three years prior to such request, or within ten
days after such request, shall entitle the town to require an inspection
through a licensed inspector. Should the owner fail to provide proof of a
baseline inspection within 30 calendar days, the town may perform a baseline
inspection through a licensed inspector at the owner’s expense.
         (d)   In the event such inspection reveals a failed system, in whole
or in part, the town shall require the owner to perform such repairs or
maintenance as may be called for from such inspection, at owner’s expense,
within 60 calendar days of the earlier of the mailing of or personal receipt of
such notice. If the repair(s) are such that 60 days is not sufficient time to
complete the repair(s), evidence of the scheduled repair(s) shall be presented
to the town and timeline for repair(s) must be approved by the Town Code
Enforcement Officer.
      (9)   In the event the owner has documentation or other acceptable proof
of an acceptable inspection with the time prescribed in division (C)(8)(b), yet
the Town Code Enforcement Officer has reason to believe additional inspection
is warranted, the town may perform such inspection as is required in the town’s
discretion at the town’s expense and impose the necessity of repair or
maintenance at the homeowner’s expense in accord with and pursuant to division
(C)(8)(a) and (d).
   (D)   In the event the owner fails to comply with the directive(s) of the
Town Code Enforcement Officer after notice pursuant to §
91.05 the provisions of §
91.06 shall apply, and any appeal of such directive(s) shall be in accord with
§
91.08.
   (E)   Baseline inspections of septic systems in the James Island Creek TMDL.
      (1)   All septic systems in the James Island Creek TMDL under town
jurisdiction must have a baseline inspection at town expense before June 30,
2022.
      (2)   A BASELINE INSPECTION means a thorough evaluation of an operating
private sewage system to determine whether the system is functioning as
designed, is not exhibiting signs of failure, and is being operated properly. A
pump out of the system is required for a baseline inspection to properly
examine the interior of the tank and to check for leaks from the house or
saturated conditions in the drainfield. All inspections and pump outs must be
performed by septic contractors with valid SCDHEC licenses.
      (3)   Town Council appropriates $150,000 to pay for baseline inspections
for septic systems in the James Island Creek TMDL under town jurisdiction from
unencumbered capital project funds in the 2021/2022 budget year.
      (4)   The Town Public Works Department shall coordinate with one or more
licensed septic contractors and property owners and residents to provide for
the required baseline inspection.
      (5)   The required baseline inspection is an additional inspection as
provided for in division (C)(9).
      (6)   Any septic system that received a baseline inspection that is
properly documented within the last three years meeting these requirements is
exempt from this division (E).
(Ord. 2021-06, passed 10-21-2021; Ord. 2021-10, passed 11-18-2021)
§ 91.04 DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.
   Weeds and other rank vegetation or solid waste allowed to accumulate and
remain on lots as described above may be deemed and declared to be a public
nuisance in the judgment of any duly appointed town code enforcement officer.
In the event such weeds and rank vegetation or solid waste, as described
herein, have not been deemed and declared to be a public health hazard by the
County Health Department, any town code enforcement officer may nevertheless
deem and declare the same to be detrimental to the health and welfare of the
community.
(Ord. 2012-10, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2012-22, passed 1-17-2013)
§ 91.05 NOTICE TO OWNER TO COMPLY.
   (A)   Any town code enforcement officer shall serve notice on the owner of
the land to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   It shall be sufficient notification to deliver the notice to the
person to whom it is addressed or to deposit a copy of the notice in the United
States mail, properly stamped, certified, and addressed to the owner of the
property at the best address available, or to post a copy of the notice upon
the premises.
(Ord. 2012-10, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2012-22, passed 1-17-2013)
§ 91.06 FAILURE TO COMPLY.
   If the person to whom the notice is directed, under the provisions of §
91.05, fails or neglects to cause such weeds and rank vegetation to be cut and
removed, or such solid waste to be removed, from the premises within ten days
after such notice has been served, he or she shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and subject to a penalty as provided in §
91.99.
(Ord. 2012-10, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2012-22, passed 1-17-2013) Penalty, see
§
91.99
§ 91.07 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE BY TOWN.
   After ten days have elapsed after notice has been served upon the owner,
then the Public Works Department or a town-authorized agent or representative
may enter upon any such lands and abate the nuisance by cutting and removing
such weeds or other rank vegetation or solid waste, and the cost of doing so
shall become a lien upon the property affected, and may be recovered by the
town through judgment proceedings. Persons desiring to contest the abatement
order may request a hearing by filing a written request with the Public Works
Director prior to the time specified for abatement.
(Ord. 2012-10, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2012-22, passed 1-17-2013)
§ 91.08 APPEAL; HEARING BOARD; PROCEDURES.
   In the event that an owner requests a hearing in writing as set forth above,
the appeal may be heard at the next regularly scheduled Board of Zoning Appeals
(BZA) meeting. All appeals will be heard by the BZA in accordance with its
procedures and schedule.
(Ord. 2012-10, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2012-22, passed 1-17-2013)
§ 91.09 CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES; SEVERANCE.
   Whenever there is, or appears to be, a conflict between any provision of
this chapter with the provisions of any other lawful ordinance, regulation, or
resolution, the more restrictive shall apply. If any provision of this chapter
or its application to any circumstance is held by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid for any reason, this holding shall not affect other
provisions or applications of this chapter which can be given effect without
the invalid provision or application, and to this end, the provisions of this
chapter are severable.
(Ord. 2012-10, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2012-22, passed 1-17-2013)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates this chapter as described in §
91.06 shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500 or imprisonment of not
more than 30 days. Each day that a condition is in violation of this chapter
shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 2012-10, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2012-22, passed 1-17-2013)
CHAPTER 92: TOWN REGULATIONS CONCERNING LITTER CONTROL
Section
   
92.01   Title
   
92.02   Purpose
   
92.03   Authority
   
92.04   Definitions
   
92.05   Application
   
92.06   Enforcement
 
   
92.99   Penalty
Editor’s note:
   The regulations set forth in this chapter are those of Charleston County
Code Chapter 10, Article V, which was adopted by the town’s Ordinance 2012-12
on October 18, 2012.
§ 92.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Litter Control Ordinance of Town of
James Island, South Carolina.”
(Ord. 2012-12, passed 10-18-2012)
§ 92.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to set standards and regulations for the
control of litter in the town. The control of litter will have a lasting effect
upon the town’s environment and appearance. The goal of this chapter is the
general upkeep of the community for the health, safety, and welfare of its
citizens. Activities such as transporting loose materials, illegal dumping,
unlawful disposal, and placement of debris shall not be allowed on any public
or private property or waters within the boundaries of the town by any person
or persons.
(Ord. 2012-12, passed 10-18-2012) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.03 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of S.C. Code § 4-9-30
(1976). Deputy sheriffs and town personnel who have been commissioned by Town
Council as code enforcement or litter control officers shall be vested with the
authority to enforce and administer litter control within the town in
accordance with the provisions of S.C. Code §§ 44-67-10 et seq., and all rules
and regulations adopted thereunder and the same are incorporated herein by
reference as fully as if set forth herein verbatim and as may be amended from
time to time.
(Ord. 2012-12, passed 10-18-2012)
§ 92.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DISPOSAL PACKAGE OR CONTAINER. All packages or containers defined as such by
rules and regulations adopted by the Department of Health and Environmental
Control. See S.C. Code §§ 44-67-10 et seq. (1976).
   LITTER. All waste materials including, but not limited to, disposable
packages or containers, trash, garbage, or refuse.
   LITTER RECEPTACLE. Those containers adopted by the Department of Health and
Environmental Control which may be standardized as to size, shape, capacity,
and color and which may bear a state or town anti-litter symbol, as well as any
other receptacle suitable for the depositing of litter.
   OWNER. Includes any person owning or having title, possession, or control
over real property including, but not limited to, landholders, landlords,
tenants, proprietors, and business operators.
   PERSON. An individual, partnership, company, contractor, subcontractor,
developer, cooperative, corporation, firm, landlord, tenant, proprietor, owner,
political subdivision, sub-development, state or town agency, trust, estate,
joint venture, or any other legal entity or its legal representative, agent, or
assigns.
(Ord. 2012-12, passed 10-18-2012)
§ 92.05 APPLICATION.
   (A)   No person shall dump, throw, drop, deposit, discard, or otherwise
dispose of litter or other solid waste upon any public or private property in
the town or in the waters of the town whether from a vehicle or otherwise
including, but not limited to, any highway, park, beach, campground, forest
land, recreational area, trailer park, highway, road, street, or alley except:
      (1)   When such property is designated by the town or the state for the
disposal of litter and other solid waste and such person is authorized to use
such property for that purpose; or
      (2)   Into a litter receptacle in such a manner that the litter will be
prevented from being carried away or deposited by the elements upon any part of
such private or public property or waters.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter shall not prohibit a private property
owner from depositing litter on such private property as an enhancement if the
depositing does not violate applicable local or state health and safety
regulations.
   (C)   The responsibility for the removal of litter from property or
receptacles shall be upon the person responsible for littering the property or
receptacles. However, if the person responsible for littering the property or
receptacles is unknown or if there is no charge or conviction of a person for
the violation in question, then the owner of the property shall be responsible
for the removal of litter from such property or receptacles in accordance with
§
92.06(E); and in such cases, the court may consider the financial or physical
ability of the property owner to remove said litter, but the burden is on the
property owner to prove same. See S.C. Code § 16-11-700 (1976).
   (D)   Where litter has traveled through forces of elements onto property of
another, the owner of the property of origin of the litter is responsible for
the removal of litter from the property wherever the forces of elements carry
or spread the litter.
   (E)   In the event it cannot be determined which occupant of any vehicle,
boat, or other conveyance committed any acts in violation of this chapter, it
shall be inferred that the driver or operator of the vehicle, boat, or
conveyance shall have violated this chapter.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, institution,
or organization to transport any loose materials by truck or other motor
vehicles within the unincorporated limits of the town unless said material is
covered and secured in such a manner as to prevent litter on public and private
property. Lack of adequate covering and securing of material while the loaded
truck or other motor vehicle is in motion shall constitute a violation of this
section.
(Ord. 2012-12, passed 10-18-2012) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.06 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the duly
authorized law and code enforcement officers of the town including, but not
limited to, the town litter control officers and all law enforcement officers
and deputies employed by the sheriff’s office (collectively all officers
described above are hereinafter referred to as “enforcement officers”).
   (B)   Town enforcement officers shall be authorized and required to cause
the inspection of any public or private property within the town and within the
jurisdictional limits on the waterways whenever it shall be necessary to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter in the presence of
an enforcement officer shall be issued a uniform summons for this offense.
   (D)   Whenever it appears to a town enforcement officer that property lying
within the town limits contains litter as defined by this chapter, the
enforcement officer shall serve written notice on the owner of the property
requiring the owner to abate or remove the litter within 15 calendar days from
the date of the notice.
   (E)   Any property owner who refuses or neglects to abate or remove litter
from properly or receptacles after receiving 15 days’ written notice shall be
served with a uniform summons and subject to prosecution in accordance with
this chapter. In addition, the enforcement officer may also cause the abatement
or removal of such litter and all expenses incurred in so abating or removing
such litter may be recoverable from the owner of the property from which the
litter is abated or removed, or from any person causing or maintaining the
same, in the same manner as debts of like amounts are now recoverable by law.
(Ord. 2012-12, passed 10-18-2012)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   A person who violates the provisions of this chapter in an amount less
than 15 pounds in weight or 27 cubic feet in volume is guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction, must be fined not less than $100 nor more than $200 for
each offense, plus court costs. In addition to a fine and for each offense
under the provisions of this item, the court shall also impose a minimum of
five hours of litter-gathering labor or other form of public service as the
court may order because of physical or other incapacities, and which is under
the supervision of the court.
   (B)   The court, in lieu of payment of the monetary fine imposed for a
violation of this chapter, may direct the substitution of additional litter-
gathering labor or other form of public service as it may order because of
physical or other incapacities, under the supervision of the court, not to
exceed one hour for each $5 of fine imposed.
   (C)   Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter in an amount
exceeding 15 pounds in weight or 27 cubic feet in volume is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, must be fined not less than $200 nor more
than $500. In addition, the court shall require the violator to pick up litter
or perform other community service commensurate with the offense committed.
   (D)   For a second and subsequent convictions hereunder, a minimum of 20
hours of community service must be imposed in addition to a fine.
   (E)   In addition to the above penalties, the court may order any person
violating the provisions of this chapter to pay restitution to the town or to
the victims for the costs of removing or abating such litter.
(Ord. 2012-12, passed 10-18-2012)
CHAPTER 93: FIREWORKS
Section
   
93.01   Permits and other requirements for public display
   
93.02   Prohibited times for discharge of fireworks
 
   
93.99   Penalty
§ 93.01 PERMITS AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS FOR PUBLIC DISPLAY.
   Any person who desires to hold an outdoor fireworks display shall first
obtain a permit from the town at least ten days prior to the date of the
display.
(Ord. 2015-10, passed 10-15-2015)
§ 93.02 PROHIBITED TIMES FOR DISCHARGE OF FIREWORKS.
   Notwithstanding any other provisions of the Town of James Island Municipal
Code, it shall be a public nuisance for any person to discharge or permit the
discharge of any fireworks between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. of the
following day, except that on December 31 the permitted hours shall be from 9:
00 a.m. until 1:00 a.m. of the following day.
(Ord. 2015-10, passed 10-15-2015)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   The civil penalty for creating a public nuisance by discharging fireworks
contrary to the provisions of this chapter is $50.
(Ord. 2015-10, passed 10-15-2015)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   BUSINESS LICENSES
      
111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
112.   MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 110: BUSINESS LICENSES
Section
General Business Licenses
   
110.01   License required
   
110.02   Definitions
   
110.03   Purpose; duration
   
110.04   Business license tax; refund
   
110.05   Registration required
   
110.06   Deductions; exemptions; charitable organizations
   
110.07   False application unlawful
   
110.08   Display and transfer
   
110.09   Administration of subchapter
   
110.10   Inspection and audits
   
110.11   Assessments; payment under protest; appeal
   
110.12   Delinquent license taxes; partial payment
   
110.13   Notices
   
110.14   Denial of license
   
110.15   Suspension or revocation of license
   
110.16   Appeals to Town Council or its designee
   
110.17   Consent, franchise, or license required for use of streets
   
110.18   Confidentiality
   
110.19   Severability
   
110.20   Classification and rates
Specific Licenses and Franchises
   
110.35   Cable service providers; franchise fee
   
110.36   Business license tax on retail telecommunications services
   
110.37   Business license tax on insurance companies
 
   
110.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Hospitality tax, see §§
33.15 through
33.21
GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSES
§ 110.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
    Intending to engage in any business, calling, occupation, profession, or
activity engaged in with the object of gain, benefit, or advantage, in whole or
in part within the limits of the town is required to pay an annual license tax
for the privilege of doing business and obtain a business license as herein
provided.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 11-18-2021)
§ 110.02 DEFINITIONS.
    For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. Any business, calling, occupation, profession, or activity engaged
in with the object of gain, benefit, or advantage, either directly or
indirectly.
   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION. An organization that is determined by the Internal
Revenue Service to be exempt from federal income taxes under 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)
(3), (4), (6), (7), (8), (10) or (19).
   CHARITABLE PURPOSE. A benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, or eleemosynary
purpose that does not result in personal gain to a sponsor, organizer, officer,
director, trustee, or person with ultimate control of the organization.
   CLASSIFICATION. That division of businesses by NAICS codes subject to the
same license rate as determined by a calculated index of ability to pay based
on national averages, benefits, equalization of tax burden, relationships of
services, or other basis deemed appropriate by the Council.
   COUNCIL. The Town Council of the Town of James Island.
   DOMICILE." A principal place from which the trade or business of a licensee
is conducted, directed, or managed. For purposes of this subchapter, a licensee
may be deemed to have more than one DOMICILE.
   GROSS INCOME. The gross receipts or gross revenue of a business, received or
accrued, for one calendar or fiscal year collected or to be collected from
business done within the municipality. If the licensee has a domicile within
the municipality, business done within the municipality shall include all gross
receipts or revenue received or accrued by such licensee. If the licensee does
not have a domicile within the municipality, business done within the
municipality shall include only gross receipts or revenue received or accrued
within the municipality. In all cases, if the licensee pays a business license
tax to another county or municipality, then the licensee’s gross income for the
purpose of computing the tax within the municipality must be reduced by the
amount of revenues or receipts taxed in the other county or municipality and
fully reported to the municipality. GROSS INCOME for business license tax
purposes shall not include taxes collected for a governmental entity, escrow
funds, or funds that are the property of a third party. The value of bartered
goods or trade-in merchandise shall be included in gross income. The gross
receipts or gross revenues for business license purposes may be verified by
inspection of returns and reports filed with the Internal Revenue Service, the
South Carolina Department of Revenue, the South Carolina Department of
Insurance, or other government agencies, in calculating gross income for
certain businesses, the following rules shall apply:
      (1)   GROSS INCOME for agents shall be calculated on gross commissions
received or retained, unless otherwise specified. If commissions are divided
with other brokers or agents, then only the amount retained by the broker or
agent is considered GROSS INCOME.
      (2)   Except as specifically required by S.C. Code § 38-7-20, GROSS
INCOME for insurance companies shall be calculated on gross premiums written.
      (3)   GROSS INCOME for manufacturers of goods or materials with a
location in the town shall be calculated on the lesser of (a) gross revenues or
receipts received or accrued from business done at the location, (b) the amount
of income allocated and apportioned to that location by the business for
purposes of the business’ state income tax return, or (c) the amount of
expenses attributable to the location as a cost center of the business.
Licensees reporting gross income under this provision shall have the burden to
establish the amount and method of calculation by satisfactory records and
proof. Manufacturers include those taxpayers reporting a manufacturing
principal business activity code on their federal income tax returns.
   LICENSE OFFICIAL. A person designated to administer this subchapter.
Notwithstanding the designation of a primary license official, the municipality
may designate one or more alternate license officials to administer particular
types of business licenses, including without limitation for business licenses
issued to businesses subject to business license taxes under Article 20,
Chapter 9, Title 58, and Chapters 7 and 45, Title 38, of the South Carolina
Code.
   LICENSEE. The business, the person applying for the license on behalf of the
business, an agent or legal representative of the business, a person who
receives any part of the net profit of the business, or a person who owns or
exercises control of the business.
   MUNICIPALITY. The Town of James Island, South Carolina.
   NAICS. The North American Industry Classification System for the United
States published under the auspices of the Federal Office of Management and
Budget.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, limited liability partnership,
limited liability company, cooperative non-profit membership, corporation,
joint venture, association, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate,
holding company, or other group or combination acting as a unit, in the
singular or plural, and the agent or employee having charge or control of a
business in the absence of the principal.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 11-18-2021)
§ 110.03 PURPOSE; DURATION.
    The business license required by this subchapter is for the purpose of
providing such regulation as may be required for the business subject thereto
and for the purpose of raising revenue for the general fund through a privilege
tax. The 2021 license year shall extend to end on April 30, 2022. Thereafter,
the license periods shall be established as follows. Except as set forth below
for business licenses issued to contractors with respect to specific
construction projects, each yearly license shall be issued for the 12-month
period of May 1 to April 30. A business license issued for a construction
contract may, at the request of the licensee, be stated to expire at the
completion of the construction project; provided, any such business license may
require that the licensee file, by each April 30 during the continuation of the
construction project, a statement of compliance, including but not limited to a
revised estimate of the value of the contract. If any revised estimate of the
final value of such project exceeds the amount for which the business license
was issued, the licensee shall be required to pay a license fee at the then-
prevailing rate on the excess amount. The provisions of this subchapter and the
rates herein shall remain in effect from year to year as amended by the
Council.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 11-18-2021) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.04 BUSINESS LICENSE TAX; REFUND.
   (A)   The required business license tax shall be paid for each business
subject hereto according to the applicable rate classification on or before the
due date of the thirtieth day of April in each year, except for those
businesses in Rate Class 8 for which a different due date is specified. Late
payments shall be subject to penalties as set forth in §
110.12, except that admitted insurance companies may pay before June 1 without
penalty.
   (B)   A separate license shall be required for each place of business and
for each classification or business conducted at one place. If gross income
cannot be separated for classifications at one location, the business license
tax shall be computed on the combined gross income for the classification
requiring the highest rate. The business license tax must be computed based on
the licensee’s gross income for the calendar year preceding the due date, for
the licensee’s 12-month fiscal year preceding the due date, or on a 12-month
projected income based on the monthly average for a business in operation for
less than one year. The business license tax for a new business must be
computed on the estimated probable gross income for the balance of the license
year. A business license related to construction contract projects may be
issued on a per-project basis, at the option of the taxpayer. No refund shall
be made for a business that is discontinued.
   (C)   A licensee that submits a payment greater than the amount owed may
request a refund. To be considered, a refund request must be submitted in
writing to the municipality before the June 1 immediately following the April
30 on which the payment was due and must be supported by adequate documentation
supporting the refund request. The municipality shall approve or deny the
refund request, and if approved shall issue the refund to the business, within
30 days after receipt of the request.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 11-18-2021) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.05 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   (A)    The owner, agent, or legal representative of every business subject
to this subchapter, whether listed in the classification index or not, shall
register the business and make application for a business license on or before
the due date of each year; provided, a new business shall be required to have a
business license prior to operation within the municipality, and an annexed
business shall be required to have a business license within 30 days of the
annexation. A license for a bar (NAICS 722410) must be issued in the name of
the individual who has been issued the corresponding state alcohol, beer, or
wine permit or license and will have actual control and management of the
business.
   (B)   Application shall be on the then-current standard business license
application as established and provided by the Director of the South Carolina
Revenue and Fiscal Affairs Office and shall be accompanied by all information
about the applicant, the licensee, and the business deemed appropriate to carry
out the purpose of this subchapter by the license official. Applicants may be
required to submit copies of portions of state and federal income tax returns
reflecting gross receipts and gross revenue figures.
   (C)   The applicant shall certify under oath that the information given in
the application is true, that the gross income is accurately reported (or
estimated for a new business) without any unauthorized deductions, and that all
assessments, personal property taxes on business property, and other monies due
and payable to the municipality have been paid.
   (D)   The municipality shall allow application, reporting, calculation, and
payment of business license taxes through the business license tax portal
hosted and managed by the South Carolina Revenue and Fiscal Affairs Office,
subject to the availability and capability thereof. Any limitations in portal
availability or capability do not relieve the applicant or licensee from
existing business license or business license tax obligations.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 11-18-2021) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.06 DEDUCTIONS; EXEMPTIONS; CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS.
   (A)    No deductions from gross income shall be made except income earned
outside of the municipality on which a license tax is paid by the business to
some other municipality or county and fully reported to the municipality, taxes
collected for a governmental entity, or income which cannot be included for
computation of the tax pursuant to state or federal law. Properly apportioned
income from business in interstate commerce shall be included in the
calculation of gross income and is not exempted. The applicant shall have the
burden to establish the right to exempt income by satisfactory records and
proof.
   (B)   No person shall be exempt from the requirements of this subchapter by
reason of the lack of an established place of business within the municipality,
unless exempted by state or federal law. The license official shall determine
the appropriate classification for each business in accordance with the latest
issue of NAICS. No person shall be exempt from this subchapter by reason of the
payment of any other tax, unless exempted by state law, and no person shall be
relieved of liability for payment of any other tax or fee by reason of
application of this subchapter.
   (C)   Wholesalers are exempt from business license taxes unless they
maintain warehouses or distribution establishments within the municipality. A
wholesale transaction involves a sale to an individual who will resell the
goods and includes delivery of the goods to the reseller. It does not include a
sale of goods to a user or consumer.
   (D)   A charitable organization shall be exempt from the business license
tax on its gross income unless it is deemed a business subject to a business
license tax on all or part of its gross income as provided in this section. A
charitable organization, or any affiliate of a charitable organization, that
reports income from for-profit activities or unrelated business income for
federal income tax purposes to the Internal Revenue Service shall be deemed a
business subject to a business license tax on the part of its gross income from
such for-profit activities or unrelated business income.
   (E)   A charitable organization shall be deemed a business subject to a
business license tax on its total gross income if (1) any net proceeds of
operation, after necessary expenses of operation, inure to the benefit of any
individual or any entity that is not itself a charitable organization as
defined in this subchapter, or (2) any net proceeds of operation, after
necessary expenses of operation, are used for a purpose other than a charitable
purpose as defined in this subchapter. Excess benefits or compensation in any
form beyond fair market value to a sponsor, organizer, officer, director,
trustee, or person with ultimate control of the organization shall not be
deemed a necessary expense of operation.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 11-18-2021) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.07 FALSE APPLICATION UNLAWFUL.
    It shall be unlawful for any person subject to the provisions of this
subchapter to make a false application for a business license or to give or
file, or direct the giving or filing of, any false information with respect to
the license or tax required by this subchapter.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 11-18-2021)
§ 110.08 DISPLAY AND TRANSFER.
   (A)    All persons shall display the license issued to them on the original
form provided by the license official in a conspicuous place in the business
establishment at the address shown on the license. A transient or non-resident
shall carry the license upon his or her person or in a vehicle used in the
business readily available for inspection by any authorized agent of the
municipality.
   (B)   A change of address must be reported to the license official within
ten days after removal of the business to a new location and the license will
be valid at the new address upon written notification by the license official
and compliance with zoning and building codes. Failure to obtain the approval
of the license official for a change of address shall invalidate the license
and subject the licensee to prosecution for doing business without a license. A
business license shall not be transferable, and a transfer of controlling
interest shall be considered a termination of the old business and the
establishment of a new business requiring a new business license, based on old
business income.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 11-18-2021) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.09 ADMINISTRATION OF SUBCHAPTER.
    The license official shall administer the provisions of this subchapter,
collect business license taxes, issue licenses, make or initiate investigations
and audits to ensure compliance, initiate denial or suspension and revocation
procedures, report violations to the municipal attorney, assist in prosecution
of violators, produce forms, undertake reasonable procedures relating to the
administration of this subchapter, and perform such other duties as may be duly
assigned.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 11-18-2021)
§ 110.10 INSPECTION AND AUDITS.
   (A)    For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this subchapter, the
license official or other authorized agent of the municipality is empowered to
enter upon the premises of any person subject to this subchapter to make
inspections and to examine and audit books and records. It shall be unlawful
for any such person to fail or refuse to make available the necessary books and
records. In the event an audit or inspection reveals that the licensee has
filed false information, the costs of the audit shall be added to the correct
business license tax and late penalties in addition to other penalties provided
herein. Each day of failure to pay the proper amount of business license tax
shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   The license official shall have the authority to make inspections and
conduct audits of businesses to ensure compliance with this subchapter.
Financial information obtained by inspections and audits shall not be deemed
public records, and the license official shall not release the amount of
business license taxes paid or the reported gross income of any person by name
without written permission of the licensee, except as authorized by this
subchapter, state or federal law, or proper judicial order. Statistics compiled
by classifications are public records.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 11-18-2021) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.11 ASSESSMENTS; PAYMENT UNDER PROTEST; APPEAL.
   (A)    Assessments, payments under protest, and appeals of assessment shall
be allowed and conducted by the municipality pursuant to the provisions of S.C.
Code § 6-1-410, as amended. In preparing an assessment, the license official
may examine such records of the business or any other available records as may
be appropriate and conduct such investigations and statistical surveys as the
license official may deem appropriate to assess a business license tax and
penalties as provided herein.
   (B)   The license official shall establish a uniform local procedure
consistent with S.C. Code § 6-1-410 for hearing an application for adjustment
of assessment and issuing a notice of final assessment; provided that for
particular types of business licenses, including without limitation for
business licenses issued to businesses subject to business license taxes under
Article 20, Chapter 9, Title 58, and Chapters 7 and 45, Title 38, of the South
Carolina Code, the municipality, by separate ordinance, may establish a
different procedure and may delegate one or more rights, duties, and functions
hereunder to the Municipal Association of South Carolina.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 11-18-2021) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.12 DELINQUENT LICENSE TAXES; PARTIAL PAYMENT.
   (A)    For non-payment of all or any part of the correct business license
tax, the license official shall impose and collect a late penalty of 5% of the
unpaid tax for each month or portion thereof after the due date until paid not
to exceed 100% of original license fee. Penalties shall not be waived. If any
business license tax remains unpaid for 60 days after its due date, the license
official shall report it to the municipal attorney for appropriate legal
action.
   (B)   Partial payment may be accepted by the license official to toll
imposition of penalties on the portion paid; provided, however, no business
license shall be issued or renewed until the full amount of the tax due, with
penalties, has been paid.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 11-18-2021) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.13 NOTICES.
    The license official may, but shall not be required to, mail written
notices that business license taxes are due. If notices are not mailed, there
shall be published a notice of the due date in a newspaper of general
circulation within the municipality three times prior to the due date in each
year. Failure to receive notice shall not constitute a defense to prosecution
for failure to pay the tax due or grounds for waiver of penalties.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 11-18-2021)
§ 110.14 DENIAL OF LICENSE.
   (A)    The license official may deny a license to an applicant when the
license official determines:
      (1)   The application is incomplete or contains a misrepresentation,
false or misleading statement, or evasion or suppression of a material fact;
      (2)   The activity for which a license is sought is unlawful or
constitutes a public nuisance per se or per accidens;
      (3)   The applicant, licensee, prior licensee, or the person in control
of the business has been convicted within the previous ten years of an offense
under a law or ordinance regulating business, a crime involving dishonest
conduct or moral turpitude related to a business or a subject of a business, or
an unlawful sale of merchandise or prohibited goods;
      (4)   The applicant, licensee, prior licensee, or the person in control
of the business has engaged in an unlawful activity or nuisance related to the
business or to a similar business in the municipality or in another
jurisdiction;
      (5)   The applicant, licensee, prior licensee, or the person in control
of the business is delinquent in the payment to the municipality of any tax or
fee;
      (6)   A licensee has actual knowledge or notice, or based on the
circumstances reasonably should have knowledge or notice, that any person or
employee of the licensee has committed a crime of moral turpitude on the
business premises, or has permitted any person or employee of the licensee to
engage in the unlawful sale of merchandise or prohibited goods on the business
premises and has not taken remedial measures necessary to correct such
activity; or
      (7)   The license for the business or for a similar business of the
licensee in the municipality or another jurisdiction has been denied,
suspended, or revoked in the previous license year.
   (B)   A decision of the license official shall be subject to appeal as
herein provided. Denial shall be written with reasons stated.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 11-18-2021)
§ 110.15 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)    When the license official determines:
      (1)   A license has been mistakenly or improperly issued or issued
contrary to law;
      (2)   A licensee has breached any condition upon which the license was
issued or has failed to comply with the provisions of this subchapter;
      (3)   A licensee has obtained a license through a fraud,
misrepresentation, a false or misleading statement, or evasion or suppression
of a material fact in the license application;
      (4)   A licensee has been convicted within the previous ten years of an
offense under a law or ordinance regulating business, a crime involving
dishonest conduct or moral turpitude related to a business or a subject of a
business, or an unlawful sale of merchandise or prohibited goods;
      (5)   A licensee has engaged in an unlawful activity or nuisance related
to the business; or
      (6)   A licensee is delinquent in the payment to the municipality of any
tax or fee; the license official may give written notice to the licensee or the
person in control of the business within the municipality by personal service
or mail that the license is suspended pending a single hearing before Council
or its designee for the purpose of determining whether the suspension should be
upheld and the license should be revoked.
   (B)   The written notice of suspension and proposed revocation shall state
the time and place at which the hearing is to be held, and shall contain a
brief statement of the reasons for the suspension and proposed revocation and a
copy of the applicable provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 11-18-2021)
§ 110.16 APPEALS TO COUNCIL OR ITS DESIGNEE.
   (A)   Except with respect to appeals of assessments under §
110.11 hereof, which are governed by S.C. Code § 6-1-410, any person aggrieved
by a determination, denial, or suspension and proposed revocation of a business
license by the license official may appeal the decision to the Council or its
designee by written request stating the reasons for appeal, filed with the
license official within ten days after service by mail or personal service of
the notice of determination, denial, or suspension and proposed revocation.
   (B)   A hearing on an appeal from a license denial or other determination of
the license official and a hearing on a suspension and proposed revocation
shall be held by the Council or its designee within ten business days after
receipt of a request for appeal or service of a notice of suspension and
proposed revocation. The hearing shall be held upon written notice at a regular
or special meeting of the Council, or, if by designee of the Council, at a
hearing to be scheduled by the designee. The hearing may be continued to
another date by agreement of all parties. At the hearing, all parties shall
have the right to be represented by counsel, to present testimony and evidence,
and to cross-examine witnesses. The proceedings shall be recorded and
transcribed at the expense of the party so requesting. The rules of evidence
and procedure prescribed by Council or its designee shall govern the hearing.
Following the hearing, the Council by majority vote of its members present, or
the designee of Council if the hearing is held by the designee, shall render a
written decision based on findings of fact and conclusions on application of
the standards herein. The written decision shall be served, by personal service
or by mail, upon all parties or their representatives and shall constitute the
final decision of the municipality.
   (C)   Timely appeal of a decision of Council or its designee does not
effectuate a stay of that decision. The decision of the Council or its designee
shall be binding and enforceable unless overturned by an applicable appellate
court after a due and timely appeal.
   (D)   For business licenses issued to businesses subject to business license
taxes under Article 20, Chapter 9, Title 58, and Chapters 7 and 45, Title 38,
of the South Carolina Code, the municipality may establish a different
procedure by ordinance.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 11-18-2021)
§ 110.17 CONSENT, FRANCHISE, OR LICENSE REQUIRED FOR USE OF STREETS.
   (A)    It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install, maintain,
or operate in, on, above, or under any street or public place under control of
the municipality any line, pipe, cable, pole, structure, or facility for
utilities, communications, cablevision, or other purposes without a consent
agreement or franchise agreement issued by the Council by ordinance that
prescribes the term, fees, and conditions for use.
   (B)   The annual fee for use of streets or public places authorized by a
consent agreement or franchise agreement shall be set by the ordinance
approving the agreement and shall be consistent with limits set by state law.
Existing franchise agreements shall continue in effect until expiration dates
in the agreements. Franchise and consent fees shall not be in lieu of or be
credited against business license taxes unless specifically provided by the
franchise or consent agreement.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 110.18 CONFIDENTIALITY.
    Except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by
law, no official or employee of the municipality may divulge or make known in
any manner the amount of income or any financial particulars set forth or
disclosed in any report or return required under this subchapter. Nothing in
this section shall be construed to prohibit the publication of statistics so
classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns.
Any license data may be shared with other public officials or employees in the
performance of their duties, whether or not those duties relate to enforcement
of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 11-18-2021)
§ 110.19 SEVERABILITY.
   A determination that any portion of this subchapter is invalid or
unenforceable shall not affect the remaining portions. To the extent of any
conflict between the provisions of this subchapter and the provisions of the
South Carolina Business License Tax Standardization Act, as codified at S.C.
Code §§ 6-1-400 et seq., the Standardization Act shall control.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 11-18-2021)
§ 110.20 CLASSIFICATION AND RATES.
   (A)   The business license tax for each class of businesses subject to this
subchapter shall be computed in accordance with the current business license
rate schedule, designated as
Appendix A to this section, which may be amended from time to time by the
Council.
   (B)   The current business license class schedule is attached to this
section as Appendix B. Hereafter, no later than December 31 of each odd year,
the municipality shall adopt, by ordinance, the latest standardized business
license class schedule as recommended by the Municipal Association of South
Carolina and adopted by the Director of the South Carolina Revenue and Fiscal
Affairs Office. Upon adoption by the municipality, the revised business license
class schedule shall then be appended to this section as a replacement Appendix
B.
   (C)   The classifications included in each rate class are listed with NAICS
codes, by sector, sub-sector, group, or industry. The business license class
schedule (Appendix B) is a tool for classification and not a limitation on
businesses subject to a business license tax. The classification in the most
recent version of the business license class schedule adopted by the Council
that most specifically identifies the subject business shall be applied to the
business. The license official shall have the authority to make the
determination of the classification most specifically applicable to a subject
business.
   (D)   A copy of the class schedule and rate schedule shall be filed in the
office of the Town Clerk.
APPENDIX A: BUSINESS LICENSE RATE SCHEDULE
  Rate ClassIncome: $0 - $2,000 Income Over $2,000
             Base Rate           Rate per Thousand or Fraction Thereof
  Rate ClassIncome: $0 - $2,000 Income Over $2,000
             Base Rate           Rate per Thousand or Fraction Thereof
1            $30                 $1.15
2            35                  1.40
3            40                  1.65
4            45                  1.90
5            50                  2.15
6            55                  2.40
7            60                  2.65
8.1          45                  1.50
8.2          Set by state statute
8.3          MASC Telecommunications
8.4          MASC Insurance
8.51         $12.50 + $12.50 per machine
8.52         $12.50 + $180.00 per machine
 
   Non-Resident Rates
Unless otherwise specifically provided, all taxes and rates shall be doubled
for nonresidents and itinerants having no fixed principal place of business
within the municipality.
   Declining Rates
Declining rates apply in all classes for gross income in excess of $1,000,000,
unless otherwise specifically provided for in this section.
 
Gross Income in $ Millions Percent of Class Rate for Each Additional $1,000
0 - 1                      100%
1 - 2                      90%
2 - 3                      80%
3 - 4                      70%
Over 4                     60%
 
   Class 8 Rates
Each NAICS number designates a separate subclassification. The businesses in
this section are treated as separate and individual subclasses due to
provisions of state law, regulatory requirements, service burdens, tax
equalization considerations, and other factors that are deemed sufficient to
require individually determined rates. In accordance with state law, the
municipality also may provide for reasonable subclassifications for rates,
described by an NAICS sector, subsector, or industry, that are based on
particularized considerations as needed for economic stimulus or for the
enhanced or disproportionate demands on municipal services or infrastructure.
Non-resident rates do not apply except where indicated.
8.1      NAICS 230000 - Contractors, Construction, All Types (Non-resident
rates apply).
Resident rates, for contractors having a permanent place of business within the
municipality:
         Minimum on first $2,000   $45.00 plus
         Each additional $1,000   $1.50
Non-resident rates apply to contractors that do not have a permanent place of
business within the municipality. A trailer at the construction site or
structure in which the contractor temporarily resides is not a permanent place
of business under this subchapter.
No contractor shall be issued a business license until all state and municipal
qualification examination and trade license requirements have been met. Each
contractor shall post a sign in plain view on each job identifying the
contractor with the job.
Sub-contractors shall be licensed on the same basis as general or prime
contractors for the same job. No deductions shall be made by a general or prime
contractor for value of work performed by a sub-contractor.
No contractor shall be issued a business license until all performance and
indemnity bonds required by the Building Code have been filed and approved.
Zoning permits must be obtained when required by the Zoning Ordinance.
Each prime contractor shall file with the License Official a list of sub-
contractors furnishing labor or materials for each project.
For licenses issued on a per-job basis, the total tax for the full amount of
the contract shall be paid prior to commencement of work and shall entitle the
contractor to complete the job without regard to the normal license expiration
date. An amended report shall be filed for each new job and the appropriate
additional license fee per $1,000 of the contract amount shall be paid prior to
commencement of new work. Only one base tax shall be paid in a license year.
Licensees holding a per-job license shall file, by each April 30 during the
continuation of the construction project, a statement of compliance, including
but not limited to a revised estimate of the value of the contract. If any
revised estimate of the final value of such project exceeds the amount for
which the business license was issued, the licensee shall be required to pay a
license fee at the then-prevailing rate on the excess amount.
 
8.2      NAICS 482 - Railroad Companies (see S.C. Code § 12-23-210).
8.3      NAICS 517111, 517112, 517122 - Telephone Companies.
With respect to “retail telecommunication services” as defined in S.C. Code §
58-9-2200, the municipality participates in a collections program administered
by the Municipal Association of South Carolina. The municipality has approved
participation in the collections program by separate ordinance (the
“Telecommunications Collections Ordinance”). The rates, terms, conditions,
dates, penalties, appeals process, and other details of the business license
applicable to insurers and brokers are set forth in the Insurers and Brokers
Collections Ordinance.
8.51   NAICS 713120 - Amusement Machines, coin operated (except gambling).
Music machines, juke boxes, kiddy rides, video games, pin tables with levers,
and other amusement machines with or without free play feature licensed by SC
Department of Revenue pursuant to S.C. Code § 12-21-2720(A)(1) and (A)(2) [Type
I and Type II].
For operation of all machines (not on gross income), pursuant to S.C. Code §
12-21-2746:
      Per
machine...................................................................$12.50
plus
      Business
license.............................................................$12.50
Distributors that sell or lease machines and are not licensed by the state as
an operator pursuant to § 12-21-2728 are not subject to Subclass 8.51.
8.52   NAICS 713290 - Amusement Machines, coin operated, non-payout. Amusement
machines of the non-payout type or in-line pin game licensed by SC Department
of Revenue pursuant to S.C. Code § 12-21-2720(A)(3) [Type III].
For operation of all machines (not on gross income), pursuant to S.C. Code §
12-21-2720(B):
      Per
machine.............................................................$180.00
plus
      Business
license.............................................................$12.50
Distributors that sell or lease machines and are not licensed by the state as
an operator pursuant to § 12-21-2728 are not subject to Subclass 8.52.
8.6   NA1CS Code Varies - Billiard or Pool Tables. A business that offers the
use of billiard or pool tables shall be subject to business license taxation
under its natural class for all gross income of the business excluding the
gross income attributable to the billiard or pool tables. In addition, the
billiard or pool tables shall require their own separate business licenses
pursuant to SC Code § 12-21-2746 and shall be subject to a license tax of $5.00
per table measuring less than 3-1/2 feet wide and 7 feet long, and $12.50 per
table longer than that.
 
   BUSINESS LICENSE CLASS SCHEDULE BY NAICS CODE
   APPENDIX B
   Classes 1 - 8: Business License Class Schedule By NAICS Code
NAICS Sector/Sub sector Industry Sector Class
   Classes 1 - 8: Business License Class Schedule By NAICS Code
NAICS Sector/Sub sector Industry Sector                                  Class
11                      Agriculture, forestry, hunting and fishing       1
21                      Mining                                           2
22                      Utilities                                        1
31 - 33                 Manufacturing                                    3
42                      Wholesale trade                                  1
44 - 45                 Retail trade                                     1
48 - 49                 Transportation and warehousing                   1
51                      Information                                      4
52                      Finance and insurance                            7
53                      Real estate and rental and leasing               7
54                      Professional, scientific, and technical services 5
55                      Management of companies                          7
56                      Administrative and support and waste management  3
                        and remediation services
61                      Educational services                             3
62                      Health care and social assistance                4
71                      Arts, entertainment, and recreation              3
721                     Accommodation                                    1
722                     Food services and drinking places                2
81                      Other services                                   4
 
   Class 1 - 8: Business License Class Schedule By NAICS Code (Cont’d)
NAICS Sector/Sub sector Industry Sector Class
Class 8                 Subclassed
   Class 1 - 8: Business License Class Schedule By NAICS Code (Cont’d)
NAICS Sector/Sub sector Industry Sector                                  Class
Class 8                 Subclassed
23                      Construction                                     8.1
482                     Rail Transportation                              8.2
517111                  Wired Telecommunications Carriers                8.3
517112                  Wireless Telecommunications Carriers (except     8.3
                        Satellite)
517122                  Agents for Wireless Telecommunications Services  8.3
5241                    Insurance Carriers                               8.4
5242                    Insurance Brokers for non-admitted Insurance     8.4
                        Carriers
713120                  Amusement Parks and Arcades                      8.51
713290                  Nonpayout Amusement Machines                     8.52
713990                  All Other Amusement and Recreational Industries  8.6
                        (pool tables)
Note: 2023 Class Schedule is based on a three- year average (2017 - 2019) of
IRS statistical data.
 
This appendix will be updated every odd year based on the latest available IRS
statistics.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 11-18-2021; Am. Ord. 2023-06, passed 10-19-2023)
SPECIFIC LICENSES AND FRANCHISES
§ 110.35 CABLE SERVICE PROVIDERS; FRANCHISE FEE.
   A franchise fee rate of 5% of gross revenues derived from the operation of
the cable system to provide cable service (as defined in S.C. Code Title 58,
Chapter 12, Art. 3) is imposed for any cable service providers upon expiration
of an existing franchise with the municipality or upon termination by the cable
service provider of an existing franchise with the municipality.
Notwithstanding any provisions of the expired or terminated franchise, the
municipality, in the event of expiration or termination by the cable service
provider of the franchise, reserves all rights to impose on the cable service
provider an ad valorem taxes, service fees, sales tax, or other taxes and fees
lawfully imposed or to be imposed on other businesses within the municipality.
(Ord. 2012-03, passed 8-9-2012)
§ 110.36 BUSINESS LICENSE TAX ON RETAIL TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES.
   (A)   (1)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of the business license
ordinance in §§
110.01 through
110.20, the business license tax for “retail telecommunications services,” as
defined in S.C. Code § 58-9-2200, shall be at the maximum rate authorized by
S.C. Code § 58-9-2220, as it now provides or as provided by its amendment. The
business license tax year shall begin on January 1 of each year. Declining
rates shall not apply.
      (2)   In conformity with S.C. Code § 58-9-2220, the business license tax
for retail telecommunications services shall apply to the gross income derived
from the sale of retail telecommunications services for the preceding calendar
or fiscal year which either originate or terminate in the municipality and
which are charged to a service address within the municipality, regardless of
where these amounts are billed or paid, and on which a business license tax has
not been paid to another municipality. The measurement of the amounts derived
from the retail sale of mobile telecommunications services shall include only
revenues from the fixed monthly recurring charge of customers whose service
address is within the boundaries of the municipality. For a business in
operation for less than one year, the amount of business license tax shall be
computed on a 12-month projected income.
   (B)   (1)   For the year 2005, the business license tax for retail
telecommunications services shall be due on February 1, 2005, and payable by
February 28, 2005, without penalty. For years after 2005, the business license
tax for retail telecommunications services shall be due on January 1 of each
year and payable by January 31 of that year, without penalty.
      (2)   The delinquent penalty shall be 5% of the tax due for each month,
or portion thereof, after the due date until paid.
   (C)   Exemptions in the business license ordinance for income from business
in interstate commerce are hereby repealed. Properly apportioned gross income
from interstate commerce shall be included in the gross income for every
business subject to a business license tax.
   (D)   (1)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to interfere with
continuing obligations of any franchise agreement or contractual agreement in
the event that the franchise or contractual agreement should expire after
December 31, 2003.
      (2)   All fees collected under such a franchise agreement or contractual
agreement expiring after December 31, 2003, shall be in lieu of fees or taxes
which might otherwise be authorized by this section.
   (E)   As authorized by S.C. Code § 5-7-300, the agreement with the Municipal
Association of South Carolina for collection of current and delinquent license
taxes from telecommunications companies pursuant to S.C. Code § 58-9-2200 in
the form attached hereto is approved, and the Mayor is authorized to execute
it. Notwithstanding the provisions of the agreement, for the year 2005, the
Municipal Association of South Carolina is authorized to collect current and
delinquent license taxes in conformity with the due date and delinquent date
for 2005 as set out in this section and is further authorized, for the year
2005, to disburse business license taxes collected, less the service charge
agreed to, to this municipality on or before April 1, 2005, and thereafter as
remaining collections permit.
(Ord. 2012-13, passed 10-1-2012)
§ 110.37 BUSINESS LICENSE TAX ON INSURANCE COMPANIES.
   (A)   Insurance companies.
      (1)   Gross premiums.
         (a)   Except as to fire insurance, GROSS PREMIUMS means gross premiums
written for policies for property or a risk located within the municipality. In
addition, GROSS PREMIUMS shall include premiums written for policies that are
sold, solicited, negotiated, taken, transmitted, received, delivered, applied
for, produced, or serviced by the insurance company’s office located in the
municipality, the insurance company’s employee conducting business within the
municipality, or the office of the insurance company’s licensed or appointed
producer (agent) conducting business within the municipality, regardless of
where the property or risk is located, provided no tax has been paid to another
municipality in which the property or risk is located based on the same
premium.
         (b)   Solicitation for insurance, receiving or transmitting an
application or policy, examination of a risk, collection or transmitting of a
premium, adjusting a claim, delivering a benefit, or doing any act in
connection with a policy or claim shall constitute conducting business within
the municipality, regardless of whether or not an office is maintained in the
municipality.
         (c)   As to fire insurance, GROSS PREMIUMS means gross premiums:
            1.   Collected in the municipality; and/or
            2.   Realized from risks located within the limits of the
municipality.
         (d)   Gross premiums shall include all business conducted in the prior
calendar year.
         (e)   Gross premiums shall include new and renewal business without
deductions for any dividend, credit, return premiums, or deposit.
         (f)   Declining rates shall not apply.
(SIC Code 63 or NAICS Code 5241)
      (2)   Life, health, and accident. 0.75% of gross premiums. (SIC Code 631-
632 or NAICS Code 52411)
      (3)   Fire and casualty. 2% of gross premiums. (SIC Code 633-635 or NAICS
Code 524126)
      (4)   Title insurance. 2% of gross premiums. (SIC Code 636 or NAICS Code
524127)
   (B)   Due date; delinquent payment penalty. Notwithstanding any other
provisions of this section, license taxes for insurance companies shall be
payable on or before May 31 in each year without penalty. The penalty for
delinquent payments shall be 5% of the tax due per month, or portion thereof,
after the due date until paid.
   (C)   Interstate commerce. Any exemptions in the business license ordinance
for income from business in interstate commerce are hereby repealed. Gross
income from interstate commerce shall be included in the gross income for every
business subject to a business license tax.
   (D)   Administration. Pursuant to S.C. Code §§ 38-45-10 and 38-45-60, the
Municipal Association of South Carolina is designated the municipal agent for
purposes of administration of the municipal broker’s premium tax. The agreement
with the Association for administration and collection of current and
delinquent license taxes from insurance companies as authorized by S.C. Code §
5-7-300 and administration of the municipal broker’s premium tax in the form
attached hereto is approved, and the Mayor is authorized to execute it.
(Ord. 2012-17, passed 11-15-2012)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is provided shall be subject to the penalty provisions in §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person violating any provision of §§
110.01 through
110.20 shall be deemed guilty of an offense and shall be subject to a fine of
up to $500 or imprisonment for not more than 30 days or both, upon conviction.
Each day of violation shall be considered a separate offense. Punishment for
violation shall not relieve the offender of liability for delinquent taxes,
penalties, and costs provided for in §§
110.01 through
110.20.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 11-18-2021)
CHAPTER 111: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
   
111.01   Sales for on-premises consumption; hours of operation
§ 111.01 SALES FOR ON-PREMISES CONSUMPTION; HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   Commercial establishments which allow for the on-premises consumption
of beer, ale, porter, wine, and/or alcoholic liquors shall be prohibited from
operating between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
   (B)   Between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., commercial
establishments which are otherwise prohibited from operation pursuant to
division (A) above may operate to offer delivery or take-out services only of
food and non-alcoholic beverages.
(Ord. 2013-18, passed 12-19-2013) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 112: MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
Section
   
112.01   Environmentally acceptable packaging and products
§ 112.01 ENVIRONMENTALLY ACCEPTABLE PACKAGING AND PRODUCTS.
   (A)   Definitions. Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever used in this
section the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below.
      AFFORDABLE. A compostable or recyclable product may cost up to l5% more
than the purchase cost of the non-compostable or nonrecyclable alternative(s)
and not be regarded, on balance, as exorbitant, overpriced, unreasonable or
invaluable.
      ASTM STANDARD. Meeting the standards of the American Society for Testing
and Materials (AS1M) International Standards D6400 or D6868 for compostable
plastics, as those standards may be amended.
      BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT. Any commercial enterprise that provides carryout
bags to its customers through its employees or independent contractors
associated with the business. The term includes sole proprietorships, joint
ventures, partnerships, corporations, or any other legal entity whether for
profit or not for profit. This term is inclusive of any store or business,
which sells or offers goods or merchandise, located or operating within the
town, including those referenced in the definitions of “food or grocery
establishment” and “food provider.”
      COMPOSTABLE. All the materials in the product or package, when composted
in an industrial or municipal compost operation, will break down, or otherwise
become part of, usable compost (e.g. soil-conditioning material, mulch) in a
safe and timely manner. Compostable food service ware must meet ASTM-Standards
for compostability and any bio-plastic or plastic-like product must be clearly
labeled, preferably with a color symbol, to allow proper identification such
that the collector and processor can easily distinguish the ASTM standard
compostable plastic from non-ASTM standard compostable plastic. Compostable
products are considered COMPOSTABLE under this section only if a business
establishment or food or grocery establishment using the products is composting
them with an industrial or municipal compost operation.
      DISPOSABLE FOOD SERVICE WARE. Interchangeable with “to go” packaging and
“food packaging material” and includes, but is not limited to: all containers,
clamshells, bowls, plates, trays, cartons, cups, straws, stirrers, napkins,
cutlery and other items designed for one-time use associated with prepared
foods, including without limitation, service ware for takeout foods and/or
leftovers from partially consumed meals prepared by food providers.
      EVENTS PROMOTER. An applicant for any event permit issued by the town.
      FOOD OR GROCERY ESTABLISHMENT. All sales outlets, stores, shops, vehicles
or other places of business located within the town, which operate, sell, or
convey foods, or beverages, which foods or beverages are predominantly
contained, wrapped or held in or on packaging. FOOD ESTABLISHMENT shall
include, but not be limited to, any place where food is prepared, mixed,
cooked, baked, smoked, preserved, bottled, packaged, handled, stored,
manufactured and sold or offered for sale, including but not limited to, any
fixed or mobile restaurant, drive-in, convenience store, coffee shop,
cafeteria, short-order café, delicatessen, luncheonette, grill, sandwich shop,
soda fountain, hotel, motel, movie house, theatre, bed and breakfast inn,
tavern, bar, cocktail lounge, nightclub, roadside stand, takeout prepared food
place, industrial feeding establishment, catering kitchen, mobile food
preparation unit, commissary, event, grocery store, public food market, produce
stand, food stand, or similar place in or at which food or drink is prepared
for sale, or for service, on the premise or elsewhere, and any other
establishment or operation where food is processed, prepared, stored, served,
sold, or provided for the public and any organization, group or individual
which provides food as part of its service.
      FOOD PROVIDER. Any vendor, business, organization, entity, group, or
individual, including food establishments, as defined in the town code that
offers food or beverages to the public.
      PERSON. An individual, business, event promoter, trust, firm, joint stock
company, corporation, non-profit, partnership, or association.
      POLYSTERENE/PLASTIC FOAM. Blown expanded and extruded polystyrene
(sometimes called Styrofoam TM) or other plastic foams which are processed by
any number of techniques including, but not limited to, fusion of monomer
spheres (expanded bead plastic), injection molding, foam molding, and
extrusion-blown molding (extruded foam plastic). POLYSTYRENE and other PLASTIC
FOAM is generally used to make cups, bowls, plates, trays, clamshell
containers, meat trays, egg cartons, coolers, ice chests, shipping boxes,
packing peanuts, and beach or pool toys. The term POLYSTYRENE also includes
clear or solid polystyrene, which is known as ORIENTED POLYSTYRENE.
      POLYSTYRENE/PLASTIC FOAM PRODUCTS. Any item such as coolers, ice chests
cups, bowls, plates, clamshells, shipping boxes, containers, cutlery, or any
other merchandise containing polystyrene/plastic foam that is not wholly
encapsulated or encased by a more durable material.
      PREPARED FOOD. Food or beverages, which are served, packaged, cooked,
chopped, sliced, mixed, brewed, frozen, squeezed or otherwise prepared within
the Town. PREPARED FOOD does not include raw, butchered meats, fish and/or
poultry sold from a butcher case or similar food establishment.
      RECYCLABLE. Any material that is accepted by the Charleston County
recycling program, including, but not limited to, paper, glass, aluminum,
cardboard and plastic bottles, jars and tubs. This also means any approved
alternative products that are accepted by the county recycling centers.
      REUSABLE CARRYOUT BAG. A carryout bag that is specifically designed and
manufactured for multiple use, and meets the following criteria:
         (a)   Displays in a highly visible manner on the bag exterior language
describing the bag’s ability to be reused and recycled;
         (b)   Has a handle which is stitched and not heat-infused;
         (c)   Is constructed out of any of the following materials:
            1.   Cloth, other machine-washable fabric, or other durable
materials whether woven or non-woven capable of being cleaned and disinfected;
or
            2.   Plastic film, with a minimum thickness of four (4.0) mills and
capable of being cleaned and disinfected;
         (d)   Has a minimum lifetime of 125 uses, which for purposes of this
definition means the capability of carrying a minimum of 22 pounds 125 times
over a distance of at least 175 feet.
      SINGLE-USE PLASTIC CARRYOUT BAG. A bag provided by a business
establishment to a customer typically at the point of sale for the purpose of a
onetime use to transport purchases, which is made predominantly of plastic
derived from either petroleum or a biologically-based source.
      TOWN OF JAMES ISLAND FACILITY. Any building, structure or vehicle owned
and operated by the town, its agents, agencies, and departments.
   (B)   Regulations.
      (1)   No business establishment or food or grocery establishment may
provide single-use plastic carryout bags at any town facility, town-sponsored
event, or any event held on town-owned property.
      (2)   No business establishment or food or grocery establishment within
the town limits may provide single-use plastic carryout bags to its customers.
All business establishments shall provide or make available to a customer
reusable carryout bags or recyclable paper bags.
      (3)   Food providers within the town may not provide food in any
disposable food service ware that contains polystyrene/plastic foam.
      (4)   Disposable food service ware that contains polystyrene/plastic foam
is prohibited from use in all town facilities.
      (5)   All food or grocery establishments, food providers and event
promoters within the town utilizing, selling or otherwise providing disposable
food service ware shall use recyclable or compostable products, subject to the
provisions of divisions (C) and (D) below.
      (6)   No business establishment or event promoter or food or grocery
establishment within the town may sell, rent, or otherwise provide any
polystyrene/plastic foam product that is not wholly encapsulated or encased
within a more durable material, except as exempted in this section. This
specifically includes, but is not limited to, cups, plates, bowls, clamshells,
bags, and other products intended primarily for food service, use, as well as
coolers, containers, ice chests, shipping boxes, or packing peanuts.
      (7)   Business establishments within the town limits are strongly
encouraged to provide prominently displayed signage advising customers of the
benefit of reducing, reusing and recycling and promoting the use of reusable
carryout bags by customers.
      (8)   While cutlery is considered exempt, food providers in the town
shall only provide, distribute or deliver disposable to-go-cutlery (i.e.,
forks, spoons, knives) for prepared food upon the request or affirmative
response of a customer or person being provided the prepared food or beverage,
or in a self-service area or dispenser.
   (C)   Exemptions. Although the town encourages the use of recyclable or
compostable products throughout, the following shall be exempt from the
provisions of this section:
      (1)   Products made from polystyrene/plastic foam, which is wholly
encapsulated or encased by a more durable material, are exempt from the
provisions of this section. Examples include surfboards, boats, life
preservers, and craft supplies which are wholly encapsulated or encased by a
more durable material, and durable coolers not principally composed of
polystyrene/plastic foam;
      (2)   Construction products made from polystyrene/plastic foam are
exempted from this section if the products are used in compliance with the town
code and used in a manner preventing the polystyrene/plastic foam from being
released into the environment;
      (3)   During a declared state of emergency or in an emergency situation
where the immediate preservation of the public peace, health or safety is
involved, any organization providing emergency services shall be exempt from
the provisions of this section;
      (4)   Laundry dry cleaning bags, door-hanger bags, newspaper bags, or
packages of multiple bags intended for use as garbage, recycling, pet waste,
yard waste or similar use; although the town encourages the use of recyclable
or compostable products throughout;
      (5)   Bags provided by physicians, dentists, pharmacists or veterinarians
to contain prescription drugs or other medical necessities;
      (6)   Bags used by a customer or an employee of a business establishment
to:
         (a)   Contain bulk items, such as produce, nuts, grains, candy, or
small hardware items;
         (b)   Contain or wrap raw or frozen foods, any meat product (i.e.,
beef, pork or poultry, whether seasoned or otherwise processed), or any seafood
product whether prepackaged;
         (c)   Contain or wrap flowers, potted plants or other items to prevent
moisture damage to other purchases; or
         (d)   Contain unwrapped prepared foods or bakery goods;
      (7)   Bags used by a non-profit corporation or other hunger relief
charity to distribute food, grocery products, clothing, or other household
items;
      (8)   Bags of any type that the customer brings to the store for their
own use for carrying away from the store goods that are not placed in a bag
provided by the store;
      (9)    Meat and seafood trays, egg cartons, plastic lids used to contain
foods and liquids, to-go condiment packages and cutlery (i.e., forks, spoons,
knives) are exempt from the provisions of this section;
      (10)   Plastic drinking straws when needed by customers due to medical or
physical conditions and for whom other straws are unsuitable are exempt from
the provisions of this section.
      (11)   Any product purchased, prepared or packaged outside the town and
thereafter sold in or delivered into the town are exempt from the provisions of
this chapter.
      (12)   Any packaging used by food or grocery establishments that is
required in order to comply with South Carolina Department of Health and
Environmental Control Retail Food Establishment Regulation 61-25 or similar
food safety regulation, or with federal food safety laws or regulations.
      (13)   Packaging used by food or grocery establishments that are
predominantly made of paper, including wax paper products, paper products that
have a clear plastic window and paper products, like paper cups or soup bowls
that are lined in plastic, which are used to package ready-to-eat foods.
   (D)   Requests for exemption.
      (1)   The Town Administrator or the Administrator’s designee, may exempt
a food or grocery establishment or food provider from the requirements set
forth in this section for up to a one-year period upon the food provider
showing, in writing, that this section would create an undue hardship or
practical difficulty not generally applicable to other persons in similar
circumstances. The Town Administrator or the Administrator’s designee shall put
the decision to grant or deny up to a one-year exemption in writing, and the
decision may be appealed to the Environment and Beautification Committee.
      (2)   Exemptions to allow for the sale or provision of polystyrene/
plastic foam products may be granted by the Town Administrator or the
Administrator’s designee, if the food or grocery establishment or food provider
can demonstrate in writing a public health and safety requirement or medical
necessity to use the product. The Town Administrator or the Administrator’s
designee shall put the decision to grant or deny the exemption in writing and
the decision may be appealed to the Environment and Beautification Committee.
      (3)   An exemption application shall include all information necessary
for the Town Administrator or the Administrator’s designee to make a decision,
including but not limited to documentation showing factual support for the
claimed exemption. The Town Administrator or the Administrator’s designee may
require the applicant to provide additional information.
      (4)   The Town Administrator or the Administrator’s designee may approve
the exemption application in whole or in part, with or without conditions.
      (5)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Town Administrator or
the Administrator’s
designee may appeal the decision to the Environment and Beautification
Committee within 30 days of the Town Administrator or designee’s issuance of
the written decision. In evaluating the appeal, the Environment and
Beautification Committee shall determine whether the decision of the Town
Administrator or the Administrator’s designee was made in compliance with the
standards, policies, and criteria of this section. The decision of the
Environment and Beautification Committee shall be final.
   (E)   Enforcement and penalties.
      (1)   The Code Enforcement Officer has primary responsibility for
enforcement of this section. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to take
any and all other actions reasonable and necessary to enforce this section,
including, but not limited to, investigating violations, entering the premises
of any business establishment during business hours.
      (2)   If a Code Enforcement Officer determines that violation of this
section has occurred, he or she will issue a written warning notice to the
owner or operator of the business establishment that a violation has occurred
and the potential fines that will apply for future violations.
      (3)   Any business establishment that violates or fails to comply with
any of the provisions of this section after a written warning notice has been
issued for that violation shall be subject to a fine that shall not exceed $200
for a first violation; $350 for a second violation within any 12-month period;
and $500 for each additional violation within any 12-month period. Every 30
days that a violation continues will constitute a separate offense.
      (4)   In addition to the penalties set forth in this section, repeated
violations of this section by a person who owns, manages, operates, is a
business agent of, or otherwise controls a business establishment may result in
the suspension or revocation of the business license issued to the premises on
which the violations occurred. No town business license shall be issued or
renewed until all fines outstanding against the applicant for violations of
this section are paid in full.
      (5)   Violation of this section is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance, which may be abated by the town by restraining order, preliminary and
permanent injunction, or other means provided for by law, and the town may take
action to recover the costs of the nuisance abatement.
(Ord. 2018-16, passed 1-17-2019; Am. Ord. 2019-09, passed 11-21-2019; Am. Ord.
2024-01, passed 2-15-2024)
Editor’s note:
   All of the requirements set forth in this section shall take effect and
become operative and enforceable on January 1, 2020.
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   [Reserved]
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   TOWN BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
      
152.   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
      
153.   ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 150: TOWN BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
   
150.01   General provisions
   
150.02   Applicability
   
150.03   Department of Building Inspection Services
   
150.04   Duties and powers of Building Official
   
150.05   Permits
   
150.06   Construction documents
   
150.07   Temporary structures and uses
   
150.08   Fees
   
150.09   Inspections
   
150.10   Certificate of occupancy
   
150.11   Service utilities
   
150.12   Licensing and registration
   
150.13   Unsafe dwellings and equipment
   
150.14   Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals
   
150.15   Violations
 
   
150.99   Penalty
Editor’s note:
   The regulations set forth in this chapter are those of Charleston County
Ordinance 1839, adopted by the county on January 20, 2015, which was adopted by
the town’s Ordinance 2016-14 on January 19, 2017.
§ 150.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Title. These regulations shall be known as the Building Code of the
Town of James Island, hereinafter referred to as “this chapter.”
   (B)   Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the construction,
alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and
occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or
structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or
structures.
   (C)   Appendices. Provisions in the appendices shall not apply unless
specifically adopted.
   (D)   Intent. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the provisions
found in S.C. Code §§ 6-9-5 et seq. and S.C. Code of Regulations 8-100 et seq.
that establish the minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety
and general welfare through structural strength, means of egress facilities,
stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, energy conservation, and
safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built
environment and to provide safety to fire fighters and emergency responders
during emergency operations.
   (E)   Referenced codes. The provisions in divisions (E)(1) through (E)(8)
below and referenced elsewhere in this chapter shall be considered part of the
requirements of this chapter to the prescribed extent of each such reference.
      (1)   Building.
         (a)   The provisions of the International Building Code as adopted by
the S. C. Building Codes Council shall apply to the construction of buildings
and structures.
         (b)   Exception: Detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple
single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories above grade
plane in height with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures
shall comply with the International Residential Code as adopted by the S.C.
Building Code Council.
      (2)   Electrical. The provisions of the National Electrical Code as
adopted by the S.C. Building Codes Council shall apply to the installation of
electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment,
appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto.
      (3)   Gas. The provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code as adopted
by the S.C. Building Codes Council shall apply to the installation of gas
piping from the point of delivery, gas appliances and related accessories as
covered in this chapter. These requirements apply to gas piping systems
extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and
the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and
related accessories.
      (4)   Mechanical. The provisions of the International Mechanical Code as
adopted by the S.C. Building Codes Council shall apply to the installation,
alterations, repairs and replacement of mechanical systems, including
equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including
ventilation, heating, cooling, air-conditioning and refrigeration systems,
incinerators and other energy-related systems.
      (5)   Plumbing. The provisions of the International Plumbing Code as
adopted by the S.C. Building Codes Council shall apply to the installation,
alteration, repair and replacement of plumbing systems, including equipment,
appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and where connected to a
water or sewage system and all aspects of a medical gas system.
      (6)   Fire prevention. The provisions of the International Fire Code as
adopted by the S.C. Building Codes Council shall apply to matters affecting or
relating to structures, processes and premises from the hazard of fire and
explosion arising from the storage, handling or use of structures, materials or
devices, from conditions hazardous to life, property or public welfare in the
occupancy of structures or premises; and from the construction, extension,
repair, alteration or removal of fire suppression and alarm systems or fire
hazards in the structure or on the premises from occupancy or operation.
      (7)   Energy. The provisions of the International Energy Conservation
Code as adopted by the State of South Carolina shall apply to all matters
governing the design and construction of buildings for energy efficiency.
      (8)   Unsafe buildings and equipment. (See §
150.13).
   (F)   Definitions. References throughout this chapter are defined as
follows:
      CODE OFFICIAL. Shall mean “Building Official.”
(Ord. 2016-14, passed 1-19-2017)
§ 150.02 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Area of applicability. This chapter shall affect all unincorporated
areas of the town, unless this chapter is adopted by an incorporated area,
excluding any parcels of land owned by the state or the federal government, and
any buildings and installations thereon unless duly requested or required by
law.
   (B)   General. Where, in any specific case, different sections of this
chapter specify different materials, methods of construction or other
requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict
between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific
requirement shall be applicable.
   (C)   Other laws. The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to
nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law.
   (D)   Application of references. References to chapter or section numbers,
or to provisions not specifically identified by number, shall be construed to
refer to such chapter, section or provision of this chapter.
   (E)   Referenced codes and standards.
      (1)   The codes and standards referenced in this chapter shall be
considered part of the requirements of this chapter to the prescribed extent of
each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this chapter
and referenced codes and standards, the provisions of this chapter shall apply.
      (2)   Exception: Where enforcement of a code provision would violate the
conditions of the listing of the equipment or appliance, the conditions of the
listing and manufacturer’s instructions shall apply.
   (F)   Partial invalidity. In the event that any part or provision of this
chapter is held to be illegal or void, this shall not have the effect of making
void or illegal any of the other parts or provisions.
   (G)   Existing structures. 
      (1)   The legal occupancy of any structure existing on the date of
adoption of this chapter shall be permitted to continue without change, except
as is specifically covered in this chapter or as is deemed necessary by the
Building Official for the general safety and welfare of the occupants and the
public.
      (2)   Existing installations. Building systems lawfully in existence at
the time of the adoption of this chapter shall be permitted to have their use
and maintenance continued if the use, maintenance or repair is in accordance
with the original design and no hazard to life, health or property is created
by such system.
   (H)   Maintenance. All building systems, materials and appurtenances, both
existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in proper
operating condition in accordance with the original design in a safe and
sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards required by this chapter shall be
maintained in compliance with the code edition under which they were installed.
      (1)   Maintenance of safeguards. Whenever or wherever any device,
equipment, system, condition, arrangement, level of protection, or any other
feature is required for compliance with the provisions of this chapter or
otherwise installed, such device, equipment, system, condition, arrangement,
level of protection, or other feature shall thereafter be continuously
maintained in accordance with the chapter and applicable referenced standards,
in effect on the date permitted or if done without permits at the time of
installation.
      (2)   Testing and operation. Equipment requiring periodic testing or
operation to ensure maintenance shall be tested or operated as specified in
this chapter.
         (a)   Test and inspection records. Required test and inspection
records shall be available to the Building Official at all times.
         (b)   Reinspection and testing. Where any work or installation does
not pass an initial test or inspection, the necessary corrections shall be made
so as to achieve compliance with this chapter.
      (3)   Supervision. Maintenance and testing shall be under the supervision
of a responsible person who shall ensure that such maintenance and testing are
conducted at specified intervals in accordance with this chapter.
      (4)   Rendering equipment inoperable. Portable or fixed fire-
extinguishing systems or devices and fire-warning systems shall not be rendered
inoperative or inaccessible except as necessary during emergencies,
maintenance, repairs, alterations, drills or prescribed testing.
      (5)   Owner/occupant responsibility. Correction and abatement of
violations of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the owner. If an
occupant creates, or allows to be created, hazardous conditions in violation of
this chapter, the occupant shall be held responsible for the abatement of such
hazardous conditions.
      (6)   Overcrowding. Overcrowding or admittance of any person beyond the
approved capacity of a building or a portion thereof shall not be allowed. The
Building Official, upon finding any overcrowding conditions or obstructions in
aisles, passageways or other means of egress, or upon finding any condition
which constitutes a life safety hazard, shall be authorized to cause the event
to be stopped until such condition or obstruction is corrected.
   (I)   Additions, alterations, or repairs. Additions, alterations or repairs
to any structure or building systems shall conform to that required for a new
structure without requiring the existing structure to comply with all of the
requirements of this chapter, unless otherwise stated. Additions, alterations,
or repairs shall not cause an existing structure to become unsafe or adversely
affect the performance of the building. See division (L) of this section
concerning substantial improvements.
   (J)   Historic buildings.
      (1)   The provisions of this chapter relating to the construction,
alteration, repair, enlargement restoration, relocation or moving of buildings
or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures
identified and/or classified by the federal, state or local jurisdiction as
historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the Building
Official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare
regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement,
restoration, relocation, change of occupancy, or moving of buildings.
      (2)   HISTORIC BUILDINGS are defined as:
         (a)   Listed or preliminarily determined to be eligible for listing in
the National Register of Historic Places;
         (b)   Determined by the Secretary of the U.S. Department of Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined to qualify as an historic
district;
         (c)   Designated as historic under a state or local historic
preservation program that is approved by the Department of Interior; or
         (d)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historical places
that has been certified by the South Carolina Department of Archives and
History.
   (K)   Moved buildings. Buildings and/or structures and their components
moved into or within the jurisdiction shall comply with the provisions of this
chapter for new installations.
   (L)   Substantially improved or substantially damaged existing buildings and
structures. The Building Official shall examine or cause to be examined the
construction documents for reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of existing buildings or structures, and shall prepare a finding
with regard to the value of the proposed work. For buildings that have
sustained damage of any origin and/or improvement to a building or structure,
the value of the proposed work shall include the cost to repair the building or
structure to its pre-damaged condition and/or cost of any improvements. If the
Building Official finds that the value of proposed work equals or exceeds 50%
of the fair market value of the building or structure, the entire building or
structure shall be brought into compliance with all applicable codes.
   (M)   Change in occupancy. It shall be unlawful to make a change in the
occupancy of any structure which will subject the structure to any special
provision of this chapter applicable to the new occupancy without approval. The
Building Official shall certify that such structure meets the intent of the
provisions of law governing building construction for the proposed new
occupancy and that such change of occupancy does not result in any hazard to
the public health, safety or welfare.
   (N)   Requirements not covered by this chapter. Requirements necessary for
the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building
or structure and its components, or for the public safety, health and general
welfare, not specifically covered by this chapter, shall be determined by the
Building Official.
(Ord. 2016-14, passed 1-19-2017) Penalty, see § 150.99
§ 150.03 DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING INSPECTION SERVICES.
   (A)   Creation of enforcement agency. The Department of Building Inspection
Services is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as
the Building Official.
   (B)   Appointment. The Building Official shall be appointed by the
appointing authority of the Town of James Island.
   (C)   Deputies. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this
jurisdiction and with the concurrence of the appointing authority, the Building
Official shall have the authority to appoint a Deputy Building Official, the
related technical officers, inspectors, plan examiners and other employees.
Such employees shall have powers as delegated by the Building Official.
(Ord. 2016-14, passed 1-19-2017)
§ 150.04 DUTIES AND POWERS OF BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   (A)   General. The Building Official is hereby authorized and directed to
enforce the provisions of this chapter. The Building Official shall have the
authority to render interpretations of this chapter and to adopt policies and
procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such
interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent
and purpose of this chapter. Such policies and procedures shall not have the
effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this chapter.
   (B)   Applications and permits. The Building Official shall receive
applications, review construction documents and issue permits for the erection,
and alteration, demolition and moving of buildings and structures, inspect the
premises for which such permits have been issued and enforce compliance with
the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Notices and orders. The Building Official shall issue all necessary
notices or orders to ensure compliance with this chapter.
   (D)   Inspections. The Building Official shall make all of the required
inspections, or the Building Official shall have the authority to accept
reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. Reports of such
inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of
such approved agency or by the responsible individual.
   (E)   Identification. The Building Official shall carry proper
identification when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of
duties under this chapter.
   (F)   Right of entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce
the provisions of this chapter, or where the Building Official has reasonable
cause to believe that there exists in a structure or upon a premises a
condition which is contrary to or in violation of this chapter which makes the
structure or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the Building Official is
authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or
to perform the duties imposed by this chapter, provided that if such structure
or premises be occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry
requested. If such structure or premises is unoccupied, the Building Official
shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having
charge or control of the structure or premises and request entry. If entry is
refused, the Building Official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by
law to secure entry.
   (G)   Department records. The Building Official shall keep official records
of applications received, permits and certificates issued, fees collected,
reports of inspections, and notices and orders issued. Such records shall be
retained in the official records for the period required for retention of
public records.
   (H)   Liability. The Building Official, member of the Construction Board of
Adjustment and Appeals or employee charged with the enforcement of this
chapter, while acting for the jurisdiction in good faith and without malice in
the discharge of the duties required by this chapter or other pertinent law or
ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally and is hereby
relieved from personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property
as a result of any act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of
official duties. Any suit instituted against an officer or employee because of
an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties
and under the provisions of this chapter shall be defended by legal
representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the
proceedings. The Building Official or any subordinate shall not be liable for
cost in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the
provisions of this chapter.
   (I)   Approved materials and equipment.
      (1)   Materials, equipment and devices approved by the Building Official
shall be constructed and installed in accordance with such approval.
      (2)   Used materials and equipment. The use of used materials which meet
the requirements of this chapter for new materials is permitted. Used equipment
and devices shall not be reused unless approved by the Building Official.
   (J)   Modifications. Wherever there are practical difficulties involved in
carrying out the provisions of this chapter, the Building Official shall have
the authority to grant modifications for individual cases, upon application of
the owner or owner’s representative, provided the Building Official shall first
find that special individual reason makes the strict letter of this chapter
impractical and the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose
of this chapter and that such modification does not lessen health,
accessibility, life and fire safety, or structural requirements. The details of
action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the files of the
Department of Building Inspection Services.
   (K)   Alternative materials, design and methods of construction and
equipment. The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the
installation of any material or to prohibit any design or method of
construction not specifically prescribed by this chapter, provided that any
such alternative has been approved. An alternative material, design or method
of construction shall be approved where the Building Official finds that the
proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions
of this chapter, and that the material, method or work offered is, for the
purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this chapter in
quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety.
      (1)   Research reports. Supporting data, where necessary to assist in the
approval of materials or assemblies not specifically provided for in this
chapter, shall consist of valid research reports from approved sources.
      (2)   Tests. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with
the provisions of this chapter, or evidence that a material or method does not
conform to the requirements of this chapter, or in order to substantiate claims
for alternative materials or methods, the Building Official shall have the
authority to require tests as evidence of compliance to be made at no expense
to the jurisdiction. Test methods shall be as specified in this chapter or by
other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test
methods, the Building Official shall approve the testing procedures. Tests
shall be performed by an approved agency. Reports of such tests shall be
retained by the Building Official for the period required for retention of
public records.
   (L)   Evacuation. The Building Official and/or the Fire Department Official
in charge of an incident shall be authorized to order the immediate evacuation
of any occupied building deemed unsafe when such building has hazardous
conditions that present imminent danger to building occupants. Persons so
notified shall immediately leave the structure or premises and shall not enter
or re-enter until authorized to do so by the Building Official and/or the Fire
Department Official in charge of the incident.
(Ord. 2016-14, passed 1-19-2017) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.05 PERMITS.
   (A)   Required permits.
      (1)   Any owner or authorized agent who intends to construct, enlarge,
alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or
structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or
replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of
which is regulated by this chapter, or to cause any such work to be done, shall
first make application; to the Building Official and obtain the required
permit.
      (2) Additional required permits. The Building Official is authorized to
issue permits for work as set forth in divisions (A)(2)(a) through (A)(2)(c) of
this section.
         (a)   Automatic fire-extinguishing systems. A permit is required for
installation of or modification to an automatic fire-extinguishing system.
Maintenance performed in accordance with this chapter is not considered a
modification and does not require a permit.
         (b)   Fire alarm and detection systems and related equipment. 
            1.   A permit is required for installation of or modification to
fire alarm and detection systems and related equipment. Maintenance performed
in accordance with this chapter is not considered a modification and does not
require a permit.
            2.   Exception: Residential type smoke detectors installed
individually or wired in series in single-family residences.
         (c)   Fire pumps and related equipment. A permit is required for
installation of or modification to fire pumps and related fuel tanks, jockey
pumps, controllers, and generators. Maintenance performed in accordance with
this chapter is not considered a modification and does not require a permit.
         (d)   Hazardous materials. A permit is required to install, repair
damage to, abandon, remove, place temporarily out of service, or close or
substantially modify a storage facility or other area regulated by Chapter 27
of the International Fire Code.
         (e)   Private fire hydrants. A permit is required for the installation
or modification of private fire hydrants and their systems.
         (f)   Standpipe systems. A permit is required for the installation,
modification, or removal from service of a standpipe system. Maintenance
performed in accordance with this chapter is not considered a modification and
does not require a permit.
         (g)   Special permits. In addition to the required permits, the
following permits are required for the following installation and/or repairs;
vinyl siding, insulation, roofing, floor covering/carpet, masonry, drywall,
carpentry, stucco, paint/wallpaper, low voltage electrical, elevators,
landscape/site development.
   (B)   Work exempt from permit. 
      (1)   Exemptions from permit requirements of this chapter shall not be
deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in
violation of the provisions of this chapter or any other laws or ordinances of
this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the following:
         (a)   Building.
            1.   One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and
storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not
exceed 120 square feet (11 m2).
            2.   Fences not over six feet (1829 mm) high.
            3.   Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity does
not exceed 5,000 gallons (18,925 L) and the ratio of height to diameter or
width does not exceed 2:1.
            4.   Retaining walls that are not over four feet (1219 mm) in
height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless
supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II, or IIIA liquids.
            5.   Sidewalks and driveways not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above
adjacent grade, and not over any basement or story below and are not part of an
accessible route.
            6.   Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets
and scenery.
            7.   Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R-
3 occupancy that are less than 24 inches (610 mm) deep, do not exceed 5,000
gallons (19,000 L) and are installed entirely above ground.
            8.   Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural
purposes, and not including service systems.
            9.   Swings and other playground equipment.
            10.   Nonfixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, counters and
partitions not over five feet nine inches (1753 mm) in height.
            11.   Window awnings supported by an exterior wall that do not
project more than 54 inches (1372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not require
additional support.
         (b)   Electrical.
            1.   Repairs and maintenance. Minor repair work, including the
replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical
equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles.
            2.   Radio and television transmitting stations. The provisions of
this chapter shall not apply to electrical equipment used for radio and
television transmissions, but do apply to equipment and wiring for a power
supply and the installations of towers and antennas.
            3.   Temporary testing systems. A permit shall not be required for
the installation of any temporary system required for the testing or servicing
of electrical equipment or apparatus.
         (c)   Gas.
            1.   Portable gas equipment of all types that is not connected to a
fixed fuel piping system.
            2.   Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of
equipment or make such equipment unsafe.
            3.   Portable fuel cell appliances that are not connected to a
fixed piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid.
         (d)   Mechanical.
            1.   Portable heating appliance.
            2.   Portable ventilation equipment.
            3.   Portable cooling unit.
            4.   Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or
cooling equipment regulated by this chapter.
            5.   Replacement of any part that does not alter its approval or
make it unsafe.
            6.   Portable evaporative cooler.
            7.   Self-contained refrigeration system containing ten pounds
(five kg) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower (746
W) or less.
            8.    Portable-fuel-cell appliances that are not connected to a
fixed piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid.
         (e)   Plumbing.
            1.   The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent
pipe, provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drain pipe, water, soil,
waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and
replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work
and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this chapter.
            2.   The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes,
valves or fixtures and the removal and reinstallation of water closets,
provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or
rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures.
         (f)   Energy. The following need not comply provided the energy use of
the building is not increased:
            1.   Storm windows installed over existing fenestration.
            2.   Glass only replacements in an existing sash and frame.
            3.   Construction where the existing roof, wall or floor cavity is
not exposed.
      (2)   Emergency repairs. Where equipment replacements and repairs must be
performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be submitted
within the next working business day to the Building Official.
      (3)   Repairs. Application or notice to the Building Official is not
required for ordinary repairs to structures, replacement of lamps or the
connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently
installed receptacles. Such repairs shall not include the cutting away of any
wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural
beam or load-bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of
egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress
requirements; nor shall ordinary repairs include addition to, alteration of,
replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage,
drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring or
mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety.
      (4)   Public service agencies. A permit shall not be required for the
installation, alteration or repair of generation; transmission, distribution or
metering or other related equipment that is under the ownership and control of
public service agencies by established right.
   (C)   Application for permit.
      (1)   Filing of application. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall
first file an application therefore in writing on a form furnished by the
Department of Building Services for that purpose. Such application shall:
         (a)   Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for
which application is made;
         (b)   Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by
address and tax map number (TMS) or property identification number (PID);
         (c)   Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed work is
intended;
         (d)   Be accompanied by construction documents and other information
as required in §
150.06.
         (e)   State the valuation of the proposed work.
         (f)   Be signed by the applicant, or the applicant’s authorized agent.
         (g)   Submit such other data and information as required by the
Building Official.
      (2)   Action on application. The Building Official shall examine or cause
to be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto within a
reasonable time after filing. If the application or the construction documents
do not conform to the requirements of pertinent laws, the Building Official
shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefore. If the
Building Official is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the
requirements of this chapter and laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the
Building Official shall issue a permit therefore as soon as practicable.
      (3)   Time limitation of application. An application for a permit for any
proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of
filing, unless such application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has
been issued; except that the Building Official is authorized to grant one or
more extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 90 days each. The
extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.
   (D)   Validity of permit. The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be
construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter or of any other ordinance of the jurisdiction.
Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this
chapter or other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. The
issuance of a permit based on construction documents and other data shall not
prevent the Building Official from requiring the correction of errors in the
construction documents and other data. The Building Official is also authorized
to prevent occupancy or use of a structure where in violation of this chapter
or of any other ordinances of this jurisdiction.
   (E)   Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work
on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its
issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or
abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. The
Building Official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of
time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The extensions shall be
requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.
   (F)   Suspension or revocation. The Building Official is authorized to
suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter wherever
the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or
incomplete information, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any
of the provisions of this chapter.
   (G)   Placement of permit. The building permit or copy shall be kept on the
site for the work until the completion of the project at an accessible and
visible location.
   (H)   Responsibility. It shall be the duty of every person who performs work
for the installation or repair of building systems, for which this chapter is
applicable, to comply with this chapter.
   (I)   Manufactured housing permits. In order for a permit to be issued to
install a manufactured home in the town, a copy of the current license of the
installer or contractor, issued by the South Carolina Manufactured Housing
Board, must be submitted with the application for the permit. If a retail
dealer is installing the home, a current copy of the retail dealer’s license,
issued by the South Carolina Manufactured Housing Board, must be submitted with
the application for the permit. The installer, contractor, or dealer may submit
an electronic copy of the license, in an acceptable format such as JPEG or PDF,
by email in place of a copy.
   (J)   Unauthorized tampering. Signs, tags or seals posted or affixed by the
Building Official shall not be mutilated, destroyed or tampered with or removed
without authorization from the Building Official.
(Ord. 2016-14, passed 1-19-2017) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.06 CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS.
   (A)   Submittal documents.
      (1)   Submission of documents.
         (a)   Construction documents, statement of special inspections and
other data shall be submitted in two or more sets with each permit application.
The construction documents shall be prepared by a registered design
professional where required by the statutes of the jurisdiction in which the
project is to be constructed. Where special conditions exist, the Building
Official is authorized to require additional construction documents to be
prepared by a registered design professional.
         (b)   Exception: The Building Official is authorized to waive the
submission of construction documents and other data not required to be prepared
by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work
applied for is such that review of construction documents is not necessary to
obtain compliance with this chapter.
      (2)   Information on construction documents. Construction documents shall
be dimensioned and drawn upon suitable material. Electronic media documents are
permitted to be submitted when approved by the Building Official. Construction
documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and
extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the
provisions of this chapter and relevant laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations, as determined by the Building Official.
         (a)   Fire protection system shop drawings. Shop drawings for the fire
protection system(s) shall be submitted to indicate conformance with this
chapter and the construction documents and shall be approved prior to the start
of system installation. Shop drawings shall contain all information as required
by the referenced installation standards in Chapter 9 of the IBC.
         (b)   Manufacturer’s installation instructions. Manufacturer’s
installation instructions, as required by this chapter, shall be available on
the job site at the time of inspection.
      (3)   Means of egress. The construction documents shall show in
sufficient detail the location, construction, size and character of all
portions of the means of egress in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter. In other than occupancies in groups R-2, R-3, and 1-1, the
construction documents shall designate the number of occupants to be
accommodated on every floor, and in all rooms and spaces.
      (4)   Exterior wall envelope.
         (a)   Construction documents for all buildings shall describe the
exterior wall envelope in sufficient detail to determine compliance with this
chapter. The construction documents shall provide details of the exterior wall
envelope as required, including flashing, intersections with dissimilar
materials, corners, end details, control joints, intersections at roof, eaves
or parapets, means of drainage, water-resistive membrane, details around
openings and wind borne debris protection systems.
         (b)   The construction documents shall include manufacturer’s
installation instructions that provide supporting documentation that the
proposed penetration and opening details described in the construction
documents maintain the weather resistance of the exterior wall envelope. The
supporting documentation shall fully describe the exterior wall system which
was tested, where applicable, as well as the test procedure used.
      (5)   Energy requirements. Details shall include, but are not limited to,
insulation materials and their R-values; fenestration U-factors and SHGCs;
system and equipment efficiencies, types, sizes and controls; duct sealing,
insulation and location; and air sealing details.
   (B)   Site plan. The construction documents submitted with the application
for permit shall be accompanied by a site plan showing to an engineer’s scale
the size and location of new construction and existing structures on the site,
distances from lot lines, the established street grades and the proposed
finished grades and, as applicable, flood hazard areas, floodways, and design
flood elevations; and it shall be drawn in accordance with an accurate boundary
line survey. In the case of demolition, the site plan shall show construction
to be demolished and the location and size of existing structures and
construction that are to remain on the site or plot. The Building Official is
authorized to waive or modify the requirement for a site plan when the
application for permit is for alteration or repair or when otherwise warranted.
   (C)   Examination of documents. The Building Official shall examine or cause
to be examined the accompanying construction documents and shall ascertain by
such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter and other pertinent laws or
ordinances.
      (1)   Approval of construction documents. When the Building Official
issues a permit, the construction documents shall be approved, in writing or by
stamp, as “Reviewed for Code Compliance.” One set of construction documents so
reviewed shall be retained by the Building Official. The other set shall be
returned to the applicant, shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open
to inspection by the Building Official or a duly authorized representative.
      (2)   Previous approvals. This chapter shall not require changes in the
construction documents, construction or designated occupancy of a structure for
which a lawful permit has been heretofore issued or otherwise lawfully
authorized, and the construction of which has been pursued in good faith within
180 days after the effective date of this chapter and has not been abandoned.
      (3)   Phased approval. The Building Official is authorized to issue a
permit for the construction of foundations or any other part of a building or
structure before the construction documents for the whole building or structure
have been submitted, provided that adequate information and detailed statements
have been filed complying with pertinent requirements of this chapter. The
holder of such permit for the foundation or other parts of a building or
structure shall proceed at the holder’s own risk with the building operation
and without assurance that a permit for the entire structure will be granted.
      (4)   Design professional in responsible charge.
         (a)   General.
            1.   When it is required that documents be prepared by a registered
design professional, the Building Official shall be authorized to require the
owner to engage and designate on the building permit application a registered
design professional who shall act as the registered design professional in
responsible charge. If the circumstances require, the owner shall designate a
substitute registered design professional in responsible charge who shall
perform the duties required of the original registered design professional in
responsible charge. The Building Official shall be notified in writing by the
owner if the registered design professional in responsible charge is changed or
is unable to continue to perform the duties.
            2.   The registered design professional in responsible charge shall
be responsible for reviewing and coordinating submittal documents prepared by
others, including phased and deferred submittal items, for compatibility with
the design of the building.
            3.   Where structural observation is required by the IBC, the
statement of special inspections shall name the individual or firms who are to
perform structural observation and describe the stages of construction at which
structural observation is to occur.
         (b)   Deferred submittals.
            1.   For the purposes of this section, deferred submittals are
defined as those portions of the design that are not submitted at the time of
the application and that are to be submitted to the Building Official within a
specified period.
            2.   Deferral of any submittal items shall have the prior approval
of the Building Official. The registered design professional in responsible
charge shall list the deferred submittals on the construction documents for
review by the Building Official.
            3.   Documents for deferred submittal items shall be submitted to
the registered design professional in responsible charge who shall review them
and forward them to the Building Official with a notation indicating that the
deferred submittal documents have been reviewed and been found to be in general
conformance to the design of the building. The deferred submittal items shall
not be installed until the design and submittal documents have been approved by
the Building Official.
   (D)   Amend construction documents. Work shall be installed in accordance
with the approved construction documents, and any changes made during
construction that are not in compliance with the approved construction
documents shall be resubmitted for approval as an amended set of construction
documents.
   (E)   Retention of construction documents. One set of approved construction
documents shall be retained by the Building Official for a period of not less
than 180 days from date of completion of the permitted work, as required by
state, local laws or in accordance with the town records retention schedule.
(Ord. 2016-14, passed 1-19-2017) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.07 TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES.
   (A)   General. The Building Official is authorized to issue a permit for
temporary structures and temporary occupancy/uses. Such permits shall be
limited as to time of service, but shall not be permitted for more than 180
days. The Building Official is authorized to grant extensions for demonstrated
cause.
   (B)   Conformance. Temporary structures and uses shall conform to the
structural strength, fire safety, means of egress, accessibility, light,
ventilation and sanitary requirements of this code as necessary to ensure
public health, safety and general welfare.
   (C)   Temporary power. The Building Official is authorized to give
permission to temporarily supply and use power in part of an electric
installation before such installation has been fully completed and the final
certificate of completion has been issued. The part covered by the temporary
certificate shall comply with the requirements specified for temporary
lighting, heat or power in the National Electrical Code.
   (D)   Termination of approval. The Building Official is authorized to
terminate such permit for a temporary structure or use and to order the
temporary structure or use to be discontinued.
(Ord. 2016-14, passed 1-19-2017) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.08 FEES.
   (A)   Payment of fees. A permit shall not be valid until the permit and/or
business license and other fees as prescribed by law have been paid, nor shall
an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fees, if any, have
been paid.
   (B)   Schedule of permit fees. On buildings, structures, electrical, gas,
mechanical, and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for
each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the schedule as
established by the governing authority.
   (C)   Building permit valuations. The applicant for a permit shall provide
an estimated permit value at time of application. Permit valuations shall
include total value of work, including materials and labor, for which the
permit is being issued, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment
and permanent systems. If, in the opinion of the Building Official, the
valuation is underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied,
unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the
Building Official. Final building permit valuation shall be set by the Building
Official.
   (D)   Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any
work on a building or structure before obtaining the necessary permits shall be
subject to a double fee.
   (E)   Related fees. The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration,
removal or demolition for work done in connection to or concurrently with the
work authorized by a permit shall not relieve the applicant or holder of the
permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by law.
   (F)   Refunds.
      (1)   There shall be no refund unless it is due to a county mistake. All
refunds caused by a county mistake are to be referred to the Building Official
for processing.
      (2)   Exceptions: Requests for refunds by the applicant’s mistake may be
made up to financial close of books (3:30 pm) on the day the funds are paid.
   (G)   Permit fees. Fees shall be as established by the Town of James Island,
as set forth below in this section.
Total Valuation Fee
Total Valuation            Fee
                           No fee, unless an inspection is required, in which
$1,000.00 and less         case a permit is required and a $50.00 fee shall be
                           charged
$1,000.00 to $2,000.00     $50.00
$2,001.00 to $50,000.00    $50.00 for the first $2,000.00 + $4.00 per $1,000.00
$50,001.00 to $100,000.00  $242.00 for the first $50,000.00 + $3.75 per
                           $1,000.00
$100,001.00 to $300,000.00 $429.50 for the first $100,000.00 +$3.50 per
                           $1,000.00
$300,001.00 to $500,000.00 $1,129.50 for the first $300,000.00 +$3.35 per
                           $1,000.00
$500,001.00 and up         $1,799.50 for the first $500,000.00 + $3.00 per
                           $1,000.00
 
         (b)   Working without permits: Double fee.
      (3)   Other permit fees.
 
Permit fee when the contractor is working as a subcontractor for the
following activities; painting/wallpaper; floor covering, drywall    $25.00
(unless part of fire related assembly), trim, cabinet, shelving,
countertops, closet systems, and shower door
   Exceptions:                                                     
   (a)   When permits are issued for work being done as the prime
contractor, the fees shall be based on construction value as in division
(G)(2) above, valuation chart, for the appropriate type of work being
performed.
   (b)   Prime contractors permitted and performing subcontractor work
utilizing their full-time regular hourly employees will be issued trade
permits with no fee.
 
      (4)   Manufactured housing permit fees.
 
For setup on a new or existing site $100.00
Note: Fees for modular construction as defined by the South Carolina Modular
Construction Act shall be based upon the fee schedule for permits based on
construction valuations.
 
      (5)   Inspection fees.
 
                                     When a reinspection fee is required, an
(a) Reinspection                     additional fee of $50.00 will be charged
                                     for each inspection.
(b) Minimum permit or inspection fee $50.00
(c) Floodplain management compliance $75.00
    inspection
(d) Hazardous occupant permits       $100.00
(e) Fireworks stand permits          $50.00
(f) Structural moving permit fee     $100.00
(g) Demolition permit fee            $50.00
 
      (6)   Other fees.
(a) Plan review fees:                       One-half permit fee based on
                                            construction valuations
(b) Construction in flood zones/filing fee: $20.00
    Note: If a prime contractor has paid a flood zone filing fee, the
   subcontractor working for the prime contractor will not be charged an
    additional filing fee.
(c) Fees for replacement of placards shall  $25.00
    be
(d) Variance/appeal application fee         $100.00
   Note: Application fees for appeals successfully granted by the Construction
    Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall be reimbursed to the applicant.
(e) Vehicle decal fee                       $6.00/vehicle/set
(f) Annual vehicle                          $3.00
 
      (7)   Penalties. Where work for which a permit is required by this
chapter is started or proceeded prior to obtaining said permit, the fees herein
specific shall be doubled, but the payment of such double fee shall not relieve
any persons from fully complying with the requirements of this chapter in the
execution of work, nor from any other penalties prescribed herein.
(Ord. 2016-14, passed 1-19-2017)
Editor’s Note:
   The specific fees set forth in this section are those of Charleston County
Ordinance 1840, adopted by the county on January 20, 2015, which was adopted by
the town’s Ordinance 2016-14 on January 19, 2017
§ 150.09 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   General. Construction or work for which a permit is required shall be
subject to inspection by the Building Official and such construction or work
shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved.
Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval
of a violation of the provisions of this chapter or of other ordinances of the
jurisdiction. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the
provisions of this chapter or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not
be valid. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to
remain accessible and exposed for inspection purpose. Neither the Building
Official nor the jurisdiction shall be liable for expense entailed in the
removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection.
   (B)   Preliminary inspection. Before issuing a permit, the Building Official
is authorized to examine or cause to be examined building, structures and sites
for which an application has been filed.
   (C)   Required inspections. The Building Official, upon notification, shall
make the inspections set forth in divisions (C)(1) through (C)(12) below.
      (1)   Footing and foundation inspection. Footing and foundation
inspections shall be made after excavations for footings are complete and any
required reinforcing steel is in place. For concrete foundations, any required
forms shall be in place prior to inspection. Materials for the foundation shall
be on the job, except where concrete is ready mixed in accordance with ASTM C
94, the concrete need not be on the job.
      (2)   Concrete slab and under-floor inspection. Concrete slab and under-
floor inspections shall be made after in-slab or under-floor reinforcing steel
and building service equipment, conduit, piping accessories and other ancillary
equipment items are in place, but before any concrete is placed or floor
sheathing installed, including the sub floor.
      (3)   Lowest floor elevation. In flood hazard areas, upon placement of
the lowest floor including the basement, and prior to further vertical
construction, an elevation certificate as required in Flood Damage Prevention
and Protection Ordinance shall be submitted to the Building Official.
      (4)   Plumbing, mechanical, gas and electrical systems inspection.
         (a)   Rough inspection of plumbing, mechanical, gas and electrical
systems shall be made prior to covering or concealment, before fixtures or
appliances are set or installed, and prior to framing inspection.
         (b)   Exception: Back-filling of ground-source heat pump loop systems
tested in accordance with the International Mechanical Code prior to inspection
shall be permitted.
      (5)   Frame and masonry inspection. Framing inspections shall be made
after the roof deck or sheathing, all framing, fire blocking, bracing and
masonry are in place and pipes, chimneys and vents to be concealed are complete
and the rough electrical, plumbing, heating wires, pipes and ducts are
approved.
      (6) Fire-resistance-rated construction inspection. Where fire-resistance-
rated construction is required between dwelling units or due to location on
property, the Building Official shall require an inspection of such
construction after all lathing and/or wallboard is in place, but before any
plaster is applied, or before wall-board joints and fasteners are taped and
finished.
      (7)   Reinforced masonry, insulating concrete form (ICF) and
conventionally formed concrete wall inspection. Reinforced masonry walls,
insulating concrete form (ICF) walls and conventionally formed concrete walls
shall be inspected after plumbing, mechanical, and electrical systems are
embedded within the walls, reinforcing steel is in place and prior to placement
of grout or concrete. Inspection shall verify the correct size, location,
spacing, and lapping of reinforcing. For masonry walls, inspection shall also
verify that the location of grout cleanouts and size of grout spaces comply
with the requirements of this chapter.
      (8)   Fire-resistant penetrations. Protection of joints and penetrations
in fire-resistance-rated assemblies shall not be concealed from view until
inspected and approved.
      (9)   Energy efficiency inspections. Inspections shall be made to
determine compliance with the International Energy Conservation Code and shall
include, but not be limited to inspections for: envelope insulation R and U
values, fenestration U value, duct system R value, and HVAC and water-heating
equipment efficiency.
      (10)   Other inspections. In addition to the inspections specified above,
the Building Official is authorized to make or require other inspections of any
construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this chapter
and other laws that are enforced by the Building Official.
      (11)   Special inspections. Special inspections shall be in compliance
with the applicable provisions of this chapter.
      (12)   Final inspection. The final inspection shall be made after all
work required by the applicable permits are completed.
   (D)   Inspection agencies. The Building Official is authorized to accept
reports of approved inspection agencies, provided such agencies satisfy the
requirements as to qualifications and reliability.
   (E)   Inspection requests. It shall be the duty of the holder of the
building permit or their duly authorized agent to notify the Building Official
when work is ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to
provide access to and means for inspection of such work that are required by
this chapter.
   (F)   Approval required. Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated
in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the
Building Official. The Building Official, upon notification, shall make the
requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the construction
that is satisfactory as completed, or notify the permit holder or his or her
agent wherein the same fails to comply with this chapter. Any portions that do
not comply shall be corrected and such portion shall not be covered or
concealed until authorized by the Building Official.
(Ord. 2016-14, passed 1-19-2017) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.10 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   Use and occupancy.
      (1)   No building or structure shall be used or occupied, and no change
in the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion
thereof shall be made until the Building Official has issued a certificate of
occupancy therefore as provided herein. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy
shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of this
code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. Certificates presuming to give
authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this chapter or other
ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid.
      (2)   Exception: Certificates of occupancy are not required for work
exempt from permits.
   (B)   Change in use. Changes in the character or use of an existing
structure shall not be made except in compliance with this chapter.
   (C)   Certificate issued. After the Building Official Inspects the building
or structure and finds no violations of the provisions of this chapter or other
laws that are enforced by the Department of Building Services, the Building
Official shall issue a certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion
that contains the following:
      (1)   The permit number.
      (2)   Permit issue date.
      (3)   The address and tax map (TMS) number or property identification
description (PID) of the structure.
      (4)   The name of the contractor or permit holder.
      (5)   A statement that describes the structure or portion thereof has
been inspected for compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
      (6)   The name of the Building Official.
      (7)   The type of construction if applicable.
      (8)   The design occupant load if applicable.
      (9)   Flood zone information.
      (10)   Any special stipulations and conditions of the building permit.
   (D)   Temporary occupancy. The Building Official is authorized to issue a
temporary certificate of occupancy before the completion of the entire work
covered by the permit, provided that such portion or portions shall be occupied
safely. The Building Official shall set a time period during which the
temporary certificate of occupancy is valid.
   (E)   Revocation. The Building Official is authorized to, in writing,
suspend or revoke a certificate of occupancy or completion issued under the
provisions of this chapter wherever the certificate is issued in error, or on
the basis of incorrect information supplied, or where it is determined that the
building or structure or portion thereof is in violation of any ordinance or
regulation or any of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2016-14, passed 1-19-2017) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.11 SERVICE UTILITIES.
   (A)   Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from
a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system that is
regulated by this chapter for which a permit is required, until released by the
Building Official.
   (B)   Temporary connection. The Building Official shall have the authority
to authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility
source of energy, fuel or power.
   (C)   Authority to disconnect service utilities. The Building Official shall
have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the
building, structure or system regulated by this chapter and the codes
referenced herein in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an
immediate hazard to life or property. The Building Official shall notify the
serving utility, and wherever possible the owner and occupant of the building,
structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such
action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the
building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as
practical thereafter.
(Ord. 2016-14, passed 1-19-2017) Penalty, §
150.99
§ 150.12 LICENSING AND REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEM. The installation service, maintenance or alteration
of a  system that detects intrusion, burglary, and breaking or entering but
does not include home health care signaling devices.
      EMPLOYEE. A regularly employed, qualified tradespersons on the premises
owned or operated by the applicant for a permit.
      FIRE ALARM SYSTEM. A system or portion of a combination system consisting
of components and circuits arranged to monitor and annunciate the status of
fire alarm or supervisory signal-initiating devices and to initiate the
appropriate response to those signals.
      FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEM. A system of overhead or underground piping, or
both, to protect the interior or exterior of a building or structure from fire
where the primary extinguishing agent is water and designed in accordance with
fire protection engineering standards. Fire protection sprinkler systems
include the following types: water based or wet-pipe systems, water foam
systems, dry-pipe systems, preaction systems, residential systems, deluge
systems, combined dry-pipe and preaction systems, non-freeze systems, and
circulating closed loop systems.
      LOW VOLTAGE. A system consisting of an isolating power supply, the low-
voltage luminaries, and associated equipment that are all identified for the
use. The output circuits of the power supply are rated for not more than 25
amperes and operate at 30 volts (42.4 volts peak) or less under all load
conditions.
      OWNER. The property owner, owner’s parents, sisters and brothers,
children of the owner and owner’s sisters and brothers, and those married to
these family members; however, when actual hardship is caused by these
limitations, the Building Official may waive these requirements.
      SIGN OR OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN. Any outdoor sign, display, device,
figure, painting, drawing, message, plaque, poster, billboard, or other thing
which is designed, intended or used to advertise or inform, any part of the
advertising or  informative contents of which is visible from any place on the
main traveled way of any road, street or highway for the purpose of this
chapter.
      SITE CONSTRUCTION WORK. Work is considered the act or process or altering
the natural cover or topography and alters the quality or quantity of
stormwater runoff.
      SWIMMING POOLS. Any structure intended for swimming, recreational bathing
or wading that contains water over 24 inches (610 mm) deep. This includes in-
ground, above-ground and on-ground pools; hot tubs; spas and fixed-in-place
wading pools.
      TOWN CONTRACTOR'S LICENSE. Authorization for a holder of a South Carolina
license issued by the South Carolina Contractors' Licensing Board, the South
Carolina Residential Builders Commission or the South Carolina Manufactured
Housing Board, to contract and/or perform construction work in the town within
the limits prescribed by the South Carolina Code of Laws or as established by
town ordinance.
      TOWN CONTRACTOR'S REGISTRATION. Authorization for a holder of a South
Carolina registration issued by the South Carolina Residential Builders
Commission or an individual or company that installs, alters or repairs
swimming pools, signs, low-volt electrical systems, elevators or landscaping/
site development, to contract and/or perform construction work in the town
within the limits prescribed by the South Carolina Code of Laws or as
established by the town ordinance.
   (B)   Town license or registration required. Before any person shall engage
in the business of construction, alteration or repairs in any building or
structure in the town, he or she must obtain a license or registration from the
town as required. It shall be the duty of every contractor or builder who shall
make contracts for erection or construction or repair of a building for which a
permit is required in the town, and every contractor or builder making such
contracts and subletting the same or any part thereof, to secure a license or
registration as provided herein.
      (1)   Anyone required to be licensed or registered by the town shall
present a copy of his or her state license or registration, if required by
state statutes. If the application is satisfactory, a town license or
registration shall be issued to the applicant within the limitations of the
state license or registration is required by state statutes, or as established
by the Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeal and upon payment of the
required license and registration fee.
      (2)   Plumbing and electrical journeymen are limited to working only
under a licensed plumber or licensed electrician and shall not be issued
permits.
   (C)   Grounds for revocation; procedure for filing charges. The Construction
Board of Adjustment and Appeals may revoke the license or registration of any
building contractor who is found guilty of fraud or deceit in obtaining a
license or registration, or gross negligence, incompetence, or misconduct in
conducting his business as a contractor. Any person, who prefers charges of
gross negligence, incompetence, or misconduct against any contractor licensed
or registered under the provisions of this division, shall submit such charges
in affidavit form and file same with the Secretary of the Construction Board of
Adjustment and Appeals.
   (D)   License identification. All holders of a license or registration in
the town shall display a current license or registration identification decal
issued by the Building Official. This decal shall be displayed on the left and
right sides of work vehicle(s).
   (E)   Limitations of work by owner. The performance of any kind of
construction, alteration, or repair upon any property by the owner thereof
shall be contingent on verification by the owner of his or her working
knowledge of the kind of construction to be done prior to issuing a permit,
such verification to be accomplished by such means as deemed sufficient by the
Building Official. In the event the owner does not qualify as to the knowledge
required to perform the work, the owner must then have a licensed or registered
town contractor secure a permit and do the work.
   (F)   Residential work by owner. Pursuant to S.C. Code, § 40-59-260 as
amended, the following provisions shall apply to homeowners obtaining permits
to perform construction-related work on their own homes:
      (1)   The owner shall do the construction-related work himself, with his
own employees, or with town licensed or registered contractors or individuals;
      (2)   The structure, group of structures, or appurtenances, including the
improvements, shall be intended for the owner's sole occupancy or occupancy by
the owner's family, and shall not be intended for sale or rent for a minimum of
two years after completion or issuance of a certificate of occupancy;
      (3)   The term “sale” or “rent” includes an arrangement by which an owner
received compensation in money, provisions, chattel, or labor from the
occupancy, or the transfer of the property or the structures on the property;
      (4)   The general public shall not have access to this structure;
      (5)   This section does not exempt a person who is employed by the owner
and who acts in the capacity of a builder of any kind;
      (6)   The homeowner shall personally appear and sign the building permit
application and shall provide the Town of James Island with a disclosure
statement provided by the Building Official or his designee; and
      (7)   The owner shall promptly file as a matter of public record a notice
with the Register of Mesne Conveyance, indexed under the owner’s name in the
grantor’s index, stating that the residential
building or structure was constructed by the owner as an unlicensed builder.
(Ord. 2016-14, passed 1-19-2017) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.13 UNSAFE DWELLINGS AND EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Authority. The provisions of this section are adopted pursuant to
“Building Code” by S.C. Code § 31-15-3 in counties and S.C. Code § 6-9-10.
   (B)   General. Structures or existing equipment that are or hereafter become
unsafe, unsanitary or deficient because of inadequate means of egress
facilities, inadequate light and ventilation or which constitute a fire hazard,
or are otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare, or that involve
illegal or improper occupancy or inadequate maintenance, shall be deemed an
unsafe condition. Unsafe structures shall be taken down and removed or made
safe, as the Building Official deems necessary and as provided for in this
section.
      (1)   Investigation and filing of a complaint. Whenever it appears to the
Building Official (on his own motion) that any dwelling is unfit for human
habitation, the Building Official shall, if his preliminary investigation
discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner
of and all parties in interest in such dwelling a complaint stating the charges
in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the
Building Official or his designated agent at a place therein fixed not less
than ten days nor more than 30 days after the serving of such complaint; that
the owner and parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to
the complaint and to appear in person or otherwise and give testimony at the
place and time fixed in the complaint; and that the rules of evidence
prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings
before the Building Official;
      (2)   Powers of the Building Official. The Building Official may exercise
such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the
purposes and provisions of this section, including the following powers in
addition to others herein granted:
         (a)   To investigate the dwelling conditions in the jurisdiction in
order to determine which dwellings therein are unfit for human habitation;
         (b)   To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and
receive evidence;
         (c)   To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations,
provided such entries be made in such manner as to cause the least possible
inconvenience to the persons in possession;
         (d)   To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and
employees as deemed necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter; and
         (e)   To delegate any of his functions and powers to such officers and
agents as he may designate.
      (3)   Service of complaints or orders; posting and filing copies.
Complaints or orders issued by the Building Official pursuant to this chapter
shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered mail, but if
the whereabouts of such persons is unknown and cannot be ascertained by the
Building Official in the exercise of reasonable diligence and the Building
Official shall make to that effect, then the serving of such complaint or order
upon such persons may be made by publishing it once each week for two
consecutive weeks in a newspaper printed and published in the municipality or,
in the absence of such newspaper, in one printed and published in the county
and circulating in the municipality in which the dwellings are located. A copy
of such complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the
premises affected by the complaint or order. A copy of such complaint or order
shall also be filed with the clerk of the county in which the dwelling is
located and such filing of the complaint or order shall have the same force and
effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law.
      (4)   Determination of Building Official.
         (a)   That if, after such notice and hearing, the Building Official
determines that the dwelling under consideration is unfit for human habitation
he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of such determination
and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order:
            1.   If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling can
be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling (as
determined by the Building Official), requiring the owner, within the time
specified in the order, to repair, alter or improve such dwelling to render it
fit for human habitation or to vacate and close the dwelling as a human
habitation; or
            2.   If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling
cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling
(as determined by the Building Official), requiring the owner, within the time
specified in the order, to remove or demolish such dwelling;
         (b)   That, if the owner fails to comply with an order to repair,
alter or improve or to vacate and close the dwelling, the Building Official may
cause such dwelling to be repaired, altered or improved or to be vacated and
closed; that the Building Official may cause to be posted on the main entrance
of any dwelling so closed, a placard with the following words: 'This building
is unfit for human habitation; the use or occupation of this building for human
habitation is prohibited and unlawful";
         (c)   That, if the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or
demolish the dwelling, the Building Official may cause such dwelling to be
removed or demolished; and
         (d)   That the amount of the cost of such repairs, alterations or
improvements, vacating and closing, or removal or demolition by the Building
Official shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was
incurred and shall be collectible in the same manner as municipal taxes.
   (C)   Unsafe conditions.
      (1)   A vacant structure that is not secured against entry is considered
an unsafe structure.
      (2)   The building, structure or portion thereof constitutes a fire
hazard having received damage by fire, flood, earthquake, wind or other cause
to the extent that the structural integrity of the building or structure is
less than it was prior to the damage and is less than the minimum requirement
established by this chapter, for new buildings.
      (3)   Any accessory structure and exterior appendage or portion of the
building or structure, shall be maintained and kept in good repair and sound
structural condition and must be securely fastened, attached or anchored such
that it is capable of resisting wind, seismic or similar loads must meet the
requirements of this chapter.
      (4)   If for any reason the building, structure or portion thereof is
manifestly unsafe or unsanitary for the purpose for which it is being used.
      (5)   The building, structure or portion thereof as a result of decay,
deterioration or dilapidation is likely to fully or partially collapse.
      (6)   The building, structure or portion thereof has been constructed or
maintained in violation of specific requirements of this chapter.
      (7)   Any building, structure or portion thereof that is in such a
condition as to constitute a public nuisance.
      (8)   The stress in any material, member or portion thereof, due to all
imposed loads including dead load exceeds the stresses allowed in this chapter
for new buildings.
      (9)   Any means of egress or portion thereof, such as but not limited to
fire doors, closing devices and fire resistive ratings, is in disrepair or in a
dilapidated or nonworklng condition such that the means of egress could be
rendered unsafe.
      (10)   Roofs shall be structurally sound and maintained in a safe manner
and have no defects which might admit rain or cause dampness in the walls or
interior portion of the building.
      (11)   Every inside and outside stair, porch and any appurtenance thereof
shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use may
cause to be placed thereon and shall be kept in sound condition and good
repair.
   (D)   Minimum standards.
      (1)   Windows and doors. Every window and door shall be substantially
weather-tight, watertight and rodent-proof, and shall be kept in sound working
condition and good repair.
      (2)   Wood surfaces and masonry joints. All exterior wood surfaces, other
than decay resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by
painting or other protective covering or treatment. All masonry joints shall be
sufficiently tuck pointed to insure water and air tightness.
      (3)   Skirting. Existing skirting shall be maintained free from broken or
missing sections, pieces or cross members. Skirting shall be securely attached
and sized from the ground to the lower outside perimeter of the structure.
      (4)   Floors, walls and ceilings. Every floor, interior wall and ceiling
shall be substantially rodent proof, shall be kept in sound condition and good
repair and shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load which normal
use may cause to be placed thereon.
      (5)   Bathroom. Every bathroom shall comply with the light and
ventilation requirements for habitable rooms except that no window or skylight
shall be required in adequately ventilated bathrooms equipped with an approved
ventilation system.
      (6)   Bathroom doors. Privacy of bathrooms shall be afforded by doors
complete with privacy hardware intended by the manufacturer for that purpose.
      (7)   Electric lights and outlets. Where there is electric service
available to the building structure, every habitable room or space shall
contain at least two separate and remote receptacle outlets. Bedrooms shall
have, in addition, at least one wall switch controlled lighting outlet, in
kitchens, two separate circuits and controlled lighting outlets shall be
provided (receptacles rendered inaccessible by appliances fastened in place or
by appliances occupying dedicated space shall not be considered as these
required outlets) and a wall or ceiling lighting outlet controlled by a wall
switch shall be provided. Every hall, water closet compartment, bathroom,
laundry room or furnace room shall contain at least one ceiling-mounted or
wall-mounted lighting outlet in every bathroom and laundry room there shall be
provided at least one receptacle outlet. Any new bathroom receptacle outlet
shall have ground fault circuit interrupter protection.
      (8)   Light on public halls and stairways. Every electrical outlet and
fixture, and all electrical wiring and equipment shall be installed, maintained
and connected to a source of electric power in accordance with the provisions
of the electrical code of the authority having jurisdiction.
      (9)   Garbage disposal. Every owner or tenant shall dispose of all his
garbage and any other organic waste which might provide food for rodents and
all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner.
   (E)   Additional minimum residential standards.
      (1)   General. No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let or sublet
to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit designed or intended to
be used for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking, or eating therein, nor
shall any vacant dwelling building be permitted to exist which does not comply
with the following requirements.
         (a)   Sanitary facilities. Every dwelling unit shall contain not less
than a kitchen sink, lavatory, tub or shower, and a water closet all in good
working condition and properly connected to an approved water and sewer system.
Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly installed and
maintained in good sanitary working condition free from defects, leaks, and
obstructions.
         (b)   Location of sanitary facilities. All required plumbing fixtures
shall be located within the dwelling unit and be accessible to the occupants of
same. The water closet, tub or shower and lavatory shall be located in a room
affording privacy to the user and such room shall have a minimum floor space of
30 square feet (2.8m ) with no dimension less than four feet. (1219 mm).
Bathrooms shall be accessible from habitable rooms, hallways, corridors or
other protected or enclosed area.
         (c)   Hot and cold water supply. Every dwelling unit shall have an
adequate supply of both cold and hot water connected to the kitchen sink,
lavatory and tub or shower. All water shall be supplied through an approved
distribution system connected to a potable water supply.
         (d)   Water heating facilities. Every dwelling unit shall have water
heating facilities which are property installed and maintained in a safe and
good working condition and are capable of heating water to such a temperature
as to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required kitchen
sink, lavatory basin, bathtub or shower at a temperature of not less than 120°F
(49°C). Such water heating facilities shall be capable of meeting the
requirements when the dwelling or dwelling unit heating facilities required
under the provisions of this chapter are not in operation. Apartment houses may
use a centralized water heating facility capable of heating an adequate amount
of water as required by the International Plumbing Code to not less than 120°F
(49°C).
         (e)   Heating facilities. Every dwelling unit shall have permanent
heating facilities which are properly installed, are maintained in safe and
good working conditions, and are capable of safely and adequately heating all
habitable rooms and bathrooms. Where a central heating system is not provided,
each dwelling unit shall be provided with facilities whereby heating appliances
may be connected.
         (f)   Kitchen facilities. Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen
equipped with the following minimum facilities:
            1.   Food preparation surfaces impervious to water and free of
defects which could trap food or liquid.
            2.   Shelving, cabinets or drawers for the storage of food and
cooking and eating utensils, all of which shall be maintained in good repair.
            3.   Freestanding or permanently installed cook stove. Portable
electric cooking equipment shall not fulfill this requirement. Portable cooking
equipment employing flame shall be prohibited.
            4.   Mechanical refrigeration equipment for the storage of
perishable foodstuffs. Exception: Nothing herein shall preclude a written
agreement between an owner and tenant that the tenant will furnish mechanical
refrigeration equipment and/or a cook stove as required in this section. It
shall be an affirmative defense available to an owner charged with a violation
of this section if such an agreement exists.
         (g)   Smoke detector and/or carbon monoxide systems. Every dwelling
unit shall be provided with an approved listed detector, installed in
accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations and listing. When activated,
the detector shall provide an audible alarm. The detector shall be tested in
accordance with and meet the requirements of UL 217, single and multiple
station smoke detectors.
      (2)   Minimum requirements for light and ventilation.
         (a)   Windows. 
            1.   Every habitable room shall have at least one window or
skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area,
measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be 8% of the floor area
of such room. Whenever wall or other portions of structures face a window of
any such room and such light-obstruction structures are located less than three
feet (914 mm) from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling
of the room, such a window shall not be deemed to face directly to the required
minimum total window area. Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight-
type window in the top of such room, the total window area of such skylight
shall equal at least 15% of the total floor area of such room.
            2.   Exception: Where adequate artificial light is provided and
controlled by a wall switch.
         (b)   Ventilation. The total of openable window area in every
habitable space shall equal to at least 45% of the minimum window area or shall
have other approved, equivalent ventilation. Year round mechanically
ventilating conditioned air systems may be substituted for windows, as required
herein, in rooms other than rooms used for sleeping purposes. Window type air-
conditioning units are not included in this exception. Where mechanical year
round ventilation is not provided screens over opening must be in good working
condition. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight
which can be easily opened or such other device as will adequately ventilate
the room.
      (3)   Minimum dwelling space requirements.
         (a)   Required space in dwelling unit. Every dwelling unit shall
contain at least 150 square feet (13.9 m2) of floor space for the first
occupant thereof and at least an additional 100 square feet (9.3 m2) of floor
area per additional occupant. The floor area shall be calculated on the basis
of the total area of all habitable rooms.
         (b)   Required space on sleeping rooms. In every dwelling unit, every
room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70
square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by
more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet (4.6 m2) of floor
space for each occupant thereof.
         (c)   Minimum ceiling height. Habitable (space) rooms other than
kitchens, storage rooms and laundry rooms shall have a ceiling height of not
less than seven feet (2134 mm). Hallways, corridors, bathrooms, water closet
rooms and kitchens shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven feet
(2134 mm) measured to the lowest projection from the ceiling. If any room in a
building has a sloping ceiling, the prescribed ceiling height for the room is
required in only one-half the room area. No portion of the room measuring less
than five feet (1524 mm) from the finished floor to the finished ceiling shall
be included in any computation of the minimum room area.
         (d)   Occupancy of dwelling unit below grade. No basement or cellar
space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit unless:
            1.   The floor and walls are impervious to leakage of underground
and surface runoff water and are insulated against dampness;
            2.   The total window area in each room is equal to at least the
minimum window area size as required;
            3.   Such required minimum window area is located entirely above
the grade of the ground adjoining such window area; and
            4.   The total of openable window area in each room is equal to at
least the minimum as required, except where some other device affording
adequate ventilation is supplied.
      (4)   Sanitation requirements.
         (a)   Sanitation. Every owner of a multiple dwelling shall be
responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or
common areas of the dwelling and premises thereof.
         (b)   Cleanliness. Every tenant of a dwelling unit shall keep in a
clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit and
premises thereof which he occupies or which is provided for his particular use.
         (c)   Extermination. Every owner of a single dwelling building and
every owner of a building containing two or more dwelling units shall be
responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents, wood-destroying
organisms, or other pests within the building or premises.
      (5)   Rooming houses.
         (a)   Compliance exceptions. No person shall operate a rooming house,
or shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any rooming unit in any rooming
house, except in compliance with the provisions of every section of this
chapter.
         (b)   Water closet, lavatory and bath facilities. At least one flush
water closet, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower, properly connected to a
water and sewer system and in good working condition, shall be supplied for
each four rooms within a rooming house wherever such facilities are shared. All
such facilities shall be located on the floor they serve within the dwelling so
as to be reasonably accessible from a common hall or passageway to all persons
sharing such facilities.
         (c)   Water heater required. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or
shower shall be supplied with hot water at all times.
         (d)   Minimum floor area for sleeping purposes. Every room occupied
for sleeping purposes by one person shall contain at least 70 square feet (6.5
m2) of floor space and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than
one person shall contain at least 50 square feet (4.6 m2) of floor space for
each occupant thereof.
         (e)   Exit requirements. Every rooming unit shall have safe,
unobstructed means of egress leading to safe and open space at ground level, as
required by the building code.
         (f)   Sanitary conditions. The operator of every rooming house shall
be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors, and ceilings,
and for maintenance of a sanitary condition in every other part of the rooming
house, and shall be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the
entire premises where the entire structure or building is leased or occupied by
the operator.
            1.   The building shall be ordered repaired in accordance with this
chapter or demolished in accordance with procedures as established within this
chapter.
            2.   If the building or structure poses an immediate hazard to life
or to the safety of the public it shall be ordered vacated immediately.
(Ord. 2016-14, passed 1-19-2017) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.14 CONSTRUCTION BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND APPEALS.
   (A)   General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or
determinations made by the Building Official relative to the licensing and/or
application and interpretation of this chapter, there shall be and is hereby
created a Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals. The Construction Board
of Adjustment and Appeals shall be appointed by the governing body and shall
hold office at its pleasure. The Board shall adopt rules of procedure for
conducting its business.
      (1) Decision-making authority. The Charleston County Construction Board
of Adjustment and Appeals shall have final decision-making authority on the
following matters:
         (a)   Appeals of orders, decision or determination made by the
Building Official;
         (b)   Licensing or registration of building contractors;
         (c)   Adjustments and appeals for stormwater management utility fees;
and
         (d)   Appeals and variances of flood plain management in reference to
Chapter 151 of the Code of Ordinances of the Town of James Island entitled
“Town Regulations Concerning Flood Damage Prevention”.
         (e)   The Charleston County Construction Board of Adjustment and
Appeals (“Board”) does not act in a review or recommending capacity.
      (2)   Officers, rules, meetings and minutes. The Charleston County
Construction Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall elect one of its members as
Chairperson and another as Vice-Chairperson, both who shall serve for one year
or until re-election or a successor is elected and qualified. The Charleston
County Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall adopt rules and
procedures in accordance with the provision of this chapter and shall keep a
record of its resolutions, findings and determinations, all of which, upon
approval, shall be filed immediately in the office of Building Official. Such
records shall be available for public review and inspection during normal
business hours. The Building Official shall be a non-voting member of the Board
and shall serve as the Secretary. Meetings of the Board shall be at the call of
the Chairperson or at such other times as a majority of the Board may
determine. Public notice of all meetings of the Board shall be provided by at
least electronic deliver to the major news television stations, the major
newspaper of general circulation, the major radio communication companies, and
several individual town/jurisdiction papers. A quorum for the transaction of
official business by the Board shall consist of six members. The decision of
the Board shall be final unless the petitioner appeals the decision to the
circuit court in Charleston County within 30 days after the date of the
decision of the Board.
   (B)   Adjustments and appeals.
      (1)   The Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall hear and
decide requests for adjustment and appeals meeting all of the following
provisions:
         (a)   Decisions on which an adjustment or appeal is requested shall be
those made by the Building Official or his designee.
         (b)   The Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals is authorized
to hear requests for adjustment or appeal to this code and other codes,
regulations, or ordinances as specifically authorized in the Code of
Ordinances, Town of James Island, South Carolina or determined by the Building
Official to be within the scope of the Construction Board of Adjustment and
Appeals.
      (2)   Right to appeal. Appeals of administrative orders, decisions or
determinations causing the appeal or variance may be filed by the owner of the
property affected by the decision or his or her duly authorized representative,
or by any person with a substantial interest in a decision of the Building
Official.
      (3)   Application filing; timing. Requests for a hearing for an
adjustment or appeal of a decision shall be in writing, and shall be received
in the office of the Building Official within 20 calendar days of notice of the
decision causing the filing of the adjustment or appeal.
   (C)   Decisions. The decisions of the Construction Board of Adjustment and
Appeals shall be final unless the applicant appeals the decision to the circuit
court in Charleston County within 20 days after the date of the decision of the
Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals.
   (D)   Limitations on authority. An application for appeal shall be based on
a claim that the true intent of this chapter or the rules legally adopted
thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this chapter do
not fully apply or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed.
The Board shall have no authority to waive requirements of this chapter.
   (E)   Qualifications. The Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall
consist of members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on
matters pertaining to building construction and are not employees of the
jurisdiction.
   (F)   Composition. The Charleston County Construction Board of Adjustment
and Appeals shall consist of eleven members appointed by Charleston County
Council for a term of four years each. The term of office shall be staggered so
no more than one-third of the Board is appointed or replaced in any year.
Members shall serve without compensation for the county. Any vacancy which may
occur on the Board shall be filled by County Council appointing a successor to
serve out the unexpired term of the vacancy. No member of the Board may hold an
elected public office in Charleston County. The eleven member Board shall
consist of the following:
      (1)   Two must be registered architects;
      (2)   One must be a registered structural engineer;
      (3)   One must be a registered mechanical engineer;
      (4)   Two must be registered civil engineers;
      (5)   One must be a licensed general contractor;
      (6)   One must be a mechanical contractor;
      (7)   One must be a licensed electrical contractor;
      (8)   One must be a licensed plumbing contractor; and
      (9)   One licensed residential home builder.
   (G)   Established; composition. The Construction Board of Adjustment and
Appeals appointed by County Council shall consist of 11 appointed members and
the Building Official shall be a non-voting member of the Board and shall serve
as the Secretary. All appointments shall be for a term of four years. The terms
of office shall be staggered so no more then one-third of the Board is
appointed or replaced in any year. Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired
term in the manner in which original appointments are required to be made.
Absence of a member in excess of three consecutive meetings may render any such
member liable to immediate removal from office.
   (H)   Quorum. Six members of the Board shall constitute a quorum.
   (I)   Establish rules for the carrying out responsibilities. The
Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall establish rules, as
appropriate, for carrying out these assigned responsibilities.
   (J)   The decisions of the Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals
shall be final unless the petitioner appeals the decision to the circuit court
in Charleston County within 20 days after the date of the decision of the
Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals.
   (K)   Additional responsibilities.
      (1)   Licensing.
         (a)   Ground for revocation of town license. The Board may revoke the
license or registration of any building contractor who is found guilty of fraud
or deceit in obtaining a license, or gross negligence incompetence, or gross
misconduct in conducting his business as a contractor. Any person who alleges
gross negligence, incompetence, or gross misconduct against any contractor
licensed or registered hereunder shall submit such allegation in affidavit form
and file the same with the Secretary of the Board.
         (b)   Reissuance of revoked license or registration. The Board may
consider a request to reissue the town license of any person whose license or
registration has been revoked six months after the date of revocation, if a
majority of the members of the Board vote in favor of such reissuance for
reasons the Board deems sufficient. If the reissuance is denied, the reissuance
can be reconsidered at six-month intervals thereafter.
         (c)   Probation. The Board may place any building contractor on
probation for a specified period of time in lieu of revoking his or her town
license or registration when allegations presented do not warrant revocation by
the majority of the Board for whatever reasons the Board deems sufficient.
         (d)   Hearing and decision of charges. Grounds detailed in division
(K)(1)(a) above, unless they are dismissed without hearing by the Board as
unfounded or trivial, shall be heard based on testimony under oath and a
determination shall be made by the Board within three months after the date of
the hearing. The accused may cross examine witnesses against him and produce
evidence or witnesses in his or her defense. A written record shall be made of
the proceedings. If, after such hearing, the Board, by majority, votes in favor
of finding the accused guilty of any fraud or deceit in obtaining his license
or registration, or gross negligence, incompetence, or gross misconduct in
conducting his business as a contractor, his or her town license or
registration will be revoked.
      (2)   Stormwater management. The Construction Board of Adjustment and
Appeals shall hear and decide requests for stormwater management utility
adjustment and appeals as follows:
         (a)   The Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall hear the
petition to determine if the annual stormwater management utility fee does not
apportion the fee with approximate equality, based upon a reasonable basis of
classification and with due regard to the benefits conferred by providing
stormwater management services to the utility customer and the requirements of
public health, safety or welfare. The determination of the annual fee by the
Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals is entitled to presumption of
correctness and the applicant has the burden of rebutting the presumption of
correctness.
         (b)   The Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall render a
written decision on each application that is heard, and such written decision
shall be issued within 20 calendar days from the day the Board heard the
application. The decision of the Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals
shall contain findings of fact and conclusions of law and the decision shall be
sent to the petitioner by first class mail.
         (c)   Prior to bringing an action to contest an annual fee, the
petitioner shall pay to the treasurer not less than the amount of the annual
stormwater fee which he admits in good faith owes. Payment of the fee shall not
be deemed an admission that the annual fee was due and shall not prejudice the
applicant in bringing an action as provided herein.
      (3)   Flood plain management. The Construction Board of Adjustment and
Appeals shall hear and decide requests for appeals and variances as referenced
in the current ordinance, entitled “The Flood Damage Prevention and
Protection.”
(Ord. 2016-14, passed 1-19-2017)
§ 150.15 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Violations.
      (1)   The violation of any of the codes or regulations adopted pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor, and
any person violating such codes or regulations shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished in accordance with this
section. In case of any violation of or proposed violation of the codes or
regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter, the Building Official or other
appropriate authority of the town, or any adjacent or neighboring property
owner who would be damaged by such violation may, in addition to other
remedies, apply for injunctive relief, mandamus or other appropriate
proceedings to prevent, correct or abate such violation or threatened
violation.
      (2)   Nothing in this chapter or in the codes adopted in this chapter
shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding now pending in any court,
or any rights acquired or liability incurred, or any cause of action accrued or
existing under any act or ordinance repealed hereby, nor shall any right or
remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
      (3)   Each day any violation of this chapter or any such ordinance,
resolution, rule, regulation or order shall continue shall constitute, except
where otherwise provided, a separate offense.
   (B)   Service of complaint. Complaints by letter or orders hereunder shall
be delivered to and/or served upon such persons either personally or by
registered mail (return receipt requested), but if the whereabouts of such
persons are unknown and cannot be ascertained in the exercise of reasonable
diligence, the Building Official or his designated representative(s) shall make
an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of such complaint or order upon
such persons may be made by publishing it once each week for two consecutive
weeks in a newspaper printed and published in the county. A copy of such
complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises
affected by the complaint or order.
   (C)   Rights of persons affected by orders. Any person affected by an order
issued by the Building Official or his designated representative(s), may within
60 days after the posting and service of the order, petition the circuit court
for an injunction restraining the Building Official or his designated
representative(s) from carrying out the provisions of the order, and the court
may, upon such petition, issue a temporary injunction restraining the Building
Official pending the final disposition of the cause. Hearings shall be had by
the court on such petitions within 20 days or as soon thereafter as possible
and shall be given preference over other matters on the court’s calendar as
authorized by S.C. Code, § 31-15-370, as amended. The court shall hear and
determine the issues raised and shall enter such final order or decree as law
and justice may require. In all such proceedings, the findings of the Building
Official as to the facts, if supported by evidence, shall be conclusive. Costs
shall be at the discretion of the court. The remedies herein provided shall be
exclusive remedies, and no person affected by an order of the Building Official
shall be entitled to recover any damages for action taken pursuant to any order
of the Building Official or his designated representative(s) or because of
compliance by such person with any order of the Building Official.
(Ord. 2016-14, passed 1-19-2017)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   Wherever in this chapter or in any ordinance of the county any act is
prohibited or is declared to be unlawful or an offense or misdemeanor, or the
doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be
unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, and no specific penalty is provided
for the violation thereof, the violation of any such provision of this chapter,
or any such ordinance, shall be subject to the maximum penalties authorized for
the Magistrates' Courts of the State of South Carolina, as from time to time
provided in S.C. Code, § 22-3-55, as amended, or successor legislation.
(Ord. 2016-14, passed 1-19-2017)
CHAPTER 151: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Section
   
151.01   County ordinance adopted by reference
§ 151.01 COUNTY ORDINANCE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   Charleston County Ord. 2306, adopted August 13, 2024, regarding flood damage
prevention, is adopted by reference by the town and is declared to be as full a
part of this chapter.
(Ord. 2024-08, passed 10-17-2024)
CHAPTER 152: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Note: The Town of James Island Comprehensive Plan is available at the following
link: http://www.jamesislandsc.us/ZLDR
Section
   
152.01   Adoption by reference
§ 152.01 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   Purpose. This section is adopted to provide for adopting the planning
elements necessary to adopt rules and regulations governing development, land
use, building, improving, draining, clearing, protecting any structure or lot
of land of property within the town limits.
   (B)   Comprehensive Plan elements. “The Town of James Island Comprehensive
Plan” including the Land Use, Economic Development, Natural Resources, Cultural
Resources, Population, Housing, Transportation, Community Facilities and
Priority Investment Elements, attached to Ordinance 2015-07 as Attachment A,
and as it may be amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated herein as fully as if set out at length herein.
(Ord. 2012-05, passed 10-18-2012; Am. Ord. 2015-07, passed 7-9-2015; Am. Ord.
2021-01, passed 5-20-2021)
CHAPTER 153: ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
153.001   Title
   
153.002   Authority
   
153.003   Effective date
   
153.004   Applicability; jurisdiction
   
153.005   Purpose; intent
   
153.006   Commentary
   
153.007   Word usage; construction of language
   
153.008   Minimum requirements
   
153.009   Conflicting provisions
   
153.010   Zoning map
   
153.011   Transitional provisions
   
153.012   Severability
   
153.013   Definitions
   
153.014   Planning and zoning fee schedule
Review and Decision-Making Authority
   
153.025   Town Council
   
153.026   Planning Commission
   
153.027   Board of Zoning Appeals
   
153.028   Zoning Administrator
Development Review Procedures
   
153.040   General; applications, notice, decisions, hearings
   
153.041   Comprehensive Plan amendments
   
153.042   Zoning and Land Development Regulations amendments
   
153.043   Zoning map amendments
   
153.044   Planned Development Zoning District
   
153.045   Special exceptions
   
153.046   Site plan review
   
153.047   Zoning permits
   
153.048   Certificates of occupancy
   
153.049   Zoning variances
   
153.050   Written interpretations of chapter
   
153.051   Public project review
   
153.052   Appeal of zoning-related administrative decisions
   
153.053   Appeal of subdivision-related administrative decisions
   
153.054   Street names; addresses
   
153.055   Development agreements
Base Zoning Districts
   
153.065   General; establishment, interpretation, split parcels
   
153.066   Measurements, computations and exceptions; dimensional standards
defined
   
153.067   NRM-25, Natural Resource Management District
   
153.068   AG-5, Agricultural Preservation District
   
153.069   AGR, Agricultural/Residential District
   
153.070   RSL, Low-Density Suburban Residential District
   
153.071   RSM, Moderate-Density Suburban Residential District
   
153.072   MHS, Low-Density Manufactured Home Subdivision District
   
153.073   OR, Residential Office District
   
153.074   OG, General Office District
   
153.075   CN, Neighborhood Commercial District
   
153.076   CC, Community Commercial District
   
153.077   I, Industrial District
   
153.078   PD, Planned Development Zoning District
   
153.079   Waterfront development standards
Overlay and Special Purpose Zoning Districts
   
153.090   General; establishment, effect
   
153.091   NRM, Natural Resource Management District
   
153.092   WDU, Water-Dependent Use Overlay District
   
153.093   FRC-O, Folly Road Corridor Overlay District
Use Regulations Table
   
153.110   Use table; use types; interpretation
Use Conditions
   
153.120   Use conditions; conditional and special exception uses
   
153.121   Animal production and agricultural processing
   
153.122   Attached single-family dwellings
   
153.123   Hair, nail, or skin care services
   
153.124   Bed and breakfasts/short-term rentals
   
153.125   Communication towers
   
153.126   Drive-in theaters
   
153.127   Dwelling groups
   
153.128   Limited retirement housing
   
153.129   Farm labor housing
   
153.130   Nature exhibitions
   
153.131   Parks, recreation, and outdoor recreation/entertainment
   
153.132   RV parks
   
153.133   Religious assembly
   
153.134   Resource extraction
   
153.135   Restaurants, bars, and lounges with alcohol
   
153.136   Self-service storage facility
   
153.137   Sewage disposal facilities
   
153.138   Sexually oriented business
   
153.139   Single-family detached affordable housing
   
153.140   Stable
   
153.141   Utility substations
   
153.142   Limited vehicle service
   
153.143   Bona fide forestry operations
   
153.144   Manufactured housing units
   
153.145   Dwelling units in nonresidential districts
   
153.146   Personal improvement education
   
153.147   Historical site
   
153.148   U.S. Postal Service
   
153.149   Adult or child day care facility
   
153.150   Indoor recreation or entertainment
   
153.151   Minor utility service
   
153.152   Reserved
   
153.153   Banks and financial services
   
153.154   Catering service
   
153.155   Administrative, business, government, and professional office
   
153.156   Special trade contractors
   
153.157   Parking lots
   
153.158   Consumer goods rental service
   
153.159   Boat yard
   
153.160   Consumer repair service
   
153.161   Liquefied petroleum gas dealers
   
153.162   Building materials, garden equipment and supplies dealers
   
153.163   Food sales
   
153.164   General retail sales or service
   
153.165   Gasoline service station
   
153.166   Consumer convenience services
   
153.167   Personal improvement services
   
153.168   Services to buildings or dwellings
   
153.169   Freight forwarding facilities
   
153.170   Golf courses
   
153.171   Solid waste disposal facility
   
153.172   Container storage facilities
   
153.173   Cemeteries
   
153.174   Kennel
   
153.175   Drop-off recycling collection
   
153.176   Airports, heliports, and other aircraft facilities
   
153.177   Specialized manufacturing
   
153.178   Sweetgrass basket stands
   
153.179   Tattoo facilities
   
153.180   Wineries
Accessory Uses and Structures
   
153.200   Accessory uses and structures allowed
   
153.201   Time establishment
   
153.202   Residential accessory uses
   
153.203   Agricultural accessory uses
   
153.204   Commercial and industrial accessory uses
   
153.205   Accessory retail sales and personal services
   
153.206   Institutional and civic accessory uses
   
153.207   Accessory structures in residential/OR districts
   
153.208   Accessory structures in general office/commercial districts
   
153.209   Manufactured housing units
   
153.210   Home occupations
   
153.211   Animals
   
153.212   Accessory storage of major recreational equipment
   
153.213   Storage and repair of operable and inoperable motor vehicles
   
153.214   Vehicle sales
   
153.215   Temporary portable storage units
   
153.216   Permanent storage units
   
153.217   Solar collectors
Temporary Uses
   
153.230   Temporary accessory uses and structures allowed
   
153.231   Temporary sales
   
153.232   Sale of indigenous produce
   
153.233   Assembly uses and parking for special events
   
153.234   Construction facilities
Special Event Uses
   
153.250   Purpose
   
153.251   Private special events
   
153.252   Special events in commercial and industrial zoning districts and
public facilities
   
153.253   Special events in residential and agricultural zoning districts
   
153.254   Zoning permit required
   
153.255   Business license; lapse of approval
[Reserved]
   
153.270 – 153.285 Reserved for future use
Subdivision Regulations
   
153.300   General; purpose, applicability, exemptions
   
153.301   Pre-application information; conference
   
153.302   Minor subdivisions
   
153.303   Major subdivisions
   
153.304   Letters of coordination for major and minor subdivisions
   
153.305   Preliminary plat
   
153.306   Final plat
   
153.307   Markers
   
153.308   Lots; layout and design
   
153.309   Tree preservation; grand trees
   
153.310   Trees and shrubs; setback from pavement
   
153.311   Pedestrian ways
   
153.312   Street names; street name signs; addresses
   
153.313   Underground utilities and services
   
153.314   Water supply and sewage disposal
   
153.315   Maintenance guarantees
Development Standards
   
153.330   Purpose and intent
   
153.331   Applicability
   
153.332   Off-street parking and loading
   
153.333   Pedestrian ways
   
153.334   Tree protection and preservation
   
153.335   Landscaping, screening, and buffers
   
153.336   Architectural and landscape design guidelines
   
153.337   Wetlands, waterways, and OCRM critical line
   
153.338   Historic preservation
   
153.339   Traffic impact studies
   
153.340   Vision clearance on roadways
   
153.341   Signs
   
153.342   Drainage design
   
153.343   Exhibits
Nonconformities
   
153.355   Purpose
   
153.356   Existing nonconformities
   
153.357   Nonconformities created by public action
   
153.358   Nonconforming uses
   
153.359   Nonconforming structures
   
153.360   Nonconforming lots
   
153.361   Nonconforming signs
   
153.362   Nonconforming registered accessory dwelling units (ADUs)
Violations and Enforcement
   
153.375   Compliance required
   
153.376   Violations
   
153.377   Enforcement responsibility; notice; complaints
   
153.378   Remedies and enforcement powers; misdemeanor
   
153.379   Private enforcement actions
   
153.380   Tree protection and preservation violations
   
153.381   Sign violations
   
153.382   Continuing violations
   
153.383   Other enforcement actions
 
   
153.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A: Road Construction Standards
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be officially known and cited as the “Zoning and Land
Development Regulations of the Town of James Island, South Carolina.” It may be
referred to in this document simply as “this chapter.”
(Ord. 2012-06, § 1.1, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2012-21, passed 12-20-2012)
§ 153.002 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the statutory authority conferred by
S.C. Code Title 4, Chapter 9 and S.C. Code Title 6, Chapter 29, as amended.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 1.2, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2012-21, passed 12-20-2012)
§ 153.003 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall take effect on October 18, 2012.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 1.3, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2012-21, passed 12-20-2012)
§ 153.004 APPLICABILITY; JURISDICTION.
   (A)   Generally. This chapter shall apply to all development, public and
private, on lands within the incorporated area of the town. All structures and
land uses constructed or commenced hereafter and all enlargements of, additions
to, changes in, and relocations of existing structures and uses occurring
hereafter shall be subject to this chapter and all other authorities pursuant
to S.C. Code Title 6, Chapter 29, as amended.
   (B)   New or moved structures. All structures built hereafter shall comply
with all of the regulations of this chapter. Any structure moved from one site
to another site, including movement within a zoning lot, shall be considered to
be a structure built hereafter.
   (C)   Remodeling. If any structure is hereafter remodeled:
      (1)   The entire structures as remodeled shall comply with the use
regulations of this chapter, the town’s Building Code, and any other federal
and state regulation applicable;
      (2)   Any alterations, enlargements, or additions to the structure shall
comply with all applicable density/intensity and dimensional standards of the
underlying zoning district; and
      (3)   Off-street parking facilities shall not be reduced below (or if
already less than, shall not be further reduced below) the requirements of this
chapter applicable to a similar new structure or use.
   (D)   Change in land use or land classification. If a use of any structure
is hereafter changed to another use, then the new use must comply with use
regulations in §§
153.110,
153.120 through
153.180,
153.200 through
153.217,
153.230 through
153.234, and
153.250 through
153.255 of this code. The establishment of a new use requires the existing
structure to comply with the Building Code and all applicable zoning codes of
the underlying zoning district.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 1.4, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2012-21, passed 12-20-2012)
§ 153.005 PURPOSE; INTENT.
   This chapter is intended to protect the health, safety, and general welfare
of existing and future residents of the town by:
   (A)   Implementing the goals, objectives, and policies of the Town
Comprehensive Plan;
   (B)   Providing for adequate light, air, and open space;
   (C)   Preventing overcrowding of land to avoid undue concentration of
population and to lessen congestion in the streets;
   (D)   Protecting and preserving scenic, historic, or ecologically sensitive
areas and resources;
   (E)   Regulating the density and distribution of populations and the uses of
building, structures, and land for trade, industry, residence, recreation,
agriculture, forestry, conservation, airports and approaches thereto, water
supply, sanitation, protection against floods, public activities, and other
purposes;
   (F)   Facilitating the adequate provision or availability of transportation,
police and fire protection, water, sewage, schools, parks and other
recreational facilities, affordable housing, disaster evacuation, and other
public services and requirements;
   (G)   Securing from fire, flood, and other dangers;
   (H)   Furthering the public welfare in any other regard specified by this
governing body;
   (I)   Facilitating the creation of a convenient, attractive, and harmonious
community;
   (J)   Encouraging the development of economically sound and stable
municipalities and counties;
   (K)   Assuring the timely provision of required streets, utilities, and
other facilities and services to new land developments;
   (L)   Assuring the provision of needed public open spaces, building sites,
and new land developments through the dedication or reservation of land for
recreational, educational, transportation, and other public purposes;
   (M)   Assuring, in general, the wise and timely development of new areas,
and redevelopment of previously developed areas in harmony with the
Comprehensive Plan;
   (N)   Fostering growth and development, and preserving our natural and
cultural resources, always respecting the rights of the individual, including
private property rights; and
   (O)   Protecting the public welfare from traffic density caused by cluster
developments.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 1.5, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2012-21, passed 12-20-2012)
§ 153.006 COMMENTARY.
   Commentaries may be included in this chapter whenever a provision requires
additional explanation to clarify its intent. Commentaries have no regulatory
effect, but rather are intended solely as a guide for administrative officials
and the public to use in understanding and interpreting provisions of the
Zoning and Land Development Regulations.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 1.6, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2012-21, passed 12-20-2012)
§ 153.007 WORD USAGE; CONSTRUCTION OF LANGUAGE.
   (A)   Meaning and intent. All provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions
contained in this chapter shall be construed according to the purpose and
intent set out in §
153.005.
   (B)   Headings, illustrations, and text. In case of any difference of
meaning or implication between the text of this chapter and any heading,
drawing, table, figure, or illustration, the text shall control.
   (C)   Lists and examples. Unless otherwise specifically indicated, lists of
terms or examples that use terms such as “including,” “such as,” or similar
language are intended to provide examples, not to be exhaustive lists of all
possibilities.
   (D)   Computation of time. All references to “days” are, to the town
government, work days unless otherwise expressly stated. The time in which an
act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including
the last day. If the last day is a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday observed by the
town government, that day shall be excluded.
   (E)   References to other regulations, publications, and documents. Whenever
reference is made to a resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation, or document,
that reference shall be construed as referring to the most recent editions of
such regulation (as amended), resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation, or
document or to the relevant document, unless otherwise expressly stated, except
for the Building Code, which has its edition mandated by the state.
   (F)   Delegation of authority. Authority to enforce the provisions of this
chapter falls to the Zoning Administrator or the designee for which the
responsibility of executing the provision falls.
   (G)   Technical and non-technical terms. Words and phrases shall be
construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but
technical words and phrases that may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
Certain words and phrases are defined in §
153.013 of this code; those words and phrases shall be construed in accordance
with their definitions in §
153.013.
   (H)   Public officials and agencies. All public officials, bodies, and
agencies to which references are made are those of the town, unless otherwise
expressly provided. Whenever reference is made to a public official’s title or
name of a public agency, that reference shall be construed as referring to the
most up-to-date title or agency name, or to the relevant successor official or
agency.
   (I)   Mandatory and discretionary terms.
      (1)   The words SHALL, WILL, and MUST are mandatory.
      (2)   The words MAY and SHOULD are advisory and discretionary terms.
   (J)   Conjunctions. Unless the context clearly suggests the contrary,
conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows.
      (1)   AND indicates that all connected items, conditions, provisions or
events apply.
      (2)   OR indicates that one or more of the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events may apply.
   (K)   Tenses and plurals. Words used in one tense (past, present, or future)
include all other tenses, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.
The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the singular.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 1.7, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2012-21, passed 12-20-2012)
§ 153.008 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
   The standards of this chapter are minimum requirements. The issuance of any
permit, certificate, or approval in accordance with the standards and
requirements of this chapter shall not relieve the recipient of responsibility
for complying with all other applicable requirements of any other town, state,
or federal agency.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 1.8, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2012-21, passed 12-20-2012)
§ 153.009 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Conflict with state or federal regulations. If the provisions of this
chapter are inconsistent with those of the state or federal government, the
more restrictive provision shall control, to the extent permitted by law.
   (B)   Conflict with other town regulations. If the provisions of this
chapter are inconsistent with one another, or if they conflict with provisions
found in other adopted ordinances or regulations of the town, the more
restrictive provision will control. No text amendment, zoning variance, or
condition of approval attached to any form of development approval under this
chapter shall have the effect of nullifying, abrogating, or diminishing the
provisions of any other town ordinance.
   (C)   Conflict with private easements, agreements, or covenants. This
chapter is not intended to abrogate, annul, or otherwise interfere with any
private easement, agreement, covenant, restriction, or other private legal
relationship. The town is responsible for enforcing this chapter; it does not
enforce private agreements, easements, covenants, or restrictions to which the
town is not a party. Restrictive covenant affidavit(s) shall be signed by the
applicant or current property owner(s) for all permit applications including
but not limited to zoning variance applications, applications for rezoning,
special exception applications, site plan review applications, subdivision
applications, and home occupation permits in compliance with S.C. Code § 6-29-
1145 that states:
      “A.   In an application for a permit, the local planning agency must
inquire in the application or by written instructions to an applicant whether
the tract or parcel of land is restricted by any recorded covenant that is
contrary to, conflicts with, or prohibits the permitted activity.
      B.   If a local planning agency has actual notice of a restrictive
covenant on a tract or parcel of land that is contrary to, conflicts with, or
prohibits the permitted activity:
      1.   In the application for the permit;
      2.   From materials or information submitted by the person or persons
requesting the permit; or
      3.   From any other source including, but not limited to, other property
holders, the local planning agency must not issue the permit unless the local
planning agency receives confirmation from the applicant that the restrictive
covenant has been released for the tract or parcel of land by action of the
appropriate authority or property holders or by court order.
      C.   As used in this section:
      1.   ‘actual notice’ is not constructive notice of documents filed in
local offices concerning the property, and does not require the local planning
agency to conduct searches in any records offices for filed restrictive
covenants;
      2.   ‘permit’ does not mean an authorization to build or place a
structure on a tract or parcel of land; and
      3.   ‘restrictive covenant’ does not mean a restriction concerning a type
of structure that may be built or placed on a tract or parcel of land.”
(Ord. 2012-06, § 1.9, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2012-21, passed 12-20-2012)
§ 153.010 ZONING MAP.
   (A)   Adoption. The town is hereby divided into zoning districts as shown on
the town’s official zoning map, which, together with all explanatory matter
thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
chapter.
   (B)   Format. The official zoning map is maintained in the form of a machine
readable representation of a geographic phenomenon stored for display or
analysis by a digital computer. The digital zoning database stored in the
Geographic Information System (GIS) is hereby designated, established, and
incorporated as a part of these regulations and originals thereof, which are on
file at the Planning/Zoning Department, shall be as much a part of these
regulations as if they were fully described in these regulations. Upon adoption
of this chapter and any amendment thereto, the Planning/Zoning Department may
produce a paper version of the official zoning map.
   (C)   Amendments. If amendments are made in zoning district boundaries in
accordance with the procedures of §
153.043, such amendments shall be effective upon final approval of the
ordinance by Town Council and shall be updated by the Planning/Zoning
Department on the zoning database promptly after the amendment has been
approved by Town Council.
   (D)   Location. The original version of the official zoning map shall be
stored in the office of the Planning/Zoning Department. The official zoning map
shall be updated at least annually. In case of any dispute regarding the zoning
classification of property subject to this chapter, the official zoning map
maintained by the Planning/Zoning Department shall control.
   (E)   Corrections and replacement. In the event that the official zoning map
becomes damaged, destroyed, lost, the Town Council may, by resolution, adopt a
new official zoning map, which shall supersede the prior official zoning map.
The new official zoning map may correct drafting and other errors or omissions
in the prior official zoning map, but no such correction shall have the effect
of amending the original official zoning map, as amended. The new official
zoning map shall be marked, “This Official Zoning Map, adopted by resolution of
the Town Council of the Town of James Island, South Carolina, on (date)
supersedes the Official Zoning Map adopted (date) of the Town of James Island,”
which statement shall be signed by the Mayor, attested by the Town Clerk, and
bear the seal of the town. Unless the prior official zoning map is lost or has
been totally destroyed, the map or any significant parts thereof remaining
after partial destruction shall be preserved, together with all records of the
town regarding its adoption and amendment.
   (F)   Interpretation of zoning district boundaries.  Where uncertainty
exists with respect to the boundary of any zoning district shown on the zoning
map, the following rules shall apply.
      (1)   Unless otherwise indicated, district boundaries follow lot lines;
center lines of streets, highways, alleys, or railroads; center lines of water
courses or impoundments of streams, reservoirs, or other bodies of water.
      (2)   Where so indicated, district boundaries are parallel to the center
lines of streets, highways, or railroads, or rights-of-way of same, or the
center lines of streams, reservoirs, or other bodies of water, or said lines
extended as such distances therefrom as indicated on the zoning map. If no
distance is given, distance shall be determined by the use of the scale on the
zoning map.
      (3)   Where any district boundary is indicated on the zoning map as
approximately following the town boundary line or the corporate limits line of
any incorporated place within the town, then such town boundary line or
corporate limits line shall be construed to be the actual district boundary.
   (G)   Marsh boundaries. With the exception of lands within the ownership of
national forests, swampland, wildlife refuges and any other publicly designated
areas, the Office of Ocean and Coastal Resource Management (OCRM) shall
determine the boundaries and have jurisdiction over critical areas. Fresh water
wetlands shall have boundaries set by the Army Corps of Engineers.
   (H)   Zoning of additional land areas. It is the intent of this chapter that
every part of the land area of the incorporated town be included in one of the
zoning districts established by this chapter. Any land area that comes under
the jurisdiction of this chapter or does not appear to be included in a zoning
district shall be classified in the NRM-25 District unless an alternative
classification is approved by the Town Council in accordance with the zoning
map amendment procedures of §§
153.040 through
153.055. The Town Council reserves the right to annex property and such annexed
tracts, parcels, or lots of land may be annexed with zoning categories being
similar in use, planned use, or vested right.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 1.10, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2012-21, passed 12-20-2012)
§ 153.011 TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Violations continue. Any violation of the previous zoning ordinance or
subdivision ordinance will continue to be a violation under this chapter and be
subject to penalties and enforcement under §§
153.375 through
153.383 and
153.999, unless the use, development, construction, or other activity complies
with the provisions of this chapter, in which case enforcement action shall
cease, except to the extent of collecting penalties for violations that
occurred before October 18, 2012.
   (B)   Legal nonconforming under prior ordinance. Any legal nonconformity
under the previous zoning ordinance will also be a legal nonconformity under
this chapter, as long as the situation that resulted in the nonconforming
status under the previous zoning ordinance continues to exist. If a
nonconformity under the previous zoning ordinance becomes conforming because of
the adoption of this chapter, then the situation will no longer be considered a
nonconformity.
   (C)   Approved projects.
      (1)   Variances and preliminary subdivision plats that have received
approval by the town shall remain valid until their expiration date.
Construction pursuant to such approval may be carried out in accordance with
the development standards in effect at the time that approval was granted,
provided that the permit or approval remains valid and has not lapsed. As of
October 18, 2012, all construction shall be subject to strict compliance with
the regulations of this chapter.
      (2)   No provision of this chapter shall require any change in the plans,
construction, or designated use of any structure for which a zoning permit or
building permit has been issued prior to October 18, 2012, provided that permit
does not lapse and remains valid.
      (3)   No previously approved lot shall be deemed an unusable lot under
the provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   Special exception uses.
      (1)   Any use that was legally established before October 18, 2012
without special exception use approval and which, after October 18, 2012, is
located in a zoning district that requires special exception approval for the
subject use shall not be considered nonconforming merely as a result of not
having secured special exception approval. Expansions and modifications of such
uses shall be subject to the nonconforming uses section of §§
153.355 through
153.361.
      (2)   Any use that was legally established before October 18, 2012, with
a conditional use permit and which, after October 18, 2012, is located within a
zoning district that requires special exception approval for the subject use
may continue to be operated under the terms of the original conditional use
permit. The use shall be subject to all applicable standards of this chapter.
Expansion and modifications of such uses shall be subject to the nonconforming
uses section of §§
153.355 through
153.361.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 1.11, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2012-21, passed 12-20-2012)
§ 153.012 SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   If any court of competent jurisdiction rules any provision of this
chapter invalid, that ruling shall not affect any provision not specifically
included in the judgment. If any court of competent jurisdiction rules invalid
the application of any provision of this chapter to a particular property,
building, or other structure or use, that ruling shall not affect the
application of the chapter provisions to any property, building, other
structure, or use not specifically included in the judgment.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be valid and
enforceable, notwithstanding inadvertent and/or clerical error(s); such error
(s) as may exist shall not affect the validity or intent of the associated
provisions, nor that of the remainder of the chapter provisions hereunder.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 1.12, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2012-21, passed 12-20-2012)
§ 153.013 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. If not
specifically defined herein, words and terms shall be defined in Merriam-
Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary, 11th edition.
   ABANDONED SIGN. See SIGN, ABANDONED for definition.
   ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADU). A dwelling unit providing complete
independent living facilities for one or more persons that is separate from and
subordinate to the principal dwelling unit, while both units are serviced by
one electrical meter. This definition includes garage apartments.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure that is detached from a principal structure
and customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal structure.
   ACCESSORY USE. A use, structure, or part of a structure customarily
incidental and subordinate to the principal use of a zoning lot or of a
structure. An ACCESSORY USE is located on the same zoning lot as the principal
use, except in the cases of off-street parking, temporary manufactured housing
parks, temporary real estate sales office, and temporary construction
facilities.
   ACTIVE RECREATION AREA. Any park and recreational facility that is not
dependent upon a specific environmental or natural resource, which is developed
with recreation and support facilities such as playgrounds, golf courses,
bicycle trails, baseball or softball fields, football or soccer fields,
basketball courts, swimming pools, clubhouses, equestrian facilities, and
tennis courts.
   ADDITION. A structure added to the original structure at some time after the
completion of the  original or an extension, alterations, or increase in floor
area or height of a building or structure.
   ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUSINESS OFFICE. The use of a building or a portion of a
building for the provision of executive, management, or administrative
services.
   ADMINISTRATIVE DECISION. Any order, requirement, decision, or determination
by the Zoning Administrator or his or her designee relating to the
administration or enforcement of the Town Zoning and Land Development
Regulations.
   ADULT DAY CARE FACILITY. A facility licensed by the State Department of
Health and Environmental Control (DHEC) for adults 18 years of age or older,
which offers, in a group setting, a program of individual and group activities
and therapies. The program is directed toward providing community-based day
care services for those adults in need of a supportive setting. The program
shall provide a minimum of four and a maximum of 14 hours of operation a day.
(See S.C. DHEC Regulations 61-75, Standards for Licensing – Day Care Facilities
for Adults.)
   ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS. Definitions provided in §
153.138(C).
   AFFORDABLE HOUSING. In the case of dwelling units for sale, housing in which
mortgage, amortization, taxes, insurance, and condominium or association fees,
if any, constitute no more than 28% of the annual household income for a
household earning no more than 80% of the area median income, by household
size, for the metropolitan statistical area as published from time to time by
the U.S. Department of Housing and Community Development (HUD) and, in the case
of dwelling units for rent, housing for which the rent and utilities constitute
no more than 30% of the annual household income for a household earning no more
than 80% of the area median income, by household size, for the metropolitan
statistical area as published from time to time by HUD.
   AGRICULTURAL PROCESSING. The preliminary processing and packaging of
agricultural products, such as a packing shed. AGRICULTURAL PROCESSING shall
not include slaughterhouses, butcheries, tanneries, or rendering plants.
   AGRICULTURAL SALES AND SERVICE. An establishment engaged in the retail or
wholesale sale from the premises of feed, grain, fertilizers, pesticides, and
similar goods.
   AGRICULTURAL USE, BONA FIDE. Allowed primary uses on real property to raise,
harvest, or store crops, feed, breed, or manage livestock, or to produce
plants, trees, fowl, or animals useful for human consumption, including the
preparation of the products raised thereon for human consumption and disposed
of by marketing or other means and which the subject property receives
agricultural preferential assessment by the County Assessor’s Office. Such uses
include agriculture, grazing, horticulture, forestry, dairying, and
mariculture. Uses that do not qualify as BONA FIDE AGRICULTURAL USES include
recreation, hunting clubs, fishing clubs, vacant land (land lying dormant), and
any other similar uses.
   AGRICULTURE. The use of the land for agricultural purposes, including
farming, dairying, pasturage, apiculture, horticulture, floriculture,
viticulture, and animal and poultry husbandry, and the accessory uses of
packing, treating, or storing of produce; provided, however, that the operation
of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the principal
agricultural use.
   ALLEY. A minor vehicular way used primarily for access to the side or rear
of properties.
   ALTERATION, STRUCTURAL. Any change in the supporting members of a building
or structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders or in the
dimensional or configurations of the roof or exterior walls. STRUCTURAL
ALTERATIONS shall not include the application of exterior siding to an existing
building for the purpose of beautifying and modernizing.
   AMBIENT AIR QUALITY STANDARD. An acceptable concentration of an air
pollutant in a community as determined by S.C. DHEC standards.
   ANIMAL. Any live or dead dog, cat, non-human primate, guinea pig, hamster,
rabbit, or any other warm-blooded animal, which is being used, or is intended
for use, for research, teaching, testing, experimentation, or exhibition
purposes, or as a pet. This term excludes birds, rats of genus Rattus and mice
of the genus Mus bred for use in research, and horses not used for research
purposes and other farm animals, such as, but not limited to, livestock or
poultry used or intended for use as food or fiber, or livestock or poultry used
or intended for use for improving animal nutrition, breeding, management, or
production efficiency or for improving the quality of food or fiber. With
respect to a dog, the term means all dogs, including those used for hunting,
security, or breeding purposes.
   ANIMAL AQUACULTURE. Land devoted to the hatching, raising, and breeding of
fish, shrimp, or other aquatic animals for commercial purposes. ANIMAL
AQUACULTURE shall include those accessory uses and activities customarily
associated with this type of operation as determined by the Zoning
Administrator.
   ANIMAL, EXOTIC. Any animal not identified in the definition of “animal” that
is native to a foreign country or of foreign origin or character, is not native
to the United States, or was introduced from abroad. This term specifically
includes animals such as, but not limited to, lions, tigers, leopards,
elephants, camels, antelope, anteaters, kangaroos, water buffalo, and species
of foreign domestic cattle, such as ankole, gayal, or yak.
   ANIMAL PRODUCTION. The raising of animals on pastureland or production of
animal products on an agricultural or commercial basis. ANIMAL PRODUCTION shall
include those accessory uses and activities customarily associated with this
type of operation as determined by the Zoning Administrator. ANIMAL PRODUCTION
shall not include concentrated animal feeding operations, slaughterhouses, or
butcheries.
   ANIMATED SIGN. See SIGN, ANIMATED for definition.
   APPLICATION, COMPLETE. An application for development review and approval
that:
      (1)   Has been submitted in the required format;
      (2)   Includes all information required by this chapter to be submitted
for the subject application type; and
      (3)   Is accompanied by the required fee.
   ARBORIST, CERTIFIED. A person certified by the International Society of
Arboriculture.
   ARTERIAL STREET. See STREET, ARTERIAL for definition.
   ARTISAN AND CRAFTSMAN. Any business establishment that produces on the
premises articles of artistic quality or effect or handmade workmanship.
Examples include candle making, weaving, pottery making, woodworking,
sculpting, painting, and other associated activities.
   ATTACHED SINGLE-FAMILY (DWELLING UNIT). See SINGLE-FAMILY, ATTACHED for
definition.
   AVIATION. Airports, landing fields, aircraft parking and service facilities,
and related facilities for operation, service, fueling, repair, storage,
charter, sales, and rental of aircraft, including activities directly
associated with the operation and maintenance of airport facilities and the
provision of safety and security. AVIATION also includes facilities for
loading, unloading, and interchange of passengers, baggage, and incidental
freight or package express between modes of transportation.
   BALCONY. A platform projecting from a building not exceeding five feet in
depth.
   BANNER. A strip of cloth containing a message or advertisement.
   BAR or LOUNGE. A use engaged in the preparation and retail sale of alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the premises, where 25% or more of the gross
receipts are for sale of alcohol. This use includes taverns, cocktail lounges,
and any member-exclusive bars or lounges.
   BARN. A farm building used for storing farm products or sheltering
livestock. This term excludes any residential use or non-agricultural use.
   BASE COURSE. A layer or layers of specified or selected material of
designated thickness or rate of application placed on a sub-base or sub-grade
to comprise a component of the pavement structure to support the pavement or
subsequent layer of construction.
   BED AND BREAKFAST/SHORT-TERM RENTAL. A portion of an owner-occupied dwelling
unit (in residential zoning districts) or owner/innkeeper/manager-occupied
dwelling unit (in non-residential zoning districts) offering transient lodging
to paying guests on an overnight basis for an amount of time that is less than
30 days.
   BERM. A human-made landscape feature generally consisting of a linear mound
of soil. Temporary soil stockpiles and retaining walls shall not be considered
a BERM.
   BILLBOARD (OUTDOOR ADVERTISING STRUCTURE). A large, stabilized third-party/
off- premise structure displaying advertising intended for viewing from
extended distances, generally more than 50 feet. BILLBOARD/OUTDOOR ADVERTISING
DISPLAYS include, but are not limited to, bulletins, wall murals, wrapped
posters, 30 sheet posters, and eight sheet posters.
   BOARDING HOUSE. See ROOMING HOUSE for definition.
   BOAT RAMP. Provides access to the water for the launching and retrieving of
watercraft. BOAT RAMPS may be located at marinas, public access points, or at
community and commercial docks subject to the applicable regulations.
   BOAT SLIP. A docking space alongside a pier, wharf, or mooring dolphins in
which a waterborne boat may be moored. For purposes of this chapter and in the
absence of an authorized quantity of boat slips by state or federal regulating
agencies, a BOAT SLIP  shall be considered a minimum length of 25 feet for side
mooring and 15 feet for stern moorings.
   BOAT YARD. A land-based operation primarily for the repair and service of
boats, including any incidental storage of boats in the process of being
repaired. This term does not include boat building. If dry stack storage for
watercraft or any type of water access is provided, the facility would be
considered a water-dependent use (§
153.092).
   BODY ART AND PIERCINGS. Any use of an implement to inject, paint, or pierce
the skin of any person shall only be allowed in properties zoned industrial
(I).
   BOTANICAL GARDEN. A place, generally open to the public for a fee, where a
wide variety of plants are cultivated for scientific, educational, or
ornamental purposes.
   BRIDGE. A structure, including supports, erected over a depression or an
obstruction, as water, highway, or railway, and having a track or passageway
for carrying traffic or other moving loads.
   BUFFER, LANDSCAPE. A vegetated area of varying width, ranging from five to
100 feet, designed exclusively to provide screening between adjoining
properties, rights-of-way, parking lots, and structures, as described
throughout § 153.335.
   BUFFER, WETLAND. An area of varying width, ranging from 15 to 35 feet,
providing a visual, spatial, and ecological transition zone between the OCRM
critical line and land development, as described in § 153.337. The WETLAND
BUFFER is designed to protect water quality and wildlife habitat.
   BUILDING. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and
intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any individual, animal,
plant, process, equipment, goods, or materials of any kind. When a portion
thereof is completely separated from every other portion by a dividing wall (or
firewall, when applicable) without openings, then each such portion shall be
deemed to be a separate BUILDING.
   BUILDING CODE. The Building Code of the town.
   BUILDING COVER. The proportion, expressed as percentage, of the area of a
zoning lot covered by all buildings located thereon, including the area covered
by all overhanging roofs.
   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance between the base flood elevation, or
ground level if the structure is not in a flood hazard area as defined by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), and:
      (1)   The average height level between the eaves and the ridge line of a
gable, hip, or gambrel roof;
      (2)   The highest point of a mansard roof; or
      (3)   The highest point of the coping of a flat roof.
   BUILDING LENGTH. The length of the facade facing the street for that unit
which the sign shall apply. The BUILDING LENGTH (facade facing the street for
the business) plus the setback from the street right-of-way/property boundary
line shall determine the “maximum size” of the wall/facade sign for that
business.
   BUILDING PERMIT. An official document or certificate issued under the Town
Building Code for any carpentry, masonry, roofing, or related construction or
repair. A BUILDING PERMIT is not required for construction under $1,000 unless
the construction or repair involves a structural modification or work done by a
contractor.
   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A building in which is conducted the principal use of
the zoning lot on which it is situated. In a residential district, any dwelling
shall be deemed to be a PRINCIPAL BUILDING.
   BUSINESS OR TRADE SCHOOL. A use providing education or training in business,
commerce, language, or other similar activity or  occupational pursuit and not
otherwise defined as a home occupation, college, or university.
   CANOPY TREE. A tree, with a diameter of at least two and one-half inches, as
measured six inches above grade, at the time of planting, which will grow to a
minimum height of 50 feet at maturity.
   CARETAKER. An individual or family who resides on premises as an accessory
use for the purpose of maintaining, protecting, or operating a permitted
principal use on the premises.
   CATERING SERVICE. An establishment that prepares and provides food and
related services to off-premise locations.
   CAUSEWAY. An earthen structure with at least one side adjacent to a
depression, wetland, or marsh that supports a road for carrying traffic or
other moving loads.
   CEMETERY. Land use or intended to be used for the burial of the dead and
dedicated for cemetery purposes, including columbariums, crematoriums,
mausoleums, and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the
boundaries of such cemetery.
   CENTER LINE OF STREET. The line surveyed and monumented as the center line
of the street, or, if such center line has not been surveyed, it shall be the
line running midway between the curbs or ditches of such street.
   CERTIFICATE OF NONCONFORMITY. A certificate issued by the Town Planning/
Zoning Department to any sexually-oriented business which is operating at the
time of the enactment of the regulations of §
153.138 and is not in compliance with one or more of its provisions.
   CHARTER BOAT (OR OTHER RECREATIONAL WATERCRAFT) RENTAL. A land-based
operation primarily for the rental or leasing of boats or other recreational
watercraft. Any operation that is associated with a marina or provides direct
water access shall be considered a water-dependent use (§
153.092).
   CHILD CARING INSTITUTION. A facility licensed by the State Department of
Social Services (DSS) with one or more staffed residences and with a total
population of 20 or more children who are in care apart from their parents,
relatives, or guardians on a continuing full-time basis for protection and
guidance.
   CHILD DAY CARE FACILITY. A facility or dwelling unit that regularly (more
than twice a week for more than four hours, but less than 24 hours) provides
child day care for seven or more children. This definition includes child care
centers and group day care homes, which are licensed by the State Department of
Social Services (DSS).
   CHURCHES AND OTHER PLACES OF WORSHIP. Same as definition for RELIGIOUS
ASSEMBLY.
   CIVIC ORGANIZATION. See SOCIAL ORGANIZATION for definition.
   COLLECTOR STREET. See, STREET, COLLECTOR for definition.
   COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY FACILITY. An educational institution that offers
courses of general or specialized study leading to a degree.
   COMMERCIAL NURSERY OPERATIONS. See HORTICULTURAL PRODUCTION for definition.
   COMMERCIAL REPAIR SERVICE. See REPAIR SERVICE, COMMERCIAL for definition.
   COMMERCIAL TIMBER OPERATION. Tracts of five acres or more devoted to the
production of marketable forest products through generally accepted
silvacultural practices including, but not limited to, harvesting, site
preparation, and regeneration.
   COMMON OPEN SPACE and/or CONSERVATION AREA. Open space, not in individually
owned lots or dedicated for public use, which is designed and intended for the
common use or enjoyment of the residents of the development.
   COMMON OPEN SPACE shall be substantially free of structures, but may contain
such improvements as are approved as a part of the development plan for such
district and are appropriate for the residents of the district. Land dedicated
to the public or designated by the development plan for the use, benefit, and
enjoyment of all residents of the development.
   COMMUNICATION SERVICE. An establishment primarily engaged in the provision
of broadcasting and other information relay services accomplished through the
use of electronic and telephonic mechanisms, but excludes those classified as
major utility facilities.
   COMMUNICATION TOWER. A tower of any size that supports communication
equipment, transmission, or reception and is utilized by commercial,
governmental, or other public or quasi-public users. This does not include
communication towers for amateur radio operators licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission which are exempt from local zoning restrictions or
communications towers less than 100 feet in height used solely for educational
communications purposes.
   COMMUNITY HEALTH CARE CENTER. See PUBLIC HEALTH CARE CENTER for definition.
   COMMUNITY INTEREST NOTICE. Notice provided to any individual, group, or
organization that has submitted a written statement of interest to the Zoning
Administrator. Municipalities within the planning area of the subject tract are
also included.
   COMMUNITY RECREATION. A recreational facility that is the principal use of a
parcel of land and that is for use by residents and guests of the following: a
particular residential development, planned development, church, private
primary or secondary educational facility, community affiliated non-profit
organization. COMMUNITY RECREATION can include both indoor and outdoor
facilities.
   COMMUNITY RECREATION CENTER. A public or quasi-public building designed for
and used as a social, recreation, and cultural center. As a part of such
RECREATION CENTERS, there may be included craft rooms, music rooms, game rooms,
meeting rooms, auditoriums, swimming pools, and kitchen facilities. Kitchen
facilities and dining areas shall be used for special events only.
   COMMUNITY RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY. A facility licensed by the State
Department of Health and Environmental Control (DHEC), which offers room and
board and provides a degree of personal assistance for a period of time in
excess of 24 consecutive hours for ten or more persons, 18 years old or older,
unrelated to the operator. Included in this definition is any facility, other
than a hospital, which offers a beneficial or protected environment
specifically for the mentally ill, drug addicted, or alcoholic or provides or
purports to provide any specific procedure or process for the cure or
improvement of that disease or condition. A COMMUNITY RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY
with nine or fewer residents shall be considered a “family.” (See S.C. DHEC
Standard for Licensing, Regulation 61-84, Community Residential Care Facility.)
   COMMUNITY ROADS. Roads that serve one or more families and usually have no
dedicated rights-of-way or drainage. These roads generally have a dirt surface,
are maintained on a regular basis, and are not in the state or town road
system.
   COMPLETE APPLICATION. See APPLICATION, COMPLETE for definition.
   CONCENTRATED ANIMAL FEEDING OPERATION. A confined area or facility within
which the property is not grazed or cropped annually and which is used and
maintained for the purposes of engaging in the business of the reception and
feeding of more than 50 beef or dairy cattle; more than 50 horses; more than
150 hogs, sheep, or goats; more than 1,000 or more birds, such as turkeys,
chickens, ducks, or geese; or more than 1,000 small animals, such as guinea
pigs, rabbits, or minks. This term shall also include commercial feed lots.
   CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT. A permit formerly issued by the Town Planning/Zoning
Department authorizing a particular use in a specified location within a zoning
district, upon demonstrating that such use complies with all the conditions and
standards specified by the zoning ordinance. CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT is a term
used in the town zoning ordinance.
   CONGREGATE LIVING. A residential facility providing 24-hour supervision and
assisted living for no more than 15 elderly residents (age 50 or older), not
needing regular medical attention.
   CONSTRUCTION PERMIT. A series of permits required by the Town Planning/
Zoning Department that may include building, electrical, plumbing, HVAC
(heating, ventilating, and air conditioning), or gas permits.
   CONSUMER CONVENIENCE SERVICE. An establishment providing services, primarily
to individuals, of a frequent or recurrent nature.
   CONSUMER GOODS RENTAL CENTER. An establishment, with greater than 5,000
square feet of gross floor area, primarily engaged in the rental or leasing of
new or used products to the general public, excluding vehicle or watercraft
rentals.
   CONSUMER GOODS RENTAL SERVICE. An establishment, with 5,000 square feet or
less of gross floor area, primarily engaged in the rental or leasing of new or
used products to the general public, excluding vehicle or watercraft rentals.
   CONSUMER REPAIR SERVICE. See REPAIR SERVICE, CONSUMER for definition.
   CONSUMER VEHICLE REPAIR. See VEHICLE REPAIR, CONSUMER for definition.
   CONVALESCENT SERVICE. A use providing bed care and in-patient services for
persons requiring regular medical attention, but excluding a facility providing
surgical or emergency medical services. This term excludes facilities providing
care for alcoholism, drug addiction, mental disease, or communicable disease.
Typical uses include nursing homes.
   CONVENIENCE STORE. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of
frequently or recurrently needed goods for household consumption, such as
prepackaged food and beverages, newspapers, and limited household supplies, to
customers who generally purchase only a few items. CONVENIENCE STORES shall not
include fuel pumps or the selling of fuel for motor vehicles.
   CONVENTION CENTER. A formal meeting place where the building or rooms are
rented or leased to the members, representatives or delegates of a particular
group. These centers can usually accommodate large groups.
   CORNER LOT. See LOT, CORNER for definition.
   CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTION. A facility providing judicially required detention
or incarceration of people.
   COUNSELING SERVICE. An establishment providing counseling, guidance, or
similar services to persons requiring rehabilitative or vocational assistance.
This term includes job training and placement services.
   COUNTRY CLUB. Land area and buildings containing golf courses, recreational
facilities, a clubhouse, and other customary accessory uses, open only to
members and their guests.
   COURTYARD. An open unoccupied space, other than a yard, on the same zoning
lot with a building, unobstructed from floor or ground level to the sky.
   CROP PRODUCTION. The raising and harvesting of tree crops, row crops, or
field crops on an agricultural or commercial basis. CROP PRODUCTION shall
include those accessory uses and activities customarily associated with these
types of agricultural operation, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
This definition excludes any agricultural uses that are more specifically
defined in this chapter.
   CUL-DE-SAC. The turnaround area at the end of a dead end street or an
egress.
   CULTURAL EVENT. Land use of a temporary nature to display objects or events
of a community and cultural interest in one or more of the arts and sciences,
such as Civil War reenactments.
   CULVERT. Any structure not classified as a bridge which provides an opening
under any roadway, including pipe culverts, and any structure so named in the
plans.
   CURB. A stone, concrete, or other improved boundary marking the edge of a
road or other paved area.
   DATA PROCESSING SERVICES. Establishments primarily involved in the
compiling, storage, and maintenance of documents, records, and other types of
information in digital form utilizing a main frame computer.
   DECIBEL (DB). A unit which describes the sound pressure level or intensity
of sound. A sound level meter is calibrated in decibels.
   DECISION-MAKING BODY. The entity that is authorized to finally approve or
deny an application or permit as required under this chapter.
   DECK. An uncovered porch, attached or detached from the primary structure.
   DEDICATION. The action of a property owner or developer to transfer an
interest in property to the town or other service provider. The approval of a
subdivision plat by Town Council is deemed to effect an acceptance by the town
of a proposed dedication of a street, easement, or other ground shown on the
plat.
   DENSITY/INTENSITY AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS. Provisions of this chapter
controlling the size and shape of zoning lots and the location and bulk of
structures thereon. Such regulations include those relating to density, lot
area, lot width, setbacks, buffers, building cover, height, and open space.
   DESIGN PROFESSIONAL. An individual or firm appropriately licensed and
registered in the state.
   DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT. See SINGLE-FAMILY, DETACHED for
definition.
   DETENTION. The temporary holding back of storm water and releasing it at a
controlled rate.
   DEVELOPER. The legal or beneficial owner of a lot or of any land proposed
for development; the holder of an option or contract to purchase; or any other
person having an enforceable contractual interest in such land.
   DEVELOPMENT. The changing of land characteristics through redevelopment,
construction, subdivision into parcels, condominium complexes, apartment
complexes, commercial parks, shopping centers, industrial parks, mobile home
parks, and similar developments for sale, lease, or any combination of owner
and rental characteristics.
   DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT (DBH). The total diameter, in inches, of a tree trunk
or trunks measured at a point four and one-half feet above existing grade (at
the base of the tree). In measuring DBH, the circumference of the tree shall be
measured with a standard diameter tape and the circumference divided by 3.14.
   DOCK. A structure extending into or upon a waterway, marshland, or other
natural water feature.
   DOCK, COMMERCIAL. A docking facility used for commercial purposes. A
COMMERCIAL DOCK is not necessarily a marina, a boat yard, or a dry storage
facility. All COMMERCIAL DOCKS shall be considered a water-dependent use (§
153.092).
   DOCK, COMMUNITY. Any docking facility that provides access for more than
four families (greater than or equal to five watercraft slips and less than or
equal to ten watercraft slips) and is not a marina. All COMMUNITY DOCKS shall
be considered a water-dependent use (§
153.092).
   DOCK, JOINT USE. Any private dock intended for the joint use of one family.
Private docks shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter.
   DOUBLE-FRONTAGE LOT. See LOT, DOUBLE-FRONTAGE for definition.
   DRAINAGE EASEMENT. See EASEMENT, DRAINAGE for definition.
   DRIP LINE. An imaginary vertical line extending from the outermost
circumference of the branches of a tree to the ground.
   DRY DOCK (STACK) STORAGE FOR WATERCRAFT. A facility for storing boats out of
water. This is principally a land operation, where boats are dry stored or
“stacked” until such time as they are transferred to the water for use. Any
type of DRY STACK STORAGE FACILITY FOR WATERCRAFT will be considered a water-
dependent use (§ 153.092).
   DUMPSTER. An accessory use of a property where trash or recyclable material
containers, or any other type of waste or refuse container is stored.
   DUPLEX. Two single-family dwelling units contained within a single building,
other than a manufactured housing unit.
   DWELLING (DWELLING UNIT). A building or portion of it designed and used for
residential occupancy by a single household and that includes exclusive
sleeping, cooking, eating, and sanitation facilities.
   DWELLING GROUP. Two or more principal structures, each a single dwelling
unit, not including manufactured housing units, that are located on the same
zoning lot. This definition does not refer to accessory dwelling units, such as
garage apartments or guest houses.
   DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY. A building containing three or more dwelling units,
including residential condominiums and apartments.
   EARTH ROADS. Those in which the traveled roadway is constructed of compacted
earth material creating an earthen driving surface.
   EASEMENT. A privilege or right of use, access, or enjoyment granted on,
above, under, or across a particular tract of land by the landowner to another
person.
   EASEMENT, DRAINAGE. The right of access of storm water runoff from the
adjacent natural drainage basin into the drainage way within the drainage
easement.
   ECO-TOURISM. Tourism involving travel to areas of natural or ecological
interest, typically under the guidance of a naturalist, for the purpose of
observing wildlife and learning about the environment.
   EDUCATIONAL NURSERY. See PRE-SCHOOL for definition.
   ENLARGEMENT. An increase in the size of an existing structure or use,
including physical size of the property, building, parking, or other
improvements. ENLARGEMENT would also include the addition of other structures
or uses on the lot.
   EXOTIC ANIMAL. See ANIMAL, EXOTIC for definition.
   FACADE. The entire building wall, fascia, windows, doors, canopy, and on any
complete elevation.
   FAMILY. An individual or two or more persons related by blood or marriage
living together; or a group of not more than six individuals, including live-in
servants, not related by blood or marriage but living together as a single
housekeeping unit. Residents of community residential care facilities licensed
by the State Department of Health and Environmental Control (DHEC) for nine or
fewer individuals shall be considered a FAMILY.
   FAMILY DAY CARE HOME. An occupied residence in which child day care is
provided on more than two days a week for periods of less than 24 hours, but
more than four hours, for not more than six children, including those children
living in the home and children received for day care who are related to the
resident care giver. FAMILY DAY CARE HOMES are licensed by the State Department
of Social Services (DSS). (See S.C. Code § 20-7-2700.)
   FAMILY, IMMEDIATE. The property owner’s or property owner’s spouse’s
parents, children, grandparents, grandchildren, nieces, nephews, aunts, or
uncles.
   FARM. A parcel of land, five acres or more, that is used for one or more of
the following: the tilling of the land, the raising of crops, fruits, and
vegetables, and the raising and keeping of animals and plants.
   FARM LABOR HOUSING. A building or structure which is designed or constructed
as a place of residence for up to ten unrelated, transient farm workers living
as a single housekeeping unit.
   FARM LABOR HOUSING, DORMITORY. A structure designed or constructed as
accommodations for transient farm workers for more than ten unrelated persons,
which is not designed as an apartment building with individual attached units.
   FAST-FOOD RESTAURANT. See RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD for definition.
   FENCE or WALL. A structural device erected to serve as an architectural
element, landscape element, visual screen, or physical barrier.
   FINANCIAL GUARANTEE. Surety intended to ensure that all improvements,
facilities, or work required by this chapter will be completed, restored, or
maintained in compliance with this chapter. (See §
153.315.)
   FINANCIAL SERVICE. An establishment primarily engaged in the provision of
financial and banking services.
   FLAG. A piece of fabric or other flexible material, usually rectangular and
of distinctive design, which is used as a symbol, such as for a nation, state,
locality, or corporation.
   FLAG LOT. See LOT, FLAG for definition.
   FLASHING SIGN. See SIGN, FLASHING for definition.
   FLOOR AREA.
      (1)   The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the
building, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the
center lines of wall separating two buildings, computed as follows:
         (a)   Floor space devoted to the principal use of the premises,
including accessory storage areas located within the selling or working space,
such as counters, racks, or closets; or
         (b)   Any basement floor area devoted to the production or processing
of goods or to business or professional offices.
      (2)   FLOOR AREA shall not include space devoted primarily to storage
purposes, except as otherwise noted herein, off-street parking or loading
facilities, including ramps and maneuvering space, or basement floor area,
other than area devoted to retailing activities, the production or processing
of goods, or business or professional offices.
   FLORIST. A commercial activity offering for sale cut flowers, ornamental
plants, floral arrangements, real or artificial, and related accessories
including cards, figurines, and indoor ornamental fixtures.
   FOOD SALES. An establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale of food
for home consumption. These establishments may include the sale of beer and
wine in unopened containers for off-premise consumption where the sale of
products other than beer and wine comprise at least 51% of the gross sales of
the establishment and at least 51% of the total display or shelf space is
devoted to products other than beer and wine.
   FORESTRY OPERATIONS, BONA FIDE. Shall mean that the property is eligible
for, and actually used for forestry or timber operations, and written
application has been approved by the County Assessor for the special assessment
for agricultural  use for the property in question pursuant to S.C. Code § 12-
43-220, S.C. Department of Revenue Regulation 117-1780.1, and other applicable
statutes, rules, and regulations.
   FREE-STANDING SIGN. See SIGN, FREE-STANDING for definition.
   FREIGHT FORWARDING FACILITY. A building or area in which freight brought by
truck, air, or ship is assembled and/or stored for routing or reshipment. This
facility does not include permanent or long-term accessory storage of goods,
but may include storage areas for trucks and repair of trucks associated with
the facility. This definition includes truck terminals, marine terminals, and
packing and crating facilities.
   FRESHWATER WETLANDS. See WETLANDS, FRESHWATER for definition.
   FRONT LOT LINE. See LOT LINE, FRONT for definition.
   FRONT SETBACK. See SETBACK, FRONT for definition.
   FUNERAL SERVICE. An establishment engaged in undertaking services such as
preparing the human or animal dead for burial and arranging and managing
funerals.
   GARAGE (PRIVATE). An accessory structure or space on a lot with a dwelling
unit devoted to or designed for the storage of automobiles and small (one-half
ton capacity or less) trucks and not used for business purposes or occupancy.
   GARAGE APARTMENT. A single dwelling unit located over a private detached
garage and containing square footage no greater than that of the garage.
   GARDEN SUPPLIES CENTER. A commercial activity offering for sale indoor or
outdoor plants, garden fixtures, packaged plant food or pesticides, garden
tools, manually or power operated with associated parts and accessories. Not
included is farm equipment elsewhere provided for in this chapter.
   GASOLINE SERVICE STATION. Any premises used primarily for the retail sale of
fuel for automobiles, light and medium trucks, motorcycles, recreational
vehicles, and other consumer motor vehicles. GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS may
include light maintenance such as engine tune-ups, lubrication, minor repairs,
and carburetor cleaning, but shall not include heavy vehicle maintenance
activities such as engine overhauls, automobile painting, and body fender work.
This term may also include the sale of motor vehicle accessories or used tires
taken in trade on the premises, but does not include vehicle, moving truck, or
trailer sales or rental.
   GENERAL CONTRACTOR. An establishment that has the ability to furnish a
variety of building materials and provide multiple construction services at a
specified price.
   GOLF COURSE. A tract of land laid out for at least nine holes for playing
the game of golf and improved with tees, greens, fairways, and hazards and that
may include a clubhouse and shelter.
   GOVERNMENT OFFICE. Federal, state, county, town, or city offices,
administrative, clerical, or public contact services, together with incidental
storage and maintenance of necessary vehicles.
   GRADE. For the purpose of determining building height:
      (1)   For buildings adjoining one street only, it is the elevation of the
sidewalk directly opposite the center of that wall which adjoins the street; in
such case where the average elevation of the finished ground surface adjacent
to the exterior walls of the building is lower than the elevation of the
sidewalk grade, or where there is no sidewalk grade, or where there are not
sidewalks, the GRADE shall be the average elevation of the ground on the lowest
side adjacent to the exterior walls of the building.
      (2)   For buildings adjoining more than one street, it is the elevation
of the sidewalk directly opposite the center of the wall adjoining the street
having the lowest sidewalk elevation.
      (3)   For buildings having no wall adjoining the street, it is the
average level of the finished ground surface adjacent to the exterior walls of
the building.
      (4)   All walls which are approximately parallel to and not more than 25
feet from a front lot line shall be considered as adjoining the street. In
alleys, the surface of the paving shall be considered to be the sidewalk
elevation. Where the elevation of the sidewalk or alley paving has not been
established, the Public Works Director shall determine such elevation for the
purpose of this chapter.
   GRAND TREE. All species of tree measuring 18 inches or greater diameter
breast height (DBH) except pine and sweet gum.
   GREENHOUSE. A partially or fully enclosed structure which is used for the
growth of plants.
   GREENHOUSE PRODUCTION. Ornamental plants or food crops grown for wholesale
sale within an enclosed structure or under cover.
   GROUND COVER. Low-growing plant material less than 18 inches in height.
   GROUP CARE HOME, RESIDENTIAL. A staffed residence, licensed by the State
Department of Social Services (DSS), with a population of fewer than 20
children who are in care apart from their parents, relatives, or guardians on a
full-time basis. GROUP CARE HOMES are classified by different levels of care
ranging from independent to assisted living.
   GROUP RESIDENTIAL. The residential use of a site, on a weekly or longer
basis, for occupancy by groups of more than six persons not defined as family,
such as fraternity or sorority houses, dormitories, or residence halls. This
term does not include rooming or boarding houses.
   HEALTH CARE LABORATORY. A facility primarily involved in the testing,
diagnosis, or observation of medical or dental samples collected at  health
care facilities. The samples are generally sent to the laboratory from off-
premises facilities.
   HEAVY COMMERCIAL TRAILER. A trailer vehicle used for any commercial purpose
and having more than four tires and which is greater than 15 feet in overall
length. Examples of HEAVY TRAILERS include, but shall not be limited to
container chassis, dump bodies, reefers, and other trailers commonly utilized
within the commercial shipping industry.
   HEAVY COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. A Class 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, and 13
Vehicle as defined by the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA). For the
purposes of this chapter, this definition does not include six-wheel pickup
trucks, motor homes, campers, or recreational vehicles.
   HEAVY CONSTRUCTION SERVICES. Service activity involved in road, bridge,
building, or other infrastructure construction.
   HEIGHT (OF SIGNS). The vertical distance measured from ground level at the
base of the sign structure to the highest point of the sign structure.
   HISTORIC SITE. A structure or place of outstanding historical and cultural
significance and designated as such by the town, the state, or the National
Register of Historic Places.
   HOME HEALTH AGENCIES. A public, non-profit, or proprietary organization
licensed by the State Department of Health and Environmental Control (DHEC)
which furnishes or offers to furnish home health services. These services
include part-time or intermittent skilled nursing care, as ordered by a
physician and provided by or under the supervision of a registered nurse, and
at least one other therapeutic service. The majority of home health services
are furnished on a visiting basis in a place of temporary or permanent
residence used as the individual’s home. (See S.C. DHEC Regulation 61-77,
Standards for Licensing – Home Health Agencies.)
   HOME IMPROVEMENT CENTER. A facility with over 5,000 square feet of floor
area engaged in the retail sale of various basic hardware lines, such as
tools, builders’ hardware, paint, glass, house wares, household appliances, and
garden supplies. Facilities under 5,000 square feet shall be considered a
“hardware store.”
   HOME OCCUPATION. An accessory use of a dwelling unit or its accessory
structure for gainful employment.
   HOMEOWNERS’ OR PROPERTY OWNERS’ ASSOCIATION. A formally constituted non-
profit association or corporation made up of the property owners and/or
residents of a fixed area. The HOMEOWNERS’ OR PROPERTY OWNERS’ ASSOCIATION may
take responsibility for costs and upkeep of common open space or facilities, or
enforce certain covenants and restrictions.
   HORTICULTURAL PRODUCTION. Land used to grow horticultural and floricultural
specialties (such as flowers, shrubs, or trees intended for ornamental or
landscaping purposes) for wholesale or retail sale in order to be transplanted
to a different location. Retail sales shall not comprise more than 25% of gross
sales. This definition excludes crop and greenhouse production that have been
identified elsewhere in this chapter.
   HORTICULTURE AND LANDSCAPING SERVICES. This activity shall include
landscaping, tree trimming, tree removal, and other similar services together
with associated equipment and machinery directed toward the care of trees,
plants, and lawns.
   HOSPITAL. A licensed facility primarily providing in-patient medical,
surgical, or psychiatric care for a period exceeding 24 hours. HOSPITAL
facilities may also include out-patient services and the following types of
accessory activities: out-patient diagnostic and treatment centers,
rehabilitation facilities, offices, laboratories, teaching facilities, meeting
areas, cafeterias, maintenance, and parking facilities. This definition
includes general hospitals, specialized hospitals, chronic hospitals,
psychiatric and substance abuse hospitals, or hospices. (See S.C. DHEC
Regulation 61-16, Standards for Licensing – Hospital and General Infirmaries,
and Regulation 61-78, Standards for Licensing – Hospices.)
   HOTEL-MOTEL. A building or portion thereof, or a group of buildings, which
provides sleeping accommodations, with or without meal service, for transients
on a daily or weekly basis, whether such establishment is designated as a
hotel, inn, automobile court, motel, motor inn, motor ledge, tourist cabin,
tourist court, or tourist home.
   HOUSEHOLD. Same as definition for FAMILY.
   HOUSEHOLD PET. See PET, HOUSEHOLD for definition.
   HYDROPONICS. Land used to produce, for wholesale sale, plants grown in
nutrient-enriched water, where no soil is used.
   ILLUMINATED SIGN. See SIGN, ILLUMINATED for definition.
   IMMEDIATE FAMILY. See FAMILY, IMMEDIATE for definition.
   INDIGENOUS PRODUCE. Fresh fruit, vegetables, and agronomic crops , such as
field corn, soybean, wheat, and oats, grown in or are characteristic of the
town. This term specifically excludes livestock, animals, or seafood.
   INDOOR RECREATION AND ENTERTAINMENT. See RECREATION AND ENTERTAINMENT,
INDOOR for definition.
   INOPERABLE VEHICLE. Any motor-driven vehicle, regardless of size, which is
incapable of being self-propelled upon the public streets of the town or which
does not meet the requirements for operation upon the public streets, including
a current motor vehicle registration.
   INTERIOR LOT. See LOT, INTERIOR for definition.
   INTERIOR LOT LINE. See LOT LINE, INTERIOR for definition.
   INTERIOR SETBACK. See SETBACK, INTERIOR for definition.
   INTERMEDIATE CARE FACILITY FOR THE MENTALLY RETARDED. A facility licensed by
the State Department of Health and Environmental Control (DHEC) that serves
four or more mentally retarded persons or persons with related conditions. This
facility provides health or rehabilitative services on a regular basis to
individuals whose mental and physical conditions require services including
room, board, and active treatment for their mental retardation or related
conditions. (See S.C. DHEC Regulations 61-13, Standards for Licensing –
Habilitation Centers for the Mentally Retarded or Persons with Related
Conditions.)
   JUNK YARD. See SALVAGE YARD for definition.
   KENNEL. A facility that provides boarding for three or more dogs, cats, or
other household pets for a fee and may include grooming, breeding, training, or
selling of animals.
   LANDFILL. A disposal facility or part of a facility where solid waste is
placed in or on land.
   LANDSCAPE BUFFER. See BUFFER, LANDSCAPE for definition.
   LETTER OF COORDINATION. Formal correspondence from an agency, organization,
or individual which expresses acknowledgment and/or consent of an application,
project, or proposal.
   LIQUOR, BEER, OR WINE SALES. An establishment primarily engaged in the
retail sale of alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption. This
definition includes all retail stores where the sales of alcoholic beverages
comprise 49% or more of gross sales.
   LODGE. See SOCIAL CLUB for definition.
   LOT. A designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by plat,
subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law to be separately owned, used,
developed, or built upon and is recorded with the Register of Mesne Conveyance
of the county.
   LOT AREA. The total area included within the boundaries of a zoning lot
measured in a horizontal plane.
   LOT, CORNER. Either a zoning lot bounded entirely by streets or a zoning lot
which adjoins the point of intersections or meeting of two or more streets and
in which the interior angle formed by the street lines is 135 degrees or less.
If the street lines are curved, the angle shall be measured at the point of
intersection of the extensions of the street lines in the directions which they
take at the intersection of the street line with the side lot line and with the
rear lot line of the lot. If the street line is curved at its point of
intersection with the side lot line or rear lot line, the tangent to the curve
at that point shall be considered the direction of the street line.
   LOT, DOUBLE-FRONTAGE. An interior lot that abuts on two parallel streets or
that abuts on two streets that do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot.
Lots with access on a street and alley shall not be considered DOUBLE-FRONTAGE
LOTS.
   LOT, FLAG. A lot with access provided to the bulk of the lot by means of a
narrow corridor.
   LOT FRONTAGE. The distance for which a zoning lot abuts on a street.
   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot with only one front lot line.
   LOT LINE. A line of record bounding a lot which divides one lot from another
lot or from a public or private street or any other public space.
   LOT LINE, FRONT. The lot line separating a lot from the street that is used
as the primary access point to the lot.
   LOT LINE, INTERIOR. The lot line other than a front lot line.
   LOT LINE, REAR. The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot
line.
   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
   LOT, THROUGH. See LOT, DOUBLE- FRONTAGE for definition.
   LOT WIDTH.
      (1)   WIDTH OF AN INTERIOR LOT. the length of the front lot line or its
chord.
      (2)   WIDTH OF A CORNER OR DOUBLE-FRONTAGE LOT.
         (a)   If there are two front lot lines, the shorter of such lines or
its chord; or
         (b)   If there are more than two front lot lines, the average length
of the two shortest of such lines or their chords.
      (3)   WIDTH OF LOTS SERVED BY A CUL-DE-SAC. Width shall be measured at
the building line.
   LOT, ZONING. Any lot that falls within the jurisdiction of the town’s Zoning
and Land Development Regulations.
   LOTS OF RECORD, APPROVED. A platted parcel or parcels of land created and
recorded with the Register of Mesne Conveyance of the county since January 1,
1955, in conformance with the subdivision regulations and bearing the Planning
Commission or Town Council stamp of approval or identical parcels created and
recorded by plat or meets and bounds prior to January 1, 1955.
   LOUNGE. See BAR for definition.
   MAIN UTILITY LINES. Those facilities including piping, conduits, outlets,
and other appurtenances necessary for the proper functioning of essential
services to a development including water, electricity, gas, sanitary sewer,
storm sewer, cable communications, and the like.
   MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE. Any security which may be required and accepted by
the town to ensure that necessary improvements are maintained and will function
as required for a specific period of time.
   MAJOR RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT. Any boat, boat trailer, camper, or other
recreational vehicle with a length of more than 25 feet.
   MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARK. A zoning lot on which two or more manufactured
housing units are parked or any zoning lot on which space for the parking of
manufactured housing unit is rented. The term does not include manufactured
housing unit subdivisions or premises where unoccupied manufactured housing
units, whether new or used, are parked for the purpose of inspection, sale,
storage, or repair, or recreational vehicle parks.
   MANUFACTURED HOUSING UNIT. Any residential dwelling unit constructed to
standards and codes set forth by the United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development, including the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and
Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. Art. 5401). The term does not include
recreational vehicles, travel trailers or motorized homes licensed for travel
on highways, nor manufactured housing units designed and built to meet
applicable requirements of the State Modular Buildings Construction Act.
   MANUFACTURED HOUSING UNIT, REPLACEMENT. A manufactured housing unit that
replaces a legally established manufactured housing unit located on an
individual lot.
   MANUFACTURING AND PRODUCTION. An establishment engaged in the manufacturing,
processing, fabrication, packaging, or assembly of goods. Natural, human-made,
raw, secondary, or partially completed materials may be used. Products may be
finished or semi-finished and are generally made for the wholesale market, for
transfer to other plants or to order for firms or consumers. Goods are
generally not displayed or sold on site, but if so, this  is a subordinate part
of sales. Relatively few customers come to the site.
   MARINA.
      (1)   Any of the following:
         (a)   Lock harbor facility;
         (b)   Any facility which provides fueling, pump-out, maintenance, or
repair services;
         (c)   Any facility which has permanent docking space for 11 or more
watercraft slips;
         (d)   Any water area with a structure which is used for docking or
otherwise mooring vessels and constructed to provide temporary or permanent
docking space for more than ten boats; or
         (e)   A dry stack facility.
      (2)   All MARINAS shall be considered a water-dependent use (§
153.092).
   MAXIMUM EXTENT FEASIBLE. The point at which all possible measures have been
undertaken by the applicant, at which point further measures would involve
physical or economic hardships that would render a development project
unfeasible or would be unreasonable in the judgment of a review or decision-
making body.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. Elevation 0.0 as determined by NGVD 29 datum.
   MEDICAL OFFICE (or OUTPATIENT CLINIC). An office or clinic for the private
practice of health care professionals licensed by the state. The majority of
patient encounters in the office or clinic involve examination, diagnosis,
treatment, or surgical procedures on an outpatient basis not extending beyond a
24-hour period. This definition excludes any facilities that have been more
specifically defined in this chapter.
   MEDICAL SERVICES. Any services provided by a licensed medical practitioner.
   MINI-WAREHOUSING. Same definition as SELF-SERVICE STORAGE.
   MINOR STREET. See STREET, MINOR for definition.
   MIXED USE OCCUPANCY. Occupancy of a building or land for more than one use.
   MIXED USE STRUCTURE. A structure containing both residential and
nonresidential uses.
   MODULAR BUILDING UNIT. A building including the necessary electrical,
plumbing, heating, ventilating, and other service systems, manufactured off-
site and transported to the point of use for installation or erection, with or
without other specified components, as a finished building and not designed for
ready removal to another site. A MODULAR BUILDING UNIT must meet the applicable
requirements of the State Modular Buildings Construction Act, being S.C. Code
§§ 23-43-10 et seq. This term is not to be limited to residential dwellings.
   MONUMENT SIGN. See SIGN, MONUMENT for definition.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle that is self-propelled that can be licensed and
registered to be driven on public streets, roads, or rights-of-way, except
mopeds, and every vehicle that is propelled by electric power obtained from
overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails.
   MULCHING OPERATION. An operation that produces mulch. Mulch consists of
organic substances placed on the earth as a protective covering around plants
to retard weed growth and prevent moisture evaporation and freezing of roots.
   MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING. See DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY for definition.
   MUSEUM. A registered non-profit organization displaying, preserving, and/or
exhibiting objects of community and cultural interest in one or more of the
arts and sciences.
   NATURE EXHIBITION. A public display of materials or living things of the
outdoors, including the re-creation of natural wildlife habitats native to the
James Island area. This term does not include facilities, such as zoos, where
the primary purpose is the display of live animals.
   NONALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE BAR. A use engaged in the preparation and retail sale
of nonalcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, where 50% or more of
the gross receipts are for sale of nonalcoholic beverages. This use includes
coffee shops and smoothie bars.
   NON-COMMERCIAL COPY. Material written for informational purposes only. This
material is non-promotional and does not advertise a business or service.
   NONCONFORMING LOT. A tract of land, designated on a duly recorded
subdivision plat or by duly recorded deed or by other lawful means that
complied with the lot area, lot width, and lot depth standards of the zoning
district in which it was located at the time of its creation, but which does
not comply with the minimum lot area, lot width, or lot depth requirements of
the zoning district in which it is now located.
   NONCONFORMING REGISTERED ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADU). An ADU that existed
on or before October 18, 2012, but which no longer complies with the density,
intensity, and dimensional standards of the underlying zoning district, yet has
met the applicable requirements in §
153.362  to be considered a registered and allowed (legal) ADU.
   NONCONFORMING SIGN. A sign that was legally established but which no longer
complies with the sign regulations of §
153.341.
   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE. A building or structure that was legally
established but which no longer complies with the density, intensity, and
dimensional standards of the underlying zoning district.
   NONCONFORMING USE. A use that was legally established but which is no longer
allowed by the use regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.
   NURSERY (PLANT). Same as definition for HORTICULTURAL PRODUCTION.
   OFFICE. Unless the context clearly suggests a more specific meaning, the
term OFFICE shall mean any of the following: government office, administrative
or professional office, or medical office.
   OFFICE OF COASTAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT (OCRM) CRITICAL LINE AREA. This line
is defined by the State Office of Ocean and Coastal Resource Management at the
date of application and determines their jurisdiction.
   OFFICE/WAREHOUSE COMPLEX. A structure or group of structures offering
compartments of varying size for rental to different tenants for the storage of
commercial goods or wares, conducting of certain retail trade activities, or
provision of those personal or business services permitted by zoning.
   OFF-PREMISES SIGN. See SIGN, OFF- PREMISES for definition.
   ON-PREMISES SIGN. See SIGN, ON- PREMISES for definition.
   OPAQUE SCREENING. See SCREENING, OPAQUE for definition.
   OPEN SPACE. An area that is not divided into building lots, streets,
driveways, parking lots, or rights-of-way, is intended to provide light and air
and is designed for either environmental resource protection, wildlife
habitats, scenic views, or recreational purposes as allowed by this chapter.
   OPEN OR FIELD STORAGE. The location of bulk items, assemblies, or sub-
assemblies in areas exposed to weather, in whole or in part, for the end use of
further manufacturing process, sale, or transportation. This shall include, but
not be limited to, open display of transportation vehicles, marine craft,
aircraft, manufactured housing units, modules, recreation vehicles, junkyards,
or “piggy-back” containers. It does not include uses that are totally enclosed.
   OUTDOOR LIVING SPACE. Uncovered, horizontal open space on a zoning lot,
which space:
      (1)   Does not include loading or parking areas, driveways, or refuse
storage area and is so arranged as to prevent entry by motor vehicles;
      (2)   Is paved, landscaped, or otherwise improved to make it suitable for
passive or active outdoor recreational use and, in the case of roofs and
balconies, is so arranged as to be safe for use by children;
      (3)   Is readily accessible to the residents of the building for which it
is required; and
      (4)   May include land, balcony, and roof areas.
   OUTDOOR RECREATION AND ENTERTAINMENT. See RECREATION AND ENTERTAINMENT,
OUTDOOR for definition.
   OUTPATIENT CLINIC. See MEDICAL OFFICE for definition.
   OUTPATIENT FACILITIES FOR CHEMICALLY DEPENDENT OR ADDICTED PERSONS. A
facility licensed by the State Department of Health and Environmental Control
(DHEC) providing specialized nonresidential service for chemically dependent or
addicted persons and their families. The outpatient services are based on an
individual treatment plan in a nonresidential setting including diagnosis,
treatment, individual and group counseling, family therapy, vocational and
educational development counseling, and referral services. (See Standards for
Licensing, S.C. DHEC Regulation 61-93.)
   PARCEL. A contiguous lot or tract of land owned and recorded as the property
of the same person or persons or controlled by a single entity.
   PARKING GARAGE. A building where residents, tourists, customers, or
employees park their motor vehicles on a temporary or daily basis with a
service charge or fee being paid to the owner or operator.
   PARKING LOT. An open area providing off-street parking for the motor
vehicles of residents, tourists, customers, or employees on a temporary, daily,
or overnight basis.
   PARKING, OFF-SITE. The minimum number of required parking spaces for the
existing or proposed use(s) not on the parcel for which the use(s) is located.
   PARKING, ON-SITE. The minimum number of required parking spaces for the
existing or proposed use(s) on the parcel for which the use(s) is located.
   PARKING, REQUIRED. The minimum number of parking spaces for a specific use
(s) as defined in this chapter. REQUIRED PARKING spaces cannot be located
within public rights-of-way.
   PARKING, SHARED. Parking for uses with different operating hours or peak
business periods that share required off-street parking spaces.
   PARKS AND RECREATION. Parks, playgrounds, swimming pools, recreation
facilities, and open space available to the general public, either without a
fee or under the management or control of a public agency.
   PAROLE OR PROBATION OFFICE. An office for those who supervise parolees or
persons placed on probation by a court in criminal proceedings.
   PARTIES IN INTEREST. Any individual, associations, corporations, or others
who have expressed an interest in writing in an application pending before the
Planning/Zoning Department and that has been received by the Zoning
Administrator.
   PAVED STREETS. Those in which the traveled roadway is constructed of a layer
or layers of materials with the surface usually being constructed of portland
cement concrete or asphalt concrete.
   PAVEMENT. The uppermost layer of material placed on the street usually as
the wearing or riding surface. This term is used interchangeably with SURFACE
COURSE or SURFACING and will usually imply portland cement concrete or asphalt
concrete, but may include ROCKING.
   PAWN SHOP. A use engaged in the loaning of money on the security of property
pledged in the keeping of the pawnbroker and the incidental sale of such
property.
   PEDESTAL SIGN. See SIGN, PEDESTAL for definition.
   PENNANTS, STREAMERS, AND OTHER MOVING DEVICES. Pennants, ribbons, streamers,
spinners, light bulbs, or other similar moving devices when part of a sign or
when used to draw attention to a business or its signs.
   PERMANENT STORAGE UNIT. Any manufactured housing unit, modular building
built, or pre-manufactured container unit exceeding 120 square feet in size
that is used solely for nonresidential purposes.
   PERSON. Individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association,
or other legal entity.
   PERSONAL IMPROVEMENT EDUCATION. An establishment primarily engaged in the
provision of information or instruction relating to a particular subject or
hobby. This term excludes any educational services more specifically defined in
this chapter.
   PERSONAL IMPROVEMENT SERVICE. An establishment primarily engaged in the
provision of informational, instructional, personal improvements, or similar
services, excluding any services that have been more specifically defined in
this chapter.
   PET GROOMING SALONS. An establishment primarily engaged in the grooming of
household pets.
   PET, HOUSEHOLD. Domestic animals typically kept for company or enjoyment
within the home. HOUSEHOLD PETS shall include, but not be limited to, domestic
cats, domestic dogs, domestic ferrets, gerbils, guinea pigs, hamsters, domestic
laboratory mice, domestic rabbits, goldfish, canaries, and parrots.
   PET STORE. An establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale of
household pets.
   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The Zoning Administrator of the town or the authorized
designee or representative of the Administrator.
   PLANTS. Includes seed, seedlings, nursery stock, roots, tubers, bulbs,
cuttings, and other plant parts used in the propagation of field crops,
vegetables, fruits, flowers, and other plants.
   PLAT. A diagram drawn to engineer’s scale showing all essential data
pertaining to the boundaries and subdivision of a tract of land as determined
by a professional land surveyor.
   PORTABLE SIGN. See SIGN, PORTABLE for definition.
   POSTAL SERVICE, UNITED STATES. Postal services, including post offices, bulk
mail processing, or sorting centers operated by the United States Postal
Service.
   PRE-MANUFACTURED CONTAINER UNIT. A standardized, reusable vessel that is or
appears to be:
      (1)   Originally, specifically, or formerly designed for or used in the
packing, shipping, movement, or transportation of freight, articles, goods, or
commodities;
      (2)   Designed or capable of being mounted or moved on a rail car; or
      (3)   Designed for or capable of being mounted on a chassis or bogie for
movement by truck trailer or loaded on a ship.
   PRE-SCHOOL. A school with an accredited training program and staffed with
certified teachers for children who are not old enough to attend kindergarten.
   PRESERVED. To remain relatively unchanged. In relation to open space,
PRESERVED shall mean land placed in a conservation easement with a permanent
deed restriction that prohibits further development.
   PRINCIPAL BUILDING. See BUILDING, PRINCIPAL for definition.
   PRINCIPAL USE. The primary or predominant use to which a property is or may
be devoted and to which all other uses on the premises are accessory.
   PROFESSIONAL OFFICE. A use providing professional or consulting services in
the fields of law, architecture, design, engineering, accounting, and similar
professions. This term does not include MEDICAL OFFICE OR CLINIC or PAROLE OR
PROBATION OFFICE.
   PROPERTY OWNERS’ ASSOCIATION. See HOMEOWNERS’ ASSOCIATION for definition.
   PROTECTED TREES. Any oak tree with a diameter breast height (DBH) of 24
inches or greater.
   PUBLIC OR COMMUNITY HEALTH CARE CENTER. A publicly owned facility or not-
for-profit organization providing health services for ambulatory patients.
These centers can include related facilities, such as laboratories, clinics,
and administrative offices typically operated in connection with such care
centers. This term does not include facilities to treat mental health or
substance abuse.
   PUBLIC PROJECT. Any project by or for a public agency using real property,
as owner or tenant, that falls within the jurisdiction of the town. These
public agencies include:
      (1)   Agencies and departments of the state;
      (2)   Counties, and county agencies and departments; and
      (3)   Municipalities, and municipal agencies and departments.
   PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR. The Director of the Department of Public Works of the
town or an authorized representative.
   PUBLICLY DESIGNATED AREA. An area set aside for public use by any federal,
state, or local government.
   RACK. A storage slip for a boat in a dry stack storage facility.
   RAILROAD FACILITY. Railroad yards, equipment servicing facilities, and
terminal facilities.
   REAL ESTATE SIGN. See SIGN, REAL ESTATE for definition.
   REAR LOT LINE. See LOT LINE, REAR for definition.
   REAR SETBACK. See SETBACK, REAR for definition.
   RECREATION AND ENTERTAINMENT, INDOOR. Participatory and spectator-oriented
recreation and entertainment uses conducted within an enclosed building,
excluding any sexually-oriented businesses.
   RECREATION AND ENTERTAINMENT, OUTDOOR. Participatory and spectator-oriented
recreation and entertainment uses conducted in open, partially enclosed, or
screened facilities, excluding any sexually-oriented businesses.
   RECREATION (or VACATION) CAMP. An area or tract of land primarily used for
recreational purposes that retains an open air or natural character.
Accommodations for temporary occupancy, such as cabins and tents, may be
located or placed in these areas. This definition does not include areas for
recreational vehicles or motorized campers.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A highway vehicular, portable structure designed as a
temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, and vacation uses. The term
includes camping trailer, motor home, travel trailer, and truck campers; the
term does not include manufactured housing units.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK. Any lot of land upon which two or more
recreational vehicle sites are located, established, or maintained for
occupancy as temporary living quarters for purposes of recreation n or
vacation. This term does not include any premises on which unoccupied
recreational vehicles, whether new or used, are parked for the purposes of
inspection, sale, storage, or repair.
   RECREATIONAL WATERCRAFT RENTAL. See CHARTER BOAT RENTAL for definition.
   RECYCLING CENTER. An establishment engaged in the processing, collection,
and transfer of recyclable materials. Typical recyclable materials include
glass, paper, plastic, cans, motor oil, or other source-separated, non-
decayable materials.
   RECYCLING COLLECTION (DROP-OFF) FACILITY. A facility used for the collection
and transfer, but not the actual processing, of any of the following recyclable
materials: glass, paper, plastic, cans, or other source-separated, non-
decayable materials. Recyclable materials at a RECYCLING COLLECTION FACILITY
shall not include motor oil, chemicals, household appliances, tires,
automobiles, automobile parts, or decayable materials.
   REHABILITATION FACILITY. A facility operated for the primary purpose of
assisting in the rehabilitation of disabled individuals through an integrated
program of medical, psychological, social, or vocational evaluation and
services under competent professional supervision.
   RELIGIOUS ASSEMBLY. A church, synagogue, temple, monastery, convent, retreat
center, or any permanent or temporary building providing regular, organized
religious worship of any denomination and religious education incidental
thereto, but excluding private primary or secondary educational facilities and
day care facilities. A property tax exemption obtained pursuant to state law
shall constitute prima facie evidence of RELIGIOUS ASSEMBLY use.
   RELOCATED TREES. A protected tree that has been relocated in accordance with
the requirements of this chapter.
   REMNANT PARCEL. A proposed subdivision that has less than the minimum square
footage for the existing zoning district.
   REMODEL. The internal or external alteration or change, in whole or in part,
of a structure or thing that changes its characteristic appearance or the
fundamental purpose of its existing design or arrangement and the uses
contemplated. Not included in this meaning are the terms ENLARGEMENT and
EXTENSION.
   REPAIR. The mending or restoration of a building or structure to a sound or
good state, at or nearest to its original designed condition, due to decay,
dilapidation, damage, or partial destruction. Such work shall not change the
size or shape in whole or in part of a building or structure to expand a use.
It shall include the terms RENOVATION, REBUILDING, and RECONSTRUCTION for
purposes of this chapter.
   REPAIR, MINOR. A repair affecting 25% or less of the gross floor area of a
structure.
   REPAIR SERVICE, COMMERCIAL. An establishment engaged in the repair or
servicing of industrial, business, or consumer machinery, equipment, tools,
scientific or professional instruments, or similar products or by-products.
Firms that service consumer goods do so mainly by providing centralized
services for separate retail outlets.
   REPAIR SERVICE, CONSUMER. An establishment primarily engaged in the
provision of repair services to individuals and households rather than firms,
but excluding vehicle and commercial repair services.
   REPLACEMENT MANUFACTURED HOUSING UNIT. See MANUFACTURED HOUSING UNIT,
REPLACEMENT for definition.
   REQUIRED TREE. Term used to refer, either collectively or separately, to all
trees required to be retained or replaced by §
153.334 including all grand trees, all protected trees, and all trees required
by §
153.335.
   RESIDENTIAL BUILDING OR USE. A RESIDENTIAL BUILDING is a building containing
only residential uses and uses accessory thereto.
   RESIDENTIAL GROUP CARE HOME. See GROUP CARE HOME, RESIDENTIAL for
definition.
   RESIDENTIAL TREATMENT FACILITY FOR CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS. A facility
licensed by the State Department of Health and Environmental Control (DHEC)
operated for the assessment, diagnosis, treatment, and care of two or more
children and/or adolescents in need of mental health treatment. The services
include a special education program, recreational facilities, and residential
treatment. This definition excludes facilities that are appropriately licensed
by the State Department of Social Services. (See S.C. DHEC Regulations 61-103,
Standards for Licensing – Residential Treatment Facilities for Children and
Adolescents.)
   RESOURCE EXTRACTION. The on-site extraction of surface or sub-surface
mineral products or natural resources.
   RESPONSIBLE ENTITY. Either:
      (1)   The unit of local government responsible under state law for the
maintenance of the roadway; or
      (2)   In the case of private roadways (non-publicly maintained), the
owner of the property on which the roadway is located, or if existing, a
homeowners’ association previously created to maintain the roadway.
   RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD. An establishment that offers quick food service,
which is accomplished through a limited menu of items already prepared and held
for service or prepared, fried or griddled quickly or heated in a device such
as a microwave oven.
      (1)   A FAST-FOOD RESTAURANT generally has one or more of the following
characteristics:
         (a)   It serves ready-to-eat foods, frozen desserts, or beverages in
edible or paper, plastic, or disposable containers;
         (b)   It serves foods that customers carry to the restaurant’s seating
facilities, to motor vehicles, or off-premises; or
         (c)   It serves foods through a pass-through window, which includes
any and all drive-in restaurants.
      (2)   Alcoholic beverages shall not comprise more than 25% of gross
receipts.
   RESTAURANT, GENERAL. An establishment engaged in the preparation and retail
sale of food and beverages for on-premises consumption, where the sales of
alcoholic beverages do not comprise more than 25% of gross receipts. This
definition does not include fast-food restaurants.
   RETAIL SALES AND SERVICE, GENERAL. An establishment primarily engaged in the
sale of new or used products to the general public, but excluding those
establishments more specifically defined in this chapter.
   RETIREMENT HOUSING. The use of a site for one or more dwelling units
designed for independent living and marketed specifically for the elderly or
persons with physical disabilities or both.
   RETIREMENT HOUSING, LIMITED. The use of an existing dwelling unit for
independent living and marketed specifically for the elderly or persons with
physical disabilities or both, with ten or fewer residents.
   REVIEW BODY. The entity that is authorized to recommend approval or denial
of an application or permit required under this chapter.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. Land that has been, or is being, dedicated for the
construction and maintenance of a street. RIGHT-OF-WAY may also be used to
identify an area dedicated for use as part of a drainage system or utility
corridor.
   ROADSIDE STAND. A small open air structure for the retail sale of sweetgrass
baskets or indigenous produce grown or produced on the farm where the
   ROADSIDE STAND is located. This definition does not include farmers markets.
   ROADWAY. The entire are between the outside limits of construction,
including appertaining structures, all slopes, ramps, intersections, drive and
side ditches, channels, waterways, and the like, necessary for proper drainage.
This term shall, in general, be considered synonymous with STREET or ROAD.
   ROCK ROAD. Those in which the traveled roadway is constructed of compacted
rock material creating a rock driving surface.
   ROOF SIGN. See SIGN, ROOF for definition.
   ROOMING HOUSE. A residential building other than a hotel-motel in which
rooms are provided for compensation for three or more, but not exceeding 20
adult persons, not related by blood, marriage, or adoption to the owner. The
rooms must be booked by pre-arrangement for definite periods of time on either
a weekly or monthly basis.
   RURAL AREA. The area designated as the “rural area” in the Comprehensive
Plan.
   SAFETY SERVICE. Facilities for the conduct of public safety and emergency
services.
   SCENIC ROAD. A road or highway designated scenic by the town or by the
state.
   SCHOOL, PRIMARY. A public, private, or parochial school offering instruction
at the elementary school level in the branches of learning and study required
to be taught in the public schools of the state.
   SCHOOL, SECONDARY. A public, private, or parochial school offering
instruction at the middle (junior) and senior high school levels in the
branches of learning and study required to be taught in the public schools of
the state.
   SCRAP AND SALVAGE SERVICE (or JUNK YARD). An establishment primarily engaged
in the storage, retail or wholesale, assembling, dismantling, sorting,
distributing, or other processing of scrap,  used equipment, mechanical
components, or waste materials.
   SCREENING (ELEMENTS). Various combinations of walls, fences, earthen berms,
trees, shrubbery, and landscape materials which comprise a screening plan
approved by the Zoning Administrator to fulfill the requirements and serve the
purposes of §
153.335.
   SCREENING, OPAQUE. A combination of screening elements, approved by the
Zoning Administrator, designed to substantially or completely obscure
horizontal views between abutting or adjacent properties. When plant materials
are used for screening, the screening shall be opaque at the time of plant
maturity.
   SCREENING, SEMI-OPAQUE. A combination of screening elements in compliance
with the requirements of §
153.335 designed to partially obscure horizontal views between abutting or
adjacent properties.
   SELF-SERVICE STORAGE or MINI- STORAGE. Storage services primarily for
personal effects and household goods within enclosed storage areas having
individual access, but excluding use as workshops, hobby shops, manufacturing,
or commercial activity.
   SEMI-OPAQUE SCREENING. See SCREENING, SEMI-OPAQUE for definition.
   SERVICE STATION. See GASOLINE SERVICE STATION for definition.
   SETBACK. A required minimum distance from a lot line or street right-of-way
that establishes an area within which a structure shall not be erected.
   SETBACK, FRONT. The setback measured from a street right-of-way.
   SETBACK, INTERIOR. The setback measured from any interior lot line.
   SETBACK, OCRM CRITICAL LINE. The setback measured from the critical line, as
determined  by the Office of Ocean and Coastal Resource Management at the time
of application.
   SETBACK, REAR. The setback measured from the rear lot line or from the
Office of Ocean and Coastal Resources Management critical line if the rear lot
line is not located on high ground.
   SETBACK, SIDE. Any setback other than a rear or front setback.
   SETTLEMENT AREAS. The areas designated as “settlement areas” by the adopted
Town Comprehensive Plan.
   SEWAGE COLLECTION SERVICE LINE. A non-lateral line connecting development to
a sewage collector or trunk line.
   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS. Definitions provided in §
153.138(C).
   SHRUB. A self-supporting perennial plant of low stature characterized by
multiple stems and branches running continuous from the base.
   SIDE LOT LINE. See LOT LINE, SIDE for definition.
   SIDE SETBACK. See SETBACK, SIDE for definition.
   SIGN. Any device or visual communication that is used to announce, direct
attention, inform, or advertise to the public.
   SIGN, ABANDONED. A sign advertising a person, business, service, event, or
other activity that is no longer available or a sign containing inaccurate or
outdated information.
   SIGN, ANIMATED. Any sign so designed as to facilitate or permit the
rotation, oscillation, or other movement of the sign or of any of its visible
parts.
   SIGN, AREA OF. The entire area within a continuous perimeter, enclosing the
extreme limits of sign display, including any frame or border. Curved,
spherical, or any other shaped sign face shall be computed on the basis of
actual surface area. The AREA OF SIGNS composed of individual letters,
numerals, or other devices shall be the sum of the area of the smallest
rectangle or other geometric figure encompassing each of said letters or
devices. Area devoted to required house numbers shall not be included in the
calculation of maximum sign area. The calculation for a double-faced sign shall
be the area of one face only. Double-faced signs shall be constructed so that
both faces are either parallel or have an interior angle of less than 90
degrees and the two faces shall not be more than 12 inches apart.
   SIGN, BONA FIDE AGRICULTURAL USE. A sign specifically used for the
advertisement of products from bona fide agricultural uses, related activities,
and farm identification that meets the requirements of this chapter.
   SIGN, FLASHING. Any lighted or electrical sign that emits light in sudden
transitory bursts. For purposes of this chapter, strobe lights in window fronts
visible from public rights-of-way are included in this definition. On/off time
and temperature signs and message boards are not considered FLASHING SIGNS for
the purpose of this chapter.
   SIGN, FREE-STANDING. A sign supported by a sign structure secured in the
ground and which is wholly independent of any building, other than the sign
structure, for support. A sign on a fence shall be considered a FREE-STANDING
SIGN.
   SIGN, HEIGHT OF. The vertical distance measured from ground level at the
base of the sign structure to the highest point of sign structure.
   SIGN, ILLUMINATED. A sign designed to give forth artificial light or to
reflect artificial light from a source incorporated in or associated with such
sign.
   SIGN IMITATING TRAFFIC DEVICES (SIGNALS). Signs of such size, location,
movement, content, coloring, or of a manner of illumination that could be
confused with or construed to be traffic control devices or hide from view any
traffic or street signal or obstruct the view in any direction from a street
intersection.
   SIGN IMITATING TRAFFIC SIGNS. Signs that imitate official traffic signs or
signals or signs that contain the words “stop,” “go,” “danger,” “slow,”
“caution,” “warning,” or similar words in such a fashion as to imitate official
traffic signs or signals.
   SIGN IN DISREPAIR. Any sign that contains damaged or defective parts or
otherwise presents an unsightly appearance due to lack of maintenance.
   SIGN IN MARSHES. Signs erected or displayed in a marsh area or on land
subject to periodic inundation by tidal action.
   SIGN, LED (LIGHT EMITTING DIODE) MESSAGE BOARD. An electronic portion of a
free- standing sign that channels light through tubes to create patterns that
can produce changing display. LED SIGNS must comply with all regulations of
this chapter.
   SIGN, MONUMENT. A free-standing sign with a sign (support) structure that:
      (1)   Is designed as one architecturally unified and proportional element
with the sign itself;
      (2)   Is at least 90% of the width of the sign face; and
      (3)   Is solid from grade at the base of the sign to the top of the sign
structure.
   SIGN, NONCONFORMING. See NONCONFORMING SIGN for definition.
   SIGN, OFF-PREMISES. Any sign located or proposed to be located at any place
other than within the same platted parcel of land on which the specific
business or activity being identified on such sign is itself located or
conducted.
   SIGN, ON-PREMISES. A sign which directs attention to a business or
profession conducted or to a principal commodity, service, or entertainment
sold or offered on the premises where such sign is located.
   SIGN, PEDESTAL. A free-standing sign with a sign (support) structure that:
      (1)   Is designed as one architecturally unified and proportional element
with the sign itself;
      (2)   Is at least 50% of the width of the sign face; and
      (3)   Is solid from grade at the base of the sign to the top of the sign
structure.
   SIGN, PORTABLE. Signs which usually rest on the ground on wheels or metal
legs and may be temporarily anchored by weights and/or cables attached to
stakes driven into the ground.
   SIGN, REAL ESTATE. Temporary sign advertising the real property upon which
the sign is located for rent or lease or sale; advertising a business or
businesses to be located on the premises; or advertising the architect,
contractor, developer, finance organization, sub-contractor, or material vendor
upon which property such individual is furnishing labor, services, or material.
   SIGN, ROOF. Any sign erected upon, against, or directly above a roof or roof
eave or on or above any architectural appendage above the roof or roof eave.
   SIGN, SANDWICH BOARD. A sign not secured or attached to the ground or
surface upon which it is located, but supported by its own frame and most often
forming the cross-sectional shape of the letter “A” when viewed from the side.
   SIGN, SHARED FREE-STANDING. A free-standing sign shared by one or more
businesses or residential developments on separate parcels that also share a
common property boundary or are located within an approved multi parcel
development. One shared sign is allowed per jointly used shared curb cut/entry
drive with an allowable maximum of two shared signs per multi-tenant
development.
   SIGN, SNIPE. A non-permitted sign pasted or attached to utility poles,
trees, fences, or other locations, or a non-permitted sign posted in the
ground.
   SIGN, SPECIAL SALES EVENT. A temporary sign advertising a special sales
event on a parcel with a legally established business. A temporary SPECIAL
SALES EVENT SIGN may be obtained for a maximum of five special sales events per
calendar year with each event not to exceed ten consecutive days.
   SIGN, TEMPORARY. Signs that are not permanently attached to a building,
other structure, or the ground and do not meet structural standards recognized
and enforced by the Town Building Inspection Department.
   SIGN, VEHICLE. A permanent or temporary sign affixed, painted on, or placed
in or upon any parked vehicle, parked trailer, or other parked device capable
of being towed, which is displayed to attract the attention of the motoring
public or pedestrian traffic.
   SIGN, WALL/FACADE. A sign painted on or attached to the outside of a
building and erected parallel to the face of a building and supported
throughout its length by such building.
   SILVACULTURE. The cultivation of a forest for the purpose of harvesting
timber.
   SINGLE-FAMILY, ATTACHED. The use of a site for two or more dwelling units,
constructed with common or abutting walls and each located on a separate lot.
Also known as TOWNHOUSES or ROW HOUSES.
   SINGLE-FAMILY, DETACHED. The use of a site for only one dwelling unit, other
than a manufactured housing unit, that is not attached to any other dwelling
unit.
   SINGLE-FAMILY, DETACHED (AFFORDABLE). See § 153.139 for definition.
   SINGLE-FAMILY, DETACHED/ MANUFACTURED HOUSING UNIT (JOINT USE). The use of a
site for one detached single-family dwelling unit and one manufactured housing
unit.
   SMALL ANIMAL BOARDING. An establishment primarily engaged in the boarding of
household pets within an enclosed building.
   SNIPE SIGN. See SIGN, SNIPE for definition.
   SOCIAL CLUB or LODGE. A building, structure, or grounds, or portion thereof,
which is owned by or leased to private organizations, social clubs, or non-
profit associations for meeting, recreational, or social purposes. The use of
such premises is restricted to the members of these organizations and their
guests.
   SOCIAL OR CIVIC ORGANIZATION. An establishment providing meeting,
recreational, or social facilities for a non-profit association, primarily for
use by members and guests of youth organizations, fraternal organizations, and
other similar groups. This use does not include any type of residential
facility, such as fraternity or sorority houses.
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY (PUBLIC OR PRIVATE). All land, structures,
other appurtenances, and improvements on the land used for treating, storing,
or disposing of solid waste. A SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY may consist of
several treatment, storage, or disposal operational units, including, but not
limited to, one or more landfills, surface impoundments, or combination
thereof.
   SPECIAL EVENT. An activity (occurring one or more times) involving the
assembly or the intention of attracting 100 or more people for cultural,
ceremonial, educational, or celebratory purposes, or any special event held on
town property, regardless of number in attendance. Such assembly includes, but
is not limited to: weddings, receptions, recitals, art exhibits, religious
ceremonies, limited youth activities, book readings, wine/food tasting events,
executive retreats, circuses, fairs, carnivals, festivals, auctions, concerts,
and any event which is advertised or marketed in any form including, but not
limited to: posters, business cards, internet, and media outlets; serves an
entrepreneurial purpose; includes fees/charges for goods/services (e.g., food
and drink);  and whenever there is an admission fee or leasing fee. Private
parties held on private residential property are exempt from this definition.
   SPECIAL EXCEPTION. An exception issued by the Board of Zoning Appeals
authorizing a particular use in a specified location within a zoning district,
upon demonstrating that such use complies with all the conditions and standards
specified by the Zoning and Land Development Regulations.
   SPECIAL TRADE CONTRACTOR. An establishment that specializes in a specific
aspect of construction, such as carpentry, electrical, painting, plumbing,
roofing, or tile.
   STABLE. A building or land where horses are kept for private or commercial
use including boarding, sale, rental, breeding, or raising of horses.
   STANDARD CUBIC FOOT (SCF). A cubic foot of gas at standard temperature and
pressure, which are 68°F and 29.92 inches of mercury.
   STREET. A vehicular way which may also serve in part as a way for pedestrian
traffic, whether called a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway,
road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, alley, mall, or otherwise designated,
including the entire area within the right-of-way.
   STREET, ARTERIAL. A street used primarily or designed to conduct traffic
between communities and activity centers and to connect communities to major
state and interstate highways. An ARTERIAL is a primary road characterized by
high traffic volumes and high speeds.
   STREET, COLLECTOR. A street used or designed to carry traffic from minor
streets to arterial or major streets for purposes of this chapter. Such streets
include those designated as collectors in any comprehensive plan or element
thereof officially adopted.
   STREET LINE. A lot line separating a street from a lot.
   STREET, MINOR. A street, other than an arterial street or collector street,
used or designated primarily to provide access to abutting property. The term
includes marginal access streets which are generally parallel and adjacent to
arterial streets, serve abutting properties and provide protection from
friction with through traffic. The term MINOR STREET includes loop streets and
cul-de-sac streets.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. See ALTERATION, STRUCTURAL for definition.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more
or less permanent location on the ground or which is attached to something
having a more or less permanent location on the ground.
   STUB STREET. A street that intersects with another local street and extends,
usually one lot deep, to the property line of the development or rear of the
block being developed.
   SUBDIVISION. All divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more
lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of sale, lease, or building development, and includes all division of
land involving a new street or change in existing streets, and includes re-
subdivision which would involve the further division or relocation of lot lines
of any lot or lots within a SUBDIVISION previously made and approved or
recorded according to law; or the alteration of any streets or the
establishment of any new streets within any SUBDIVISION previously made and
approved or recorded according to law and includes combination of lots of
record.
   SUB-GRADE. The top surface of a roadbed upon which the roadway structure and
shoulders are constructed.
   SUBJECT PROPERTY. Property, which may or may not include one or more tax
parcels, or the total area impacted by a specific use, e.g., utility service
area, facility, easement, or right-of-way. In the case of a utility trunk or
service line, the SUBJECT PROPERTY, for the purpose of posted notice, shall be
the entire distance or length of the trunk or main line right-of-way or
easement and shall be treated as one SUBJECT PROPERTY.
   SUBSTANDARD LOT. A proposed or existing lot of record having less than the
minimum requirements for the existing zoning district.
   SUBURBAN AREA. The area designated as the “suburban area” in the adopted
Town Comprehensive Plan.
   SWEETGRASS BASKET STAND. An open air stand that sells handmade baskets from
locally grown sweetgrass. SWEETGRASS BASKET STANDS shall be limited to a 500
square foot covered area.
   TATTOO or TATTOOING. To indelibly mark or color the skin by subcutaneous
introduction of nontoxic dyes or pigments. The practice of TATTOOING does not
include the removal of tattoos, nor the practice of branding, cutting,
scarification, skin braiding, or the mutilation of any part of the body.
   TATTOO FACILITY. Any room, space, location, area, structure, or business, or
any part of any of these places where tattooing is practiced or where the
business of tattooing is conducted and which is licensed by the Department
(S.C. DHEC) as a tattoo facility.
   TATTOO PARLOR. Any place where a person obtains or seeks to obtain injected
art designs on his or her skin. This includes body piercing establishments or
businesses. These are only allowed in industrial (I) zoned properties within
the town.
   TEMPORARY PORTABLE STORAGE UNIT. Any structure that is used for storage that
is portable and does not have a door or other entranceway into a dwelling unit
and that does not have water fixtures within its confines, the use of which is
limited solely to storage of inanimate objects.
   TEMPORARY SIGN. See SIGN, TEMPORARY for definition.
   TENANT DWELLING. A dwelling located on a bona fide farm and which is
occupied or designed to be occupied by a non-transient farm worker employed by
the owner or operator of the farm.
   THROUGH LOT. See LOT, DOUBLE- FRONTAGE for definition.
   TRADE SCHOOL. See BUSINESS SCHOOL for definition.
   TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD DESIGN. Development designs intended to enhance the
appearance and functionality of the new development so that it functions like a
traditional neighborhood or town. These designs make possible reasonably high
residential densities, a mixture of residential and commercial land uses, a
range of single and multi-family housing types, and street connectivity both
within the new development and to surrounding roadways, pedestrian and bicycle
features.
   TRANSITIONAL HOUSING. A facility providing supervision or detention, or
both, for residents making the transition from institutional to community
living. This classification includes pre-parole detention facilities and
halfway houses for juvenile delinquents and adult offenders. This
classification also includes overnight shelters for the homeless and emergency
shelters during crisis intervention for victims of crime, abuse, or neglect.
   TREE. Any self-supporting woody plant having a single trunk or trunks of two
inches DBH or greater and usually having branches.
   TREE PROTECTION FENCING. A fence or wall at least four feet in height that
ensures the protection of protected and grand trees during development.
   TRUCK STOP. Any building, premises, or land in which or upon which a
business, service, or industry involving the maintenance, servicing, storage,
or repair of commercial vehicles is conducted or rendered, including the
dispensing of motor fuels or other petroleum products directly into motor
vehicles and the sale of accessories or equipment for trucks and similar
commercial vehicles. Any overnight accommodations and restaurant facilities
primarily for the use of truck crews shall be considered as a separate use and
shall follow the use requirements for that particular use as provided for in
this chapter.
   UNDER-STORY TREES. A tree, ten to 12 feet tall at the time of planting,
which will grow to a minimum height of 20 feet at maturity.
   USE PERMITTED BY RIGHT. A principal use permitted without the requirement of
a special exception.
   UTILITY. A provider of electricity, gas, water, sewage service, telephone,
cable, or other similar service for principal development and the provider of
the service is publicly regulated.
   UTILITY SERVICE, MAJOR. Facilities and structures that are necessary for the
generation, transmission, and/or distribution of utilities to support principal
development, such as generation facilities, electrical and telephone switching
facilities, electric substations, pumping stations, sewage collection or
disposal facilities, water or sewage treatment plants, water storage tanks,
sewage collector or trunk lines, water mains, and similar facilities.
   UTILITY SERVICE, MINOR. Minor structures, such as lines and poles, that are
necessary to distribute utilities and provide service.
   VACATION CAMP. See RECREATION CAMP for definition.
   VARIANCE. A relaxation by the Board of Zoning Appeals of the dimensional
regulations of the chapter where such action will not be contrary to the public
interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the
results of actions or the situation of the applicant, a literal enforcement of
this code would result in unnecessary and undue hardship and such variance is
consistent with S.C. Code § 6-29-800 of S.C. Code Title 6, Chapter 29.
   VEHICLE RENTAL AND LEASING. The rental or leasing of automobiles, light or
medium trucks, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, or utility trailers,
including incidental storage, maintenance, and servicing. This use does not
include boats or other watercraft.
   VEHICLE REPAIR, CONSUMER. An establishment that primarily provides service
to automobiles, light and medium trucks, motorcycles, or recreational vehicles.
These services include the maintenance, repair, or refinishing of motor
vehicles, including both minor and major mechanical overhauling, paint, and
body work. Generally the customer does not wait at the site while the service
or repair is being performed. This term excludes any dismantling or scrap and
salvage service.
   VEHICLE SALES. The sale of automobiles, light or medium trucks, motorcycles,
recreational vehicles, or boats, including incidental storage, maintenance, and
servicing.
   VEHICLE SERVICE, LIMITED. An establishment that provides direct services to
motor vehicles where the driver or passengers generally wait in the vehicle or
nearby while the service is performed.
   VEHICLE SIGN. See SIGN, VEHICLE for definition.
   VEHICLE STORAGE. An establishment offering long- or short-term storage of
operating vehicles or vehicles contracted for repair. This term excludes any
dismantling, scrap, and salvage service or junked vehicle yards.
   VESTED RIGHT. A property right of ownership as defined by the S.C. Code of
Laws.
   VETERINARY SERVICE. An establishment offering veterinary services and
hospitals for animals.
   VIBRATION. The periodic displacement or oscillation of the earth.
   WALL or FENCE. A structural device erected to serve as an architectural
element, landscape element, visual screen, or physical barrier.
   WALL/FACADE SIGN. See SIGN, WALL/ FACADE for definition.
   WAREHOUSE AND DISTRIBUTION FACILITY. An establishment engaged in the storage
or movement of goods, such as manufactured products, supplies, equipment, or
food. This term excludes bulk storage of materials that are inflammable or
explosive or that create hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions.
Goods are generally delivered to other firms or the final consumer, except for
some will-call pickups. There is little on-site sales activity with the
customer present.
   WASTE-RELATED USE. Uses that collect or receive solid or liquid waste for
disposal, treatment, transfer to another location, or production of energy from
the waste. This term does not include uses otherwise defined as utilities.
   WATER SERVICE LINE. A non-lateral line connecting development to a water
main.
   WATERFRONT (PROPERTY). Property within 500 feet of any river, tidal wetland
or waterway, including saltwater marshes. Property abutting freshwater wetlands
shall not be considered WATERFRONT PROPERTY.
   WETLAND BUFFER. See BUFFER, WETLAND for definition.
   WETLANDS, FRESHWATER. Those areas of land that are inundated or saturated by
fresh water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support
and that, under normal circumstances, do support a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions and delineated as
freshwater wetlands by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
   WHOLESALE SALES. An establishment engaged in the wholesale sale of products
primarily
intended for industrial, institutional, or commercial businesses. The uses
emphasize on-site sales or order taking and often include display areas.
Businesses may or may not be open to the general public, but sales to the
general public are limited. Products may be picked up on-site or delivered to
the customer.
   WINERY. An agricultural processing facility used for the commercial purpose
of processing grapes, other fruit products, or vegetables to produce wine or
wine related spirits, excluding beer and liquor. Processing includes wholesale
sales, crushing, fermenting, blending, aging, storage, bottling, administrative
office functions for the winery, and warehousing. Retail sales and tasting
facilities of wine and related promotional items and winery tours may be
permitted as part of the WINERY operations.
   WINE-TASTING ROOM. An area limited to 1,500 square feet that is devoted to
the sampling and sales thereof of wine produced on or off the premises. Sale of
food is prohibited; however, incidental provision of food without compensation
is allowed.
   WRITTEN INTERPRETATION. Any review or evaluation by the Zoning
Administrator, in written form, concerning the Town Zoning and Land Development
Regulations, Comprehensive Plan, or any other relevant documents.
   WRITTEN NOTICE. Notice may be sent via U.S. mail or email.
   ZONING DISTRICT. A specifically delineated geographic area or zone in the
town within which uniform development regulations and requirements govern the
use, density, and the placement, spacing, or size of buildings.
   ZONING LOT. See LOT, ZONING for definition.
   ZONING MAP. A graphical representation of zoning districts by color or
shading adopted by the Planning Commission to demonstrate the various zoning
districts approved for the town.
   ZONING PERMIT. A permit issued by the Town Planning/Zoning Department that
acknowledges that the intended land use, structure, building or construction
complies with the provisions of the Zoning and Land Development Regulations or
authorized variance therefrom. A ZONING PERMIT shall be required prior to the
activities described in §
153.047(A) of this code.
   ZOO. A facility where live animals are kept for display.
(Ord. 2012-06, §§ 12.1 and 12.2, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-11, passed 8-15-
2013; Ord. 2018-14, passed 12-20-2018; Ord. 2019-01, passed 5-16-2019; Ord.
2023-04, passed 5-18-2023; Ord. 2024-04, passed 6-20-2024; Ord. 2025-02, passed
3-20-2025; Ord. 2025-10, passed 11-20-2025)
§ 153.014 PLANNING AND ZONING FEE SCHEDULE.
   The planning and zoning fee schedule shall be set and amended by resolution
of the Town Council.
(Ord. 2013-05, passed 6-20-2013; Ord. 2018-14, passed 12-20-2018; Ord. 2025-05,
passed 6-19-2025)
REVIEW AND DECISION-MAKING AUTHORITY
§ 153.025 TOWN COUNCIL.
   (A)   Review authority. The Town Council does not act in a review or
recommending capacity.
   (B)   Decision-making authority. The Town Council shall have final (local)
decision-making authority on the following matters:
      (1)   Comprehensive Plan amendments;
      (2)   Zoning and Land Development Regulations text amendments;
      (3)   Zoning map amendments (rezonings);
      (4)   Planned development (PD) development plans and PD zoning map
amendments; and
      (5)   Acceptance of public dedications (offered as part of subdivision
plat process and/or by deed).
(Ord. 2012-06, § 2.1, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2012-21, passed 12-20-2012)
§ 153.026 PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Review authority. The Planning Commission acts in a review and
recommending capacity on the following matters:
      (1)   Comprehensive Plan amendments;
      (2)   Zoning and Land Development Regulations text amendments;
      (3)   Zoning map amendments (rezonings); and
      (4)   Planned development (PD) development plans and PD zoning map
amendments.
   (B)   Decision-making authority. The Planning Commission shall have final
(local) decision-making authority on the following matters:
      (1)   Preliminary subdivision plats; Planning Commission may delegate
final plat review and approval to the planning staff;
      (2)   Public project review;
      (3)   Appeals of administrative decisions on final subdivision plats;
      (4)   Appeals of administrative decisions on subdivision matters;
      (5)   Names of new streets and roads;
      (6)   Requests for street name changes; and
      (7)   Any other matters pursuant to S.C. Code§ 6-29-340, as amended.
   (C)   Officers, rules, meetings, and minutes. Pursuant to S.C. Code§§ 6-29-
350 and 6-29-360, the Planning Commission shall elect one of its members as
chairperson and one as vice-chairperson whose terms must be for one year. It
shall appoint a secretary who may be an officer or an employee of the governing
authority or of the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall adopt
rules of organizational procedure and shall keep a record of its resolutions,
findings, and determinations, which record must be a public record. The
Planning Commission shall meet at the call of the chairperson and at such times
as the chairperson or Commission may determine. The Planning Commission may
purchase equipment and supplies and may employ or contract for such staff and
such experts as it considers necessary and consistent with funds appropriated.
   (D)   Composition. The Planning Commission shall consist of five members
appointed by the Town Council for terms of four years each; provided, however,
that, of the initial members of the Planning Commission, two members shall be
appointed for two- year terms and three members shall be appointed for four-
year terms. Members shall serve until their successors are appointed and
qualified. Any vacancy which may occur on the Planning Commission shall be
filled by Town Council appointing a successor to serve out the un-expired term
of the vacancy. In appointing members to the Planning Commission, the Town
Council shall consider their professional expertise, knowledge of the
community, and concern for the future welfare of the total community and its
citizens. The membership of the Planning Commission should represent a broad
cross-section of the interests and concerns within the town. All Planning
Commission members shall reside within the municipal jurisdiction of the town.
No member of the Planning Commission may hold any elected public office.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 2.2, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2012-21, passed 12-20-2012; Ord.
2014-01, passed 2-20-2014)
§ 153.027 BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.
   (A)   Review authority. The Board of Zoning Appeals does not act in a review
or recommending capacity.
   (B)   Decision-making authority. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have
final decision-making authority on the following matters:
      (1)   Special exceptions;
      (2)   Variances; and
      (3)   Appeals of administrative decisions on zoning-related matters.
   (C)   Officers, rules, meetings, and minutes. Pursuant to S.C. Code § 6-29-
360, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall elect one of its members as chair who
shall serve for one year or until re-election or a successor is elected and
qualified. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall adopt rules and procedures in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter not inconsistent with the
provisions of S.C. Code Title 6, Chapter 29, as amended. The Board of Zoning
Appeals shall appoint a secretary. The secretary may be an employee of the
town. Meetings of the Board shall be at the call of the chair and at such other
times as the Board of Zoning Appeals may determine. Public notice of all
meetings of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be provided by publication in a
newspaper of general circulation in the town. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall
keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each
question or if absent or failing to vote. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall
maintain records of its examinations and official actions, all of which, upon
approval, shall be filed immediately in the office of the Zoning Administrator.
Such records shall be available for public review and inspection during normal
business hours.
   (D)   Composition. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall consist of five members
appointed by the Town Council for terms of four years each; provided, however,
that, of the initial members of the Board of Zoning Appeals, three members
shall be appointed for four-year terms and two members shall be appointed for
two-year terms. Members shall serve until their successors are appointed and
qualified. Any vacancy which may occur on the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be
filled by the Town Council appointing a successor to serve out the un-expired
term of the vacancy. In appointing members to the Board of Zoning Appeals, the
Town Council shall consider their professional expertise, knowledge of the
community, and concern for the future welfare of the total community and its
citizens. All members of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall reside within the
municipal jurisdiction of the town. No member of the Board of Zoning Appeals
may hold an elected public office.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 2.3, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2012-21, passed 12-20-2012; Ord.
2014-01, passed 2-20-2014)
§ 153.028 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Review authority. The Zoning Administrator shall act in review
capacity on the following matters:
      (1)   Comprehensive Plan amendments;
      (2)   Zoning and Land Development Regulations text amendments;
      (3)   Zoning map amendments (rezonings);
      (4)   Planned development (PD) development plans and PD zoning map
amendments;
      (5)   Subdivision plats;
      (6)   Special exceptions, variances and appeals; and
      (7)   Public project review.
   (B)   Decision-making authority. The Zoning Administrator shall have final
(local) decision-making authority on the following matters:
      (1)   Written interpretations;
      (2)   Zoning permits;
      (3)   Final minor subdivision plats; and
      (4)   Court-ordered subdivision plats.
   (C)   Other powers and duties. The Zoning Administrator shall have the
following powers and duties in addition to those otherwise set out under this
chapter:
      (1)   Maintaining permanent and current records of this chapter
including, but not limited to, all zoning maps, amendments, special exceptions,
variances, appeals, and applications thereof and records of hearings thereon.
Such records shall be open to public inspection during business hours;
      (2)   Providing such clerical, technical, and consultative assistance as
may be required by the Board of Zoning Appeals, Planning Commission, and other
boards, commissions, and officials in the exercise of their duties relating to
this chapter;
      (3)   Enforcing all provisions of this chapter;
      (4)   Maintaining a record of all applications for zoning permits,
including all plats and plans submitted therewith, which record shall be open
to public inspection during business hours;
      (5)   Conducting or causing inspections of structures, land, and the uses
thereof to determine compliance with this chapter;
      (6)   Receiving, filing, and forwarding to the Board of Zoning Appeals
the records of all appeals and variances;
      (7)   Receiving, filing, and forwarding to the Board of Zoning Appeals
all applications for special exceptions; and
      (8)   Reviewing, approving, and issuing administrative permits as
authorized by this chapter and maintain records of these permits.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 2.4, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2012-21, passed 12-20-2012)
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES
§ 153.040 GENERAL; APPLICATIONS, NOTICE, DECISIONS, HEARINGS.
   (A)   General. The general provisions of this section apply to all
development applications and procedures under this chapter unless otherwise
stated.
   (B)   Authority to file applications. Applications for review and approval
under this chapter may be initiated by:
      (1)   Petition of all the owners of the property that is the subject of
the application;
      (2)   The owners’ authorized agents; or
      (3)   Review and decision-making bodies.
   (C)   Form of application. Applications required under this chapter shall be
submitted in a format and in such numbers as required by the official
responsible for accepting the application. Application submittal requirements
and format information shall be available to the public in the Planning/Zoning
Department.
   (D)   Filing fees. Applications shall be accompanied by the fee amount that
has been established by the Town Council for the respective type of
application. Fees shall not be required for applications initiated by
authorized review or decision-making bodies.
   (E)   Application completeness and submission deadlines.
      (1)   Applications required under this chapter shall be considered
complete only if they are submitted in the required format, include all
mandatory information and are accompanied by the established fee.
      (2)   Applications for consideration by the Board of Zoning Appeals shall
be submitted no later than 12:00 p.m. on the Friday, four weeks prior to the
regularly scheduled Board of Zoning Appeals meeting, unless otherwise provided
in this chapter or as directed by the Chairperson of the Board of Zoning
Appeals. Application filing deadlines and Board of Zoning Appeals meeting dates
are available at the Planning/Zoning Department. Within 15 days of submittal of
the application, staff will determine if the application is complete and can be
scheduled for the next available Board of Zoning Appeals meeting. The
requirements for applications deemed incomplete by the Zoning Administrator are
listed in division (E)(4) below.
      (3)   Applications for consideration by the Planning Commission shall be
submitted no later than 12:00 p.m. on the Friday, six weeks prior to the
regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting, unless otherwise provided in
this chapter or as directed by the Chairperson of the Planning Commission.
Application filing deadlines and Planning Commission meeting dates are
available at the Planning/Zoning Department. Within 15 days of submittal of the
application, staff will determine if the application is complete and can be
scheduled for the next available Planning Commission meeting. The requirements
for applications deemed incomplete by the Zoning Administrator are listed in
division (E)(4) below.
      (4)   Any application that is determined to be incomplete shall, within
15 days of its submittal, be returned to the applicant along with an
explanation of the application’s deficiencies. Fees shall not be refunded. No
further processing of the application shall occur until the deficiencies are
corrected. Once the deficiencies are corrected, the application may be
resubmitted without the payment of additional fees, provided that it is
resubmitted within six months of the date that the application was returned to
the applicant. Applications resubmitted more than six months after the date
that the application was returned as incomplete shall require repayment of
applicable fees.
   (F)   Application submittal. Whenever the procedures of this chapter
expressly state that applications are to be submitted after a “pre-application
conference,” applicants shall be responsible for scheduling and attending such
meetings. When pre-application conferences are required, an application shall
not be accepted until the pre-application conference has been conducted and any
errors or omissions noted in review of the application for completeness have
been addressed by the applicant.
   (G)   Notices.
      (1)   Content.
         (a)   All notices, with the exception of posted notices, required
under this chapter shall:
            1.   Indicate the date, time, and place of the public hearing or
date of action that is the subject of the notice;
            2.   Describe the property involved in the application by street
address and, if required, by legal description;
            3.   Describe the nature, scope, and purpose of the application or
proposal; and
            4.   Indicate where additional information on the matter can be
obtained.
         (b)   Posted notices under this chapter shall indicate time and place
and indicate where any additional information on the subject of the notice can
be obtained.
      (2)   Types.
         (a)   Newspaper notice. When the provisions of this chapter require
that “newspaper notice” be provided, the official responsible for accepting the
application shall ensure that notice is published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the town. Unless otherwise expressly provided in state statutes
or this chapter, the first required newspaper notice shall be published at
least 15 calendar days before the public hearing, meeting or date of action
that is the subject of the notice. Newspaper notice shall indicate the time and
place or date of action that is the subject of the notice, describe the
property involved in the application by street address and, if required, by
legal description, describe the nature, scope and purpose of the application or
proposal.
         (b)   Posted notice. When the provisions of this chapter state that
“posted notice” should be provided, the official responsible for accepting the
application shall post the notice on the subject property in a manner that
makes the notice clearly visible to neighboring residents and passers-by from
each public street bordering the subject property. Unless otherwise expressly
provided in state statutes or in this chapter, posted notice shall be in place
at least 15 calendar days before the public hearing, meeting or date of action
that is the subject of the notice.
         (c)   Neighbor notice. When the provisions of this chapter require
that “neighbor notice” be provided, the official responsible for accepting the
application shall mail notice to the applicant and all property owners within
300 feet of the subject property. Ownership information shall be obtained from
the County Assessor’s Office. Unless otherwise expressly provided in state
statutes or in this chapter, required neighbor notices shall be deposited in
the U.S. mail at least 15 calendar days before the public hearing, meeting or
date of action that is the subject of the notice. Failure to provide this
notice will not invalidate any action taken.
         (d)   Parties in interest. When the provisions of this chapter require
that notice be sent, the following “parties in interest” shall be notified: the
applicant and the owner of the property (if other than applicant). PARTIES IN
INTEREST shall mean any individual, associations, corporations, or others who
have expressed an interest in writing in an application pending before the
Planning/Zoning Department and that has been received by the Zoning
Administrator. It is the responsibility of the parties in interest to provide
updated contact information to the Planning/Zoning Department. The Planning/
Zoning Department will keep the parties in interest contact information on file
for one year from the initial date received.
         (e)   Community interest notice. When the provisions of this chapter
require that “community interest notice” be provided, the official responsible
for accepting the application shall provide written notice to any individual,
group or organization that has submitted a written statement of interest to the
Zoning Administrator. When community interest notice is required, courtesy
notice will be provided to the Zoning Administrator of any municipality within
the planning area of the subject tract. Community interest notice is a courtesy
notice; failure to provide this notice will not invalidate any action taken.
      (3)   Constructive notice. Minor defects in a notice shall not impair the
notice or invalidate proceedings pursuant to the notice if a bona fide attempt
has been made to comply with applicable notice requirements. In all cases,
however, the requirements for the timing of the notice and for specifying the
date, time and place of a hearing and the location of the subject property
shall be strictly construed. If questions arise regarding the adequacy of
notice, Review and decision-making bodies shall make formal findings regarding
whether there was substantial compliance with the notice requirements of this
chapter.
   (H)   Action by decision-making bodies. Unless otherwise expressly stated,
decision-making bodies shall be authorized to approve, approve with conditions
or deny applications and permit requests based on compliance with the
applicable review and approval criteria. Decision-making bodies shall also be
authorized to refer an application back to a review body or to defer action
while additional information is being obtained.
   (I)   Inaction by review and decision-making bodies. When a review or
decision-making body fails to take action on an application within the time
required, such inaction shall be interpreted as a recommendation of approval of
the application, respectively. Timeframes for action may be extended if the
applicant consents to the extension. When a review body fails to take action on
an application within the time required, the decision-making body shall be free
to proceed with its own action on the matter without further awaiting the
recommendation of the review body.
   (J)   Conditions of approval. Unless otherwise expressly stated, decision-
making bodies shall be authorized to impose conditions or approval as allowed
by law. Conditions may be those deemed necessary to reduce or minimize any
potential adverse impact upon other property in the area or to carry out the
general purpose and intent of this chapter. All conditions must relate to a
situation created or aggravated by the proposed use and be roughly proportional
to the impact of the approved use or activity.
   (K)   Approval criteria; burden of persuasion. In all cases, the applicant
shall have the burden of establishing that an application complies with
applicable approval criteria.
   (L)   Public hearings. A public hearing for which proper notice was given
may be continued to a later date without again complying with the notice
requirements of this chapter, provided that the continuance is set for a
certain date and time and the date and time are announced at the public
hearing.
   (M)   Successive applications.
      (1)   Time limit. If a final decision-making body denies an application
for a zoning map amendment, planned development, or special exception use, an
application for the same or more intensive zoning, development, or use on the
subject parcel, whether the parcel is in its original configuration, expanded,
or reduced in area, shall not be accepted for 12 months from the date that the
decision-making body acted to deny the application.
      (2)   Waivers. The time limit of division (M)(1) above notwithstanding,
decision-making bodies may, after receipt of written petition by the property
owner, waive the waiting period requirement by a vote of members present and
voting. If the time limit is waived, the decision-making body shall give
written notice to the Zoning Administrator, directing staff to process the
application. All re-submissions shall be processed as new application, with
prescribed fees. All documents and fees required for the respective type of
application shall be included with the new application. Denial of the
application shall be final and the 12-month waiting period shall be met before
further consideration of a similar application on the subject property.
      (3)   Applications withdrawn before public hearing notice. Withdrawal of
an application by the applicant before advertisement of any public hearing and
before any required signs have been posted on the subject property shall be
considered a termination of the application. Although no fees shall be
refunded, re-application in such cases shall not be subject to the 12-month
waiting period.
      (4)   Applications withdrawn after public hearing notice. Postponement
requests and withdrawals of applications that occur after advertisement of any
public hearing or after any required signs have been posted on the subject
property shall be treated the same as a denied application. Application
processing shall terminate upon receipt of written notice from the applicant or
owner. Reapplication shall be subject to a 12-month waiting period unless a
waiver is granted in accordance with division (M)(2) above.
      (5)   Requests for postponements of applications to the Board of Zoning
Appeals. Requests for postponements of applications from Board of Zoning
Appeals public hearings must be made in writing by the applicant. Such requests
received after advertisement of any public hearing or after any required signs
have been posted on the subject property shall be subject to all applicable
application fees as listed in the fee schedule approved by Town Council.
      (6)   Requests for postponements of applications to the Planning
Commission. Requests for postponements of all applications from Planning
Commission meetings, with the exception of subdivision applications, must be
made in writing and the letter must be signed by both the property owner(s) and
the applicant(s). Postponement requests received within ten calendar days of
the Planning Commission meeting for which the application is scheduled shall be
considered withdrawals. In the event an application is withdrawn for failure to
meet the ten-day provision, the applicant must submit a new application in
compliance with division (E) above, “Application completeness and submission
deadlines,” and all applicable fees must be paid. The Planning Commission may
waive the required fees when the request for postponement is made due to
extenuating circumstances as determined in the sole discretion of the Planning
Commission.
   (N)   Vested rights. Vested rights shall be consistent with S.C. Code Title
6, Chapter 29, Art. 11, Vested Rights.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 3.1, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2012-21, passed 12-20-2012)
§ 153.041 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Pre-application conference and application filing. Applications for
amendments to the Comprehensive Plan shall be submitted by individuals or
groups of individuals to the Zoning Administrator on forms available in the
Planning/Zoning Department.
      (1)   Prior to the submittal of an application for a Comprehensive Plan
amendment, applicants shall participate in a pre-application conference
scheduled with the Zoning Administrator. A pre-application conference is not
required for applications submitted by the county.
      (2)   Applications for amendments to the Comprehensive Plan shall be
submitted by individuals or groups of individuals to the Zoning Administrator
on forms available in the Planning/Zoning Department.
      (3)   No application for a Comprehensive Plan amendment shall be accepted
as complete unless it includes the required fee and the following information:
         (a)   Completed Comprehensive Plan amendment application signed by the
current property owner(s) or applicant(s);
         (b)   Twenty copies of the applicant’s letter of intent explaining the
objective of the proposed amendment(s) and how the criteria listed in division
(F) are met;
         (c)   Twenty copies of the proposed changes to the Comprehensive Plan
based on the current Comprehensive Plan in effect and showing proposed text
deletions as strike-through text and proposed text additions in bold, italic
text. Proposed changes to any Comprehensive Plan map shall be illustrated in a
map format similar to the existing Comprehensive Plan maps and shall be labeled
as “proposed amendment;” and
         (d)   Any other information that the Planning Commission determines is
reasonably necessary to make an informed decision as to whether the application
complies with the standards of this section.
      (4)   Applications for Comprehensive Plan amendments shall comply with §
153.040(E), Application completeness and submission deadlines, of this code.
      (5)   The applicant may hold a community workshop for the proposed
Comprehensive Plan amendment. The purpose of a community workshop is to ensure
early citizen participation in an informal forum, in conjunction with
development applications, and to provide an applicant the opportunity to
understand and try to mitigate any impacts an application may have on an
affected community. The workshop shall ensure that citizens and property owners
have an adequate opportunity to learn about applications that may affect them
and to work with the applicant to resolve any concerns at this stage of the
process. A community workshop is not intended to produce complete consensus on
all applications, but to encourage applicants to be good neighbors. If the
applicant chooses to hold a community workshop, a summary of the workshop may
be submitted with the application for the Comprehensive Plan amendment.
   (B)   Public hearing notice. Newspaper notice of public hearing on
Comprehensive Plan amendments shall be provided at least 30 calendar days
before the hearing. Newspaper and parties in interest notice shall be provided
in accordance with §
153.040(G) of this code.
   (C)   Zoning Administrator review and report. The Zoning Administrator shall
review each proposed Comprehensive Plan amendment in light of the approval
criteria of division (F) below and, if deemed necessary, distribute the
application to other agencies and reviewers. Based on the results of those
reviews, the Zoning Administrator shall provide a report on the proposed
amendment to the Planning Commission. The Zoning Administrator shall have at
least 30 calendar days to conduct required reviews.
   (D)   Planning Commission review and recommendation. The Planning Commission
shall review the proposed amendment and adopt a resolution, by majority vote of
the members present and voting, recommending that the Town Council approve,
approve with conditions, or deny the proposed amendment, based on the approval
criteria of division (F) below.
   (E)   Town Council hearing and decision. After receiving the recommendations
of the Planning Commission, the Town Council shall hold at least one public
hearing and, any time after the close of the public hearing, act to approve,
approve with conditions, or deny the proposed Comprehensive Plan amendment,
based on the approval criteria of division (F) below. A majority of the entire
Town Council membership shall be required to approve, approve with conditions,
or disapprove the amendment.
   (F)   Approval criteria. Comprehensive Plan amendments may be approved by
the Town Council only if they determine that the proposed amendment is
consistent with the overall purpose and intent of the Comprehensive Plan and
that any one of the following criteria has been met:
      (1)   There was a significant error in the original Comprehensive Plan
adoption;
      (2)   In adopting the Comprehensive Plan, the Town Council failed to take
into account facts, projections, or trends that were reasonably foreseeable to
exist in the future;
      (3)   Events, trends, or facts after adoption of the Comprehensive Plan
have changed the Town Council’s original findings made upon Plan adoption; or
      (4)   Events, trends, or facts after adoption of the Comprehensive Plan
have changed the character or condition of an area, making the proposed
amendment necessary.
   (G)   Final action. Comprehensive Plan amendments shall be adopted by
ordinance.
   (H)   Notice of decision. Following final action by the Town Council, the
Zoning Administrator and or the Town Clerk shall be responsible for providing
the applicant with written notice of the decision.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 3.2, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2012-21, passed 12-20-2012; Ord.
2018-02, passed 5-17-2018)
§ 153.042 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Application filing.
      (1)   Applications for amendments to the text of this chapter shall be
submitted to the Zoning Administrator on forms available in the Planning/Zoning
Department.
      (2)   No application for a Zoning and Land Development Regulations text
amendment shall be accepted as complete unless it includes the required fee and
the following information:
         (a)   Completed Zoning and Land Development Regulations text amendment
application signed by the current property owner(s) or applicant(s);
         (b)   Twenty copies of the applicant’s letter of intent explaining the
proposed amendment(s) and how it meets the criteria listed in division (F)
below;
         (c)   Twenty copies of the proposed text amendment based on the
current ordinance in effect and showing proposed deletions as strike-through
text and proposed additions in bold, italic text;
         (d)   Restrictive covenants affidavit(s) signed by the applicant or
current property owner(s) in compliance with state law, if applicable; and
         (e)   Any other information that the Planning Commission determines is
reasonably necessary to make an informed decision as to whether the application
complies with the standards of this section.
      (3)   Applications for Zoning and Land Development Regulations text
amendments shall comply with §
153.040(E), Application completeness and submission deadlines, of this code.
   (B)   Public hearing notice. Newspaper and party in interest notice of the
Town Council’s public hearing shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of §
153.040(G). Newspaper notice of a public hearing regarding any proposed
amendments to §§
153.300 through
153.315, Subdivision regulations, shall be made at least 30 calendar days prior
to a public hearing on any proposed amendments.
   (C)   Zoning Administrator review and report. The Zoning Administrator shall
review each proposed text amendment in light of the approval criteria of
division (F) below and provide a report to the Planning Commission. The Zoning
Administrator shall have at least 30 calendar days to conduct required reviews.
   (D)   Planning Commission review and recommendation. The Planning Commission
shall review the proposed amendment and take action by majority vote of the
members present and voting, recommending that the Town Council approve or deny
the proposed amendment. The Planning Commission’s recommendation shall be based
on the approval criteria of division (F) below. The Planning Commission shall
submit its recommendation to the Town Council within 30 calendar days of the
Planning Commission meeting at which the amendment was introduced.
   (E)   Town Council hearing and decision. After receiving the recommendation
of the Planning Commission, the Town Council shall hold at least one public
hearing, and, any time after the close of the public hearing, take action to
approve, approve with modifications, or deny the proposed amendment based on
the approval criteria of division (F) below. A simple majority vote of Town
Council members present and voting shall be required to approve the amendment.
   (F)   Approval criteria. Text amendments to this chapter may be approved if
the following approval criteria have been met:
      (1)   The proposed amendment corrects an error or inconsistency or meets
the challenge of a changing condition;
      (2)   The proposed amendment is consistent with the adopted Town
Comprehensive Plan and goals as stated in §
153.005; and
      (3)   The proposed amendment is to further the public welfare in any
other regard specified by Town Council.
   (G)   Final action. Text amendments shall be adopted by ordinance.
   (H)   Notice of decision. Following final action by the Town Council, the
Zoning Administrator and/or the Town Clerk shall be responsible for providing
the applicant with written notice of the decision.
   (I)   Pending text amendments. No application for a zoning permit, building
permit, or certificate of occupancy shall be accepted for property within any
area involved in or affected by a pending ordinance text amendment if the
zoning permit, building permit, or certificate of occupancy would allow uses or
activities that would be forbidden under the proposed amendment. This
prohibition on acceptance of applications shall apply from the date that the
application is filed until action on the amendment is taken by Town Council.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 3.3, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2012-21, passed 12-20-2012; Ord.
2018-02, passed 5-17-2018)
§ 153.043 ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Application filing.
      (1)   Applications for amendments to the official zoning map (rezonings)
shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator on forms available in the
Planning/Zoning Department.
      (2)   Upon submission of a rezoning application, no additional rezoning
applications shall be accepted for the subject property until the original
application has been withdrawn or the Town Council has rendered its final
decision and all applicable time limits on re-filing have expired.
      (3)   No application for a zoning map amendment shall be accepted as
complete unless it includes the required fee and the following information:
         (a)   Completed zoning map amendment application signed by the current
property owner(s);
         (b)   A copy of a legible approved and recorded plat showing current
property boundaries;
         (c)   A copy of the current, recorded deed;
         (d)   Restrictive covenants affidavit(s) signed by the applicant or
current property owner(s) in compliance with state law; and
         (e)   Any other information that the Planning Commission determines is
reasonably necessary to make an informed decision as to whether the application
complies with the standards of this section.
      (4)   Applications for zoning map amendments shall comply with §
153.040(E), Application completeness and submission deadlines, of this code.
   (B)   Public hearing notice. Public notice, neighbor, parties in interest,
and posted notice of the Town Council’s public hearing shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements of §
153.040(G) of this code.
   (C)   Zoning Administrator review and report. The Zoning Administrator shall
review each proposed zoning map amendment in light of the approval criteria of
division (F) below, and, if deemed necessary, distribute the application to
other agencies and reviewers. Based on the results of those reviews, the Zoning
Administrator shall provide a report on the proposed amendment to the Planning
Commission. The Zoning Administrator shall have at least 30 working days to
conduct required reviews.
   (D)   Planning Commission review and recommendation. The Planning Commission
shall review the proposed zoning map amendment and adopt a resolution, by
majority vote of the members present and voting, recommending that the Town
Council approve or deny the proposed zoning map amendment. The Planning
Commission’s recommendation shall be based on the approval criteria of division
(F) below. The Planning Commission shall submit its recommendation to the Town
Council within 30 calendar days of the Planning Commission meeting at which the
zoning map amendment was introduced.
   (E)   Town Council hearing and decision. After receiving the recommendation
of the Planning Commission, the Town Council shall hold at least one public
hearing, and, any time after the public hearing, take action to approve or deny
the proposed zoning map amendment based on the approval criteria of division
(F) below. A simple majority vote of Town Council members present and voting
shall be required to approve the amendment. Zoning map amendments shall not be
approved “with conditions” except planned developments or property developments
under the state’s Local Government Development Agreement Act (1993), being S.C.
Code §§ 6-31-10 et seq., as amended.
   (F)   Approval criteria. Zoning map amendments may be approved only if the
proposed amendment corrects an error or inconsistency, meets the challenge of
some changing condition in the area, or if all of the following criteria are
met:
      (1)   The proposed amendment is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan
and the stated purposes of this chapter;
      (2)   The proposed amendment will allow development that is compatible
with existing uses and zoning of nearby property;
      (3)   The town and other service providers will be able to provide
adequate water and sewer supply, storm water facilities, waste disposal, and
other public facilities and services to the subject property, while maintaining
adequate levels of service to existing development;
      (4)   The applicant provides documentation that the proposed amendment
will not result in significant adverse impacts on other property in the
vicinity of the subject tract or on the environment, including air, water,
noise, storm water management, traffic congestion, wildlife, and natural
resources; and
      (5)   The subject property is suitable for proposed zoning classification
considering such things as parcel size, parcel configuration, road access, and
the presence of natural resources and amenities.
   (G)   Final action. Zoning map amendments shall be adopted by ordinance.
   (H)   Notice of decision. Following the final action by the Town Council,
the Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for providing the applicant with
written notice of the decision and for revising the official zoning map, if the
amendment was adopted.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 3.4, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2012-21, passed 12-20-2012; Ord.
2018-02, passed 5-17-2018)
§ 153.044 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONING DISTRICT.
   Planned developments shall adhere to the procedures and guidelines contained
in §
153.078, PD, Planned Development Zoning District, and shall be considered
zoning and map amendments.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 3.5, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2012-21, passed 12-20-2012)
§ 153.045 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Application filing.
      (1)   Applications for special exceptions shall be submitted to the
Zoning Administrator on forms available in the Planning/Zoning Department.
      (2)   Upon submission of a special exception application, no additional
special exception applications shall be accepted for the subject property until
the original application has been withdrawn or the decision-making body has
rendered its final decision and all applicable time limits on refiling have
expired.
      (3)   Special exception applications shall comply with §
153.040(E), Application completeness and submission deadlines, of this code.
      (4)   No application for a special exception shall be accepted as
complete unless it includes the required fee and the following information:
         (a)   Completed special exception application signed by the current
property owner(s);
         (b)   The applicant’s letter of intent explaining the proposed use and
how it meets the approval criteria of division (E) below;
         (c)   Site plan drawn to an engineer’s scale showing the property
dimensions, dimensions and locations of existing and proposed structures and
improvements, parking areas, grand trees, wetlands (properties containing DHEC-
OCRM critical line areas must contain an up to date DHEC-OCRM signature on the
site plan or plat), holding basins and buffers when applicable. One 24 by 36
copy and 15 reduced 11 by 17 copies shall be submitted;
         (d)   A copy of a legible approved and recorded plat;
         (e)   Restrictive covenants affidavit(s) signed by the applicant or
current property owner(s) in compliance with state law; and
         (f)   Any other information that the Zoning Administrator determines
is necessary to make an informed decision as to whether the application
complies with the standards required by this section.
      (5)   All proposed special exception uses, except placement of
manufactured housing, shall satisfy the site plan review process. Applicants
shall attend at least one site plan review meeting prior to submitting the
application for special exception.
   (B)   Public hearing notice. Newspaper, neighbor, parties in interest and
posted notice for the Board of Zoning Appeals’ public hearing shall be provided
in accordance with the requirements of §
153.040(G) of this code.
   (C)   Zoning Administrator review and report. The Zoning Administrator shall
review each proposed special exception in light of the approval criteria of
division (E) below, and, if deemed necessary, distribute the application to
other agencies and reviewers. Based on the results of those reviews, the Zoning
Administrator shall provide a report on the proposed special exception to the
Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (D)   Board of Zoning Appeals hearing and decision.
      (1)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold at least one public hearing
on the proposed special exception and, within a reasonable time following the
close of the public hearing, act to approve, approve with conditions, or deny
the proposed special exception based on the approval criteria of division (E)
below.
      (2)   A majority of the Board of Zoning Appeals constitutes a quorum.
      (3)   A majority of the members present and voting are required to
approve a special exception.
   (E)   Approval criteria.
      (1)   Special exceptions may be approved only if the Board of Zoning
Appeals finds that the proposed use:
         (a)   Is consistent with the recommendations contained in the Town
Comprehensive Plan and the character of the underlying zoning district “purpose
and intent;”
         (b)   Is compatible with existing uses in the vicinity and will not
adversely affect the general welfare or character of the immediate community;
         (c)   Adequate provision is made for such items as: setbacks,
buffering (including fences and/or landscaping) to protect adjacent properties
from the possible adverse influence of the proposed use, such as noise,
vibration, dust, glare, odor, traffic congestion, and similar factors;
         (d)   Where applicable, will be developed in a way that will preserve
and incorporate any important natural features;
         (e)   Complies with all applicable rules, regulations, laws, and
standards of this chapter, including but not limited to any use conditions,
zoning district standards, or site plan review requirements of this chapter;
and
         (f)   Vehicular traffic and pedestrian movement on adjacent roads
shall not be hindered or endangered.
      (2)   In granting a special exception, the Board of Zoning Appeals may
attach to it such conditions regarding the location, character, or other
features of the proposed building or structure as the Board may consider
advisable to protect established property values in the surrounding area or to
promote the public health, safety, or general welfare.
   (F)   Final decision and orders. Final decisions and orders of the Board
must be in writing and be filed in the Office of the Zoning Administrator as a
public record. Final decisions shall be available for public inspection during
regular office hours. All findings of fact and conclusions of law must be
separately stated in final decisions or orders of the Board which must be
delivered to parties in interest by certified mail. As a courtesy notice, the
orders of the Board may be sent via U.S. mail to persons on the neighborhood
notice list.
   (G)   Notice of decision. The written final decision shall be mailed to all
parties in interest by certified mail and published once in a newspaper of
general circulation in the town.
   (H)   Appeals. Any person with a substantial interest in a decision of the
Board of Zoning Appeals or any officer, board, or bureau of the town may appeal
a final decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals to the Circuit Court of the
town. Appellants shall file with the Court Clerk a written petition plainly and
fully setting forth how such decision is contrary to law. Such appeal shall be
filed within 30 calendar days after the decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals
is mailed.
   (I)   Lapse of approval. An approved special exception shall lapse and be of
no further effect consistent with S.C. Code Title 6, Chapter 29, Art. 11,
Vested Rights.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 3.6, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2012-21, passed 12-20-2012)
§ 153.046 SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   (A)   Applicability.
      (1)   Except as expressly exempted in §
153.047(B), the site plan review procedures shall apply to:
         (a)   New development, redevelopment, and property improvements that
increase by more than 25% of the number of parking spaces, the area devoted to
vehicular use areas, or the gross floor area of building; and
         (b)   Any change in use to a more intensive use, as determined by the
Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   The entire site shall be brought into compliance with all
applicable ordinance standards at the time of site plan review.
   (B)   Applications. Applications for site plan review shall be submitted to
the Zoning Administrator on forms available in the Planning/Zoning Department.
   (C)   Review and action; Site Plan Review Committee. The Site Plan Review
Committee shall review each site plan application in light of the applicable
approval criteria of division (D) below and act to approve, approve with
conditions, or deny the site plan application. The Site Plan Review Committee
consists of representatives from the Planning/Zoning Department, Department of
Public Works, State Department of Health and Environmental Control (DHEC),
Department of Transportation, Corps of Engineers, and Office of Ocean and
Coastal Resources Management, and other departmental representatives as deemed
necessary by the Zoning Administrator, each of whom addresses the issues
relevant to his or her respective department’s responsibilities.
   (D)   Approval criteria. A site plan application may not be approved unless
the Zoning Administrator finds that the proposed project complies with all
applicable provision of this chapter.
   (E)   Appeals. Appeals shall be processed in accordance with the procedures
of §
153.052 of this code.
   (F)   Amendments. The procedure for amending a site plan shall be the same
as required for the original approval.
   (G)   Expiration and lapse of approval. Site plan review approvals shall be
consistent with S.C. Code Title 6, Chapter 29, Art. 11, Vested Rights.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 3.7, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2012-21, passed 12-20-2012)
§ 153.047 ZONING PERMITS.
   (A)   Applicability.
      (1)   Except as expressly exempted in division (B) below, a zoning
approval shall be required before any of the following activities:
         (a)   The issuance of a building permit under the Town Building Code;
         (b)   Excavation preparatory to constructing a structure for which a
building permit is required;
         (c)   Improving any zoning lot by grading, filling, or surfacing or by
constructing a driveway in conjunction with the construction of a single-family
residence or by constructing or enlarging parking areas containing more than
six spaces;
         (d)   Change in the use classification of any part of a structure or
lot, including any increase in the number of families or dwelling units
occupying a building or lot;
         (e)   Installation of any sign (on-premises or off-premises);
         (f)   Moving of any house or mobile home;
         (g)   Prior to obtaining a business license;
         (h)   Any earth disturbing activity; or
         (i)   Clearing and grubbing, including grading, drainage, or the
construction of roads or utilities in a subdivision.
      (2)   Prior to issuance of a zoning permit, a pre-construction planning
conference for tree preservation, as specified in §
153.334, shall be held with the Zoning Administrator’s representative, the
applicants, and any parties deemed appropriate for the purpose of determining
if there is a need for additional tree protection techniques and for
designating placement of tree barricades, construction employee parking,
temporary construction offices, and dumpsters.
      (3)   Agricultural uses shall be subject to the applicable provisions of
§
153.334, Tree protection and preservation.
   (B)   Exemptions.
      (1)   Agriculture. A zoning approval shall not be required with respect
to any parcel of land being used for a bona fide, principal agricultural use as
of October 18, 2012, including: farming, dairying, pasturage, agriculture,
horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, animal and poultry husbandry,
forestry, and other uses or enterprises customarily carried on in the field of
general agriculture, including the necessary accessory uses for packing,
treating, or storing of produce, in any zoning district. The operation of any
accessory use shall be secondary to that of the normal agricultural activity.
      (2)   Utility lines. A zoning approval shall not be required for a
service connection with established electric distribution or transmission
lines, water lines, sewer, gas, or other pipelines, provided that such
facilities shall comply with all other applicable standards of this chapter.
Installation of new main or distribution trunk lines for water, sewer, or gas
shall not be exempt.
      (3)   Fences. A zoning permit shall not be required for the installation
of any fence that is less than six feet in height and exempt from Town Building
Code requirements, as amended, except those made of brick, stone, or concrete.
Fence installation must also comply with the vision clearance requirements of §
153.066(C) of this code.
      (4)   Accessory structures. A zoning permit shall not be required for the
placement of one, 1-story detached accessory structure used as a tool or
storage shed, playhouse, or similar accessory structure, provided the building
footprint does not exceed 120 square feet. In the event that one detached
accessory structure already exists on the subject property, a zoning permit is
required for any additional detached accessory structure. Detached accessory
structures must also comply with all applicable standards of the Zoning and
Land Development Regulations Ordinance.
   (C)   Application filing. Applications for zoning permits shall be filed
with the Zoning Administrator on forms available in the Planning/Zoning
Department, which shall include the following items:
      (1)   For all new construction or changes in building footprint,
applications shall include a site plan drawn to engineer’s scale that shows
proper dimensions, dimensions and locations of all existing and proposed
structures and accessories, setbacks, driveways, and wetlands/OCRM critical
line, if applicable;
      (2)   Applications shall include an approved, recorded plat indicating
new county parcel ID number or if an approved, recorded plat is not available,
the application shall include a county parcel boundary map showing the subject
parcel, surrounding properties, and county parcel ID number;
      (3)   Proposed construction, including accessory uses and structures, if
occurring on more than one abutting lot of record, shall not be placed on
property lines and must meet all setback requirements;
      (4)   Applications shall include a current letter of availability from
local providers for public water and/or sewer. If water and/or sewer service is
not available, a well and/or septic tank permit final approval from S.C. DHEC
shall be required;
      (5)   Applications shall include an approved tree survey showing grand
trees (24-inch DBH or greater, except pine trees) in the footprint, and within
20 feet, of any proposed construction as required by this chapter unless the
applicant provides a signed statement indicating no protected trees will be
affected;
      (6)   For all structures requiring a new address (e.g., new building
construction, power poles, irrigation systems, or accessory structures with
electrical service), written address confirmation must be obtained from the
Planning/Zoning Department. A site plan showing the location of the proposed
structure and street access is required for address confirmation. The site plan
should also show the street access for all existing structures; and
      (7)   Commercial, multi-family, office, industrial, and other
nonresidential uses require site plan review approval prior to an application
for a zoning permit.
   (D)   Zoning Administrator review and action.
      (1)   When an application is made for a zoning permit for improvements
and uses that comply with all requirements of this chapter, the Zoning
Administrator shall issue a zoning permit and return a signed copy of the
application, including plan, to the applicant within 30 calendar days of
receipt of the application.
      (2)   When the Zoning Administrator receives a zoning permit application
for improvements or uses that do not comply with all requirements of this
chapter, the Zoning Administrator shall deny the zoning permit application,
and, within 30 calendar days of receipt of the application, return the
application, including plan, to the applicant along with written notice of the
denial, and cite the sections of this chapter with which the application does
not comply.
      (3)   When a zoning permit application includes a request for a variance
or an appeal of an administrative decision, the Zoning Administrator shall
transmit such application, together with all supporting information, within 30
working days of receipt of the application, to the Board of Zoning Appeals for
its review. Upon receipt of a written order from the Board of Zoning Appeals,
the Zoning Administrator shall complete the ordered action within ten working
days of receipt of the order.
   (E)   Effect of permit issued.
      (1)   After a zoning approval is given for construction requiring a
building permit, the Building Inspection Services Director shall issue a
building permit when the requirements of the Building Codes have been met in
the submitted plan.
      (2)   After a zoning permit is issued for a use or construction not
requiring a building permit, the applicant may proceed to carry out the
improvement described in the approved zoning permit application.
   (F)   Lapse of approval. A zoning approval shall be consistent with S.C.
Code Title 6, Chapter 29, Art. 11, Vested Rights.
   (G)   Administrative permits.
      (1)   Temporary zoning permits.
         (a)   The Zoning Administrator may issue a temporary zoning permit not
to exceed a one-year period, provided such uses are in compliance with and are
authorized by this chapter. Permits for permanent installation shall be
obtained simultaneously with the temporary zoning permit.
         (b)   Temporary zoning permits may be issued for temporary
installation of the following if located on the same zoning lot as the
permanent installation:
            1.   Manufactured housing unit installation to be used as a
residence while the permanent residential structure is being built;
            2.   Temporary office for construction office or security guard
quarters;
            3.   Temporary structure for commercial use while construction of
the permanent structure is in progress; and
            4.   Temporary power permits for construction of permitted uses.
         (c)   A temporary zoning permit may be issued by the Zoning
Administrator to move a single- family detached home, modular home, or
manufactured home to a lot of record, subject to the following:
            1.   The lot on which the home is placed must be zoned for
residential use;
            2.   The lot on which the home is placed must comply with all
requirements for the applicable zoning district;
            3.   An application for a temporary zoning permit shall be
completed by the owner of the property on a form established by the Zoning
Administrator prior to movement of the home;
            4.   The home will not be occupied until a certificate of occupancy
is issued after a complete zoning and building permit application has been
approved and all requirements of this chapter have been complied with; and
            5.   The temporary zoning permit is valid for a period not to
exceed 30 days from the date the permit is issued.
         (d)   The temporary zoning permit may be renewed by the Zoning
Administrator if the applicant provides documentation indicating they have
submitted a complete application for a zoning permit and building permit.
         (e)   The home must be removed within 15 days after the temporary
zoning permit expires. Failure to comply is a violation of this chapter and is
subject to the provisions of §§
153.375 through
153.383, Violations and enforcement, and §
153.999, Penalty.
         (f)   All regulatory agencies may inspect at any time for safety and
non-movement of the temporary placement and require further installation
safeguards in compliance with these regulations.
      (2)   Renewal of temporary zoning permits.
         (a)   Renewal of temporary zoning permits may be granted for one
additional year when construction is being actively pursued, and it is evident
that progress is being made in construction. Extensions beyond the renewal
shall be processed as a special exception.
         (b)   The temporary use of a manufactured housing unit as an accessory
dwelling unit as per §§
153.110,
153.120 through
153.180,
153.200 through
153.217,
153.230 through
153.234, and
153.250 through
153.255 of this code may be renewed annually subject to the criteria listed in
§
153.230, Accessory uses and structures allowed, of the temporary uses
subchapter §§
153.230 through
153.234.
         (c)   Administrative review and renewal of a special exception for an
accessory dwelling unit shall occur every five years and will be contingent
upon confirmation by the Zoning Administrator that the structure complies with
the accessory dwelling provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   Minor repair permits. If an application for a zoning permit is to
effect only minor repairs, the Zoning Administrator shall be authorized to
waive the requirement for an approved plat, site plan, and/or septic tank
approval. The work to be performed shall be clearly defined in the zoning
permit.
      (4)   Emergency permits.
         (a)   Individual. When a use, structure or building has been damaged
or destroyed by fire, flood, wind, or other act of God, and strict compliance
with zoning permit requirements will impair the health and safety of the
affected individuals or the security of the premises, the Zoning Administrator
may declare an emergency condition and grant a temporary administrative permit
in accordance with the following requirements:
            1.   If the use, structure, or building complies with all
applicable requirements of this chapter, a nonrenewable, temporary
administrative permit shall be issued for a period not to exceed one year;
            2.   If the use, structure, or building is a legal nonconformity,
and less than 50% of the appraised value has been damaged or destroyed, a
nonrenewable, temporary administrative permit shall be issued for a period not
to exceed one year; or
            3.   If the use, structure, or building is a legal nonconformity,
and 50% or more of the appraised value has been damaged or destroyed, only
emergency housing or the use of manufactured housing units for the conduct of
emergency business operations while relocation efforts are in progress shall be
allowed. The nonrenewable, temporary administrative permit shall be issued for
a period not to exceed six months.
         (b)   Community. Where a major disaster affects the health, safety, or
welfare of the general public and compliance with zoning permit requirements
will delay remedial action, the Zoning Administrator shall be authorized, upon
approval of the Town Administrator, to waive zoning permit requirements for a
specified period of time.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 3.8, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2012-21, passed 12-20-2012)
Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.048 CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   Applicability. No structure or zoning lot or part thereof for which a
zoning permit has been issued shall be used or occupied until the Building
Official and/or the Zoning Administrator has, after final inspection, issued a
certificate of occupancy indicating that the use or structure complies with all
applicable requirements of the zoning permit and this chapter. This certificate
of occupancy may be combined with or made a part of the certificate of
occupancy required under the Building Code. The issuance of a certificate of
occupancy shall not be construed as waiving any provision of this chapter or
the applicable zoning permit.
   (B)   Utility connections.
      (1)   Electric or gas utility companies or cooperatives shall not provide
their respective utility until receipt of an approved certificate of occupancy.
      (2)   Temporary electrical power permits shall require authorization from
the Zoning Administrator prior to such services being provided by the utility
companies.
      (3)   Temporary power poles shall require authorization from the
Planning/Zoning Department and inspection by the building inspector and the
utility before power is permitted to be turned on.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 3.9, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2012-21, passed 12-20-2012)
§ 153.049 ZONING VARIANCES.
   (A)   Applicability; limitations. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall be
authorized to approve zoning variances to any zoning-related dimensional,
design, or performance standard set forth in this chapter, provided that the
approval criteria of division (F) below are met and provided that such zoning
variance does not have the effect of:
      (1)   Permitting a use, activity, business, or operation that is not
otherwise allowed by the use regulations of the underlying zoning district;
      (2)   Allowing the physical extension of a nonconforming use, except as
expressly allowed in §§
153.355 through
153.361;
      (3)   Increasing the density of a residential use above that permitted by
the underlying district;
      (4)   Varying the sign regulations of this chapter;
      (5)   Varying or waiving the subdivision regulations contained in §§
153.300 through
153.315; or
      (6)   Varying or waiving any other standard of this chapter that is
expressly stated as being ineligible for a zoning variance.
   (B)   Application filing.
      (1)   Applications for zoning variances shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator on forms available in the Planning/Zoning Department.
      (2)   Zoning variance applications shall comply with §
153.040(E), Application completeness and submission deadlines, of this code.
      (3)   No application for a zoning variance shall be accepted as complete
unless it includes the required fee and the following information:
         (a)   Completed zoning variance application signed by the current
property owner(s);
         (b)   Applicant’s letter of intent explaining the requested zoning
variance and how it meets the approval criteria of division (F) below;
         (c)   Site plan drawn to engineer’s scale showing the property
dimensions, dimensions and locations of existing and proposed structures and
improvements, parking areas, grand trees, wetlands (properties containing DHEC-
OCRM critical line areas must contain an up to date DHEC-OCRM signature on the
site plan or plat), holding basins, and buffers when applicable. One 24 by 36
copy and 15 reduced 11 by 17 copies shall be submitted;
         (d)   A copy of a legible approved and recorded plat;
         (e)   Restrictive covenants affidavit(s) signed by the applicant or
current property owner(s) in compliance with state law; and
         (f)   Any other information that the Zoning Administrator determines
is necessary to make an informed decision as to whether the application
complies with the standards required by this section.
      (4)   All proposed zoning variances, except single-family residential
development, shall satisfy the site plan review process. Applicants shall
attend at least one site plan review meeting prior to submitting an application
for a zoning variance.
      (5)   Separate applications and fees shall be filed for more than one
variance request to each requirement of this chapter. If an applicant requests
a variance for removal of more than one protected/ grand tree, each additional
protected/grand tree shall require an additional fee.
   (C)   Public hearing notice. Newspaper, neighbor, parties in interest and
posted notice of the Board of Zoning Appeals’ public hearing shall be provided
in accordance with the requirements of §
153.040(G) of this code.
   (D)   Zoning Administrator review and report. The Zoning Administrator shall
review each proposed zoning variance in light of the approval criteria of
division (F) below and, if deemed necessary, distribute the application to
other agencies and reviewers. Based on the results of those reviews, the Zoning
Administrator shall provide a report on the proposed zoning variance to the
Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (E)   Board of Zoning Appeals hearing and decision. The Board of Zoning
Appeals shall hold at least one public hearing on the proposed zoning variance
and, within a reasonable time after the close of the public hearing, act to
approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposed zoning variance based on
the approval criteria of division (F) below. A quorum of the Board of Zoning
Appeals shall be achieved when the number of members in attendance equals more
than one-half of the total membership of the Board of Zoning Appeals. A simple
majority of the members present and voting shall be required to approve a
zoning variance.
   (F)   Approval criteria.
      (1)   The Board of Zoning Appeals has the authority to hear and decide
appeals for a zoning variance when strict application of the provisions of this
chapter would result in unnecessary hardship.
      (2)   A zoning variance may be granted in an individual case of
unnecessary hardship if the Board of Zoning Appeals makes and explains in
writing the following findings:
         (a)   There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to
the particular piece of property;
         (b)   These conditions do not generally apply to other property in the
vicinity;
         (c)   Because of these conditions, the application of this chapter to
the particular piece of property would effectively prohibit or unreasonably
restrict the utilization of the property;
         (d)   The authorization of a variance will not be of substantial
detriment to adjacent property or to the public good, and the character of the
zoning district will not be harmed by the granting of the variance;
         (e)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall not grant a variance the
effect of which would be to allow the establishment of a use not otherwise
permitted in a zoning district, to extend physically a nonconforming use of
land, or to change the zoning district boundaries shown on the official zoning
map;
         (f)   The need for the variance is not the result of the applicant’s
own actions; and
         (g)   Granting of the variance does not substantially conflict with
the Comprehensive Plan or the purposes of this chapter.
      (3)   In granting a variance, the Board of Zoning Appeals may attach to
it such conditions regarding the location, character, or other features of the
proposed building or structure as the Board may consider advisable to protect
established property values in the surrounding area or to promote the public
health, safety, or general welfare.
   (G)   Factors not to be considered. The fact that property may be utilized
more profitably if a zoning variance is granted shall not be considered grounds
for granting a zoning variance.
   (H)   Final decisions and orders. Final decisions and orders of the Board
must be in writing and be filed in the Office of the Zoning Administrator as a
public record. Final decisions shall be available for public inspection during
regular office hours. All findings of fact and conclusions of law must be
separately stated in final decisions or orders of the Board which must be
delivered to parties in interest by certified mail. As a courtesy notice, the
orders of the Board may be sent via U.S. mail to neighborhood notice list.
   (I)   Notice of decision. The written final decision shall be mailed to all
parties in interest by certified mail and published once in a newspaper of
general circulation in the county.
   (J)   Appeals. Any person with a substantial interest in a decision of the
Board of Zoning Appeals or any officer, board, or bureau of the town may appeal
a final decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals to the Circuit Court.
Appellants shall file with the Court Clerk a written petition plainly and fully
setting forth how such decision is contrary to law. Such appeal shall be filed
within 30 calendar days after the decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals is
mailed.
   (K)   Lapse of approval. An approved zoning variance shall lapse and be of
no further effect consistent with S.C. Code Title 6, Chapter 29, Art. 11,
Vested Rights.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 3.10, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2012-21, passed 12-20-2012)
§ 153.050 WRITTEN INTERPRETATIONS OF CHAPTER.
   (A)   Application filing. Applications for written interpretations of this
chapter shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator on forms available in
the Planning/Zoning Department.
   (B)   Zoning Administrator review and decision.  Within 30 working days of
receipt of a complete application for a written interpretation, the Zoning
Administrator shall:
      (1)   Review and evaluate the application in light of this chapter, the
Comprehensive Plan, and any other relevant documents;
      (2)   Consult with other staff as necessary; and
      (3)   Render a written interpretation.
   (C)   Form. The interpretation shall be provided to the applicant in writing
and shall be filed in the official record of interpretations.
   (D)   Official record of interpretations. An official record of
interpretations shall be kept on file in the Planning/Zoning Department. The
record of interpretations shall be available for public inspection in the
Planning/Zoning Department during normal business hours.
   (E)   Appeals. Appeals of the Zoning Administrator’s written interpretation
shall be taken to the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with procedures of
§
153.052. If the appeal results in a change of interpretation, the new
interpretation shall be filed in the official record of interpretations.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 3.11, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2012-21, passed 12-20-2012)
§ 153.051 PUBLIC PROJECT REVIEW.
   (A)   Applicability. Public project review shall apply to all public
projects except those expressly exempt under S.C. Code § 6-29-540.
   (B)   Application filing. Applications for public project review shall be
submitted to the Zoning Administrator on forms available in the Planning/Zoning
Department.
   (C)   Public hearing notice. Newspaper and parties in interest notice of the
Planning Commission meeting shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of §
153.040(G) of this code.
   (D)   Zoning Administrator review and report. The Zoning Administrator shall
review each proposed public project in light of the Comprehensive Plan. Based
on the results of that review, the Zoning Administrator shall provide a report
on the proposed public project to the Planning Commission.
   (E)   Planning Commission review and decision.
      (1)   The Planning Commission shall review the public project to
determine whether it is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. This
determination shall include written findings. The Planning Commission may hold
one or more public hearings in accordance with the requirements of §
153.040(G) prior to completing its review.
      (2)   If the Planning Commission finds the proposal conflicts with the
Comprehensive Plan, it shall forward its written findings and an explanation of
its reasoning to the public entity proposing the project.
      (3)   If the public entity proposes to proceed with its public project in
conflict with the Comprehensive Plan, then the entity must publicly state its
intention to proceed and its reasons for proceeding. The public entity must
provide written notice of its intention to proceed and its reasons to the
Planning Commission, as well as public notice in a publication of general
circulation at least 30 days in advance of award of a contract or beginning
construction of the proposed public project.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 3.12, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2012-21, passed 12-20-2012)
§ 153.052 APPEAL OF ZONING-RELATED ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS.
   (A)   Authority. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall be authorized to hear and
decide appeals only on zoning-related matters where it is alleged that there is
an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an
administrative official in the administration or enforcement of any of the
zoning-related regulations of this chapter. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall
have no authority to hear or decide appeals from administrative decision made
pursuant to the subdivision regulations of §§
153.300 through
153.315.
   (B)   Right to appeal. Appeals of administrative decisions on zoning-related
matters may be filed by any officer, board, or bureau of the town or by any
person with a substantial interest in a decision of an administrative official.
Fees for the appeal are to be paid by the applicant.
   (C)   Application filing; timing. Applications for appeals of administrative
decisions on zoning-related matters shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator on forms available in the Planning/Zoning Department. Appeals of
administrative decision to grant or deny a zoning permit shall be filed within
30 calendar days of receiving notice of the action being appealed.
   (D)   Effect of filing. The filing of a complete application for appeal
stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed, unless the
official whose decision is being appealed certifies to the Board of Zoning
Appeals, after the appeal is filed, that because of facts stated in the
certification, a stay would cause immediate peril to life or property. In such
case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order, which
may be granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals or by a court of record.
   (E)   Record of administrative decision. The official whose decision is
being appealed shall transmit to the Board of Zoning Appeals all papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed is taken.
   (F)   Public hearing notice. Newspaper notice and notice to parties in
interest of the Board of Zoning Appeals’ public hearing shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements of §
153.040(G) of this code. The applicant shall be responsible for the cost of
fees incurred as part of an appeal.
   (G)   Board of Zoning Appeals review and action.
      (1)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold at least one public hearing
on the appeal and, within a reasonable time following the close of the public
hearing, take final action based on the procedures and requirements of this
section.
      (2)   In exercising the appeal power, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall
have all the powers of the official from whom the appeal is taken, and the
Board of Zoning Appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify
the decision being appealed.
      (3)   If the Board of Zoning Appeals determines that it is necessary to
obtain additional evidence in order to resolve the matter, it shall remand the
appeal to the official from whom the appeal is taken. With directions to obtain
such evidence and to reconsider the decision in light of such evidence and to
that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken
and may issue or direct issuance of a permit. The Board of Zoning Appeals in
execution of the duties specified in this subchapter may subpoena witnesses and
in case of contempt may certify this fact to the Circuit Court having
jurisdiction.
      (4)   A quorum of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be achieved when the
number of members in attendance equals more than one-half of the total
membership of the Board of Zoning Appeals. A simple majority of the members
present and voting shall be required to reverse any order, requirement,
decision, or determination of any administrative office or agency.
   (H)   Approval criteria; findings of fact. An appeal shall be sustained only
if the Board of Zoning Appeals finds that the administrative official erred.
The decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be accompanied by specific,
written findings of fact and conclusions of law clearly stating the reason (s)
for the decision. Those written findings shall be delivered to parties in
interest by certified mail, published once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the town, and permanently filed in the Planning/Zoning
Department.
   (I)   Appeals. Any person with a substantial interest in a decision of the
Board of Zoning Appeals or any officer, board, or bureau of the town may appeal
a final decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals to the Circuit Court of the
town. Appellants shall file with the Court Clerk a written petition plainly and
fully setting forth how such decision is contrary to law. Such appeal shall be
filed within 30 calendar days after the decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals
is mailed.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 3.13, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2012-21, passed 12-20-2012)
§ 153.053 APPEAL OF SUBDIVISION- RELATED ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS.
   (A)   Authority. The Planning Commission shall be authorized to hear and
decide appeals only on subdivision-related matters (including determinations of
{'{'}subdivision application{'}'} incompleteness) where it is alleged there is
an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an
administrative official in the administration or enforcement of any of the
subdivision regulations of §§
153.300 through
153.315 of this code.
   (B)   Right to appeal. Appeals of administrative decision on subdivision-
related matters may be filed by any officer, board, or bureau of the town or by
any person with a substantial interest in a decision of an administrative
official.
   (C)   Application filing; timing. Applications for appeals of administrative
decisions on subdivision- related matters shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator on forms available in the Planning/Zoning Department. Appeals of
administrative decisions on subdivision matters shall be filed within 30
calendar days of the date of written notice of the decision being appealed.
   (D)   Effect of filing. The filing of a complete application for appeal
stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed, unless the
official whose decisions being appealed certifies to the Planning Commission,
after the appeal is filed that, because of facts stated in the certification, a
stay would cause immediate peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings
shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order, which may be granted by
the Planning Commission or by a court of record.
   (E)   Record of administrative decision. The official whose decision is
being appealed shall transmit to the Planning Commission all papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed is taken.
   (F)   Public hearing notice. Newspaper notice of the Planning Commission’s
public hearing shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of §
153.040(G) of this code. The applicant shall be responsible for the cost of
fees incurred as part of an appeal.
   (G)   Planning Commission review and action.
      (1)   The Planning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing on
the appeal and, within a reasonable time following the close of the public
hearing, take final action based on the procedures and requirements of this
section. When an appeal relates to a determination of (application)
incompleteness, the Planning Commission shall hear and take action on the
appeal within 15 calendar days of the date of the appeal.
      (2)   In exercising the appeal power, the Planning Commission shall have
all the powers of the official from whom the appeal is taken, and the Planning
Commission may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the decision
being appealed.
      (3)   If the Planning Commission determines that it is necessary to
obtain additional evidence in order to resolve the matter, it shall remand the
appeal to the official from whom the appeal is taken, with directions to obtain
such evidence and to reconsider the decision in light of such evidence, and to
that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is
taken.
      (4)   A quorum of the Planning Commission shall be achieved when the
number of members in attendance equals more than one-half of the total
membership of the Planning Commission. A simple majority of the members present
and voting shall be required to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or
determination of any administrative officer or agency.
   (H)   Approval criteria; findings of fact. An appeal shall be sustained only
if the Planning Commission finds that the administrative official erred. The
decision of the Planning Commission shall be accompanied by specific, written
findings of fact and conclusions of law clearly stating the reason(s) for the
decision. Those written findings shall be delivered to parties in interest by
certified mail and permanently filed in the Planning/Zoning Department.
   (I)   Appeals. Any person with a substantial interest in a decision of the
Planning Commission or any officer, board, or bureau of the town may appeal a
final decision of the Planning Commission to the Circuit Court. Appellants
shall file with the Court Clerk a written petition plainly and fully setting
forth how such decision is contrary to law. Such appeal shall be filed within
30 calendar days after the decision of the Planning Commission is mailed.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 3.14, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2012-21, passed 12-20-2012)
§ 153.054 STREET NAMES; ADDRESSES.
   (A)   Authority.
      (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall be authorized to assign and change
physical addresses as provided in S.C. Code §§ 23-47-60 et seq., as amended.
      (2)   The Planning Commission shall be authorized to approve the name of
a new street or road within the jurisdiction of the town, as provided for in
S.C. Code § 6-29-1200 and S.C. Code §§ 23-47-60 et seq., as amended. The
Planning Commission may delegate this authority to the Zoning Administrator.
   (B)   Application filing. Applications for the following shall be submitted
to the Zoning Administrator on forms available in the Planning/Zoning
Department:
      (1)   Requests for reservations of street names; and
      (2)   Requests for street name changes.
   (C)   Street names.
      (1)   Requests for reservations of street names. All street names shall
comply with Chapter 4, Art. VII of the County Code of Ordinances, as amended,
and S.C. Code §§ 23-47-60 et seq., as amended. Street names proposed by the
applicant shall be approved by the Planning/Zoning Department. The Planning/
Zoning Department shall be given at least five working days to approve requests
for reservations of street names.
      (2)   Requests for street name changes. The Planning Commission shall be
authorized to approve requests for street name changes within the jurisdiction
of the county, including but not limited to the naming of existing unnamed
easements, rights-of-way, and other access types where there is no street name
or the current street name poses a threat to the efficient provision of
emergency services. Requests for street name changes shall be in accordance
with S.C. Code § 6-29-1200 and S.C. Code §§ 23-47-60 et seq., as amended, and
Chapter 4, Art. VII of the County Code of Ordinances, as amended.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 3.15, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2012-21, passed 12-20-2012)
§ 153.055 DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS.
   Development agreements are hereby authorized for land development in the
town, subject to and in accordance with the state’s Local Government
Development Agreement Act in S.C. Code §§ 6-31-10 et seq., as amended. Requests
for development agreements shall be processed pursuant to S.C. Code §§ 6-31-10
et seq., as amended.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 3.16, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2012-21, passed 12-20-2012)
BASE ZONING DISTRICTS
§ 153.065 GENERAL; ESTABLISHMENT, INTERPRETATION, SPLIT PARCELS.
   (A)   Establishment. The following base zoning districts are hereby
established:
District Name Comprehensive Plan Land Use Designation
District Name                           Comprehensive Plan Land Use
                                        Designation
NRM-25 Resource Management              N/A
AG-5   Agricultural Preservation        N/A
AGR    Agricultural/Residential         N/A
RSL    Low-Density Suburban Residential Suburban Residential/Residential Low
                                        Density
RSM    Moderate-Density Suburban        Mixed Style Residential/Residential
       Residential                      Moderate Density
MHS    Low-Density Manufactured Housing Suburban Residential/Residential Low
       Subdivision                      Density
OR     Residential Office               Office
OG     General Office                   Office
CN     Neighborhood Commercial          Commercial Neighborhood
CC     Community Commercial             Commercial
I      Industrial                       N/A
PD     Planned Development              Planned Development (All areas of
                                        Plan)
 
   (B)   Zoning district references.
      (1)   References in this chapter to “nonresidential” zoning districts
shall be construed as references to all base zoning districts beginning with
the letters “O” (office), “C” (commercial), or “I” (industrial).
      (2)   References to “residential” zoning districts shall be construed as
references to all base zoning districts beginning with the letter “R” or “M.”
      (3)   References to “agricultural” zoning districts shall be construed as
references to all base zoning districts beginning with the letter “A.”
      (4)   References to “natural resource” zoning districts shall be
construed as references to all base zoning districts beginning with the acronym
“NRM.”
   (C)   Zoning district hierarchy. Under the hierarchy established by this
chapter, the NRM-25 District is the most restrictive base zoning district,
while the I District is the least restrictive base zoning district. The table
of division (A) above presents the districts in order from most to least
restrictive. The planned development, overlay, and special purpose zoning
districts are not included in the zoning district hierarchy.
   (D)   Existing and proposed parcels containing split zoning parcels.
      (1)   Existing lots of record with split zoning districts. Uses and
development standards for existing lots of record with split zoning districts
shall be limited to the most restrictive zoning district within the parcel per
§
153.009, Conflicting provisions, and division (C) above, Zoning district
hierarchy.
      (2)   New parcels. No new parcels with split zoning districts shall be
created. A property boundary line may be created to eliminate the existing
split zoning districts, provided the proposed parcels meet the minimum lot area
requirements for the zoning district each parcel is to be located.
      (3)   Mixed use. This division (D) does not apply to mixed use
developments such as parcels zoned RSM or PD or the overlay and special purpose
zoning districts.
      (4)   Amendment. Property owner(s) with existing split zoning districts
shall apply for a zoning map amendment (rezoning) in order to eliminate split
zoning districts if the Comprehensive Plan supports the proposed future land
use or file a Comprehensive Plan amendment.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 4.1, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.066 MEASUREMENTS, COMPUTATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS; DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
DEFINED.
   (A)   Density.  
      (1)   DENSITY refers to the number of dwelling units per unit of land
area. Density is calculated by dividing the number of dwelling units on a site
by the gross area (in acres) of highland (including retention ponds) of the
site on which the dwelling units are located. The number of dwelling units
allowed on a site is based on the presumption  that all other applicable
standards of this chapter shall be met. The maximum density established for a
district is not a guarantee that such densities may be obtained, nor shall the
inability of a development to achieve the stated maximum density be considered
sufficient justification for varying or otherwise adjusting other density,
intensity, or dimensional standards of this chapter.
      (2)   Additional dwelling units. Additional dwelling units may be placed
on a lot in which a principal dwelling unit is existing, provided that the
additional dwelling unit complies with all dimensional standards of the
applicable zoning district, as contained in these chapters, including all
density, setback, buffer, building coverage, stormwater standards, height
requirements, and waterfront development standards.
   (B)   Lot area.
      (1)   Measurement.  LOT AREA refers to the horizontal land area within
lot lines, including retention ponds.
      (2)   Exceptions. No zoning permit, building permit, or development
approval may be issued for a lot that does not meet the minimum lot area
requirements of this chapter except in the following cases:
         (a)   Nonconforming lots may be used in accordance with the provisions
contained in §§ 153.355 through 153.361 of this code.
         (b)   Utilities using land or unoccupied buildings covering less than
1,000 square feet of site area shall be exempt from minimum lot area standards.
      (3)   Absence of sewer or water. In the absence of public water or public
sewer, no zoning permit or building permit shall be issued until the lot meets
all applicable requirements of this chapter and the State Department of Health
and Environmental Control (DHEC).
   (C)   Setbacks.  SETBACKS refer to the unobstructed, unoccupied open area
between the furthermost projection of a structure and the property line of the
lot on which the structure is located, except as modified by the standards of
this section.
      (1)   Exceptions to setbacks. Every part of a required setback must be
open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky except as set out in this
division.
         (a)   Trees, shrubbery, or other landscape features may be located
within any required setback; however, they shall be selected for site specific
conditions. Plant material to be located adjacent to public drainage easements
and rights-of- way shall be selected and placed not to impede future access.
Additionally, vegetation planted within utility easements shall be selected and
sited to minimize pruning for future maintenance and clearance of such
utilities. The Zoning Administrator may require modifications (substitutions
and relocation) of plant material on proposed landscape plans when necessary to
ensure access and ease of maintenance to any easements and rights-of-way and to
preserve the public health, safety, and welfare.
         (b)   1.   Fences and walls may be located within any required
setback, provided that in residential, office, and commercial districts no
fence, wall, or hedge shall exceed:
               a.   Four feet in height when located within any front or street
side setback with the exception of chain link chain link fences, which can be
six feet in height; or
               b.   Eight feet in height when located in an interior side or
rear setback.
            2.   In all zoning districts, fences, hedges, and walls may be
located within any required setback, provided that no fence, wall, or hedge
shall obstruct the view of vehicular access to any roadway between three and
ten feet in height above grade. For the safety of pedestrian and vehicular
traffic, in residential zoning districts, an unobstructed vision clearance
triangle shall be maintained along intersections of residential driveways with
adjacent roadways. The vision clearance triangle shall be formed by the
connection of a perpendicular line measuring 15 feet from the point of
intersection at the edge of the travelway into the driveway and a 15-foot
parallel line away from the point of intersection along the roadway (see Figure
153.066.1). Residential driveways along roadways with a classification of
collector or higher may be subject to a greater distance of measurement.
Figure 153.066.1
Vision Clearance Triangle
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/cbb4cb52629993459358aebd28fe6c3dee2bdafa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1013.jpg]
 
         (c)   Driveways may be located in front and side setbacks.
         (d)   Sidewalks may be located within any required setback.
         (e)   Utility lines, wires, and associated structures, such as power
poles, may be located within any required setback.
         (f)   Uncovered porches, uncovered steps to building entrances,
uncovered patio decks, and uncovered balconies may extend up to five feet into
any required front, rear, or street side setback.
         (g)   Openwork fire balconies and fire escapes may extend up to five
feet into any required side setback.
         (h)   Sills, belt courses, cornices, buttresses, eaves, and other
architectural features may extend up to two feet into any required setback.
         (i)   Chimneys and flues may extend up to two feet into any required
setback.
         (j)   Satellite dish antennas may be placed in required rear setbacks.
         (k)   Mechanical equipment, including heating ventilation and air
conditioning (HVAC) equipment may be extended up to five feet into required
side or rear setbacks in all zoning districts.
      (2)   Contextual setbacks. Notwithstanding the front setback requirements
of the underlying zoning district, the front building line of any structure or
addition to a structure may be as close to the street as the front building
line of a structure located on any lot that is immediately adjacent to the
subject lot. If the subject lot is located between two developed lots, the
front building line of the structure that is set back further from the street
shall apply to the subject lot.
      (3)   Front setbacks on narrow streets. Where a lot abuts a dedicated
street (that has been accepted for street maintenance) with a right-of-way
width of less than 50 feet, the required front setback shall be measured from
the center line of the right-of-way, provided all building code and fire/safety
requirements are met.
      (4)   Setbacks on corner and double-frontage lots. On corner and double-
frontage lots, front setback standards will apply to each lot line that borders
a street. The remaining lot lines will be subject to side setback standards.
There is no rear lot line.
      (5)   Reduction for public purpose. When an existing setback is affected
because of conveyance to a federal, state, or local government for a public
purpose and the remaining setback is at least 50% of the required minimum
setback for the district in which it is located, then that remaining setback
will be deemed to satisfy the minimum setback standards of this chapter.
      (6)   Front setbacks on narrow ingress/egress easements. Where a lot
abuts an ingress/egress easement (that has not been accepted for street
maintenance) with a width of less than 50 feet, and is used as a primary access
point to the lot as indicated on an approved plat recorded prior to October 18,
2012 (with dashed or solid lines), the required front setback shall be measured
from the center line of the easement, provided all building code and fire/
safety requirements are met. There shall be a minimum 25- foot setback between
the edge of the easement to the front of any structure.
   (D)   Building height.
      (1)   In general.  BUILDING HEIGHT refers to the vertical distance
between the base flood elevation and:
         (a)   The average height level between the eaves and ridge line of a
gable, hip, or gambrel roof;
         (b)   The highest point of a mansard roof; or
         (c)   The highest point of the coping of a flat roof.
Figure 153.066.2
Building Height
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/cbb4cb52629993459358aebd28fe6c3dee2bdafa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1011.jpg]
 
      (2)   Fences or walls. Height shall be measured from ground level on the
higher side of the fence or wall.
      (3)   Exceptions to height limits. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the
height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to any of the following:
         (a)   Farm buildings in any agricultural zoning (A) district;
         (b)   Electrical power transmission lines;
         (c)   Belfries, cupolas, spires, domes, monuments, flagpoles,
chimneys, decorative fence post caps not to exceed 25% of the fence height,
radio/television receiving antennas, or chimney flues not for human habitation;
or
         (d)   Bulkhead, elevator, water tank, or any other similar structure
or necessary mechanical appurtenance extending above the roof of any building,
if such structure does not occupy more than 33% of the area of the roof.
   (E)   Building coverage.  BUILDING COVERAGE refers to the area of a lot
covered by buildings (principal and accessory) or roofed areas, as measured
along the outside wall at ground level, and including all projections, other
than open porches, fire escapes, canopies, and the first two feet of a roof
overhang.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 4.2, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013; Ord.
2023-04, passed 5-18-2023; Ord. 2024-10, passed 11-21-2024; Ord. 2025-02,
passed 3-20-2025)
§ 153.067 NRM-25, NATURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The NRM-25, Natural Resource Management District
is intended to protect and conserve natural resources and is principally used
for timber production, wildlife habitat, recreation, and commercial fishing.
   (B)   Use regulation. Uses are allowed in the NRM-25 District in accordance
with the use regulations of §§
153.110,
153.120 through
153.180,
153.200 through
153.217,
153.230 through
153.234, and
153.250 through
153.255.
   (C)   Density and dimensional standards. All residential and nonresidential
development in the NRM-25 District shall be subject to the following density,
intensity, and dimensional standards:
NRM-25
Density/Intensity and Dimensional Standards
NRM-25
Density/Intensity and Dimensional Standards
Maximum density        1 dwelling unit per 25 acres
Minimum lot area       1 acre
Minimum lot width      135 feet
Minimum setbacks        
   Front/street side50 feet
   Interior side    50 feet
   Rear             50 feet
   OCRM critical lin50 feet
Maximum building cover 10,000 square feet
Maximum height         35 feet
 
   (D)   Other regulations. Development in the NRM-25 District shall comply
with all other applicable regulations of this chapter, including the
development standards of §
153.079 and §§
153.330 through
153.342.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 4.3, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.068 AG-5, AGRICULTURAL PRESERVATION DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The AG-5, Agricultural Preservation District is
intended to protect farmlands and the needs of the farming industry with
compatible residential development.
   (B)   Use regulations. Uses are allowed in the AG-5 District in accordance
with the use regulations of §§
153.110,
153.120 through
153.180,
153.200 through
153.217,
153.230 through
153.234, and
153.250 through
153.255.
   (C)   Density and dimensional standards. All residential and nonresidential
development in the AG-5 District shall be subject to the following density and
dimensional standards:
AG-5
Density/Intensity and Dimensional Standards
Maximum density 1 dwelling unit per 5 acres
AG-5
Density/Intensity and Dimensional Standards
Maximum density        1 dwelling unit per 5 acres
Minimum lot area       1 acre
Minimum lot width      135 feet
Minimum setbacks        
   Front/street side50 feet
   Interior side    15 feet
   Rear             30 feet
   OCRM critical lin50 feet
Maximum building cover 30% of lot
Maximum height         35 feet
 
(Ord. 2012-06, § 4.4, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.069 AGR, AGRICULTURAL/ RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The AGR, Agricultural/ Residential District is
intended to support residential development that is rural in nature on parcels
too small to support viable agriculture.
   (B)   Use regulations. Uses are allowed in the AGR District in accordance
with the use regulations of §§
153.110,
153.120 through
153.180,
153.200 through
153.217,
153.230 through
153.234, and
153.250 through
153.255.
   (C)   Density and dimensional standards. All residential and nonresidential
development in the AGR District shall be subject to the following density and
dimensional standards:
AGR
Density/Intensity and Dimensional Standards
AGR
Density/Intensity and Dimensional Standards
Maximum density        1 dwelling unit per acre
Minimum lot area       1 acre
Minimum lot width      100 feet
Minimum setbacks        
   Front/street side50 feet
   Interior side    15 feet
   Rear             30 feet
   OCRM critical lin50 feet
Maximum building cover 30% of lot
Maximum height         35 feet
 
   (D)   Other regulations. Development in the AGR District shall comply with
all other applicable regulations of this chapter, including the development
standards of §
153.079 and §§
153.330 through
153.342.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 4.5, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.070 RSL, LOW-DENSITY SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The RSL, Low-Density Suburban Residential District
implements suburban residential/residential low density policies of the
Comprehensive Plan.
   (B)   Use regulations. Uses are allowed in the RSL District in accordance
with the use regulations of §§
153.110,
153.120 through
153.180,
153.200 through
153.217,
153.230 through
153.234, and
153.250 through
153.255.
   (C)   Density, intensity, and dimensional standards. All residential and
nonresidential development in the RSL District shall be subject to the
following density, intensity, and dimensional standards:
RSL
Density/Intensity and Dimensional Standards
Maximum density 3 dwelling units per acre
RSL
Density/Intensity and Dimensional Standards
Maximum density                      3 dwelling units per acre
Minimum lot area                     14,520 square feet
Minimum lot width                    60 feet
   Without public water and/or sew70 feet
Minimum setbacks                      
   Front/street side              25 feet
   Interior side                  10 feet
   Rear                           15 feet
   OCRM critical line             35 feet
Maximum building cover               30% of lot
Maximum height                       35 feet
 
   (D)   Other regulations. Development in the RSL District shall comply with
all other applicable regulations of this chapter, including the development
standards of §
153.079 and §§
153.330 through
153.342.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 4.6, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.071 RSM, MODERATE-DENSITY SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The RSM, Moderate- Density Suburban Residential
District implements the mixed style residential/residential moderate density
policies of the Comprehensive Plan.
   (B)   Use regulations. Uses are allowed in the RSM District in accordance
with the use regulations of §§
153.110,
153.120 through
153.180,
153.200 through
153.217,
153.230 through
153.234, and
153.250 through
153.255.
   (C)   Density, intensity, and dimensional standards. All residential and
nonresidential development in the RSM District shall be subject to the
following density, intensity, and dimensional standards:
RSM
Density/Intensity and Dimensional Standards
Maximum density 4 dwelling units per acre
RSM
Density/Intensity and Dimensional Standards
Maximum density        4 dwelling units per acre
Minimum lot area       1 acre
Minimum lot width      40 feet
Minimum setbacks        
   Front/street side25 feet
   Interior side    10 feet
   Rear             10 feet
   OCRM critical lin35 feet
Maximum building cover 35% of lot
Maximum height         35 feet
 
   (D)   Other regulations. Development in the RSM District shall comply with
all other applicable regulations of this chapter, including the development
standards of §
153.079 and §§
153.330 through
153.342.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 4.7, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.072 MHS, LOW-DENSITY MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The MHS, Low- Density Manufactured Home
Subdivision District implements the suburban residential/residential low
density policies of the Comprehensive Plan.
   (B)   Use regulations. Uses are allowed in the MHS District in accordance
with the use regulations of §§
153.110,
153.120 through
153.180,
153.200 through
153.217,
153.230 through
153.234, and
153.250 through
153.255.
   (C)   Density and dimensional standards table. All residential and
nonresidential development in the MHS District shall be subject to the
following density, intensity, and dimensional standards:
MHS
Density/Intensity and Dimensional Standards
Maximum density 3 dwelling units per acre
MHS
Density/Intensity and Dimensional Standards
Maximum density                             3 dwelling units per acre
Minimum lot area                            14,520 square feet
Minimum lot width                           60 feet
   Without public water and/or public sew70 feet
Minimum setbacks                             
   Front/street side                     25 feet
   Interior side                         10 feet
   Rear                                  10 feet
   OCRM critical line                    35 feet
Maximum building cover                      30% of lot
Maximum height                              35 feet
 
   (D)   Other regulations. Development in the MHS District shall comply with
all other applicable regulations of this chapter, including the development
standards of §
153.079 and §§
153.330 through
153.342.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 4.8, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.073 OR, RESIDENTIAL OFFICE DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The OR, Residential Office District implements the
office policies of the Comprehensive Plan.
   (B)   Use regulations. Uses are allowed in the OR District in accordance
with the use regulations of §§
153.110,
153.120 through
153.180,
153.200 through
153.217,
153.230 through
153.234, and
153.250 through
153.255.
   (C)   Density and dimensional standards. All development in the OR District
shall be subject to the following density, intensity, and dimensional
standards:
OR
Density/Intensity and Dimensional Standards
OR
Density/Intensity and Dimensional Standards
Minimum lot area       14,520 square feet
Minimum lot width      60 feet
Minimum setbacks        
   Front/street side25 feet
   Interior side    10 feet
   Rear             15 feet
   OCRM critical lin50 feet
Maximum building cover 35% of lot
Maximum height         35 feet
 
   (D)   Other regulations. Development in the OR District shall comply with
all other applicable regulations of this chapter, including the development
standards of §
153.079 and §§
153.330 through
153.342.
   (E)   Supplemental district standards. In addition to all other applicable
provisions of this chapter, structures within the OR District shall be subject
to the following standards:
      (1)   Architectural character. Structures in the OR District shall be
compatible with the established architectural character of the neighborhood in
which they are located by using a design that is complementary in terms of:
         (a)   Consistency of roof lines, roof materials, and roof colors;
         (b)   Use of similar proportions in building mass and outdoor spaces;
         (c)   Similar relationships to the street;
         (d)   Similar window and door patterns;
         (e)   Similar streetscapes including landscaping, light fixtures, and
other site amenities; and
         (f)   Free-standing signs only with indirect illumination.
      (2)   Building orientation. Primary facades and entries shall face the
adjacent street.
      (3)   Building materials. Building materials shall either be similar to
the materials already being used in the neighborhood or, if dissimilar
materials are being proposed, other characteristics, such as scale and
proportions, form architectural detailing, color, and texture shall be utilized
to ensure that enough similarity exists for the building to be compatible
despite the differences in materials.
      (4)   Building colors. Color shades shall be used to facilitate blending
into the neighborhood and unifying the development with its surroundings. The
color shades of building materials shall draw from the range of color shades
found in structures in the immediate area.
   (F)   Residential uses. Residential uses in the OR District shall be subject
to the density, intensity, and dimensional standards of the RSL District (§
153.070).
(Ord. 2012-06, § 4.9, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.074 OG, GENERAL OFFICE DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The OG, General Office District implements the
office policies of the Comprehensive Plan.
   (B)   Use regulations. Uses are allowed in the OG District in accordance
with the use regulations of §§ §§
153.110,
153.120 through
153.180,
153.200 through
153.217,
153.230 through
153.234, and
153.250 through
153.255.
   (C)   Density, intensity, and dimensional standards. All development in the
OG District shall be subject to the following density, intensity, and
dimensional standards:
OG
Density/Intensity and Dimensional Standards
OG
Density/Intensity and Dimensional Standards
Minimum lot area       4,000 square feet
Minimum lot width      50 feet
Minimum setbacks        
   Front/street side25 feet
   Interior side    10 feet
   Rear             15 feet
   OCRM critical lin50 feet
Maximum building cover 40% of lot
Maximum height         35 feet
 
   (D)   Other regulations. Development in the OG District shall comply with
all other applicable regulations of this chapter, including the development
standards of §
153.079 and §§
153.330 through
153.342.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 4.10, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.075 CN, NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The CN, Neighborhood Commercial District
implements the commercial neighborhood policies of the Comprehensive Plan.
   (B)   Use regulations. Uses are allowed in the CN District in accordance
with the use regulations of §§
153.110,
153.120 through
153.180,
153.200 through
153.217,
153.230 through
153.234, and
153.250 through
153.255.
   (C)   Density, intensity, and dimensional standards. All development in the
CN District shall be subject to the following density, intensity, and
dimensional standards:
CN
Density/Intensity and Dimensional Standards
CN
Density/Intensity and Dimensional Standards
Minimum lot area       4,000 square feet
Minimum lot width      15 feet
Minimum setbacks        
   Front/street side25 feet
   Interior side    10 feet
   Rear             10 feet
   OCRM critical lin50 feet
Maximum building cover 25% of lot
Maximum height         35 feet
 
   (D)   Other regulations. Development in the CN District shall comply with
all other applicable regulations of this chapter, including the development
standards of §
153.079 and §§
153.330 through
153.342.
   (E)   Supplemental district standards. In addition to any other applicable
provisions of this chapter, structures in the CN District shall be subject to
the following performance standards:
      (1)   Floor area. All structures, including accessory structures, shall
be limited to a maximum of 5,000 square feet gross floor area, provided that
structures between 5,000 and 10,000 square feet gross floor area may be
approved in accordance with the special exception procedures of §
153.045. In no case shall the total, combined gross floor area of all principal
and accessory structures exceed 10,000 square feet.
      (2)   Enclosed buildings. All commercial activities, excluding accessory
gasoline outlets and restaurants, shall be operated entirely within enclosed
buildings.
      (3)   Gasoline pump nozzles. Accessory gasoline pumps shall be limited to
a maximum of four nozzles, provided that five to eight nozzles may be approved
in accordance with the special exception procedures of §
153.045. In no case shall the number of gasoline nozzles exceed eight.
   (F)   Signs. Signs within the CN District shall comply with the following
standards:
Standard
Maximum sign face area 20 square feet
Standard
Maximum sign face area                              20 square feet
Maximum sign height [1]                             6 feet
Maximum number of signs per major road frontage [2] 1
Internal illumination allowed                       No
Notes:
[1]   Free-standing signs shall be monument or pedestal type.
[2]   When a parcel abuts more than one road classification, signs will be
allowed on the road with the higher classification only.
 
   (G)   Operating hours. All commercial uses within the CN District shall be
limited to operating hours between 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
   (H)   Residential uses. Residential uses in the CN District shall be subject
to the density, intensity, and dimensional standards of the RSL District (§
153.070).
(Ord. 2012-06, § 4.11, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.076 CC, COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The CC, Community Commercial District implements
the commercial policies of the Comprehensive Plan.
   (B)   Use regulations. Uses are allowed in the CC District in accordance
with the use regulations of §§
153.110,
153.120 through
153.180,
153.200 through
153.217,
153.230 through
153.234, and
153.250 through
153.255.
   (C)   Density and dimensional standards. All development in the CC District
shall be subject to the following density, intensity, and dimensional
standards:
CC
Density/Intensity and Dimensional Standards
Minimum lot area 4,000 square feet
CC
Density/Intensity and Dimensional Standards
Minimum lot area       4,000 square feet
Minimum lot width      40 feet
Minimum setbacks        
   Front/street side15 feet
   Interior side    10 feet
   Rear             20 feet
   OCRM critical lin50 feet
Maximum building cover 35% of lot
Maximum height         35 feet
 
   (D)   Other regulations. Development in the CC District shall comply with
all other applicable regulations of this chapter, including the development
standards of §§
153.330 through
153.342 and 153.079.
   (E)   Residential uses. Residential uses in the CC District shall be subject
to the density, intensity, and dimensional standards of the RSM District (§
153.071).
(Ord. 2012-06, § 4.12, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.077 I, INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The I, Industrial District is intended for
manufacturing, production, or other uses that may be incompatible with consumer
service commercial uses or residential uses.
   (B)   Use regulations. Uses are allowed in the I District in accordance with
the use regulations of §§
153.110,
153.120 through
153.180,
153.200 through
153.217,
153.230 through
153.234, and
153.250 through
153.255.
   (C)   Density, intensity, and dimensional standards. All development in the
I District shall be subject to the following density, intensity, and
dimensional standards:
I
Density/Intensity and Dimensional Standards
I
Density/Intensity and Dimensional Standards
Minimum lot area       15,000 square feet
Minimum lot width      70 feet
Minimum setbacks        
   Front/street side50 feet
   Interior side    25 feet
   Rear             25 feet
   OCRM critical lin50 feet
Maximum building cover 70% of lot
Maximum height         35 feet
 
   (D)   Other regulations. Development in the I District shall comply with all
other applicable regulations of this chapter, including the development
standards of §§
153.330 through
153.342.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 4.13, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.078 PD, PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONING DISTRICT.
   (A)   Authority.
      (1)   The state’s Local Government Comprehensive Planning Enabling Act of
1994, as amended, (“Planning Act”) authorizes local governments to utilize
zoning and planning techniques (not limited to those found in the Planning Act)
for implementation of the goals specified in S.C. Code § 6-29-720 (2007). The
Town Council hereby establishes a zoning and planning technique called a
“Planned Development” Zoning District. The Planned Development Zoning District
incorporates provisions of the planning technique called “planned development
district” referred to in the Planning Act and identified in this chapter and
the additional provisions found in this section that expands, varies, and/or
differs from the provisions found in the references to planned development
districts in the Planning Act. A PLANNED DEVELOPMENT, as applied herein, is a
type of zoning district (PD) and a type of development plan. PD zoning
districts are inextricably linked to planned development plans, in that no
rights of development apply to a PD zoning designation other than those of the
approved planned development plan.
      (2)   Planned development provisions are intended to encourage innovative
site planning for residential, commercial, institutional, and/or industrial
developments within planned developments. Planned developments may provide for
variations from other ordinances and the regulations of other established
zoning districts concerning use, setbacks, lot size, density, bulk, and other
requirements to accommodate flexibility in the arrangement of uses for the
general purpose of promoting and protecting the public health, safety, and
general welfare. A PLANNED DEVELOPMENT as used in this chapter is intended to
apply the flexibility and variation provisions of the Planning Act provided in
the planned development zoning district provision, along with the additional
regulatory and procedural provisions of this section.
   (B)   Purpose and intent. The town finds and determines that this section is
consistent with the following goals of the Comprehensive Plan:
      (1)   To preserve the essential character of this sea island (Residential
Land Use Goal 1);
      (2)   To encourage use of innovative site planning techniques to achieve
quality development that is sensitive to this unique environment (Residential
Land Use Goal 1);
      (3)   To support island commerce in serving the local market as the need
arises (Commercial Goal 1); and
      (4)   To ensure that if and when agricultural land is developed it is
done in a manner sensitive to the natural habitat and environment (Agricultural
Land Goal 1).
   (C)   Intent and results. The PD, Planned Development, Zoning District
regulations of this section are intended to encourage achievement of the goals
of the town’s Comprehensive Plan and to allow flexibility in development of
property that proposes a single or multiple use(s) that will result in improved
design, character, and quality of new or redesigned developments and preserve
natural and scenic features of open spaces. The following objectives may be
attained through the use of the planned development process:
      (1)   A maximum choice in the types of environment available to the
public by allowing a development that would not be possible under the strict
application of the standards of this chapter that were designated primarily for
development on individual lots;
      (2)   A greater freedom in selecting the means to provide access, light,
open space, and design amenities;
      (3)   Quality design and environmentally sensitive development by
allowing development to take advantage of special site characteristics,
locations, and land use arrangements;
      (4)   A development pattern in harmony with the applicable goals and
strategies of the Comprehensive Plan;
      (5)   The permanent preservation of common open space, recreation areas,
and facilities;
      (6)   An efficient use of the land resulting in more economical networks
of utilities, streets, schools, public grounds and buildings, and other
facilities;
      (7)   A creative approach to the use of land and related physical
facilities that results in better development and design and the construction
of amenities; and
      (8)   A development pattern that incorporates adequate public safety and
transportation-related measures in its design and does not adversely affect
existing infrastructure and compliments the developed properties in the
vicinity and the natural features of the site.
   (D)   Applicability. There is a minimum three- acre lot size requirement
(combined) for a planned development as long as the planned development meets
all requirements of this section.
   (E)   Development standards.
      (1)   Dimensional standards.
         (a)   The waterfront development standards of the base zoning
district, as set forth in §
153.079 of this code, shall be applied to all waterfront lots within the
planned development.
         (b)   Each lot located on the perimeter of the planned development
shall maintain the rear yard setback requirements and any buffer requirements
of the adjacent zoning district.
      (2)   Architectural standards. The architectural design guidelines of §§
153.330 through
153.342 shall apply to all proposed planned developments. Modifications to the
architectural design guidelines may be proposed in a planned development
request where the Zoning Administrator determines that the architectural design
of the proposed development is compatible with the architectural design of
development on adjacent properties.
      (3)   Access.
         (a)   Streets within planned develop- ments should connect to
adjoining neighborhoods/ developments. Cul-de-sacs, T-turnarounds, and dead-end
streets are discouraged.
         (b)   Areas between structures shall be covered by easements where
necessary for access and to provide for maintenance and utility service.
         (c)   Primary vehicular access to office, commercial, or industrial
development shall be through limited access roads.
      (4)   Commercial areas.
         (a)   Commercial areas and adjacent residential, office, and
industrial areas shall be directly connected through paved sidewalks, trails,
or other pedestrian infrastructure.
         (b)   Commercial areas shall be planned as groups having common
parking areas and common ingress and egress points.
      (5)   Industrial areas.
         (a)   A minimum vegetated buffer of 40 feet shall be required where
industrial uses abut residential uses.
         (b)   All intervening spaces between the right-of-way line and project
building line and intervening spaces between buildings, drives, parking areas,
and improved areas shall be landscaped with trees and plantings and properly
maintained at all times.
      (6)   Areas designated for future use. All areas designated for future
expansion or not intended for immediate improvement or development shall remain
in a natural state until such time as development permits are approved.
      (7)   Signs. Specifications of size, type, height, setback, location,
design, illumination, and number of signs shall be included in the planned
development guidelines. Specifications shall be as restrictive or more
restrictive than the standards set forth in this chapter.
      (8)   Parking. Parking shall be provided in accordance with the standards
set forth in §§
153.330 through
153.342 of this code. Modifications to the parking standards of §§
153.330 through
153.342 may be proposed in a planned development request where the Zoning
Administrator determines that the amount of parking requested and its location
is sufficient for the use proposed.
      (9)   Resource areas.
         (a)   Planned developments shall protect any resources determined
significant by the Zoning Administrator, including, but not limited to:
agricultural soils and active farmland, buffer areas between active farmland
and existing/planned future non-farm development, wetlands, mature trees, land
adjacent to preserved farmland on neighboring properties, scenic views, water
access and shoreline buffers, and habitat of species designated as of federal,
state, and local concern.
         (b)   Planned developments shall comply with all provisions of §
153.334, tree protection and preservation, of this code.
   (F)   Planned development procedure. The procedure and criteria for planned
development applications is outlined below. Planned development applications
are comprised of planned development stipulations and sketch plans, referred to
herein as the PD development plan. All sketch plan(s) shall be drawn to scale.
      (1)   Pre-application conference. Before submitting a PD development plan
for a planned development, the applicant shall confer with the Zoning
Administrator and any other officials designated by the Zoning Administrator.
The purpose of this pre-application conference is to discuss the proposal and
the applicable development review and approval procedures.
      (2)   Conceptual PD development plan presentation. At least one time
prior to submitting a formal application, planned development applicants shall
present their conceptual PD development plan to the Town Planning Commission at
a Planning Commission workshop. This presentation shall be for discussion and
feedback purposes only and no action shall be taken on the conceptual PD
development plan at the workshop.
      (3)   Community workshop. After the pre-application conference, it is
recommended that the applicant hold one or more community workshops. The
purpose of a community workshop is to ensure early citizen participation in an
informal forum, in conjunction with the development applications and to provide
an applicant the opportunity to understand and try to mitigate any impacts an
application may have on an affected community. A community workshop is not
intended to produce complete consensus on all applications, but to encourage
applicants to be good neighbors.
      (4)   Draft PD development plan submittal. After the required pre-
application conference and prior to submitting a formal application, the
applicant shall submit at least five copies of a draft of the requested PD
development plan for staff review. The draft PD development plan must comply
with all requirements of this chapter and all other applicable regulations.
Additionally, the checklist, available in the Planning/Zoning Department, must
be filled out and turned in with the draft PD development plan.
      (5)   PD development plan application. Complete applications for planned
developments (PD development plans) may be submitted on forms available in the
Planning/Zoning Department once the Zoning Administrator has determined that
the requested PD development plan complies with the requirements of this
chapter and all other applicable regulations.
         (a)   No application for a PD development plan shall be accepted as
complete unless it includes the 20 required paper copies of the PD development
plan, the required fee, and the following information:
            1.   One completed zoning map amendment application signed by the
current property owner(s);
            2.   One copy of a legible approved and recorded plat showing the
current property lines of the property/properties to be included in the planned
development;
            3.   One copy of the current, recorded deed;
            4.   One restrictive covenants affidavit(s) signed by the applicant
or current property owner(s) in compliance with state law;
            5.   One copy of the completed checklist;
            6.   Documentation of any community workshops held regarding the
proposed PD development plan application;
            7.   A digital version of all text, charts, tables, exhibits, and
graphics used in the PD;
            8.   A current aerial overlaid with the proposed sketch plan; and
            9.   Any other information that the Planning Commission determines
is reasonably necessary to make an informed decision as to whether the
application complies with the standards of this section.
         (b)   Applications for PD development plans shall comply with §
153.040(E), Application completeness and submission deadlines, of this code.
         (c)   Town Council may waive the fees at its discretion.
         (d)   The following shall be included in the requested planned
development stipulations:
            1.   The following shall be included in the requested planned
development stipulations:
               a.   The name of the planned development, not duplicating the
name of any other planned development or subdivision, the final plat of which
has been recorded in the county;
               b.   A statement of objectives of the proposed development;
               c.   A description of how the proposed development meets the
objectives contained in division (C) above, Intent and results, addressing each
objective separately;
               d.   The total acreage of the planned development, broken down
into total acreage, total highland acreage, total freshwater wetland acreage,
and total critical line wetland, or marsh, acreage;
               e.   A table of proposed land uses including:
                  i.   A table of proposed maximum and average residential
densities for each residential use;
                  ii.   The maximum total acreage of each residential use,
including affordable dwelling units, if applicable;
                  iii.   The maximum allowable number of each type of
residential unit requested, including affordable dwelling units, if applicable;
                  iv.   The maximum proposed floor area ratios (percentage of
lot in relation to building floor area), and the maximum building/lot coverage
for each nonresidential use; and
                  v.   All dimensional and lot standards requested, for each
land use type designated.
               f.   An analysis of the impact of the proposed development on
existing public facilities and services (e.g., roads and streets, water, sewer,
and the like). Any proposed future improvements to these facilities and
services to be made as part of the planned development shall also be included;
               g.   A traffic study that meets the requirements of §§
153.330 through
153.342 of this code for planned developments that contain 50 or more dwelling
units, or five or more acres of nonresidential development;
               h.   A development schedule with a generalized phasing schedule,
if appropriate. The phasing schedule shall include the number of dwelling
units, total acreage of each residential use, total gross floor area of each
nonresidential use, percentage and acreage of common open space to be included
in each phase, and percentage, number, and acreage of affordable dwelling units
to be included in each phase (if applicable);
               i.   A statement indicating how any common open space/recreation
areas will be owned or managed;
               j.   A statement indicating how all roads and alleys will be
owned and maintained;
               k.   A statement of inclusion and compliance with processes
included in the town’s Zoning and Land Development Regulations that are not
mentioned in the planned development stipulations;
               l.   A statement of agreement to proceed with proposed
development in accordance with the provisions of these zoning regulations,
applicable provisions of the town’s Comprehensive Plan, and with such
conditions as may be attached to any rezoning to the applicable PD district;
               m.   A statement that the provisions of §
153.049, Zoning variances, of this code shall not apply to the planned
development and that all major changes to the planned development must be
approved by Town Council. Tree variances may be granted in accordance with this
section and all other sections of this chapter;
               n.   A description of how the proposed development complies with
the approval criteria contained in division (F)(5)(i) below, addressing each
criterion separately;
               o.   A historic and archaeological survey identifying all
historic and cultural sites, structures, and landscapes on the subject
property, consistent with §§
153.330 through
153.342, Historic preservation, of this code. Any required on-site mitigation
must be detailed in the planned development stipulations and proof of
coordination with OCRM and/or the State Historic Preservation Office must be
included;
               p.   Letters of coordination from all agencies from which the
applicant must either obtain permits, or obtain services and/or facilities; and
               q.   Any other information that the Zoning Administrator
determines is necessary to determine whether or not an application complies
with the standards established in this section.
            2.   The following shall be included on the requested sketch plan.
Multiple sketch plans may be submitted. Sketch plans shall be drawn to scale.
               a.   The general location and amount of land proposed for each
land use including single-family residential, multi-family residential,
institutional, office, commercial, industrial, common open space/recreation,
street use, and the like;
               b.   Conceptual lot lines;
               c.   Pedestrian and motor traffic circulation;
               d.   Location, acreage, and type (freshwater or critical line/
marsh) of all wetlands as they exist prior to development. The location and
acreage of all freshwater wetlands to be developed upon shall be indicated;
               e.   A tree survey to include all Grand trees on residential
lots of one acre or less and in road rights-of-way and easements. Significant
trees shall be shown on residential lots greater than one acre. Tree surveys
for nonresidential uses shall conform with the standards of §
153.334(C) of this code;
               f.   Architectural elevations for each type of residential and
nonresidential unit;
               g.   The general location, size, and capacity of all existing
and proposed water and sewer lines;
               h.   Areas to be included in each phase of development,
including the location of all common open space areas and/or affordable housing
units to be included in each phase;
               i.   The location of all construction entrances;
               j.   A landscaping sketch plan including the location and
composition of all screening and buffering materials;
               k.   A utility sketch plan with the location of any on-site
natural areas, buffers, trees and sidewalks that may be impacted by utility
facilities including existing and proposed location of any easements or rights-
of-way; and
               l.   Any other information that the Zoning Administrator
determines is necessary to determine whether the application complies with the
standards established in this section.
         (e)   Public hearing notice.  Newspaper, neighbor, parties in
interest, and posted notice of the Town Council’s public hearing shall be
provided in accordance with the requirements of §
153.040(G) of this code.
         (f)   Zoning Administrator review and report. Once an application is
deemed complete and to contain all information required herein by the Zoning
Administrator, the application will be scheduled for a Planning Commission
meeting and the applicant and other interested parties will be notified in
accordance with this chapter. The Zoning Administrator shall prepare a staff
report that reviews the PD development plan application.
         (g)   Planning Commission review and recommendation.
            1.   The Planning Commission shall review the proposed PD
development plan and adopt a resolution, by majority vote of the entire
membership, recommending that the Town Council approve, approve with
conditions, or deny the proposed development plan. The Planning Commission’s
recommendation shall be based on the approval criteria of division (F)(5)(i)
below. The Planning Commission shall submit its recommendation to the Town
Council within 30 calendar days of the Planning Commission meeting at which the
PD development plan was introduced.
            2.   At any time prior to action by the Planning Commission, the
applicant may request that the Planning Commission enter mediation. When
mediation is requested, the Planning Commission shall assign one of its members
as a representative in mediation proceedings and the Zoning Administrator shall
represent the Planning staff. A majority vote of the entire Planning Commission
membership in a public meeting shall be required to accept any mediated
settlement. An accepted mediated settlement cannot waive the standards of this
chapter. Prior to beginning talks, applicable time limits for review and action
on complete applications must be extended by mutual agreement of the applicant
and Planning Commission.
         (h)   Town Council hearing and decision. After receiving the
recommendation of the Planning Commission, the Town Council shall take action
to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposed PD development plan
based on the approval criteria of division (F)(5)(i) below. Town Council shall
hold a public hearing prior to giving first reading to planned development/
zoning map amendment applications. If the Town Council takes action to approve
the PD development plan, it may require time-frames for development of the
entire planned development and its individual phases, if any. Within ten
working days of approval by Town Council of a planned development, the
applicant shall submit three copies of the approved planned development
guidelines and sketch plan to the Planning/Zoning Department. This plan shall
contain all changes and conditions approved by Council. The approval of a
planned development shall deem it to be a new zoning district with its own
zoning designation.
         (i)   Approval criteria. Applications for PD development plan approval
may be approved only if the Town Council determines that the following criteria
are met:
            1.   The PD development plan complies with the standards contained
in this section;
            2.   The development is consistent with the intent of the
Comprehensive Plan and other adopted policy documents; and
            3.   The town and other agencies will be able to provide necessary
public services, facilities, and programs to serve the development proposed, at
the time the property is developed.
   (G)   Identification of zoning maps. Approved PDs shall be indicated on the
official zoning map.
   (H)   Compliance with other regulations. Unless expressly stated in this
section or approved at the time of a planned development approval, all
applicable standards of this chapter and other law shall apply to development
within a planned development. Planned developments may provide for variations
from this chapter or other ordinances and the regulations of established zoning
districts concerning use, setbacks, lot area, bulk, and other requirements to
accommodate flexibility in the arrangement of uses for the general purpose of
promoting and protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare. All
development, other than single-family residential, shall comply with the site
plan review requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 4.14, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.079 WATERFRONT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   The following standards have precedence over base zoning district
standards for properties which contain or abut an OCRM critical line:
Standard [1] NRM-25 AG-5 AGR RSL
Standard [1]                                    NRM-25 AG-5 AGR  RSL
Min. lot area                                   1 Ac   1 Ac 1 Ac 14,520 sq. ft.
Min. lot width (feet)                           200    175  125  90
Min. lot width average (feet)                   250    200  150  100
Min. buffers/ setbacks (feet)
OCRM critical line buffer (feet)                35     35   35   15
Building setback from OCRM critical line (feet) 50     50   50   35
Notes:
Ac = Acre
Min. = Minimum
[1]   Landscape buffer standards specified in §§
153.330 through
153.342 may require greater setbacks.
 
   (B)   Minimum lot width (feet). The minimum lot width (feet) is measured and
maintained from the front lot line through the entire parcel to the OCRM
critical line. All lots within a subdivision must meet the minimum lot width
average. (Exception: flag lots and lots served by cul-de-sacs.)
      (1)   Lots fronting on cul-de-sacs shall meet the minimum lot width at
the required minimum front setback. Flag lots are designed with a “flag pole”
area with a minimum width of 20 feet. The flag pole area is not required to
meet the minimum lot width nor does this area count towards the minimum lot
size or area. Flag lots must meet the minimum lot width at the end of the flag
pole area/base of lot. All lots within a subdivision must meet the required
minimum lot width average for the zoning district within this section,
Waterfront development standards.
      (2)   Reductions from minimum lot width average requirements for parcels
which contain or abut an OCRM critical line may be permitted if the Zoning
Administrator determines that one of the following criteria has been met:
         (a)   No more than three waterfront lots are being created from the
original parcel and that a reduction of no more than 10% of lot width average
is required for any resulting lot; or
         (b) Where two lots of record (lots existing prior to October 18, 2012)
have been combined, the resulting lot may be subdivided into the original
configuration shown on the previously approved, recorded plat of record, even
if the original lots do not meet the minimum lot width requirement of this
division (B), provided that the subdivision meets all other requirements of
this chapter.
   (C)   Minimum lot standards for dwelling groups on parcels which contain or
abut an OCRM critical line. The number of dwelling units shall not exceed the
maximum number permitted by the density, intensity, and dimensional standards
of the underlying base zoning district. In addition, the dwelling groups shall
comply with the requirements of this section, Waterfront development standards,
including the minimum lot area and lot width requirements.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 4.15, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2012-21, passed 12-20-2012; Ord.
2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
OVERLAY AND SPECIAL PURPOSE
ZONING DISTRICTS
§ 153.090 GENERAL; ESTABLISHMENT, EFFECT.
   (A)   Establishment of districts. The following overlay and special purpose
zoning districts are hereby established:
 
District Name                                     Type
FRC-O Folly Road Corridor Overlay Zoning District Overlay zoning district
NRM   Natural Resource Management                 Special purpose
WDU   Water-Dependent Use                         Special purpose
 
   (B)   Procedure for establishment. Overlay and special purpose zoning
districts shall be established, changed, or modified in accordance with the
procedures applicable to all zoning districts as described in §§
153.040 through
153.055 of this code.
   (C)   Overlay district applicability. The overlay districts only apply to
parcels indicated on the corresponding overlay district maps.
   (D)   Overlay zoning district effect.
      (1)   The overlay zoning districts contained in this chapter are zones
that impose a set of requirements or relax a set of requirements imposed by the
underlying zoning district. Therefore, compliance with §
153.043, Zoning map amendments (rezonings), of this code, is not required for
parcels within these overlay zoning districts to be developed in compliance
with the overlay zoning district regulations, including but not limited to the
use regulations and density, intensity, and dimensional standards of the
overlay zoning districts. Development of parcels within the overlay zoning
districts shall comply with all other applicable requirements and processes of
this chapter, including but not limited to the site plan review process, the
zoning permit process, and the subdivision process.
      (2)   If the land use recommendation for a parcel in an overlay zoning
district, as shown on the overlay zoning district map, is not utilized, the
regulations of the underlying zoning district shall apply.
      (3)   The provisions of this division (D) do not apply to special purpose
districts and floating zones, where compliance with §
153.043, Zoning map amendments (rezonings), and all other applicable sections
of this chapter, may be required.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 5.1, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.091 NRM, NATURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The NRM, Natural Resource Management District
implements the conservation management (rural landscape – agricultural area)
policies of the Comprehensive Plan.
   (B)   Development standards. All development within the NRM Districts shall
be in accordance with the procedures contained in this chapter. Development
standards shall be established taking into account all applicable Comprehensive
Plan policies, FEMA designations, erosion patterns, wildlife and plant habitat,
soils, wetlands, and other natural resource constraints.
   (C)   Exceptions; NRM-25 District standards. For islands within the NRM
District, the Zoning Administrator shall be expressly authorized to issue
permits for development that complies with the NRM-25 Zoning District standards
instead of the planned development procedures and standards of this chapter,
provided that only one principal dwelling unit shall be allowed per lot.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 5.2, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.092 WDU, WATER-DEPENDENT USE OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The WDU, Water-Dependent Use Overlay District is
intended to accommodate community docks, boat ramps, marinas and commercial
docks, and other nonresidential uses that require locations near water bodies.
      (1)   Private docks intended for the private use of one family shall be
exempt from the requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   Joint use docks intended for the private use of two to four
families shall be exempt from the requirements of this section.
   (B)   Uses. Community docks, boat ramps, marinas and commercial docks, and
other uses that require locations near water bodies may be allowed in the WDU
District, if approved in accordance with the procedures of this chapter.
   (C)   Community docks.
      (1)   A COMMUNITY DOCK(S) is any docking facility that provides access
for more than four families (greater than or equal to five watercraft slips and
less than or equal to ten watercraft slips) and is not a marina. All community
docks shall be considered a water-dependent use.
      (2)   Community dock(s) shall be subject to the following standards:
         (a)   All proposed community docks shall comply with the site plan
review procedures contained within this chapter;
         (b)   All proposed community docks shall comply with all applicable
regulatory requirements of state and federal agencies including but not limited
to State Department of Health and Environmental Control (DHEC) and U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers;
         (c)   All proposed community docks that provides access for more than
four families (greater than or equal to five watercraft slips and less than or
equal to ten watercraft slips) shall require review and approval in accordance
with the special exception procedures of this chapter;
         (d)   All proposed community docks must have a minimum of 75 feet of
lot frontage at the marsh edge (OCRM critical line) and a minimum of 75 feet
between its extended property lines at the location in the waterbody of the
proposed dock;
         (e)   No leasing or other transfer of space to individuals who do not
reside in the residential community or other commercial uses are allowed at
community docks;
         (f)   Project proposals shall include facilities for the proper
handling of litter, waste, refuse, and petroleum products in accordance with
DHEC regulations;
         (g)   A boat ramp may be allowed at a community dock subject to
division (D) below; and
         (h)   Approval of this particular use by the town shall not relieve
the recipient (use) of responsibility for complying with all other applicable
requirements of any other local, county, state, or federal agency. In addition,
approval by the town does not guarantee nor recommend approval from any other
legal entity or governmental agency.
   (D)   Standards for boat ramps.
      (1)   Boat ramps provide access to the water for the launching and
retrieving of watercraft not exceeding 12,000 pounds gross weight. Boat ramps
providing launching and retrieving of watercraft in excess of 12,000 pounds
gross weight shall follow the special exception provisions of this chapter in
addition to the following requirements which shall apply to all boat ramps.
      (2)   Boat ramps shall be subject to the following standards:
         (a)   Filling or excavating of vegetated wetlands for boat ramp
construction is prohibited unless no feasible alternatives exist in non-
vegetated wetland areas. In addition, the area to be filled or excavated must
be limited to that which is reasonable for the intended use;
         (b)   Boat ramps must consist of environmentally acceptable materials,
demonstrate sound design and construction so that they could reasonably be
expected to be safe and effective, and minimize adverse effects;
         (c)   Justification for boat ramp construction in environmentally
sensitive areas shall be considered using the following priorities:
            1.   Public use – open to all citizens;
            2.   Restricted use – open to citizens of a particular area or
organization only; and
            3.   Private use – use for one citizen or family.
         (d)   In cases where private use is necessary, siting of ramps must,
wherever feasible, be located in areas where the least environmental impact
will accrue to the area and be limited to 12 feet in width;
         (e)   Boat ramp location requiring dredging or filling of wetlands to
provide deep water access to the ramp, parking areas for the ramp, or other
associated facilities are prohibited unless no feasible alternatives exist and
environmental impacts can be minimized;
         (f)   The siting of “public use” boat ramps is encouraged in easily
accessible areas such as bridges and existing, abandoned causeways, provided
that these sites comply with other applicable regulations;
         (g)   All proposed boat ramps shall comply with the site plan review
procedures contained within this chapter;
         (h)   All proposed boat ramps shall comply with all applicable
regulatory requirements of state and federal agencies including but not limited
to State Department of Health and Environmental Control (DHEC) and U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers;
         (i)   All proposed “public use” boat ramps shall require review and
approval in accordance with the special exception procedures of this chapter;
and
         (j)   Approval of this particular use by the town shall not relieve
the recipient (use) of responsibility for complying with all other applicable
requirements of any other local, county, state or federal agency. In addition,
approval by the town does not guarantee nor recommend approval from any other
legal entity or governmental agency.
   (E)   Standards for marinas.
      (1)   A MARINA is any of the following:
         (a)   Lock harbor facility;
         (b)   Any facility which provides fueling, pump-out, maintenance, or
repair services;
         (c)   Any facility which has permanent docking space for 11 or more
watercraft slips;
         (d)   Any water area with a structure which is used for docking or
otherwise mooring vessels and constructed to provide temporary or permanent
docking space for more than ten boats; or
         (e)   A dry stack facility.
      (2)   All marinas shall be considered a water-dependent use.
      (3)   Marinas shall be subject to the following standards:
         (a)   Uses. The following uses and activities shall be allowed in
association with a marina:
            1.   Marinas may provide the following services if specifically
authorized by a special exception approval:
               a.   Launching ramps and small hoists (to accommodate primarily
the launching of watercraft not exceeding 12,000 pounds in residential and
agricultural residential districts);
               b.   Piers, wharfs, and other facilities for the berthing and
securing of recreational watercraft;
               c.   Dockside maintenance and repair necessary to keep
watercraft in operable condition;
               d.   Wet storage and mooring of seaworthy pleasure craft in
operable condition;
               e.   Dispensing of fuel, subject to all applicable ordinance
requirements;
               f.   Shower and laundry facilities for marina clientele only;
               g.   Vending machines; and
               h.   Dry stack storage of watercraft.
            2.   Excluding marinas in agricultural and residential districts,
marinas providing 25 or more boat slips may provide the following additional
services:
               a.   Bait and tackle retail sales;
               b.   Retail sales of basic marine supplies and accessories
necessary for boat operation, maintenance, and upkeep (not to include the sale
of boats and/or motors); and
               c.   Snack bars and retail groceries.
         (b)   Performance standards. In addition to any other applicable
provisions of the chapter, marinas shall be subject to the following
performance standards.
            1.   Lot area and location. The property shall have frontage on a
public-owned road or a privately maintained road built to county road and meet
the following density, intensity, and dimensional standards unless more
restrictive standards are imposed at the time of special exception approval:
Marina
Density/Intensity and Dimensional Standards
Minimum lot area 1 acre
Marina
Density/Intensity and Dimensional Standards
Minimum lot area      1 acre
Minimum lot width     250 feet
Minimum setbacks [1]   
   Front/street sid25 feet
   Interior side   15 feet
   Rear            25 feet
   OCRM critical li50 feet
Maximum building      35% of lot
cover
Maximum height        35 feet [2]
[1]    Landscape buffer standards and wetlands buffer standards of §§
153.330 through
153.342 also apply.
[2]    Properties located within the Water-Dependent Use District that have a
zoning district designation of Industrial (I) or Community Commercial (CC) are
allowed a maximum height of 60 feet.
 
            2.   Services. All services provided by the marina shall be located
on the same zoning lot or on the piers associated therewith.
            3.   Structures. All retail sales and services shall be enclosed.
The maximum structure size or bulk shall be limited to ten square feet of net
floor area for each boat slip.
            4.   Setbacks. All structures shall be setback a minimum of 100
feet from abutting agricultural and residential zoning districts except where
the property line is the street right-of-way line, in which case the front
setback established for the zoning lot shall apply.
            5.   Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance
with the requirements contained in §§
153.330 through
153.342. Any parking associated with the use of the launching ramp and other
marine activities must be accommodated on-site. Parking surfaces and off-street
roads or driveways within the facility shall be graded and covered with a
permanent dust proof surface.
            6.   Storage. Areas for boat trailer storage and open field boat
storage shall be designated and screened in accordance with the landscaping,
screening, and buffer requirements of §§
153.330 through
153.342. Open field boat storage on trailers may be provided at a ratio of one
10-foot by 20-foot space for each two boat slips.
            7.   Screening. Marina developments, including areas for boat
trailer storage and open field boat storage, shall be screened from adjacent
uses in accordance with the landscaping, screening, and buffer requirements of
§§
153.330 through
153.342.
            8.   Signs. Those signs that identify commercial activity shall be
placed and designated so as not to distract the general public.
            9.   Wastewater disposal facilities. Wastewater disposal facilities
shall meet the requirements of the regulatory agencies having jurisdiction.
            10.   Fire prevention. Firefighting or fire prevention equipment
shall be as specified by the local fire district in which the marina is
located.
            11.   Siting standards. Marinas shall meet all of the following
requirements:
               a.   All proposed marinas shall comply with the site plan review
procedures contained within this chapter;
               b.   All proposed marinas shall comply with all applicable
regulatory requirements of state and federal agencies including but not limited
to State Department of Health and Environmental Control (DHEC) and U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers;
               c.   All proposed marinas shall require review and approval in
accordance with the special exception procedures of this chapter;
               d.   New marinas, which includes all structures defined as
marinas in §
153.013, are not allowed in waters classified for shellfish harvesting, except
for any lock harbor, dry stack, or expanded existing marina that does not close
any additional waters for shellfish harvesting, as provided by DHEC;
               e.   Marinas should be located in areas that will have minimal
adverse impact on wetlands, water quality, wildlife and marine resources, or
other critical habitats; and
               f.   Approval of this particular use by the town shall not
relieve the recipient (use) of responsibility for complying with all other
applicable requirements of any other local, county, state, or federal agency.
In addition, approval by the town does not guarantee nor recommend approval
from any other legal entity or governmental agency.
   (F)   Standards for commercial docks that are not marinas. A COMMERCIAL DOCK
(S) is a docking facility used for commercial purposes. A commercial dock is
not necessarily a marina, a boat yard, or a dry storage facility but shall be
subject to the following standards.
      (1)   All proposed commercial docks shall comply with the site plan
review procedures contained within this chapter.
      (2)   All proposed commercial docks shall comply with all applicable
regulatory requirements of state and federal agencies including but not limited
to State Department of Health and Environmental Control (DHEC) and U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers.
      (3)   All proposed commercial docks shall require review and approval in
accordance with the special exception procedures of this chapter.
      (4)   All proposed commercial docks must meet the density, intensity, and
dimensional standards of §
153.092(E)(3)(b)1.
      (5)   Project proposals shall include facilities for the proper handling
of litter, waste, refuse, and petroleum products in accordance with DHEC
regulations.
      (6)   New commercial docks are not allowed in waters classified for
shellfish harvesting if their proposed uses would result in closure of
additional waters for shellfish harvesting, as provided by DHEC.
      (7)   Commercial docks shall be located in areas that will have minimal
adverse impact on wetlands, wildlife and marine resources, or other critical
habitats;
      (8)   A boat ramp may be allowed at a commercial dock subject to division
(D) above.
      (9)   Approval of this particular use by the town shall not relieve the
recipient (use) of responsibility for complying with all other applicable
requirements of any other local, county, state, or federal agency. In addition,
approval by the town does not guarantee nor recommend approval from any other
legal entity or governmental agency.
   (G)   Legal nonconforming water-dependent uses. Any water-dependent use, as
defined by this section, that is a legal nonconforming use, has been permitted
or application has been made for permitting to the state existing prior to June
17, 2008, shall be considered an existing water-dependent use for the purposes
of this section. Any expansion of the existing use that is more intense or
increases by 25% or more of the use shall be subject to all provisions
contained within this section.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 5.3, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.093 FRC-O, FOLLY ROAD CORRIDOR OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   (A)   Statement of findings. The Folly Road Corridor Overlay Zoning District
(FRC-O) fronts on the east and west sides of Folly Road from its intersection
with Tatum Road south to Folly River, as shown on the map titled “Folly Road
Corridor Overlay Zoning District.” Folly Road is the main thoroughfare on James
Island and the only route leading to Folly Beach. As such, it carries a large
number of vehicles each day. Moreover, some of the properties along Folly Road
are located within the jurisdictional limits of the town, the City of Folly
Beach, the City of Charleston, and unincorporated Charleston County. The FRC-
O District was adopted to implement traffic safety measures, to improve the
visual character of the corridor, and to create consistency between the town,
the City of Folly Beach, the City of Charleston, and unincorporated Charleston
County concerning land use and design standards.
   (B)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of the FRC-O, Folly Road Corridor
Overlay Zoning District, is to create a corridor that is well-planned and
attractive through the implementation of consistent land use and design
standards with adjacent jurisdictions and utilizing traffic safety measures and
access management for vehicles and pedestrians to ensure safe and efficient
traffic movement.
   (C)   Effect of overlay zoning district. The FRC-O Folly Road Corridor
Overlay Zoning District regulations of this section apply in addition to the
underlying (base) zoning district and all other applicable regulations of this
chapter to impose different development rules for properties within the overlay
zoning district. In case of conflict between the regulations of this section
and other regulations in this chapter, the regulations of this section shall
control. These district regulations are intended to be consistent with similar
regulations adopted by the county and the City of Charleston. Legally
established existing development that does not meet the requirements as
described in this section shall be considered legal nonconforming and shall be
subject to the legal nonconforming requirements of this chapter.
   (D)   Applicability. The standards of this section shall apply to all
development within the FRC-O District, as shown on the maps titled “Folly Road
Corridor Overlay Zoning District,” “North Village Area,” “Commercial Core
Area,” “South Village Area,” “Neighborhood Preservation Area,” and
“Conservation Area,” except single-family residential development.
   (E)   Coordination with adjacent jurisdictions. A letter of coordination
from the town, the county, City of Charleston, and City of Folly Beach
(dependent upon jurisdiction) shall be required as part of all land development
applications with the exception of applications for single-family detached
residential uses. The purpose of the letter of coordination is to ensure that
each jurisdiction is aware of proposed development and that there is
consistency in land use, density/intensity and dimensional standards, and
design and development standards adopted by the jurisdictions. Coordination
with applicable town, city, or county: Council, Planning Commission, staff,
Design Review Board, or other review, recommendation, or decision-making bodies
may be required.
   (F)   Development standards and requirements (all areas). The following
development standards and requirements apply to all parcels within the Folly
Road Corridor Overlay District in addition to the requirements described in
each of the five areas. All non-single-family detached development applications
shall, at the time application is made, provide proof that the following
requirements will be met:
      (1)   Vehicle access.
         (a)   All parcels in this overlay with a future land use designation
of OR (Office Residential) are allowed one curb cut per 150 feet of road
frontage; all other commercial uses are allowed one curb cut every 250 feet.
Single-family detached residentially zoned parcels and parcels containing
single-family detached residential uses shall be exempt from this requirement.
         (b)   The minimum distance from a street intersection for new
residential or commercial use access is 75 feet measured from the edge of the
intersecting roadway to the beginning of the driveway radius. These minimum
spacing requirements will be increased if a right-turn deceleration lane is
required and shall equal the length of the turn lane and taper plus an
additional distance of 50 feet.
         (c)   As a condition of nonresidential use zoning/rezoning, a suitable
access management plan must be submitted demonstrating that the driveway
separation requirements can be met. The following techniques may be employed to
achieve this result, but the burden of accomplishing the desired effect remains
with the developer of the property:
            1.   Aggregation of parcels;
            2.   Parallel frontage or “backage” roads;
            3.   Shared curb cuts between adjoining properties; and
            4.   Shared access easements between parcels.
      (2)   Traffic study. A traffic impact analysis shall be required in all
instances in which the proposed developmental area exceeds five acres or 100
peak hour vehicle trips. Such traffic impact analysis shall be prepared by an
independent planning or engineering firm and shall be provided to the
municipality or jurisdiction for review simultaneous with submission of the
preliminary site plan for consideration.
      (3)   Pedestrian access. Bike and pedestrian ways shall be included in
site design and shall provide a continual link access to adjacent parcels, as
well as within the development area. Grade-separated pedestrian walkways must
provide a direct connection from the street to the main entrance, and to
abutting properties. Pedestrian walkways must be designed and located in a
manner that does not require pedestrians to walk through parking lots or cross
driveways and sidewalks may be allowed in right-of-way buffers.
      (4)   Building height. Maximum 35-foot height, excluding previously
approved planned developments.
      (5)   Signs. In addition to the requirements in §
153.341, all free-standing signs shall meet the following requirements:
         (a)   Reserved;
         (b)   Maximum six-foot height and 40 square feet in the North/South
Village, Neighborhood Preservation, and Conservation Areas;
         (c)   Maximum eight-foot height and 50 square feet in the Commercial
Core Area;
         (d)   Shared shopping center signs shall be allowed with a maximum
ten-foot height and 100 square feet;
         (e)   Internal illumination shall be allowed for all areas except the
Neighborhood Preservation and Conservation Areas which shall utilize external
illumination;
         (f)    Electronic message board signs shall be prohibited (except for
civic/institutional uses when approved by Zoning Administrator); and
         (g)   All legal nonconforming signs located in the Folly Road Corridor
Overlay Zoning District shall remain legal nonconforming until removed or
replaced.
      (6)   Rethink Folly Road Standards. The following development standards
and requirements apply to all parcels within the Folly Road Corridor Overlay
District in addition to the requirements described in each of the five Areas.
All non-single family detached development applications shall, at the time
application is made, provide proof that the following requirements will be met:
         (a)   A separated 12-foot multi-use path along the frontage of the
parcel shall be installed. Required ROW buffer plantings can be reduced to
accommodate the path if space is limited. The Zoning Administrator shall be
authorized to reduce the width of the required multi-use path if conditions
exist that would render the required width unfeasible.
         (b)    Required bicycle parking shall be installed in accordance with
§
153.332(J).
   (G)   North Village Area. (City of Charleston and Charleston County). The
North Village Area extends from Crosscreek/Tatum Street to Oakpoint Road (Ellis
Creek Area) as illustrated on the FRC-O map entitled “North Village.” Parcels
in this area are within the jurisdiction of the City of Charleston and
unincorporated Charleston County. This area currently consists of mixed medium
and low intensity commercial such as shopping centers, professional office, and
vehicle services. There are also higher intensity residential uses such as
apartment complexes. This area is intended to have less intense commercial uses
than the commercial uses found in the Commercial Core Area, particularly along
the north side of Central Park Road and west side of Folly Road. This area is
not intended for large scale commercial development such as big box stores or
mega-shopping centers. Future development in this area is to be a mix of medium
to lower intensity commercial, office, and residential uses with increased
buffers along Folly Road for more intensive commercial uses. The following
commercial recommendations apply to parcels within the North Village Area as
indicated on the map. All development applications shall, at the time
application is made, provide proof that the following requirements will be met:
      (1)   Permitted uses. Shall include those allowed in the Residential
Office (OR), General Office (OG), and Neighborhood Commercial (CN) Zoning
Districts as indicated on the overlay map and as described in
Table 153.110, Use Table.
         (a)   Prohibited uses. Vehicle sales (new or used), hotels and motels.
      (2)   Buffers.
         (a)   A minimum 25-foot vegetated right-of-way buffer shall be
required along Folly Road in the CN or OG designated areas;
         (b)   A minimum 15-foot vegetated right-of-way buffer shall be
required along Folly Road in the OR designated areas;
         (c)   In the CN or OG designated use areas, a minimum 20-foot rear
vegetated buffer shall be required adjacent to residential uses;
         (d)   In the OR designated use areas, a minimum 15-foot vegetated rear
buffer shall be required adjacent to residential uses; and
         (e)   Where appropriate, fencing may be required to screen adjacent or
surrounding residential uses. When a minimum six-foot height, opaque fence or
wall is utilized, the Zoning Administrator may reduce the land use buffer by up
to half its required depth when deemed appropriate; however, no required
vegetated buffer shall be less than ten feet in depth.
   (H)   Commercial Core Area. (Town of James Island and City of Charleston).
This area is the gateway and commercial center to the town and extends from Oak
Point Road (Ellis Creek Area) to Prescott Street as shown on the FRC-O map
entitled “Commercial Core.” Parcels in this area are primarily within the town
with a few parcels within the City of Charleston. This area consists of higher
intensity commercial uses such as chain type restaurants, vehicle service and
repair, drug stores, and shopping centers with minimal buffering along Folly
Road. Future development in this area is intended for higher intensity
commercial uses than those found in the other areas of the corridor. Future
development in this area should place high priority on pedestrian connectivity
between businesses and neighborhoods with attractive planted streetscapes and
building architecture. The following commercial recommendations apply to
parcels along Folly Road as indicated on the map. All development applications
shall, at the time application is made, provide proof that the following
requirements will be met:
      (1)   Permitted uses. Shall include those allowed in the Community
Commercial (CC) Zoning District as indicated on the overlay map and as
described in
Table 153.110, Use Table.
         (a)   Prohibited uses. Self-service storage/mini warehouses, vehicle
sales (new or used), hotels and motels.
      (2)   Uses requiring special exception.  Liquor, beer, or wine sales (as
defined in this chapter), bar or lounge, consumer vehicle repair, fast- food
restaurant, gasoline service stations (with or without convenience stores),
indoor recreation and entertainment, vehicle service.
      (3)   Buffers.
         (a)   A minimum of a 15-foot vegetated right-of-way buffer shall be
required along Folly Road.
         (b)   A minimum of a 25-foot rear vegetated buffer shall be required
adjacent to residential uses; and
         (c)   Fencing may be required to screen adjacent or surrounding
residential uses. When a minimum six-foot height, opaque fence or wall is
utilized, the Zoning Administrator may reduce the land use buffer by up to half
its required depth when deemed appropriate; however, no required vegetated
buffer shall be less than ten feet in depth.
   (I)   South Village Area. (City of Charleston, Town of James Island,
Charleston County). The South Village Area extends from Prescott Street to
Rafael Lane as illustrated on the FRC-O map entitled “South Village.” Parcels
in this area are within the jurisdiction of the town and the City of
Charleston, with a few parcels in unincorporated Charleston County. This area
currently consists of mixed high to medium intensity commercial development
along the west side of Folly Road such as shopping centers, big box stores, and
consumer services, and small scale offices and residential uses along the east
side of Folly Road. This area is intended to be developed similar to the North
Village Area with less intense commercial development than the Commercial Core
Area. This area is intended to have a mix of high to medium intensity uses
along the west side of Folly and low intensive development on the east side of
Folly Road. Future development in this area is to be a mix of commercial and
residential uses with increased right-of-way buffers along the west side of
Folly Road increased land use buffers on both sides of Folly Road when
commercial development occurs adjacent to single-family detached residential
uses. The following commercial recommendations apply to parcels within the
South Village Area as indicated on the map. All development applications shall,
at the time application is made, provide proof that the following requirements
will be met:
      (1)   Permitted uses. Shall include those allowed in the Residential (R),
Residential Office (OR), and Neighborhood Commercial (CN) Zoning Districts on
the east side of Folly Road and Community Commercial (CC) Zoning Districts on
the west side of Folly Road as indicated on the overlay map and as described in
Table 153.110, Use Table.
         (a)   Prohibited uses. Self-service storage/mini warehouses, vehicle
sales (new or used), hotels and motels.
      (2)   Uses requiring special exception. Vehicle storage, boat/RV storage,
bar or lounge, consumer vehicle repair, fast-food restaurant, gasoline service
stations (with or without convenience stores), indoor recreation and
entertainment, vehicle service.
      (3)   Buffers.
         (a)   A minimum 15-foot vegetated right-of-way buffer shall be
required along the east side of Folly Road and a minimum 35-foot vegetated
right-of-way buffer shall be required along the west side of Folly Road.
         (b)   A minimum 20-foot vegetated rear buffer shall be required
adjacent to residential uses.
         (c)   Fencing may be required to screen adjacent or surrounding
residential uses. When a minimum six-foot height, opaque fence or wall is
utilized, the Zoning Administrator may reduce the land use buffer by up to half
its required depth when deemed appropriate; however, no required vegetated
buffer shall be less than ten feet in depth.
   (J)   Neighborhood Preservation Area. (Charleston County, City of
Charleston). The Neighborhood Preservation Area extends from Rafael Lane to
Battery Island Drive as illustrated on the FRC-O map entitled “Neighborhood
Preservation.” This area consists primarily of low-intensity residential uses
with some commercial development primarily along the northwest area of Folly
Road. This portion of the overlay district is to provide an appropriate
transition from the more intense commercial development on James Island before
entering the Conservation Area and the City of Folly Beach by preserving the
existing low density residential character. The following commercial and
residential recommendations apply to parcels along Folly Road as indicated on
the map. All development applications shall, at the time application is made,
provide proof that the following requirements will be met:
      (1)   Permitted uses. Shall include those allowed in the Special
Management (S3) and Neighborhood Commercial (CN) Zoning Districts as indicated
on the overlay map and as described in
Table 153.110, Use Table.
         (a)   Prohibited uses. Vehicle sales (new or used), hotels and motels.
      (2)   Uses requiring special exception. Liquor, beer, or wine sales (as
defined in this chapter), bar or lounge.
      (3)   Building size. No single building structure shall exceed 5,000
square feet.
      (4)   Buffers.
         (a)   A minimum of a 25-foot vegetated right-of-way buffer shall be
required along Folly Road in the commercial area which may be reduced to 15
feet when there is no parking or vehicular use area between buildings and
right-of-way.
         (b)   A minimum of a 20-foot vegetated rear buffer shall be required
adjacent to residential uses.
         (c)   Fencing may be required to screen adjacent or surrounding
residential uses. When a minimum six-foot height, opaque fence or wall is
utilized, the Zoning Administrator may reduce the land use buffer by up to half
its required depth when deemed appropriate; however, no required vegetated
buffer shall be less than ten feet in depth.
   (K)   Conservation Area. (Charleston County, City of Folly Beach). The
Conservation Area extends from Battery Island Drive to Folly River as
illustrated on the FRC-O map entitled “Conservation.” This area is intended to
be the least intensely developed area of the overlay zoning district and is to
provide a natural scenic open space before entering the City of Folly Beach by
preserving the marsh views and vistas of this area. The following commercial
and residential recommendations apply to parcels along Folly Road as indicated
on the map. All development applications shall, at the time application is
made, provide proof that the following requirements will be met:
      (1)   Permitted uses. Shall include those allowed in the Neighborhood
Commercial (CN) and the Special Management (S3) Zoning District.
         (a)   Prohibited uses. Vehicle sales (new or used), hotels and motels.
      (2)   Uses requiring special exception. Liquor, beer, or wine sales (as
defined in this chapter), bar or lounge, consumer vehicle repair, fast- food
restaurant, gasoline service stations (with or without convenience stores),
indoor recreation and entertainment, vehicle service, hotels and motels.
      (3)   Buffers.
         (a)   A minimum of a 25-foot vegetated right-of-way buffer shall be
required along Folly Road in the Commercial Area which may be reduced to 15
feet when there is no parking or vehicular use area between buildings and
right-of-way.
         (b)   A minimum of a 20-foot vegetated rear buffer shall be required
adjacent to residential uses.
         (c)   Fencing may be required to screen adjacent or surrounding
residential uses. When a minimum six-foot height, opaque fence or wall is
utilized, the Zoning Administrator may reduce the land use buffer by up to one-
half its required depth when deemed appropriate; however, no required vegetated
buffer shall be less than ten feet in depth.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 5.4, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013; Ord.
2013-12, passed 11-21-2013; Ord. 2017-01, passed 2-16-2017; Ord. 2018-04,
passed 6-21-2018; Ord. 2018-07, passed 8-16-2018; Ord. 2019-04, passed 8-15-
2019; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 2020-02, passed 3-19-2020; Am. Ord.
2020-04, passed 5-21-2020)
USE REGULATIONS TABLE
§ 153.110 USE TABLE; USE TYPES; INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Use table. Principal uses shall be allowed within the base zoning
districts of this chapter in accordance with
Table 153.110.
   (B)   Definitions. All of the types of uses listed in the
Table 153.110 are defined in §
153.013.
   (C)   Use types. This subchapter and §§
153.120 through
153.180,
153.200 through
153.217,
153.230 through
153.234, and
153.250 through
153.255 explain how to interpret
Table 153.110, Use Table. The top of
Table 153.110 contains the zoning districts and left side of the table contains
the use types. Under the hierarchy established by this chapter, the NRM-25
District is the least intensive base zoning district, while the I District is
the most intensive base zoning district. The uses listed in
Table 153.110 are permitted or not permitted in each zoning district according
to the letter coding described in divisions (C)(1) through (C)(5) below.
      (1)   A; uses allowed by right. An “A” indicates that a use type is
allowed by right in the respective zoning district, subject to compliance with
all other applicable regulations of this chapter. A use allowed by right is
defined in §
153.013 of this code as a principal use allowed without the requirement of a
special exception.
      (2)   C; uses subject to conditions. A “C” indicates that a use type is
allowed in the respective zoning district only if it complies with use-specific
conditions and all other applicable regulations of this chapter. A cross-
reference to the applicable conditions can be found in the “condition” column
of
Table 153.110. The number provides a cross-reference to the use-specific
conditions contained in §§
153.120 through
153.180,
153.200 through
153.217,
153.230 through
153.234, and
153.250 through
153.255.
      (3)   S; special exception uses. An “S” indicates that a use type is
allowed only if reviewed and approved in accordance with the special exception
procedures of this chapter, subject to compliance with use-specific conditions
and all other applicable regulations of this chapter. A cross-reference to the
applicable conditions can be found in the “condition” column of
Table 153.110. The number provides a cross-reference to the use-specific
conditions contained in §§
153.120 through
153.180,
153.200 through
153.217,
153.230 through
153.234, and
153.250 through
153.255.
         (a)   Any use that was legally established before October 18, 2012
without special exception approval and which after October 18, 2012 is located
in a zoning district that requires special exception approval for the subject
use and which presently continues as an allowable use, shall not be considered
a nonconforming use and shall not require a special exception. Such uses shall
be deemed uses permitted by right, as defined in §
153.013 of this code.
         (b)   Any use that was legally established before October 18, 2012
with a conditional use permit and which after October 18, 2012 is located in a
zoning district that requires special exception approval for the subject use
and which presently continues as an allowable use, shall not be considered a
nonconforming use and shall not require a special exception. Such uses shall be
deemed uses permitted by right, as defined in §
153.013 of this code.
      (4)   Uses not allowed. A blank cell indicates that a use type is not
allowed in the respective zoning district, unless it is otherwise expressly
allowed by other regulations of this chapter.
      (5)   New or unlisted uses and use interpretation. The Zoning
Administrator shall be authorized to make use determination whenever there is a
question regarding the category of use based on the definitions contained in §
153.013 of this code or may require that the use be process in accordance with
the planned development (PD) procedures of this chapter.
To view a PDF file of this table, click here.
Table 153.110 Zoning Districts                          Condition
              NRM-25 AG-5 AGR RSL RSM MHS OR OG CN CC I
Table 153.110                                                          Zoning Districts
                                                                       NRM- AG- AGR RSL RSM MHS OR OG CN CC        I Condition
                                                                       25   5
AGRICULTURAL USES
ANIMAL PRODUCTION
Animal aquaculture, including finfish farming, fish hatcheries, or     A    A   C                            §
shrimp or shellfish farming (in ponds)                                                                               153.121
Concentrated animal feeding operations                                 S                                    
Horse or other animal production                                       S    A   C                            §
                                                                                                                     153.121
CROP PRODUCTION
Crop production                                                        S    A   A   S   S      S                 
Greenhouse production or food crops grown under cover                  A    A   A   C   C      C    C  C         C §
                                                                                                                     153.121
Horticultural production or commercial nursery operations              A    A   A   S         S      A         A  
Hydroponics                                                            S    A   A                             
Wineries                                                               C    C   C                           C §
                                                                                                                     153.180
FORESTRY AND LOGGING
Bona fide forestry operations                                          C    C   C                            §
                                                                                                                     153.143
Lumber mills, planing, or saw mills, including chipping or mulching    A    A   S                           A  
STABLE
Stable                                                                 S    A   C   C                         §
                                                                                                                     153.140
SUPPORT ACTIVITIES FOR AGRICULTURE USES                                                                    
Agricultural processing                                                C    C   S                           A §
                                                                                                                     153.121
Agricultural sales or services                                         A    A   C                  A         A §
                                                                                                                     153.164
                                                                                                                     §
Roadside stands, including the sale of sweetgrass baskets              C    C   C   C   C   C   C  C  C  C         C 153.164, §
                                                                                                                     153.178
RESIDENTIAL USES
Affordable dwelling units                                              S    C   C   C   A      C                §
                                                                                                                     153.139
Child caring institution (more than 20 children)                       S    S   S   S   S   S   S                 
Congregate living for the elderly (up to 15 residents)                 S    S   S   S   S   S   S                 
Duplex                                                                              A   S                    
Dwelling group                                                         C    C   C   C   C   C   C    C            §
                                                                                                                     153.127
Farm labor housing (up to 10 residents)                                C    C   C                            §
                                                                                                                     153.129
Farm labor housing (dormitory) (more than 10 residents)                S    S   S                            §
                                                                                                                     153.129
Group care home, residential (up to 20 children)                       S    S   S   S   S   S   S                 
Manufactured housing park                                                                                  
Manufactured housing unit                                              A    A   A   C   C   A   C                §
                                                                                                                     153.144
Manufactured housing unit, replacement                                 A    A   A   C   C   A   S                §
                                                                                                                     153.144
Multi-family, including condominiums or apartments                                  A            A           
Retirement housing                                                     S    S   S   S   S   S   S                 
Retirement housing, limited (up to 10 residents)                       S    S   S   S   S   S   S                §
                                                                                                                     153.128
Single-family attached, also known as townhouses or rowhouses                       C   S         C          §
                                                                                                                     153.122
Single-family detached                                                 A    A   A   A   A   A   A  C  C  C         C §
                                                                                                                     153.145
Single-family detached/manufactured housing unit (joint) or two        A    A   A   C         C                §
manufactured housing units (joint)                                                                                   153.144
Transitional housing, including homeless and emergency shelters, pre-               S      S  S  S  A           
parole detention facilities, or halfway houses
CIVIC / INSTITUTIONAL USES
COURTS AND PUBLIC SAFETY
Correctional institutions                                                                                A  
Parole offices or probation offices                                                                      A  
Safety services, including emergency medical or ambulance service,     A    A   A   S   S   S   A  A  A  A         A  
fire protection, or police protection
DAY CARE SERVICES
Adult day care facilities                                                  C   C   S   S   S   S  S  A  A         A §
                                                                                                                     153.149
Child day care facilities, including group day care home or child care     S   S   S   S   S   S  A  A  A         A §
center                                                                                                               153.149
Family day care home                                                   A    A   A   A   A   A   A  A    A         S  
DEATH CARE SERVICES
Cemeteries                                                             A    A   C   C   C   S   A  A  A  A         A §
                                                                                                                     153.173
Funeral services, including funeral homes or mortuaries                                   A  A  A  A         A  
EDUCATIONAL SERVICES
Business or trade school                                                   S   S              S  S  A         A  
College or university facility                                             S   S   S   S   S   S  S  S  A         A  
Personal improvement education, including fine arts schools or             S   S            S  S  C  A         A §
automobile driving schools                                                                                           153.146
Pre-school or educational nursery                                          C   C   S   S   S   S  S  A  A         A §
                                                                                                                     153.149
School, primary                                                            S   S   S   S   S   S      S           
School, secondary                                                          S   S   S   S   S   S      S           
HEALTH CARE SERVICES
Community residential care facilities                                         S      S        S    A           
Convalescent services, including nursing homes                                S   S   S   S   S  S  S  A           
Counseling services, including job training or placement services             S            A  A  A  A         A  
Health care laboratories, including medical diagnostic or dental                          A  A  A  A         A  
laboratories
Home health agencies                                                          S            A  A  A  A         A  
Hospitals, including general hospitals, specialized hospitals, chronic                    S  A  S  A         S  
hospitals, psychiatric or substance abuse hospitals, or hospices
Intermediate care facility for the intellectually disabled                    S      S        S  S  A           
Medical office or outpatient clinic, including psychiatrist offices,
abortion clinics, chiropractic facilities, or ambulatory surgical             S            A  A  A  A         A  
facilities
Outpatient facilities for chemically dependent or addicted persons                          S  S  A           
Public or community health care centers                                       S            A  A  A  A           
Rehabilitation facilities                                                                 S  A  A  A         A  
Residential treatment facility for children or adolescents (mental            S            S  S  S  A           
health treatment)
MUSEUMS, HISTORICAL SITES, AND SIMILAR INSTITUTIONS
Botanical gardens                                                      A    A   A                S  S         A  
Historical sites (open to the public)                                  C    C   C   C   C   A   A  A    A         A §
                                                                                                                     153.147
Libraries or archives                                                      A   A   A   A   A   A  A  A  A           
Museums                                                                    S   S   S   S   S   A  A  A  A           
Nature exhibition                                                      C    C   C                S  A          §
                                                                                                                     153.130
Zoos                                                                       S   S                S  S           
POSTAL SERVICE
Postal Service, United States                                          C    C   C   C   C   C   A  A  A  A         A §
                                                                                                                     153.148
RECREATION AND ENTERTAINMENT
Community recreation, including recreation centers                     A    A   A   A   A   A   A  A  A  A         A  
                                                                                                                     §
Drive-in theaters                                                                               C         A 153.126, §
                                                                                                                     153.131
Fishing or hunting guide service (commercial)                          A    A   A            A  A  A  A         A  
Fishing or hunting lodge (commercial)                                  A    A                                
Golf courses or country clubs                                          C    C   C   C   C      C                §
                                                                                                                     153.170
Golf driving ranges                                                        S   S                            §
                                                                                                                     153.131
Outdoor shooting ranges                                                S    S                               §
                                                                                                                     153.131
Parks and recreation                                                   C    C   C   C   C   C   C  C  C  C          §
                                                                                                                     153.131
Recreation and entertainment, indoor, including billiard parlors,                                                    §
bowling centers, ice or roller skating rinks, indoor shooting ranges,                         C  A          153.150
theaters, or video arcades
Recreation and entertainment, outdoor, including amusement parks,                                                    §
fairgrounds, miniature golf courses, race or go-cart tracks, or sports     C                     C         C 153.131
arenas
Recreation or vacation camps                                           C    C   C                            §
                                                                                                                     153.131
Special events (commercial and industrial)                                                    C  C         C §
                                                                                                                     153.252
Special events (residential and agricultural)                              S   S   S         S                §
                                                                                                                     153.253
RELIGIOUS, CIVIC, PROFESSIONAL, AND SIMILAR ORGANIZATIONS
Business, professional, labor, or political organizations                                 A  A  A  A         A  
Religious assembly                                                     C    C   C   C   C   C   C  C  C  C         C §
                                                                                                                     153.133
Social club or lodge                                                       S   S   S   S   S   S  A  A  A         A  
Social or civic organizations, including youth organizations,              S   S            S  A  A  A         A  
sororities, or fraternities
UTILITIES AND WASTE-RELATED USES
                                                                                                                     §
Utility service, major                                                 S    S   S   C   C   C   C  C  C  C         C 153.141, §
                                                                                                                     153.137
                                                                                                                     §
   Electric or gas power generation facilities                      S    S   S   C   C   C   C  C  C  C         C 153.141, §
                                                                                                                     153.137
   Electrical or telephone switching facility                       S    S   S   C   C   C   C  C  C  C         C §
                                                                                                                     153.141
   Sewage collector or trunk lines                                  S    S   S   C   C   C   C  C  C  C         C §
                                                                                                                     153.141
   Sewage disposal facilities                                       S    S   S   C   C   C   C  C  C  C         C §
                                                                                                                     153.137
   Utility pumping station                                          S    S   S   C   C   C   C  C  C  C         C §
                                                                                                                     153.141
   Utility substation                                               S    S   S   S   S   C   C  C  C  C         C §
                                                                                                                     153.141
   Water mains                                                      S    S   S   C   C   C   C  C  C  C         C §
                                                                                                                     153.141
   Water or sewage treatment facilities                             S    S   S   C   C   C   C  C  C  C         C §
                                                                                                                     153.141
   Water storage tank                                               S    S   S   C   C   C   C  C  C  C         C §
                                                                                                                     153.141
Utility service, minor                                                 A    A   A   A   A   A   A  A  A  A         A §
                                                                                                                     153.151
   Electric or gas power distribution                               A    A   A   A   A   A   A  A  A  A         A §
                                                                                                                     153.151
   Sewage collection service line                                   A    A   A   A   A   A   A  A  A  A         A §
                                                                                                                     153.151
   Water service line                                               A    A   A   A   A   A   A  A  A  A         A §
                                                                                                                     153.151
Waste-related uses                                                                                       S  
   Hazardous waste treatment or disposal                                                              S  
   Nonhazardous waste treatment or disposal                                                           S  
   Septic tank installation, cleaning, or related services                                   S         S  
   Solid waste combustors or incinerators, including cogeneration                                     S  
plants
   Solid waste disposal facility                                                                      S §
                                                                                                                     153.171
   Waste collection services                                                                          S  
   Waste transfer facilities                                                                          S  
COMMERCIAL USES
ACCOMMODATIONS
Bed and breakfast/short-term rentals                                   C    C   C   C   S   S   C  C  C  C          §
                                                                                                                     153.124
Hotels or motels                                                                            S  A  A         A  
Rooming or boarding houses                                                                  S  A  A           
RV (recreational vehicle) parks or campgrounds                         S    S   S                            §
                                                                                                                     153.132
ANIMAL SERVICES
Kennel                                                                 A    A   C                            §
                                                                                                                     153.174
Pet stores or grooming salons                                                                   S         A §
                                                                                                                     153.152
Small animal boarding (enclosed building)                              A    A   S                  S         A §
                                                                                                                     153.152
Veterinary services                                                    A    A   S            S  C  C  A         A §
                                                                                                                     153.152
FINANCIAL SERVICES
Banks                                                                                     C  C  C  A         A §
                                                                                                                     153.153
Financial services, including loan or lending services, savings and                       C  C  C  A         A §
loan institutions, or stock and bond brokers                                                                         153.153
FOOD SERVICES AND DRINKING PLACES
Bar or lounge (alcoholic beverages), including taverns, cocktail                              S  S         S  
lounges, or member exclusive bars or lounges
Catering service                                                       S    S   S   S   S   S   C  C  A  A         A §
                                                                                                                     153.154
Nonalcoholic beverage bars including coffee shops and smoothie bars                       S  C  C  C         C §
                                                                                                                     153.154
Restaurant, fast-food, including snack bars                                                   S  S         C §
                                                                                                                     153.135
Restaurant, general, including cafeterias, diners, delicatessens, or                        C  C  C         C §
full-service restaurants                                                                                             153.135
Sexually oriented business                                                                               C §
                                                                                                                     153.138
INFORMATION INDUSTRIES
Communication services, including radio or television broadcasting
studios, news syndicates, film or sound recording studios,                                  S  S  A         A  
telecommunication service centers, or telegraph service offices
Communications towers                                                  C    C                 C  C  C         C §
                                                                                                                     153.125
Data processing services                                                                    A  A  A         A  
Publishing industries, including newspaper, periodical, book,                             S  A  A  A         A  
database, or software publishers
OFFICES
Administrative or business office, including bookkeeping services,                                                   §
couriers, insurance offices, personnel offices, real estate services,                     C  C  A  A         A 153.155
secretarial services, or travel arrangement services
Government office and courts                                                              C  C  C  A         A §
                                                                                                                     153.155
Professional office, including accounting, tax preparation,                               C  C  C  A         A §
architectural, engineering, or legal services                                                                        153.155
OTHER NONRESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
Billboard                                                                                                S  
Convention center or visitors bureaus                                                     S  S  A  A         A  
Heavy construction services or general contractors, including paving                                     A  
contractors, or bridge or building construction
Office/warehouse complex                                                                      S  A         A  
Special trade contractors (offices/storage)                                                   S  A         A §
                                                                                                                     153.156
   Building equipment or other machinery installation contractors                          S  A         A §
                                                                                                                     153.156
   Carpentry contractors                                                                   S  A         A §
                                                                                                                     153.156
   Concrete contractors                                                                    S  A         A §
                                                                                                                     153.156
   Drywall, plastering, acoustical, or insulation contractors                              S           A §
                                                                                                                     153.156
   Electrical contractors                                                                  S  A         A §
                                                                                                                     153.156
   Excavation contractors                                                                  S  A         A §
                                                                                                                     153.156
   Masonry or stone contractors                                                            S  A         A §
                                                                                                                     153.156
   Painting or wall covering contractors                                                   S  A         A §
                                                                                                                     153.156
   Plumbing, heating, or air-conditioning contractors                                      S  A         A §
                                                                                                                     153.156
   Roofing, siding, or sheet metal contractors                                             S  A         A §
                                                                                                                     153.156
   Tile, marble, terrazzo, or mosaic contractors                                           S  A         A §
                                                                                                                     153.156
PARKING, COMMERCIAL
Parking garages                                                                             A    A         A  
Parking lots                                                                              S  A  A  A         A §
                                                                                                                     153.157
RENTAL AND LEASING SERVICES
Charter boat or other recreational watercraft rental services              C   C                S  A          §
                                                                                                                     153.092
Commercial or industrial machinery or equipment rental or leasing                               A         A  
Construction tools or equipment rental                                                        S  A         A  
Consumer goods rental centers                                                                 S  A           
Consumer goods rental service, including electronics, appliances,                                                    §
formal wear, costume, video or disc, home health equipment,                                   C  A          153.158
recreational goods, or other household items
Heavy duty truck or commercial vehicle rental or leasing                                        A         A  
Self-service storage/mini warehouses                                                            A         A §
                                                                                                                     153.136
Vehicle rental or leasing, including automobiles, light or medium duty
trucks, motorcycles, moving vans, utility trailers, or recreational                             A         A  
vehicles
REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE SERVICES
                                                                                                                     §
Boat yard                                                                  C   S                  C         C 153.159, §
                                                                                                                     153.092
Repair service, commercial, including electric motor repair,
scientific or professional instrument repair, tool repair, heavy duty                           A         A  
truck or machinery servicing and repair, tire retreading or recapping,
or welding shops
Repair service, consumer, including appliance, shoe, watch, furniture,                        C  A         A §
jewelry, or musical instrument repair shops                                                                          153.160
Vehicle repair, consumer, including muffler shops, auto repair                              S  S  A         A §
garages, tire or brake shops, or body or fender shops                                                                153.142
Vehicle service, limited, including automotive oil change or                                  C  A         A §
lubrication shops, or car washes                                                                                     153.142
RETAIL SALES
Building materials or garden equipment and supplies retailers                                 C  A         A §
                                                                                                                     153.162
   Garden supplies centers                                                                 C  A          §
                                                                                                                     153.162
   Hardware stores                                                                         C  A          §
                                                                                                                     153.162
   Home improvement centers                                                                  A           
   Outdoor power equipment stores                                                          C  A          §
                                                                                                                     153.162
   Paint, varnish, or wallpaper stores                                                     C  A          §
                                                                                                                     153.162
Food sales, including grocery stores, meat markets or butchers, retail                      C  C  A          §
bakeries, or candy shops                                                                                             153.163
Liquor, beer, or wine sales                                                                   S  S           
Nonstore retailers                                                                              A         A  
   Direct selling establishments                                                             A         A  
   Electronic shopping or mail-order houses                                                  A         A  
   Fuel (except liquefied petroleum gas) dealers, including heating                                   A  
oil dealers
   Liquefied petroleum gas (bottled gas) dealers                                             A         A §
                                                                                                                     153.161
   Vending machine operators                                                                 A         A  
Retail sales or services, general                                                             C  A          §
                                                                                                                     153.164
   Art, hobby, musical instrument, toy, sporting goods, or related                         C  A          §
products store                                                                                                       153.164
   Clothing, piece goods, shoes, jewelry, luggage, leather goods, or                       C  A          §
related products store                                                                                               153.164
   Convenience stores                                                                      S  S           
   Drug stores or pharmacies                                                               C  A          §
                                                                                                                     153.164
   Duplicating or quick printing services                                                C  C  A         A §
                                                                                                                     153.164
   Electronics, appliance, or related products store                                       C  A          §
                                                                                                                     153.164
   Florist                                                                                 C  A          §
                                                                                                                     153.164
   Furniture, cabinet, home furnishings, or related products store                         C  A          §
                                                                                                                     153.164
   Pawn shop                                                                                 A         A §
                                                                                                                     153.164
   Private postal or mailing service                                                     C  C  A         A §
                                                                                                                     153.164
   Tobacconist                                                                             C  A          §
                                                                                                                     153.164
   Warehouse clubs or superstores                                                            A         A  
Service stations, gasoline (with or without convenience stores)                               S  S         A §
                                                                                                                     153.165
Truck stop                                                                                      S         A  
Vehicle parts, accessories, or tire stores                                                      A         A  
Vehicle sales (new or used)                                                                     A         A  
   Automobile, or light or medium duty truck dealers                                         A         A  
   Heavy duty truck or commercial vehicle dealers                                            A         A  
   Manufactured (mobile) home dealers                                                        A         A  
   Motorcycle, watercraft, or recreational vehicle dealers                                   A         A  
RETAIL OR PERSONAL SERVICES
Consumer convenience service                                                                  A  A          §
                                                                                                                     153.166
   Automated bank/teller machines                                                        C  C  A          §
                                                                                                                     153.166
   Drycleaners or coin-operated laundries                                                  C  A          §
                                                                                                                     153.166
   Drycleaning or laundry pick-up service stations                                         C  A          §
                                                                                                                     153.166
   Locksmith                                                                               C  A          §
                                                                                                                     153.166
   One-hour photo finishing                                                                C  A          §
                                                                                                                     153.166
   Tailors or seamstresses                                                                 C  A          §
                                                                                                                     153.166
Hair, nail, or skin care services, including barber shops or beauty    C    C   C   C   C   C   C  C  A  A         A §
salons                                                                                                               153.123
Landscaping and horticultural services to commercial, industrial, or   C    C   S            C  C  A  A         A §
institutional buildings, and residences                                                                              153.168
Personal improvement service, including dance studios, health or                          C  C  C  A         A §
physical fitness studios, photography studios, or reducing studios                                                   153.167
Services to buildings or dwellings, including carpet or upholstery                        C  C  C  A         A §
cleaning, exterminating, or janitorial services                                                                      153.168
Tattoo parlors                                                                                           C §
                                                                                                                     153.179
VEHICLE AND WATERCRAFT STORAGE
Boat ramps                                                             C    C   C   C   C   C   C  C  C  C         C §
                                                                                                                     153.092(D)
Commercial dock                                                            S   S   S   S   S   S  S  S  S         S §
                                                                                                                     153.092(F)
Community dock                                                         S    S   S   S   S   S   S  S  S  S         S §
                                                                                                                     153.092(C)
Marina                                                                     S   S   S   S      S  S  S  S         S §
                                                                                                                     153.092(E)
Vehicle storage, including bus barns, boat or RV storage, or impound                            A         A  
yards
WHOLESALE SALES
Aircraft wholesalers, including related parts                                                   A         A  
Beverage or related products wholesalers, including alcoholic                                   A         A  
beverages
Book, periodical, or newspaper wholesalers                                                      A         A  
Chemical wholesalers (except pharmaceutical products, fertilizers, or                           A         A  
pesticides)
Clay or related products wholesalers                                                          S  A         A  
Computers or electronic products wholesalers                                                    A         A  
Construction material wholesalers, including brick, cement, concrete,
lumber, millwork, plywood, shell, stone, wood panel, or other related                           A         A  
materials
Electrical equipment, appliances, or components wholesalers                                     A         A  
Fabric or apparel wholesalers                                                                   A         A  
Farm supplies or equipment wholesalers                                                          A         A  
Flower, nursery stock, or florists’ supplies wholesalers             A    A                     A         A  
Food or related products wholesalers                                                            A         A  
Furniture, cabinets, or related products wholesalers                                            A         A  
Glass or related products wholesalers                                                           A         A  
Leather products wholesalers                                                                    A         A  
Machinery, tools, or construction equipment wholesalers                                         A         A  
Manufactured home (mobile home) or other prefabricated structures                               A         A  
wholesalers
Metal or mineral (except petroleum) wholesalers                                                 A         A  
Motor vehicles (commercial or passenger) or trailers wholesalers,                               A         A  
including related parts
Paint, varnish, or related supplies wholesalers                                                 A         A  
Paper or paper products wholesalers                                                           S  A         A  
Petroleum wholesalers                                                                           A         A  
Pharmaceutical wholesalers                                                                      A         A  
Plastics or rubber products wholesalers                                                         A         A  
Professional or commercial equipment or supplies wholesalers,                                   A         A  
including office, medical, or restaurant equipment
Sign wholesalers                                                                                A         A  
Tobacco or related products wholesalers                                                         A         A  
Toy or artwork wholesalers                                                                      A         A  
Watercraft (commercial or recreational) wholesalers, including related                          A         A  
parts
Wood products wholesalers                                                                       A         A  
Other miscellaneous wholesale sales                                                             S         A  
INDUSTRIAL USES
INDUSTRIAL SERVICES
Drycleaning or carpet cleaning plants                                                                    A  
Laundries, commercial                                                                                    A  
Photo finishing laboratories                                                                             A  
Research and development laboratories                                                                    A  
Scrap and salvage service, including automotive wrecking yards, junk
yards, parts salvage, paper salvage yards, wholesale scrap or waste                                      S  
materials establishments, or materials recovery facilities
MANUFACTURING AND PRODUCTION
Aircraft manufacturing, including related parts                                                          A  
Beverage or related products manufacturing, including alcoholic                                 S         A  
beverages
Cement or concrete products manufacturing, including concrete batching                                   A  
or asphalt mixing
Chemical manufacturing, including pharmaceutical products, chemical                                      S  
fertilizers, or pesticides
Clay or related products manufacturing                                 C                       C  C         A §
                                                                                                                     153.177
Computers or electronic products manufacturing                                                  C         A §
                                                                                                                     153.177
Electrical equipment, appliances, or components manufacturing                                   C         A §
                                                                                                                     153.177
Fabric or apparel manufacturing, including textile mills                                                 A  
Food or related products manufacturing                                                                   A  
Furniture, cabinets, or related products manufacturing                 C    C                     C         A §
                                                                                                                     153.177
Glass or related products manufacturing                                                         C         A §
                                                                                                                     153.177
Leather products manufacturing, including tanneries                                                      A  
Machinery, tools, or construction or construction equipment                                     C         A §
manufacturing, including farm equipment                                                                              153.177
Manufactured home (mobile home) or other prefabricated structures                                        A  
manufacturing
Metal, petroleum, coal, and other mineral products manufacturing,                                        A  
including refineries
Motor vehicle (commercial and passenger) or trailer manufacturing,                                       A  
including related parts
Paint, varnish, or related supplies manufacturing                                                        A  
Plastics or rubber products manufacturing                                                                A  
Printing press production or lithography                                                        C         A §
                                                                                                                     153.177
Professional or commercial equipment or supplies manufacturing,                                 C         A §
including office, medical, restaurant equipment, or specialty items                                                  153.177
Pulp or paper mills                                                                                      S  
Rendering plants                                                                                         S  
Sign manufacturing                                                                                       A  
Slaughterhouse and meat packing                                                                          S  
Stone or shell products manufacturing                                                           C         S §
                                                                                                                     153.177
Tobacco products manufacturing                                                                           A  
Toy or artwork manufacturing                                           C    C   C                  C         A §
                                                                                                                     153.177
Watercraft (commercial or recreational) manufacturing, including                                         A  
related parts
Wood products manufacturing                                                C   C                  C         A §
                                                                                                                     153.177
Other miscellaneous manufacturing and production                       C    C   C                  C         A §
                                                                                                                     153.177
WAREHOUSE AND FREIGHT MOVEMENT
Warehouse and distribution facilities                                                                    A  
   Cold storage plants                                                                                A  
   Freight container storage yards, excluding fuel storage facilitie                              C�§
                                                                                                                     153.172
   Freight forwarding facilities, including truck terminals, marine                          C         C §
terminals, or packing and crating facilities                                                                         153.169
   Fuel storage facilities, excluding nuclear fuels                                                   A  
   Grain terminals and elevators                                                                      A  
   Household moving storage                                                                           A  
   Parcel services                                                                                    A  
   Retail store warehouses                                                                            A  
   Stockpiling of sand, gravel, or other aggregate materials                                          A  
   Storage of weapons or ammunition                                                                   S  
OTHER USES
RECYCLING SERVICES
Recycling center                                                                                         A  
Recycling collection, drop-off                                         C    C   C   C   C   C   C  C  C  C         A §
                                                                                                                     153.175
RESOURCE EXTRACTION/MINING
Resource extraction/mining, including borrow pits, mining, oil or gas  S    S   S                           S §
extraction, quarries, or sand or gravel operations                                                                   153.134
TRANSPORTATION
Aviation, including private air strips                                 S                                  C §
                                                                                                                     153.176
Railroad facility                                                                                        A  
Sightseeing transportation, land or water                              S    S                     A         A §
                                                                                                                     153.092
Taxi or limousine service                                                                       A         A  
Urban transit systems                                                                                    A  
Water transportation, including coastal or inland water passenger          S   S                A  A         A §
transportation                                                                                                       153.092
 
(Ord. 2012-06, §§ 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, and Table 6.1-1, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-
02, passed 4-18-2013; Ord. 2015-01, passed 2-19- 2015; Ord. 2016-01, passed 4-
21-2016; Ord. 2016-05, passed 6-16-2016; Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-16-2017; Ord.
2018-02, passed 5-17-2018; Ord. 2018-08, passed 8-16-2018; Ord. 2019-01, passed
5-16-2019; Ord. 2022-01, passed 4-21-2022; Ord. 2022-03, passed 10-20-2022;
Ord. 2023-04, passed 5-18-2023)
USE CONDITIONS
§ 153.120 USE CONDITIONS; CONDITIONAL AND SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES.
   The following use conditions shall apply to principal uses in any zoning
district where these uses are allowed as conditional uses or special exceptions
as shown in
Table 153.110.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4 introduction, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-
18-2013)
§ 153.121 ANIMAL PRODUCTION AND AGRICULTURAL PROCESSING.
   Animal production and agricultural processing uses shall be subject to the
following standards.
   (A)   In order to be permitted by right, such uses must be located on a lot
with a minimum area of five acres. On lots with an area of under five acres,
such uses are allowed only if reviewed and approved in accordance with the
special exception procedures of this chapter.
   (B)   The use shall be set back at least 100 feet from road rights-of-way
and property lines bordering undeveloped parcels. A minimum 200-foot setback
shall be required from property lines abutting developed parcels.
   (C)   A minimum 50-foot buffer shall be maintained and planted within the
setback area along all interior property lines.
   (D)   Any outdoor lighting shall be oriented and arranged to minimize
spillover lighting and glare on surrounding roads and properties.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.1, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.122 ATTACHED SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS.
   Attached single-family dwellings shall be subject to the following
standards.
   (A)   Number of attached units in a single structure. In RSL and more
restrictive districts, no single structure may contain more than one attached
single-family dwelling. In all other districts, no single structure may contain
more than eight attached single- family dwellings.
   (B)   Lot area. The minimum lot area for attached dwellings shall comply
with the minimum lot area standards of the underlying zoning district. Where a
common area is provided, minimum lot area requirements may be calculated as an
average lot area by counting a proportionate amount of the common area in
calculating the area of each lot.
   (C)   Accessory structures. All accessory structures shall be located on the
property of the attached single-family dwelling and for the private use of the
property occupant(s). A minimum interior setback of three feet is required
between an accessory structure and the interior lot lines, provided that an
accessory structure may be located on one of the zero lot lines when
constructed of a material finish matching the dwelling unit exterior or is the
same height and materially a part of a fence or wall.
   (D)   Design standards.
      (1)   The front facade of an attached single- family dwelling may not
include more than 40% garage wall area.
      (2)   The roof of each attached single-family dwelling must be distinct
from the other through either separation of roof pitches or direction, or other
variation in roof design.
      (3)   At least 10% of the area of each facade that faces a street must be
comprised of windows.
   (E)   Other requirements. Prior to development or redevelopment of attached
housing on parcels in these districts, an applicant must complete site plan
review and meet all standards of this chapter. Single- family detached
residences are exempt from this requirement.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.2, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.123 HAIR, NAIL, OR SKIN CARE SERVICES.
   Hair, nail, or skin care services shall be subject to the following
standards.
   (A)   Hair, nail, or skin care services shall be limited to a maximum of one
chair in those districts in which they are allowed as a use subject to
conditions, otherwise this use shall fall under the special exception (S)
provisions of this chapter. There shall be no limit on the number of chairs in
those zoning districts in which they are a use allowed by right (A).
   (B)   Where hair, nail, and skin care services are allowed as a use with
conditions (C), this use shall have a maximum floor area of 5,000 square feet,
otherwise this use shall fall under the special exception provisions of this
chapter.
   (C)   Barber shops, beauty salons, and nail salons are allowed as a home
occupation in all residential and agricultural districts with a maximum of one
chair.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.3, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.124 BED AND BREAKFASTS/SHORT-TERM RENTALS.
   Bed and breakfasts/short-term rentals shall be subject to the following
standards.
   (A)   In residential zoning districts there shall be no visible evidence of
the conduct of a bed and breakfast/short-term rental when viewed from the
street right-of-way or from an adjacent lot and signs are expressly prohibited.
   (B)   Bed and breakfasts/short-term rentals shall contain no more than three
guest rooms.
   (C)   There shall be no cooking or kitchen uses in the bed and breakfast/
short-term rental space, distinct from the principal dwelling, in residential
zoning districts.
   (D)   Parking areas for bed and breakfast/short-term rental uses located in
agricultural or residential zoning districts shall be screened from view of
residential zoning districts and public rights-of-way by evergreen plant
material that will provide opaque screening at the time of plant maturity. In
addition to vehicles registered at the dwelling address, only one car per guest
room is allowed and must be capable of being completely parked within and upon
the premises.
   (E)   Owner of bed and breakfast/short- term rental shall be a full-time
resident of the dwelling and shall reside in the dwelling in residential zoning
districts. Proof of full-time residency must be provided at the time of
application with owner-occupied legal residence tax bill, driver’s license,
voter registration, vehicle registration, and any other documentation requested
by the Zoning Administrator and listed on the application. There shall be an
owner or innkeeper/manager residing on the premises in non-residential zoning
districts.
   (F)   Advertisements and listings for bed and breakfast/short-term rentals
must include an approved permit number. Advertisements that do not list a
permit number are considered a violation of this section.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.4, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013; Ord.
2019-01, passed 5-16-2019; Ord. 2023-04, passed 5-18-2023)
§ 153.125 COMMUNICATION TOWERS.
   (A)   Purpose and legislative intent. The Federal Telecommunications Act of
1996 affirmed the town’s authority concerning the placement, construction, and
modification of wireless telecommunications facilities. The regulations of this
section are designed to site communications towers in the town. It is the
intent of these regulations to allow for the harmonious coexistence of
communications towers and other land uses. It is also the intent of these
regulations to reduce the overall negative impact of communications towers by:
      (1)   Reducing the number of towers needed through a policy of
encouraging co-location; and
      (2)   If co-location is not feasible, encouraging the following:
         (a)   The use of stealth tower design, as defined in division (C)(1)
below;
         (b)   The clustering of towers (“tower farms”);
         (c)   The placement of towers away from roadways;
         (d)   The provision of effective screening; and
         (e)   The location of communications equipment on existing structures
or within existing utility substations or uses.
   (B)   Co-location exemption. Proposed communications equipment co-locating
on existing towers and structures without adding to their height shall require
only a zoning permit and shall not be subject to the requirements of this
section.
   (C)   Stealth tower provision.
      (1)   For the purposes of this section, the term STEALTH TOWER shall mean
a communications tower designed to unobtrusively blend into its existing
surrounding so as not to have the appearance of a communications tower.
Examples of STEALTH TOWERS include, but are not limited to, antenna tower
alternative structures, architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas,
building-mounted antennas painted to match the existing or proposed trees and
landscaping, and antenna structures designed to look like light poles.
      (2)   All proposed stealth tower designs must be approved by the Zoning
Administrator.
      (3)   A complete zoning permit application for a stealth tower that meets
all requirements of this chapter shall be approved.
   (D)   Tower abandonment. A tower that is not used for communication purposes
for more than 120 days (with no new application on file for any communication
user) is presumed to be out of service and the owner of such tower must notify
the staff and remove the tower within 50 days. Towers which are not maintained
by the owner according to the Building Code shall be removed by the owner
within 60 days. To ensure the removal of towers which do not meet requirements
for continued use or proper maintenance, a statement of financial
responsibility shall be submitted for each tower over 100 feet and a
performance bond for the amount of anticipated removal costs shall be posted
for each tower over 150 feet. Removal costs shall be charged to the tower
owner. The bond must be renewed as necessary to ensure that it is maintained at
all times during the existence of the tower.
   (E)   Pre-application meeting. Prior to submitting a formal application for
a zoning permit for communications tower the applicant is required to attend
one or more pre-application meetings. The purpose of the pre-application
meeting is to address key issues which will help to expedite the review and
permitting process. The Zoning Administrator may conduct a site visit at the
pre-application meeting.
   (F)   Zoning permit submittal requirements. Prior to zoning permit approval,
all applications for communications towers shall complete the site plan review
process as provided in §§
153.040 through
153.055 of this code. In addition to any site plan review requirements, the
application must contain the following items:
      (1)   A site plan, drawn to engineer’s scale, showing the location of the
tower guy anchors (if any), existing or proposed buildings and structures or
improvements, including parking, driveways, or access roads, fences, and
protected and grand trees affected by the proposed construction. If there are
no grand trees affected, a surveyor’s statement on the site plan must be shown.
Adjacent land uses shall also be noted on the site plan, with precise
measurements noted between the proposed tower and any residential structures on
surrounding properties.
      (2)   The site plan must show a vegetated buffer, either existing or
installed, that provides an effective screen from public rights-of-way and
adjacent property owners. If a buffer is to be installed, its placement on the
site will vary in order to provide the most effective screening from public
view. Required materials will be based on installation of a 25-foot buffer
around the fenced area.
      (3)   The height and typical design of the tower, typical materials to be
used, color, and lighting shall be shown on elevation drawings. The applicant
shall submit documentation justifying the total height of any communications
towers, facility and/or antenna and the basis therefor. Additionally, color and
material samples shall be provided.
      (4)   The tower must be located no closer to a residential structure than
a distance equal to one and one-half feet for each one foot in height of the
proposed tower plus 50 feet as measured from the center of the proposed tower.
At a minimum, there must be a 150-foot distance between the proposed tower and
a residential structure.
      (5)   A six-foot non-climbable fence must be placed around the tower
(except for those designed in a manner compatible with division (A)(2) above,
Stealth exemption) and any associated building. Guy wires may be fenced
separately.
      (6)   The proposed tower shall only be illuminated as required by the
Federal Communications Commission or Federal Aviation Administration. Nighttime
strobe lighting shall not be incorporated unless required by the Federal
Communications Commission or Federal Aviation Administration. If lighting is
required, the applicant shall provide a detailed plan for sufficient lighting
that shall be as unobtrusive and inoffensive as permissible under state and
federal regulations, and an artist’s rendering or other visual representation
showing the effect of light emanating from the site on neighboring habitable
structures within 1,500 feet of all property lines of the parcel on which the
communications towers are located.
      (7)   Communications towers shall contain a sign no larger than four
square feet to provide adequate notification to persons in the immediate area
of the presence of an antenna that has transmission capabilities. The sign
shall contain the name(s) of the owner(s) and operator(s) of the antenna(s) as
well as emergency phone number(s). The sign shall be located so as to be
visible from the access point of the site. No other signage, including
advertising, shall be permitted on any facilities, antennas, antenna supporting
structures, or antenna towers, unless required by law.
      (8)   The proposed tower must be located such that adequate setbacks are
provided on all sides to prevent the tower’s fall zone from encroaching onto
adjoining properties. The fall zone shall be determined by an engineer
certified by the state in a letter which includes the engineer’s signature and
seal.
      (9)   Proposed towers may not be located within 1,000 feet of the center
of an existing tower unless the applicant certifies that the existing tower
does not meet the applicant’s structural specifications and the applicant’s
technical design requirements, or that a co-location agreement could not be
obtained at a reasonable market rate. In the event of the above situation, the
clustering of new towers on the same parcel near existing towers is permitted.
      (10)   A copy of the tower’s search ring.
      (11)   The applicant shall supply the FAA study number for the proposed
tower.
      (12)   For the purposes of co-location review and review of efforts at
siting a tower on the same lot near an existing tower, the applicant shall
submit satisfactory written evidence such as correspondence, agreements,
contracts, and the like, that alternative towers, buildings, or other
structures are not available or suitable for use within the applicant’s tower
site search area that are structurally capable of supporting the intended
antenna or meeting the applicant’s necessary height criteria, providing a
location free of interference from other communication towers, or available at
the prevailing market rate (as determined by staff communication with persons
doing business within the industry). Additionally, the applicant shall build
the proposed tower in such a manner as may allow other telecommunication users
to co-locate.
      (13)   The tower shall be designed with excess capacity for future needs.
      (14)   A statement of financial responsibility shall be submitted for
each tower over 100 feet and a performance bond for the amount of anticipated
removal costs shall be posted for each tower over 150 feet. The bond must be
renewed as necessary to ensure that it is maintained at all times during the
existence of the tower.
      (15)   The applicant shall furnish a visual impact assessment which shall
include:
         (a)   A “zone visibility map” which shall be provided in order to
determine locations where the tower may be seen.
         (b)   Pictorial representations of “before and after” view from key
viewpoints both inside and outside the county, including but not limited to
major highways and roads; state and local parks; historic districts; preserves
and historic sites normally open to the public; and from any other location
where the site is visible to a large number of visitors, travelers, or
residents.
         (c)   An assessment of the visual impact of the tower base, guy wires,
and accessory buildings from abutting and adjacent properties and streets.
   (G)   Retention of expert assistance and reimbursement by applicant.
      (1)   The town may hire any consultant and/or expert necessary to assist
the town in reviewing and evaluating the application, including the
construction and modification of the site, once permitted, and any requests for
recertification.
      (2)   For towers proposed to be 100 feet or higher, the applicant shall
deposit with the town funds sufficient to reimburse the town for all reasonable
costs of the consultant and expert evaluation and consultation to the town in
connection with the review of any application including the construction and
modification of the site, once permitted. The initial deposit shall be $5,000.
The application will not be processed until receipt of this initial deposit.
The town will maintain a separate account for all such funds. The town’s
consultants/experts shall invoice the county for all its services in reviewing
the application, including the construction and modification the site, once
permitted. If at any time during the process this account has a balance less
than $1,000, the applicant shall immediately, upon notification by the town,
replenish said account so that it has a balance of at least $5,000. Such
additional account funds shall be deposited with the town before any further
action or consideration is taken on the application. In the event that the
amount held in the account by the town is more than the amount of the actual
invoicing at the conclusion of the project, the remaining balance shall be
promptly refunded to the applicant. The applicant shall not be entitled to
receive any interest earnings on unused funds.
      (3)   The total amount of the funds needed as set forth in division (G)
(2) above may vary with the scope and complexity of the project, the
completeness of the application and other information as may be needed to
complete the necessary review, analysis, and inspection of any construction or
modification.
      (4)   Additional fees may be required if additional hearings before the
Board of Zoning Appeals are caused by or requested by the applicant.
   (H)   Surrounding property owner notification.
      (1)   In order to better inform the public, in the case of a new
communications tower, the applicant shall hold a “balloon test” as follows: the
applicant shall arrange to fly, or raise upon a temporary mast, a minimum of
three foot diameter brightly colored balloon at the maximum height of the
proposed new tower. The dates (including a second date, in case of poor
visibility on the initial date) shall be provided to the Zoning Administrator
ten days after receipt of the complete application notice. The dates shall be
set a minimum of 15 days prior to the Zoning Administrator making a final
decision on the zoning permit. The balloons shall be flown for ten consecutive
hours between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
      (2)   Once the application is deemed complete by the Zoning Administrator
for a communications tower zoning permit, the Planning/Zoning Department shall
provide parties in interest, neighbor, posted and newspaper notice in
accordance with the requirements of §
153.040(G) of this code. The public notice shall include the dates of the
balloon tests as provided by the applicant and the date the Zoning
Administrator must make a final decision on the zoning permit.
   (I)   Time limit for staff review. Upon receipt of an application deemed
complete by the Zoning Administrator for a communications tower zoning permit,
the Zoning Administrator shall have a maximum of 45 days to act on the
application. The 45 days begins from the date the applicant is sent written
notice of a complete application from the Zoning Administrator. Failure to act
on the application within 45 days will result in the applicant being granted a
zoning permit.
   (J)   Zoning permit approval criteria.
      (1)   A complete zoning permit application for a stealth tower that meets
all requirements of this chapter shall be approved.
      (2)   Upon review of a complete application, no zoning permit shall be
issued for a communications tower until the Zoning Administrator determines
that the proposed tower complies with the following criteria and standards:
         (a)   That the location and height of the proposed tower will not
substantially impact the character of property listed in or eligible for the
National Register of Historic Places, other significant environmental,
cultural, or historical sites, officially designated scenic roads, or rivers,
and that the tower is designed to blend into the environment and minimize
visual impact;
         (b)   If a completely new tower is necessary, the applicant must
provide written proof of attempts at co-location and siting a tower on the same
lot near an existing tower were proven not feasible or practical;
         (c)   That the applicant has pursued any available publicly owned
sites and privately owned sites occupied by a compatible use, and if not
utilized, that these sites are unsuitable for operation of the facility under
applicable communications regulations and the applicant’s technical design
requirements; and
         (d)   Staff shall review and approve the color and materials to be
used for the proposed tower.
      (3)   If the Zoning Administrator finds a proposed communications tower
will have a substantially negative impact on a surrounding area or adjoining
property, the use shall fall under the special exception (S) provisions of this
chapter. In determining whether the use shall fall under the special exception
(S) provisions, the Zoning Administrator may consider one or more of the
following items:
         (a)   The proposed use will be detrimental to adjacent land uses
including historical sites;
         (b)   The proposed use will have a negative aesthetic visual impact;
         (c)   The proposed use will have an adverse effect on the environment
(not including radio frequency emissions); and/or
         (d)   The proposed use is contrary to the public health, safety, or
welfare.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.5, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.126 DRIVE-IN THEATERS.
   Drive-in theaters shall be subject to the following standards.
   (A)   A use for this purpose shall have a setback 200 feet from any
agricultural, residential, or office zoning district. Adult drive-in theaters
are subject to §
153.138 of this code.
   (B)   Such use shall be located as to draw a minimum of vehicular traffic to
and through local streets in nearby residential areas.
   (C)   The principal vehicular access for such use shall be on a major
thoroughfare or collector street having a right-of-way at least 60 feet wide.
   (D)   Vehicular entrances and exits shall be provided separately and not
less than 100 feet apart.
   (E)   Between the street entrance and the ticket gate there shall be an area
for vehicles waiting to pass the gate. Said area shall have such capacity as
will make it ordinarily unnecessary for entering vehicles to wait in the
street.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.6, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.127 DWELLING GROUPS.
   (A)   General. The Zoning Administrator shall be authorized to make
recommendations to the Planning Commission who has the authority to allow the
use of dwelling groups for two or more residential structures on the same
zoning lot when it is deemed necessary to facilitate random grouping of
buildings to preserve trees and other natural features, mitigate development
constraints due to irregular shaped parcels or for the conversion of
condominium buildings to fee simple ownership. Dwelling groups are required to
complete the site plan review process and the subdivision process for fee
simple ownership as provided by S.C. Code § 6-29-110.
   (B)   Density, intensity, and dimensional standards. Density, intensity, and
dimensional standards of the underlying zoning district shall apply including
all waterfront development standards of §
153.079. In each case, the distance between structures shall not be less than
the sum of the minimum interior setbacks required for the zoning district. This
distance shall be measured from the closest protrusion of each structure. A
minimum 40 foot by 40 foot building envelope (1,600 square feet) and a maximum
of a 100 foot by 100 foot building envelope (10,000 square feet) shall be shown
for each dwelling to indicate the area where each dwelling is to be
constructed.
      (1)   Access; services. The provisions for access, parking, utilities,
sewer, and water can be provided by a public entity or located on common area
owned by the property owners.
      (2)   Setbacks and buffers. Setback and buffer requirements within
building envelopes shall not apply to dwelling groups.
   (C)   Site plan review. Dwelling groups are required to complete the site
plan review process. In addition to any other applicable provisions of this
chapter, the following information shall be shown on all site plans.
      (1)   Layout. Each dwelling unit shall face (front) a street, courtyard,
or outdoor living space.
      (2)   Building envelope. Building envelopes shall be depicted on site
plans indicating the location of the proposed or existing building footprint or
building area as a dashed line.
      (3)   Accessory structures. Proposed accessory structures must be shown
on the site plans and meet the accessory structure requirements of this
chapter.
      (4)   Parking and vehicular access. If the required parking is not within
the building to be constructed, there shall be shared or offsite parking that
meets the required parking needs within the common area. Each dwelling group
shall provide an access consistent with the road construction standards in
Appendix A of Ordinance 2012-06, as amended.
   (D)   Subdivision. Individual lots for attached or detached buildings may be
located on their own fee-simple lot provided the subdivision meets the
following requirements:
      (1)   Site plan review. Completion of site plan review as described in
division (C) above is required prior to submitting for subdivision of a
dwelling group.
      (2)   Lots. Except as described in divisions (B) and (C) above, lots
created in dwelling groups for fee simple ownership shall meet the subdivision
regulations in §§
153.300 through
153.315 and road construction standards in Appendix A of Ordinance 2012-06, as
amended.
      (3)   Building envelopes. Building envelopes shall be depicted on
subdivision plats indicating the location of the proposed or existing building
footprint or building area as a solid line.
      (4)   Common area. A mandatory property owners association shall own the
common areas and documentation shall be included on all plats and recorded deed
insuring access, parking, utilities, and maintenance.
      (5)   Subdivisions. Subdivisions shall be in compliance with the
Horizontal Property Act, S.C. Code §§ 27-31-130 et seq.
   (E)   Other zoning requirements. Unless specifically modified by this
section, dwelling groups shall comply with all other requirements of this
chapter for the district in which located.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.7, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.128 LIMITED RETIREMENT HOUSING.
   Small site retirement housing shall be subject to the following standards.
   (A)   Such use shall be allowed only if reviewed and approved as a special
exception in accordance with the procedures of this chapter.
   (B)   Only existing single-family dwelling units may be used for such
facilities.
   (C)   No more than ten residents shall be allowed within such facility.
   (D)   Medical services shall not be permitted on the premises.
   (E)   Small site retirement housing will not include programs or treatment
for individuals suffering from mental illness, drug addiction, or alcoholism.
   (F)   Facilities shall comply with all applicable state regulations.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.8, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.129 FARM LABOR HOUSING.
   Farm labor housing shall be subject to the following standards.
   (A)   Such use shall be set back 100 feet from road rights-of-way and
property lines bordering undeveloped parcels. A minimum 200-foot setback shall
be required from property lines abutting developed parcels.
   (B)   A minimum 50-foot buffer shall be maintained and planted within the
setback area along all interior lot lines.
   (C)   For farm labor housing that is not dormitory style, the minimum lot
area for such use as a use permitted by right shall be five acres. Such use
shall be allowed as a special exception on parcels under five acres in area.
   (D)   Farm labor housing shall be used on a seasonal basis only, not as
year-round housing.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.9, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.130 NATURE EXHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Where nature exhibitions are of public ownership or listed in the
National Registry of Natural Landmarks or registered as a heritage site with
the State Heritage Trust in accordance with the provisions of S.C. Code §§ 51-
17-10 et seq., either in public or private ownership, accessory uses to acquire
maintenance revenue are permitted.
   (B)   Accessory uses are limited to the retail sale of gifts, novelties,
souvenirs, food services, and bicycle, horse, or boat rental for on-premises
use.
   (C)   Accessory structures so used shall not exceed 10% in size of the
principal structures when the nature exhibit is housed, or 1,200 square feet
for each acre when the nature exhibit is not enclosed.
   (D)   Parking requirements for each accessory use, in addition to the
parking requirements for the principal use, shall comply with the parking
requirements for the type of use as specified in the off-street parking
schedule of §§
153.330 through
153.342 of this code.
   (E)   Signs advertising accessory uses shall be located on the premises and
not visible from a public road.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.10, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.131 PARKS, RECREATION, AND OUTDOOR RECREATION/ ENTERTAINMENT.
   Any structure established in connection with such uses shall have a setback
of not less than 100 feet from any property in an agricultural, residential, or
office zoning district, except where such property line abuts a street, in
which case the front setback established for the district shall apply.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.11, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.132 RV PARKS.
   Recreational vehicle parks shall be subject to the following standards.
   (A)   Location and access. Recreational vehicle parks shall be located in a
public park or with direct access to a state or federal numbered highway or an
approved county road. No entrance to or exit from a recreational vehicle park
shall be through an agricultural, residential, or office zoning district.
   (B)   Site conditions. Condition of soil, groundwater level, drainage, and
topography shall not create hazards to the property or the health or safety of
the occupants. No portion of the site that is subject to unpredictable and/or
sudden flooding, subsidence, or erosion shall be used for any purpose that
would expose persons or property to hazards.
   (C)   Spaces for occupancy; uses permitted; lengths of stay. Spaces in
recreational vehicle parks may be used by recreation vehicles, as defined
herein. Spaces shall be rented by the day, week, or month only, and no
recreational vehicle shall remain in the same trailer park for more than 30
days. The recreational vehicle park owner shall be responsible for maintaining
records of all recreational vehicles and their lengths of stay and shall make
these records available to the Zoning Administrator for review upon request.
   (D)   Site planning and required improvements. Site planning and
improvements shall provide for:
      (1)   Facilities and amenities appropriate to the needs of the occupants;
      (2)   Safe, comfortable, convenient, and sanitary use by occupants under
all weather conditions to be expected during periods of occupancy; and
      (3)   Protection of occupants from adverse environmental influences, and
where appropriate, protection of the neighborhood from potential adverse
influences within the recreational vehicle park.
   (E)   Relation of spaces to public streets. No space shall be located so
that any part intended for occupancy for sleeping purposes shall be within 50
feet of the right-of-way line of any major thoroughfare or collector street, or
within 25 feet of the right-of-way line of any other street.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.12, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.133 RELIGIOUS ASSEMBLY.
   All religious assembly uses shall comply with the site plan review
requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.13, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.134 RESOURCE EXTRACTION.
   (A)   Applications. All uses involving resource extraction shall complete
the site plan review process and obtain a zoning permit. Prior to site plan
review approval, the applicant shall receive approval or written documentation
of exemption from the State Department of Health and Environmental Control
(DHEC).
   (B)   Special exceptions. Resource extraction uses that do not meet the
conditions below shall comply with the special exception procedures of this
chapter and all requirements of division (A) above, Applications, shall apply.
The applicant shall receive special exception approval and approval from DHEC,
prior to site plan review approval. The Board of Zoning Appeals may, on a case-
by-case basis, also require conditions of approval, including but not limited
to, requiring that the excavation area be screened and that a drainage plan be
submitted and approved for the restoration of the site when excavation has been
completed.
   (C)   Special exception exemptions for residential and bona fide
agricultural uses. Excavation or grading activities solely for residential use,
recreational use, or bona fide agricultural use shall be exempt from the
special exception procedures of this chapter if the use complies with all of
the following conditions.
      (1)   The resource extraction operation shall be limited to one year.
      (2)   The resource extraction operation shall not be located within 50
feet of any property boundary and/or within 250 feet of any building intended
for human occupancy existing at the time of permit application.
      (3)   The resource extraction operation shall be two acres or less,
provided that the total accumulated area(s) dedicated to resource extraction
uses on a parcel is less than five acres. The special exception procedures of
this chapter shall apply if the total accumulated resource extraction area is
greater than five acres.
      (4)   No more than one resource extraction use shall be permitted on the
same property within one year from the date of zoning permit approval for a
previous resource extraction use.
   (D)   Plat alternative for bona fide agricultural uses. The Zoning
Administrator may waive the requirement that an approved and recorded plat of
the subject property be submitted as part of a resource extraction application
for a bona fide agricultural use when the proposed use complies with all of the
conditions of division (C) above, and a scaled survey, scaled aerial
photograph, or print of equal quality is submitted.
   (E)   Special exception exemption for solid waste disposal facility.
Excavation or grading activities required to prepare, operate, or close a
permitted solid waste disposal facility site shall be exempt from the special
exception procedures of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.14, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.135 RESTAURANTS, BARS, AND LOUNGES WITH ALCOHOL.
   All proposed bars, lounges, and restaurants serving beer or alcoholic
beverages located within 500 feet of the property line of a lot in a
residential zoning district or a lot containing a residential use shall require
review and approval in accordance with the special exception procedures of this
chapter. Distances shall be measured from the nearest property line of the
subject parcel to the nearest property line of a lot containing a residential
use or located in a residential zoning district.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.15, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.136 SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY.
   Self-service storage facilities shall be subject to the following standards.
   (A)   Performance standards.
      (1)   Front setback. All structures, including the accessory manager’s
office/apartment, must be set back a minimum of 35 feet from the right-of-way
or the district minimum setback, whichever is greater.
      (2)   Side and rear buffers/screening.
         (a)   Where projects abut lots zoned office, commercial, or
industrial, no side and rear setbacks are required.
         (b)   Where sites abut residentially zoned properties, buildings
adjacent to the perimeter must face inward with their doors away from such
areas.
      (3)   Building lengths and access. To ensure ease of access for emergency
vehicles, no building shall exceed 300 feet in length. Spaces between ends of
buildings shall be at least 30 feet.
      (4)   Accessory office/apartment. One management office and/or accessory
residence shall be permitted.
      (5)   Parking and circulation.
         (a)   Project entrances shall be 30 feet in width.
         (b)   Roadway widths on interior drives shall be at least 24 feet in
width where buildings face and open onto such drives on only one side. Where
buildings face and open onto drives on both sides, widths of such drives shall
be at least 34 feet.
         (c)   Turning radii, whether provided at the terminus of interior
drives or at points between buildings, shall be at least 30 feet to provide for
the maneuverability of emergency vehicles.
      (6)   Signs. Signs shall comply with the requirements contained in §§
153.330 through
153.342 of this code. Signs shall not be attached to or displayed on walls or
fences used as required screening.
   (B)   Operating conditions.
      (1)   Commercial activities. The manufacture or sale of any commercial
commodity or the provision of any service from the premises is prohibited.
      (2)   Commercial repair activities. Commercial repairs of autos, boats,
motors, furniture, or other items on the premises are prohibited.
      (3)   Storage of flammable substances. Storage of flammable chemical
substances within the complex is prohibited.
      (4)   Open storage. Open storage of automobiles and boats is permitted
only where such areas are screened to comply with landscaping, screening, and
buffer requirements contained in §§
153.330 through
153.342 of this code.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.16, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.137 SEWAGE DISPOSAL FACILITIES.
   Sewage disposal facilities shall be subject to the following standards.
   (A)   Sewage disposal facilities shall comply with the site plan review
requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Any structure established in connection with such uses shall have a
setback of not less than 50 feet from any property line.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.17, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.138 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. It is the purpose of the regulations of this
section to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the
health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the town, and to
establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the continued
deleterious locating and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within
the town. The provisions of this section have neither the purpose nor effect of
imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative
materials including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the
intent or effect of this section to restrict or deny access by adults to
sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access
by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their
intended market. Neither is it the intent or effect of this section to condone
or legitimize any use or act which is otherwise prohibited or punishable by
law.
   (B)   Findings of fact.
      (1)   There are no sexually oriented businesses in the town. However,
should such a business open, it is in the interests of the health, safety, and
welfare of the patrons of such businesses, as well as the citizens of the town,
to provide certain minimum standards and regulations for sexually oriented
businesses, as well as the operators and employees of such businesses.
      (2)   Sexually oriented businesses generate secondary effects that are
detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare. Additionally, sexually
oriented businesses are frequently used for unlawful sexual activities,
including public sexual indecency, prostitution, and sexual encounters of a
casual nature. Such businesses are of particular concern to the community when
they are located in close proximity to each other, or close to schools,
churches, or parks and playgrounds.
      (3)   The concern over sexually transmitted diseases is a legitimate
health concern of the town which demands reasonable regulation of sexually
oriented businesses in order to protect the health and well-being of our
citizens.
      (4)   Live entertainment presented by some sexually oriented businesses
involves a considerable amount of bodily contact between patrons and semi-nude
and nude employees and dancers, including physical contact, such as hugging,
kissing, and sexual fondling of employees and patrons. Many sexually oriented
businesses have “couch” or “straddle” dancing, and in these “dances,” employees
sometimes do such things as sit in a patron’s lap, place their breasts against
the patron’s face while physical contact is maintained, and gyrate in such a
manner as to simulate sexual intercourse. Such behavior can lead to
prostitution. The Town Council recognizes that preventing prostitution and the
spread of sexually transmitted diseases are clearly within its police powers:
Southeastern Promotions, Inc. v. Conrad, 341 F. Supp. 465, 477 (E.D. Tenn.
1972), rev’d on other grounds, 420 U.S. 546 (1975). The Town Council believes
that prohibiting physical contact between performers and patrons at a sexually
oriented business establishment is a reasonable and effective means of
addressing these legitimate governmental interests.
      (5)   Licensing is a legitimate and reasonable means of accountability to
ensure that operators of sexually oriented businesses comply with reasonable
regulations, to facilitate the enforcement of legitimate location and
distancing requirements, and to ensure that operators do not knowingly allow
their establishments to be used as places of illegal sexual activity or
solicitation.
      (6)   The location of sexually oriented businesses close to residential
areas diminishes property values and leads to conditions that give rise to
crime in residential neighborhoods. Many studies performed in other communities
indicate conclusively that property crimes and sexual crimes increase
significantly in neighborhoods in which a sexually oriented business is
located.
      (7)   It is not the intent of this section to suppress any speech
activities protected by the First Amendment or to place any impermissible
burden on any constitutionally-protected expression or expressive conduct by
the enactment or enforcement of this chapter. Rather, it is the intent of the
Town Council to enact a “content neutral regulation” that addresses the
secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ADULT ARCADE. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated, slug-operated, or electronically, electrically, or
mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other
image-producing devices are maintained to show images to one or more persons
per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are
distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of “specified
sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
      ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT RETAIL STORE, or ADULT VIDEO STORE. A commercial
establishment which excludes any person by virtue of age from all or part of
the premises generally held opened to the public where products or equipment
distinguished or characterized by a predominant emphasis or simulation of
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” are sold, rented,
or displayed therein (unless the business complies with the requirements of
division (c) of this definition), or which has as one of its principal business
purposes, the sale or rental of any form, for consideration, one or more of the
following:
         (a)   Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion picture, video cassettes or video reproductions,
slides, or other visual representations which depict or describe “specified
sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
         (b)   Instruments, devices, parapher- nalia, or clothing which are
designed for use in connection with “specified sexual activities,” excluding
condoms and other birth control and disease prevention products. A commercial
establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve
the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing “specified
sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” and still be categorized as
an adult bookstore or adult video store. Such other business purposes will not
serve to exempt such commercial establishment from being categorized as an
adult bookstore or adult video store so long as one of its principal business
purposes is the offering for sale or rental, the specified materials which
depict or describe “specified sexual activities or “specified anatomical
areas.”
         (c)   ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT RETAIL STORE, or ADULT VIDEO STORE does
not mean any establishment which displays, rents, or sells sexually-explicit
materials in an enclosed room equal to less than 10% of the business’s total
square footage, and which prohibits anyone under 18 years of age from entering
the room.
         (d)   PRINCIPAL BUSINESS PURPOSE, as used in this definition, means
that more than 25% of the “stock in trade” of the business is devoted to the
display, rent, or sale of items, products, or equipment distinguished or
characterized by a predominant emphasis on, or simulation of, “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
         (e)   STOCK IN TRADE for purposes of this definition shall mean the
greater of:
            1.   The retail dollar value of all items, products, or equipment
readily available for purchase, rental, viewing, or use by patrons of the
establishment, excluding material located in any storeroom or other portion of
the premises not regularly open to patrons; or
            2.   The total volume of shelf space and display area.
      ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial eating
or drinking establishment, which regularly features:
         (a)   Persons who appear in a state of nudity;
         (b)   Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
“specified anatomical areas” or by “specified sexual activities;” and/or
         (c)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
      ADULT CAR WASH. A car wash where some or all of the employees are semi-
nude or nude and/or where “specified sexual activities” occur or “specified
anatomical areas” are exhibited.
      ADULT MOTEL.
         (a)   A hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment which:
            1.   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of
consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas;” and which may
have a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the
availability of these types of photographic reproductions;
            2.   Routinely offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time
that is less than eight hours; or
            3.   Routinely allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to
sub-rent the room for a period of time that is less than eight hours.
         (b)   Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or a similar
commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a
period of time that is less than eight hours creates a rebuttable presumption
that the establishment is an ADULT MOTEL as that term is defined in this
section.
      ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial motion picture theater, one of
whose principal business purposes is, for any form of consideration, to
regularly show films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
      ADULT THEATER. A commercial theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment, one of whose principal business purposes is to
regularly feature persons who appear in a state of nudity, or which features
live performances which are characterized by the exposure of “specified
anatomical areas” or by “specified sexual activities.”
      CERTIFICATE OF NONCONFORMITY. A certificate issued by the Planning/Zoning
Department to any sexually oriented business which is operating at the time of
the enactment of this chapter, and is not in compliance with one or more of its
provisions.
      DANCER. An employee of a sexually oriented business who entertains
patrons through expressive forms of dance and/or movement.
      EMPLOYEE. An individual working and performing services for any sexually
oriented business, including any independent contractor who provides services
on behalf of any sexually oriented business to the patrons of such business.
      ESTABLISHED or ESTABLISHMENT. As used in this section, means and includes
any of the following:
         (a)   The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as
a new business;
         (b)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a
sexually oriented business, to a sexually oriented business;
         (c)   The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other
existing sexually oriented business; or
         (d)   The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
      HEALTH CLUB. As used in this section, means a health club where some or
all of the employees are nude or semi-nude, or in which “specified sexual
activities” occur or “specified anatomical activities” are exhibited.
      LICENSEE. A person in whose name a sexually oriented business regulatory
license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the
individual listed as an applicant on the application for a sexually oriented
business regulatory license.
      LIVE ENTERTAINMENT. For purposes of this section, means a person who
appears nude, semi-nude, or a performance which is characterized by the
exposure of “specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities.”
      NUDE MODEL STUDIO. Any place where a person appears in a state of nudity
or displays “specified anatomical areas” and is observed, sketched, drawn,
painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who
pay money or any other form of consideration, and such place is not subject to
an exemption pursuant to any provision herein.
      NUDE, NUDITY, or STATE OF NUDITY.
         (a)   The appearance, real or simulated, of a bare human buttock,
anus, male genitals, female genitals, or the areola or nipple of the female
breast; or
         (b)   A state of dress which fails to completely cover a human
buttocks, anus, male or female genitals, pubic region, or areola or nipple of
the female breast.
      OPERATE or CAUSES TO BE OPERATED. As used in the section, means to cause
to function or to put or keep in operation.
      OPERATOR. Any person on the premises of a sexually oriented business who
is authorized to exercise overall operational control of the business, or who
causes to function or who puts or keeps in operation the business. A person may
be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business
whether or not the person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business.
      PATRON. Any person who pays a sexually oriented business any form of
consideration for services provided to him or her by the sexually oriented
business.
      PERSON. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.
      SEMI-NUDE or SEMI-NUDITY. A state of dress in which clothing covers no
more than the genitals of a man, or the pubic region and areolae of the breasts
of a woman.
      SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. Includes an adult arcade, adult bookstore,
adult retail store or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult
motion picture theater, adult theater, nude model studio, or any other
business, such as a car wash or a health club, which offers, for consideration,
materials or services characterized as depicting “specified sexual activities”
or “specified anatomical areas”, or whose employees perform services in a state
of nudity or semi-nudity.
      SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS REGULATORY LICENSE. A special annual operating
license necessary for a sexually oriented business to do business in the town.
Such license is in addition to a county business license, and is issued by the
Planning/Zoning Department.
      SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. The male genitals in a state of sexual
arousal and/or the vulva or more intimate parts of the female genitals.
      SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Includes any of the following:
         (a)   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts;
         (b)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;
         (c)   Masturbation, actual or simulated; and/or
         (d)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in divisions (a) through (c) above.
      SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT (OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS). The increase
in floor areas occupied by the business by more than 25%, as the floor areas
exist on the date the original zoning permit was obtained.
      TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL (OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS).
Includes any of the following:
         (a)   The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
         (b)   The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling
interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; and/or
         (c)   The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal
device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for
transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person
possessing the ownership or control.
      VIEWING ROOM. The room, booth, or area where a patron of a sexually
oriented business would ordinarily be positioned while watching a film, video
cassette, video reproduction, or live production.
   (D)   Permits and licenses; application.
      (1)   Every person engaged or intending to engage in a sexually oriented
business is required to obtain a sexually oriented business regulatory license.
      (2)   A person commits a misdemeanor if he or she operates a sexually
oriented business without a valid zoning permit and business license and
sexually oriented business regulatory license issued by the town.
      (3)   An application for a zoning permit and/or a sexually oriented
business regulatory license must be made on a form provided by the Planning/
Zoning Department. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram
showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor
space occupied by the business. The sketch of diagram need not be prepared by
an architect, engineer, or surveyor, but must be drawn to a designated scale or
drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of
plus or minus six inches.
      (4)   The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of
division (E) below and the premises must be inspected and found to be in
compliance with applicable state laws by the State Department of Health and
Environmental Control (DHEC) and the Building Official.
      (5)   If an entity wishing to operate a sexually oriented business is an
individual, he or she must sign the application for a sexually oriented
business regulatory license as applicant. If an entity wishing to operate a
sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has
a 10% or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a
sexually oriented business regulatory license as an applicant.
      (6)   The fact that a person possesses other types of state or town
permits and/or licenses does not exempt him or her from the requirements to
obtain a sexually oriented business regulatory license.
      (7)   All licenses granted pursuant to this section shall be for a term
of one year. Said term shall commence on January 1 of each year and terminate
upon December 31 of the same year. Applications for a license filed at any
other time during the year shall be treated the same as if they were filed
January 1 of that year and shall terminate on December 31 of that same year,
and no proration shall be permitted.
      (8)   The completed application shall contain the following information
and shall be accompanied by the following documents:
         (a)   If the applicant is:
            1.   An individual, the individual shall state his or her legal
name and any aliases and shall submit satisfactory proof that he or she is 18
years of age;
            2.   A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name,
and the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited,
and a copy of the partnership agreement, if any;
            3.   A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name,
the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good
standing under the statutes of the state, or in the case of a foreign
corporation, evidence that it is currently authorized to do business in the
state, the names and capacity of all officers, directors, and principal owners,
and the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the
registered office for service of process; or
            4.   A limited liability company shall state its complete name, the
date of filing of the articles of organization and operating agreement, and the
names of all managers and members.
         (b)   Whether the applicant or any other individual listed under
division (D)(8)(a) above had worked under or has had a previous sexually
oriented business regulatory license under this section or other adult business
or adult entertainment ordinance from another state, city or town denied,
suspended, or revoked, including the name and location of the adult business
for which the permit was denied, suspended, or revoked, as well as the date of
the denial, suspension, or revocation.
         (c)   Whether the applicant or any other individual listed under
division (D)(8)(a) above holds any other licenses under this section or other
similar adult business ordinance from another city, town, or state and, if so,
the names and locations of such other permitted business.
         (d)   The location of the proposed sexually oriented business,
including a legal description of the property, street address, and telephone
number(s), if any.
         (e)   Proof of the applicant’s right to possession of the premises
wherein the sexually oriented business is proposed to be conducted.
         (f)   The applicant’s or any other individual’s listed, pursuant to
division (D)(8)(a) above, mailing address and residential address.
         (g)   A photocopy of the driver’s license or other government issued
identification card for the individuals listed in division (D)(8)(a) above.
      (9)   If the applicant is an individual, he or she must sign the
application for a license. If the applicant is a corporation, it must be signed
by the president or vice president, attested to by the secretary or assistant
secretary, and each individual having a 10% or greater interest in the
corporation. If the applicant is a general or limited partnership, it must be
signed by a general partner. If the applicant is a limited liability company,
it must be signed by the manager and each individual having a 10% or greater
interest in the company.
      (10)   If an omission or error is discovered by the Zoning Administrator,
the application will be returned to the applicant for completion or correction
without further action by the Zoning Administrator . Any application rejected
due to an omission or error shall be re-filed only when the omission or error
has been remedied. For the purposes of this section, the date the Zoning
Administrator accepts an application which is complete shall be the date the
application is deemed to be filed with the Zoning Administrator .
      (11)   In the event that the Zoning Administrator determines that the
applicant has improperly completed the application, he or she shall promptly
notify the applicant of such fact and allow the applicant 30 days to properly
complete the application. The time period for granting or denying a license
shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is allowed an
opportunity to properly complete the application.
      (12)   Applicants for a license under this section shall have a
continuing duty to promptly supplement application information required by this
section in the event that said information changes in any way from what is
stated on the application. The failure to comply with said continuing duty
within 30 days from the date of such change, by supplementing the application
on file with the Zoning Administrator , shall be grounds for suspension or
revocation of a sexually oriented business regulatory license.
   (E)   Approval or denial of license.
      (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall approve or deny the issuance of a
sexually oriented business regulatory license to an applicant within 30 days
after receipt of a completed application. The Zoning Administrator shall deny a
license if:
         (a)   The applicant (if a natural person) is under the age of 18
years;
         (b)   The applicant has made a false statement upon the application or
has given false information in connection with an application;
         (c)   The applicant or any holder of any class of stock, or a
director, officer, partner, or principal of the applicant has had an adult
business license revoked or suspended anywhere within the state within one year
prior to the application;
         (d)   The applicant has operated an adult business which has
determined to be a public nuisance under state law or this code within one year
prior to the application;
         (e)   A corporate applicant is not in good standing or authorized to
do business in the state;
         (f)   The applicant is overdue in the payment to the town of taxes,
fees, fines, or penalties assessed against him, her, or it or imposed against
him, her, or it in relation to an adult business;
         (g)   The applicant has not obtained the required sales tax license;
or
         (h)   The applicant of the sexually oriented business is in violation
of, or is not in compliance with, any of the provisions of this section.
      (2)   In the event that the Zoning Administrator denies a license, he or
she shall make written findings of fact stating the reasons for the denial, and
a copy of such decision shall be sent by first class mail to the address shown
in the application. An applicant shall have the right to a hearing before the
Board of Zoning Appeals as set forth in division (J) below. A written request
for such hearing shall be made to the Zoning Administrator within ten days of
the date of the denial of the license by the Zoning Administrator. This hearing
shall be held within 60 days from the date a timely request for hearing is
received. If no such hearing is held or if no order is issued within the time
set forth below following such hearing, the application shall be deemed
approved.
         (a)   At the hearing referred to above, the Board of Zoning Appeals
shall hear such statements and consider such evidence as the Planning staff,
enforcement officers, the applicant or other party in interest, or any other
witness shall offer which is relevant to the denial of the license application
by the Zoning Administrator.
         (b)   If the Board of Zoning Appeals determines that the applicant is
ineligible for a license per division (E)(1) above, it shall issue an order
sustaining the Zoning Administrator’s denial of the application, within five
days after the hearing is concluded, which shall include findings of fact. A
copy of the order shall be mailed to the applicant at the address supplied on
the application.
         (c)   The order of the Board of Zoning Appeals made pursuant to this
section shall be a final decision and may be appealed to the Circuit Court
pursuant to the provisions of the state’s Local Government Planning Act, as may
be amended from time to time. Failure of an applicant to timely follow the
limits specified above constitutes a waiver by him, her, or it of any right he,
she, or it may otherwise have to contest denial of his, her, or its license
application.
      (3)   If any town official or department fails to render a timely
decision pursuant to the terms of this section then said official or department
shall be deemed to have approved or consented to the issuance of the requested
license.
      (4)   The sexually oriented business regulatory license, if granted,
shall state of its face the names of the persons to whom it is granted, the
expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. The
sexually oriented business regulatory license shall be posted in a conspicuous
place at or near the entrance of the sexually oriented business so that it may
be easily read at any time.
   (F)   Temporary permits.
      (1)   An applicant may apply for a temporary permit if a sexually
oriented business regulatory license has been denied by the Zoning
Administrator, an appeal has been denied by the Board of Zoning Appeals, and an
appeal or other legal challenge is pending in the Circuit Court.
      (2)   The temporary permit application shall include all information
required by the sexually oriented business regulatory ordinance.
      (3)   The temporary permit application shall also include written
evidence of the pendency of the appeal to the Circuit Court.
      (4)   The completeness of the temporary permit application will be
determined within five days of its submittal.
      (5)   After submittal of a complete application, the Zoning Administrator
shall issue the temporary permit within five days.
      (6)   Upon issuance, the applicant may commence its sexually oriented
business adult use as set forth in the permit, pending compliance with other
applicable non-sexually oriented business laws, rules, and regulations.
      (7)   In the event that denial of a sexually oriented business regulatory
license is upheld by the courts, an investment or construction undertaken
during the time of temporary permit must be removed and the business ceased.
The applicant shall not have the right to continue with any business or recoup
any investment from the town. Revocation of the permit shall not be considered
a taking.
   (G)   Inspection.
      (1)   An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the
Sheriff’s Office, State Department of Health and Environmental Control (DHEC),
local Fire Department, Planning/Zoning Department, Legal Department, and/or
Building Inspections Department to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented
business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is
occupied open for business.
      (2)   The licensee (or the licensee’s agent or employee) of a sexually
oriented business commits a misdemeanor if he or she refuses such lawful
inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or open for business.
Such refusal is also grounds for suspension or revocation of a sexually
oriented business regulatory license.
   (H)   Expiration of sexually oriented business regulatory license.
      (1)   A sexually oriented business regulatory license must be renewed
each year, at least two weeks prior to the expiration date.
      (2)   If, after denying the issuance or renewal of a sexually oriented
business regulatory license, the Zoning Administrator finds that the basis for
denial of the license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may then be
granted a sexually oriented business regulatory license.
   (I)   Suspension of sexually oriented business regulatory license. The
Zoning Administrator shall suspend a sexually oriented business regulatory
license for a period not to exceed 30 days if the Zoning Administrator
determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee:
      (1)   Has violated or is not in compliance with any provision of this
section;
      (2)   Has refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented
business premises as authorized by this section; or
      (3)   Has knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually
oriented business premises.
   (J)   Revocation of sexually oriented business regulatory license.
      (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall revoke a sexually oriented business
regulatory license if a cause of suspension in division (H) above occurs and
the sexually oriented business regulatory license has previously been suspended
within the preceding 12 months.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator shall revoke a sexually oriented business
regulatory license if the Zoning Administrator determines that:
         (a)   The licensee gave false or misleading information in the
material submitted to the Zoning or Business License Departments during the
application process;
         (b)   The licensee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually
oriented business during a period of time when the licensee’s sexually oriented
business regulatory license was suspended; or
         (c)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of
sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation to occur in or on
the permitted and/or licensed premises.
      (3)   If subsequent to revocation, the Zoning Administrator finds that
the basis for the revocation of the sexually oriented business regulatory
license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a sexually
oriented business regulatory license.
   (K)   Appeal of designation, or suspension or revocation of sexually
oriented business regulatory license. A sexually oriented business or a
licensee may appeal, in writing, the Zoning Administrator’s designation of a
business as a sexually oriented business, or the suspension or revocation of a
sexually oriented business regulatory license to the Board of Zoning Appeals in
accordance with the procedures of §
153.052.
   (L)   Transfer of sexually oriented business regulatory license. Each
sexually oriented business regulatory license issued hereunder is non-
transferable. A licensee shall not transfer a sexually oriented business
regulatory license to another sexually oriented business, nor shall a licensee
operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a sexually oriented
business regulatory license at any place other than the address designated in
the application.
   (M)   Location restriction.
      (1)   A person commits a misdemeanor if he or she operates or causes to
be operated a sexually oriented business outside of the zoning district where
the use is allowed. (See §
153.110.)
      (2)   A person commits a misdemeanor if he or she operates or causes to
be operated a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of:
         (a)   A facility for religious assembly;
         (b)   A public or private school;
         (c)   A boundary of any residential zoning district;
         (d)   A public park adjacent to any residential zoning district; and
         (e)   The property line of a lot occupied by a residential use.
      (3)   A person commits a misdemeanor if he or she causes or allow the
operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented
business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or the
substantial enlargement of floor areas of any sexually oriented business in any
building, structure, or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented
business without the issuance of sexually oriented business regulatory license
for each use and every expansion.
      (4)   For the purpose of this section, measurement shall be made in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the
nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises
where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line
of the premises of a facility for religious assembly, a public or private
school, to the nearest boundary of any residential zoning district, a public
park adjacent to any residential zoning district, or the nearest property line
of a lot occupied by a residential use.
      (5)   No expansion of the uses or physical structure of a building
housing a sexually oriented business shall occur without the issuance of a
sexually oriented business regulatory license for each use and expansion.
   (N)   Regulation of adult car washes. Nude or semi-nude employees of adult
car washes must not be able to be seen from any public right-of-way or
adjoining parcels. Necessary fencing and/or buffers, as set forth in the
relevant sections of this chapter, must be placed around the establishment in
order to ensure that patrons can only view the employees once the patrons are
inside the establishment.
   (O)   No fondling or caressing. It is a misdemeanor for any nude or semi-
nude employee or dancer to fondle or caress any patron, and no patron shall
fondle or caress any nude or semi-nude employee or dancer.
   (P)   Nonconforming sexually oriented business.
      (1)   Any sexually oriented business operating on the date the original
sexually oriented business regulations were enacted by the Town Council, that
is found to be in violation of any of the location provisions of division (L)
above, shall be deemed a nonconforming use, and upon written notification by
the Zoning Administrator, must obtain a certificate of nonconformity from the
Planning/Zoning Department. A certified nonconforming use will be permitted to
continue to operate for a period not to exceed one year before being licensed.
      (2)   If the sexually oriented business does not, within six months of
notification by the Zoning Administrator, obtain a certificate of
nonconformity, then the business will be deemed in violation of the chapter,
and will not be permitted to continue to operate more than six months after the
date that the regulations of this section first became effective.
      (3)   No nonconforming use shall be increased, enlarged, extended, or
altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use.
      (4)   If two or more sexually oriented businesses are within 1,000 feet
of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented
business which was first established and continually operating at that
particular location is the conforming use and the later-established business is
the nonconforming use.
      (5)   Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming
use is not rendered a nonconforming use due to the subsequent location of a
church, public or private elementary or secondary school, public park,
residential district, or a residential lot within 1,000 feet of the sexually
oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid
sexually oriented business regulatory license, and does not apply when an
application for a sexually oriented business regulatory license is submitted
after a sexually oriented business regulatory license has expired or has been
revoked.
   (Q)   Adult motels prohibited. A person in control of a sleeping room in a
hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment, commits a misdemeanor if he
or she rents or sub-rents a sleeping room to a person, and then, within eight
hours from the time the room is rented, rents or sub-rents the same sleeping
room again, as such creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is
an adult motel as that term is defined in this section. For purposes of this
section, RENT or SUB-RENT means the act of permitting a room to be occupied for
any form of consideration.
   (R)   Six-foot distance rule.
      (1)   No nude or semi-nude employee or nude or semi-nude dancer shall
perform live entertainment within six feet of any patron, nor shall any patron
experience live entertainment within six feet of any nude or semi-nude employee
or nude or semi-nude dancer, in a sexually oriented business. In the case of
adult car washes, the six-foot distance rule necessitates that patrons get out
of their vehicles, and watch the vehicles being washed no less than six feet
away from the nude or semi-nude employees.
      (2)   Sexually oriented businesses with live entertainment shall
conspicuously post a sign that advises patrons that they must be at least six
feet away from nude or semi-nude dancers at all times.
   (S)   Gratuities.
      (1)   No patrons shall personally pay or personally give a gratuity to
any nude or semi-nude dancer or nude or semi-nude, employee in a sexually
oriented business establishment. Gratuities can be placed in containers at a
location away from the nude or semi-nude dancer, or handed to clothed
employees. In the alternative sexually oriented businesses could charge a cover
charge, and prohibit all gratuities.
      (2)   No nude or semi-nude dancer or nude or semi-nude employee a
sexually oriented business shall solicit or accept any pay or gratuity
personally from a patron.
      (3)   Sexually oriented businesses with nude or semi-nude dancers or nude
or semi-nude employees shall conspicuously post a sign that advises patrons
that gratuities to be paid personally to nude or semi-nude dancers and nude or
semi-nude employees are prohibited.
   (T)   Additional regulations pertaining to the exhibition of sexually
explicit films and videos, adult arcades, and health clubs. A person who
operated or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, as defined in
this section, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than 150
square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, or other video reproduction
which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or
which allows specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or
which allows specified sexual activities to occur in a separate room in the
establishment shall comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   Upon application for a sexually oriented business regulatory
license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises
showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager’s
stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures, and designating
any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager’s
station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also
designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if
granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer’s or
architect’s blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be
oriented to the north or to some designated street or object, and should be
drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the
various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an
accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The Zoning Administrator may waive the
foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram
that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the
premises has not been altered since it was prepared.
      (2)   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
      (3)   No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager’s
station may be made without the prior approval of the Zoning Administrator.
      (4)   It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure
that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager’s station at
all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
      (5)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of every area of
premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding
restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the
premises has two or more manager’s stations. The view required in this division
must be by direct line of sight from the manager’s station.
      (6)   It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and also the duty
of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that the view
area specified in division (T)(5) above remains unobstructed by any doors,
walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials at all times and to
ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has
been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the
application filed pursuant to division (T)(1) above.
      (7)   No viewing room, nor any room or enclosed area in a health club
that cannot be viewed from the manager’s station, may be occupied by more than
one person at any time.
      (8)   In order to ensure that places to which patrons access are
adequately illuminated, the premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting
fixtures at an illumination at least one candle foot as measured at the floor
level.
      (9)   It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and also the duty
of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that the
illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is
present in the premises.
      (10)   A person having a duty under divisions (T)(1) through (T)(9) above
commits a misdemeanor if he or she knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.
   (U)   Exemptions. It is a defense to prosecution under this section that a
person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
      (1)   By a proprietary school licensed by the state; a college, junior
college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation.
      (2)   By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation.
      (3)   In a structure:
         (a)   Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and
no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing.
         (b)   Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll
at least three days in advance of the class.
         (c)   Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one
time.
   (V)   Violations. Refer to provisions contained in §§
153.375 through
153.383, Violations and enforcement.
   (W)   Severability. If any provision of this section or its application to
any circumstance is held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid for
any reason, this holding does not affect other provisions or applications of
this section which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end, the provisions of this section are severable.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.18, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.139 SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
   (A)   To promote ownership or occupancy of affordable, quality housing by
low-income households, property within the AG-5, AGR, or RSL Zoning District
may be approved for subdivision and development in accordance with the density,
intensity, and dimensional standards of this section (see division (B)(3)
below).
   (B)   The entity developing the subject parcel must construct new
residential housing for the provision of affordable housing as certified by the
town. The purchaser or tenant of the affordable household, at the time of
closing or rental agreement, must meet the HUD definition of low-income. The
following standards of this section must also be met.
      (1)   Single-family detached affordable housing units. Single-family
detached affordable housing units shall meet the low-moderate income standards
as defined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development or the LOW
INCOME definition, which is a household income 80% or below the median
household income for the town.
      (2)   Ownership. Single-family detached affordable housing units shall be
sold or rented to qualified low-moderate income households, as defined in
division (B)(1) above.
      (3)   Density, intensity, and dimensional standards.
         (a)   The maximum density and minimum lot area standards listed in the
following table shall apply to single-family detached affordable housing units:
 
Zoning District Maximum Density           Minimum Lot Area
AG-5            3 dwelling units per acre 8,000 square feet
AGR             3 dwelling units per acre 8,000 square feet
RSL             4 dwelling units per acre 4,000 square feet
 
         (b)   Single-family detached affordable housing units in the AG-
5 Zoning District shall comply with the dimensional standards of the underlying
base zoning district, as contained in §§
153.065 through
153.079, Base zoning districts, where no standard is listed in the table above.
         (c)   Single-family detached affordable housing units in the AGR and
RSL Zoning Districts shall comply with the dimensional standards of the RSL
Zoning District, as contained in §§
153.065 through
153.079, Base zoning districts, where no standard is listed in the table above.
      (4)   Uses.
         (a)   Single-family attached housing units are allowed in the RSL
Zoning District if they meet all requirements of this section.
         (b)   Only single-family detached affordable housing units are allowed
in the AG-5 and AGR Zoning Districts.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.19, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.140 STABLE.
   Boarding or riding stables shall require a minimum lot area of five acres of
highland. Riding areas and trails shall be limited to the subject parcel upon
which the stable is located unless documentation is provided granting access
onto other lands. Such documentation shall be provided through written and
recorded documents.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.20, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013;
Ord. 2018-02, passed 5-17-2018)
§ 153.141 UTILITY SUBSTATIONS.
   Electricity regulating substations, gas pressure control stations, or
similar utility substations shall be subject to the following standards.
   (A)   Utility substations shall comply with the site plan review
requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Any structure shall have a setback of not less than 25 feet from all
property lines or the minimum setback of the underlying zoning district,
whichever is greater.
   (C)   The storage of vehicles and equipment on the premises shall be
prohibited except in Community Commercial (CC) or Industrial (I) Zoning
Districts.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.21, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.142 LIMITED VEHICLE SERVICE.
   Vehicle service, limited shall be subject to the following standards.
   (A)   No outdoor storage of vehicles shall be permitted in conjunction with
a limited vehicle service use.
   (B)   In zoning districts subject to conditions (C), this use shall have a
maximum floor area of 5,000 square feet; otherwise this use shall fall under
the special exception procedures of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.22, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.143 BONA FIDE FORESTRY OPERATIONS.
   (A)   For this use to be allowed, the contiguous parcels must have five
acres or more of forest land. Additionally, if a parcel is harvested of grand
trees (excluding live oak species per §
153.334(A)(2)(b)4.), zoning permits or development applications may not be
submitted within five years of issuing permit for the harvest because it shall
be presumed that such harvest was done in anticipation of future development
and is not considered a bona fide forestry activity as defined by this chapter.
Any person seeking to rebut this presumption shall have the burden of proving
his or her claim by clear and convincing evidence.
   (B)   BONA FIDE FORESTRY OPERATIONS shall mean that the property is eligible
for, and actually used for forestry or timber operations, and written
application has been approved by the County Assessor for the special assessment
for agricultural use for the property in question pursuant to S.C. Code § 12-
43-220, S.C. Department of Revenue Regulation 117-1780.1, and other applicable
statutes, rules, and regulations.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.23, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.144 MANUFACTURED HOUSING UNITS.
   (A)   Replacement in RSL and RSM Zoning Districts. The replacement of
manufactured housing units shall be allowed by right in the RSL and RSM
Districts if the manufactured housing unit has been removed within 60 days of
the receipt of the application by the Zoning Administrator. If the manufactured
housing unit was removed prior to 60 days of the receipt of the application,
this use must comply with the requirements and procedures of divisions (B) and
(C) below.
   (B)   Requirements in RSL Zoning Districts. Manufactured housing units
placed in RSL Zoning District shall be skirted by: manufactured skirting, or
other materials suitable for exterior use, including corrosion-resistant metal,
fiberglass/plastic, wood/wood siding (both must be protected from the elements
by water resistant solution/substance), decay resistant wood/pressure treated
lumber, and masonry concrete. The enclosed crawl space under the manufactured
housing unit must be ventilated. Skirting placed on manufactured housing units
in any Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) flood hazard boundary area
must comply with any applicable FEMA requirements.
   (C)   Placement in RSL Zoning District. Placement of a manufactured home
within the RSL Zoning District is conditional upon determination by the Zoning
Administrator that:
      (1)   The area within 300 feet of the parcel proposed for manufactured
home placement is characterized either entirely of manufactured homes or a mix
of site built and manufactured homes. (The mix shall contain a minimum number
of manufactured homes equivalent to 25% of the number of existing principal
residences located on parcels within 300 feet of the subject property); and
      (2)   If the Zoning Administrator determines that the area is not
characterized either entirely of manufactured homes or by a mix of site built
and manufactured homes, the use shall fall under the special exception
procedures of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.24, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.145 DWELLING UNITS IN NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   Single-family detached dwelling units shall be allowed in all nonresidential
zoning districts subject to the following conditions.
   (A)   A maximum of one single-family detached dwelling unit shall be allowed
per zoning lot in nonresidential zoning districts.
   (B)   Dwelling units for security or maintenance personnel as accessory
structures, per §
153.204(C) of this chapter, shall not be permitted on the same zoning lot as a
single-family detached dwelling unit.
   (C)   The single-family detached dwelling unit must meet all dimensional
standards of the nonresidential zoning district in which it is located.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.25, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.146 PERSONAL IMPROVEMENT EDUCATION.
   In zoning districts subject to conditions (C), personal improvement
education shall have a maximum floor area of 5,000 square feet or less;
otherwise this use shall fall under the special exception procedures of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.26, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.147 HISTORICAL SITE.
   In zoning districts subject to conditions (C), the operation of historical
sites shall be restricted to the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.;
otherwise this use shall fall under the special exception procedures of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.27, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.148 U.S. POSTAL SERVICE.
   In zoning districts subject to conditions (C), any postal service facility
shall have a maximum floor area of 5,000 square feet or less; otherwise this
use shall fall under the special exception procedures of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.28, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.149 ADULT OR CHILD DAY CARE FACILITY.
   All adult or child day care facilities shall comply with the site plan
review procedures contained within this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.29, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.150 INDOOR RECREATION OR ENTERTAINMENT.
   No indoor shooting ranges shall be allowed in the Commercial Transition (CN)
Zoning District.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.30, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.151 MINOR UTILITY SERVICE.
   (A)   Minor utility service uses shall comply with the limited site plan
review requirements of this chapter and shall obtain a clearing and grubbing
permit prior to commencement of such activities.
   (B)   Minor utility service shall be underground in the Commercial
Transition (CN) Zoning District.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.31, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.152 RESERVED.
§ 153.153 BANKS AND FINANCIAL SERVICES.
   In zoning districts subject to conditions (C), banks and financial services
shall have a maximum floor area of 5,000 square feet or less; otherwise these
uses shall fall under the special exception provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.33, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.154 CATERING SERVICE.
   (A)   In zoning districts subject to conditions (C), a structure or
structures used for catering services shall have a maximum floor area of 5,000
square feet.
   (B)   In zoning districts subject to special exception provisions (S), a
structure or structures used for catering services shall have a maximum floor
area of 2,000 square feet.
   (C)   On-site retail sales are prohibited.
   (D)   All catering service uses shall comply with the site plan review
requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.34, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.155 ADMINISTRATIVE, BUSINESS, GOVERNMENT, AND PROFESSIONAL OFFICE.
   In zoning districts subject to conditions (C), administrative or business
office, government offices, and professional offices shall have a maximum floor
area of 5,000 square feet or less; otherwise these uses shall fall under the
special exception provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.35, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.156 SPECIAL TRADE CONTRACTORS.
   Special trade contractors shall be subject to the following standards.
   (A)   This use excludes any tractor trailer containers in outside storage
areas.
   (B)   In zoning districts subject to conditions (C), this use shall have a
maximum area of 5,000 square feet including the building and any outside
storage, otherwise this use shall fall under the special exception procedures
of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.36, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.157 PARKING LOTS.
   In the Commercial Transition (CN), General Office (OG) and Residential
Office (OR) Zoning Districts, all parking lots shall have one canopy tree per
six parking spaces. There shall be no automobile ingress/egress onto
residential streets from a parking lot in an OR Zoning District if the parking
lot is serving a commercial use, unless no other reasonable alternative exists.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.37, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013;
Ord. 2018-11, passed 10-18-2018)
§ 153.158 CONSUMER GOODS RENTAL SERVICE.
   In zoning districts subject to conditions (C), consumer goods rental
services shall have a maximum floor area of 5,000 square feet or less;
otherwise this use shall fall under the special exception procedures of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.38, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.159 BOAT YARD.
   If a boat yard provides dry stack or wet slip storage of watercraft or
direct access to the water, this use shall be considered a water-dependent use
and subject to the water-dependent use requirements contained in §§
153.090 through
153.093 of this code.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.39, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.160 CONSUMER REPAIR SERVICE.
   Repair service, consumer shall be subject to the following standards.
   (A)   In zoning districts subject to conditions (C), consumer repair
services shall have a maximum floor area of 5,000 square feet or less;
otherwise this use shall fall under the special exception procedures of this
chapter.
   (B)   In the Neighborhood Commercial (CN) Zoning District, no outside
storage will be allowed.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.40, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.161 LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS DEALERS.
   The amount of storage for liquid petroleum gas dealers shall be limited to
40,000 gallons per site.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.41, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.162 BUILDING MATERIALS, GARDEN EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES DEALERS.
   Building materials or garden equipment and supplies dealers shall be subject
to the following standards.
   (A)   This use excludes any tractor trailer containers in outside storage
areas.
   (B)   In zoning districts subject to conditions (C), this use shall have a
maximum area of 5,000 square feet including the building and any outside
storage; otherwise this use shall fall under the special exception procedures
of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.42, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.163 FOOD SALES.
   In zoning districts subject to conditions (C), food sales shall have a
maximum floor area of 5,000 square feet or less; otherwise this use shall fall
under the special exception procedures of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.43, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013;
Ord. 2018-02, passed 5-17-2018)
§ 153.164 GENERAL RETAIL SALES OR SERVICE.
   In zoning districts subject to conditions (C), retail sales or service,
general shall have a maximum floor area of 5,000 square feet or less; otherwise
the use shall fall under the special exception procedures of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.44, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.165 GASOLINE SERVICE STATION.
   In zoning districts subject to conditions (C), gasoline service stations
shall have a maximum floor area of 5,000 square feet or less; otherwise this
use shall fall under the special exception procedures of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.45, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.166 CONSUMER CONVENIENCE SERVICES.
   In zoning districts subject to conditions (C), consumer convenience services
shall have a maximum floor area of 5,000 square feet or less; otherwise this
use shall fall under the special exception procedures of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.46, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.167 PERSONAL IMPROVEMENT SERVICES.
   In zoning districts subject to conditions (C), personal improvement services
shall have a maximum floor area of 5,000 square feet or less; otherwise this
use shall fall under the special exception procedures of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.47, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.168 SERVICES TO BUILDINGS OR DWELLINGS.
   (A)   Services to buildings or dwellings. In zoning districts subject to
conditions (C), services to buildings or dwellings shall have a maximum floor
area of 5,000 square feet or less; otherwise this use shall fall under the
special exception procedures of this chapter.
   (B)   Landscaping services.
      (1)   In zoning districts subject to conditions (C), a structure or
structures used for landscaping services shall have a maximum floor area of
2,000 square feet; and
      (2)   All landscaping service uses shall comply with the site plan review
requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.48, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.169 FREIGHT FORWARDING FACILITIES.
   In zoning districts subject to conditions (C), freight forwarding facilities
shall have a maximum floor area of 10,000 square feet or less; otherwise this
use shall fall under the special exception procedures of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.49, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.170 GOLF COURSES.
   Golf courses shall be subject to the following standards and criteria.
   (A)   An impact analysis must be submitted that indicates the potential
number of members, the characteristics of the golf course membership, a traffic
impact analysis, and a complete site analysis as detailed below.
      (1)   Required site analysis. The layout of any golf course shall be
determined after preparing the required site analysis. The detailed site
analysis will be done in order to identify the site’s most significant
environmental, historic, cultural, and natural resources.
      (2)   Content. The site analysis will include:
         (a)   Vegetation. Characteristics of a vegetation survey related to
land use will describe principal, predominant, and significant vegetation, by
type, condition, age, use, and general or specific location. Features in the
survey will include trees and shrubs, agricultural fields, treelines, native
vegetation, orchards, groves, woodlots, pastures, wetlands, forests, and
grasslands. The vegetation survey shall indicate any significantly large trees
or endangered plant or animal species that may reside on the site and is
protected by law;
         (b)   Historical, archaeological, and cultural resources. Historical
resources located within the proposed golf course development must be
identified on the plat. Sources such as the County Historical Survey (1991),
state registers, and federal registers such as the National Register of
Historic Places shall be utilized in identifying these resources. The
historical survey is important for noting structures and areas that must be
protected as designated landmarks;
         (c)   Adjacent land use patterns. Land use on adjacent properties
shall be identified. Features such as, but not limited to, roads, rice dams,
traditional settlement areas, cemeteries, clusters of structures, parks,
marinas, and logging areas shall be shown;
         (d)   Hydrography. All water features including streams and sensitive
areas on the site, such as wetlands and riparian corridors, must be located.
The purpose of locating these features is to limit disturbance of soil and
vegetation that affect water quality features. Hydrography shall be used to
determine where water required wetland buffers and other requirements such as
drainage easements will be located. Wetland buffers of 50 feet are required on
all saltwater marshes, and 35 feet on all protected freshwater wetlands. All
water bodies – rivers, streams, drainage channels, marshes or wetland,
floodplains, and aquifers – must be inventoried or identified; and
         (e)   Wildlife habitat areas. The purpose of identifying wildlife
areas is to assess the ecological conditions of the landscape and to provide
continuation of these habitat areas. Features of this survey shall include the
presence of any threatened or endangered species, natural areas vital to
wildlife species, habitat areas that are connected to larger undisturbed
natural habitat (connected habitat system). Through this method the study will
develop key points or areas that should be left undeveloped, then define those
areas most suitable for development.
   (B)   Within the NRM-25, AG-5, AGR, and RSL Zoning Districts, only Audubon
International “Signature Program” golf courses will be allowed.
   (C)   Potential sites should be selected which allow the golf course to be
routed in such a way as to minimize the need to alter, create, or remove
existing native landscapes, trees, and vegetation, and which provide
opportunities for restoration/enhancement of valuable habitat.
   (D)   Sites which have archaeological or geological significance and
sensitive or critical habitat or environmental features shall be identified and
either relocated or preserved through careful golf course design. Permanent
open space easements or other techniques may be used, as appropriate, to effect
preservation. The site design shall identify areas for restoration, replanting,
and enhancement of riparian and littoral habitat to re-establish wildlife
migration corridors and lineages between fragmented habitat areas. Protection
and planned restoration and/or enhancements for such areas during construction
and ongoing operation must be ensured. Native habitats and communities of
special value to threatened and/or endangered species shall be preserved to the
greatest extent possible, consistent with state and federal regulation.
   (E)   Each site selected as a golf course development will likely have a
variety of habitat types present. These habitat types must be identified and
provisions made for routing of the course or relocation of the species.
   (F)   The site plan should protect drainage systems that support retained
vegetation. Ponds shall be developed which mimic conditions in terms of both
aesthetics and habitat.
   (G)   Structures and buildings should be located such that impacts to
habitats and significant natural areas are avoided.
   (H)   Design and construction standards:
      (1)   Marshes, creeks, and wetlands.
         (a)   The golf course design must attempt to minimize the number of
marsh, creek, or wetland crossings. Marsh, creek, or wetland crossings must be
designed in such a way to minimize erosion and harmful effects of significant
habitat and migration corridors.
         (b)   Bridges must minimize alteration of the marsh, creek, or wetland
environment.
         (c)   Design must create and restore riparian habitat, especially in
previously degraded habitat areas, and must reduce the impact of alterations
necessitated by design and construction of the course.
         (d)   The course design must employ vegetated buffer strips of
sufficient width to mitigate impacts to riparian corridors and other
significant habitat which may result from surface drainage of the golf course,
cart paths, and other developed areas. In certain circumstances where riparian
vegetation has been degraded or does not exist, turf grass and rough areas may
be located in closer proximity to the marshes, creeks, and wetlands.
         (e)   Cart paths must be graded such that runoff from them generally
does not flow directly into any marsh, creek, or wetland.
         (f)   Construction fencing/siltation barriers must be utilized during
the construction phase where needed to protect habitat and marsh, creek, or
wetland areas.
      (2)   Trees.
         (a)   The selected site must not be heavily forested (with more than
60% tree canopy coverage).
         (b)   The design of the course and related facilities must maximize
the preservation of clusters or significant stands of trees, particularly grand
trees, and otherwise preserve “interior” habitat areas.
         (c)   Irrigation systems shall be designated to avoid impacting
existing oaks or other sensitive vegetation.
         (d)   If required by the Zoning Administrator, a certified
professional arborist, botanist, or forester shall be employed by the applicant
to evaluate the status of the trees and related habitats on the site and
provide direction for restoration and/or enhancement of impacted trees.
         (e)   Cart paths within the drip lines of trees slated for
preservation must be grated in such a way as to not damage or stress the tree.
         (f)   Barriers (curbs, fencing, vegetation, and the like) should be
established to discourage cart and pedestrian travel off paths located within
or adjacent to sensitive habitat.
      (3)   Water quality.
         (a)   Lined artificial storage ponds must not be located in prime
groundwater recharge areas.
         (b)   Turf grass species and landscaping around buildings should be
selected which are drought resistant or tolerant and which are suited for any
special site characteristics or soil conditions.
         (c)   State-of-the-art irrigation systems with site meteorological
monitoring capability should be used to minimize water use.
         (d)   If on-site wells or ponds are to be used as the irrigation water
source, analysis will be required to determine the safe yield in order to
prevent aquifer, off-site wells, and/or marsh, creek, or wetland depletion. The
developer will be held responsible for any negative impact on water supplies to
adjacent or nearby properties.
         (e)   Paved areas should be limited in order to minimize impermeable
surfaces, and thereby reduce surface runoff.
         (f)   The project should employ established best management practices
pursuant to the non-point source program guidelines to control non-point source
(stormwater) runoff pollution. For example: impervious liners for detention/
retention ponds and water hazards to protect ground and surface water quality;
buffer strips, oil/grease separators, or other recommended techniques for
parking area drainage systems; grease traps and other recommended technologies
for facilities such as golf cart maintenance or wash areas to prevent untreated
runoff from entering the natural aquatic environment; berms, vegetative strips,
grease traps, or other recommended technologies in parking areas for drainage
controls to minimize pollution to nearby riparian areas and surface waters.
         (g)   The overall drainage system should be designed to ensure that
there is no increase in the velocity or amount of off-site flows during major
storm events.
      (4)   Archaeology.
         (a)   The design of the course must preserve significant
archaeological areas and/or historical features present on the site.
         (b)   Significant archaeological sites must be staked, flagged, or
fenced off to ensure their protection.
      (5)   Noise.
         (a)   Where possible, clubhouse facilities and other noise-generating
uses and facilities should be located away from neighbors who might be
impacted.
         (b)   Roads must be sited such that traffic noise is minimized for
adjacent areas.
      (6)   Growth-inducing impacts.
         (a)   The project should not provide infrastructure improvements that
would be capable of serving new development other than the proposed project.
         (b)   The project should not stimulate economic expansion or growth
(e.g., major changes in tax revenue base, employment expansion, and the like)
other than that necessary to serve the proposed project.
         (c)   The project should not establish a precedent for significant
change in current Comprehensive Plan policy.
         (d)   In cases where the golf course developer owns lands adjacent to
the project site, a plan for the potential development of those adjacent lands
should be submitted for evaluation.
         (e)   Deed restrictions, open space easements, or other appropriate
techniques must be used to mitigate or prevent growth-inducing impacts inside
the development.
   (I)   Notification. Upon the receipt of a complete application for a golf
course, the Planning/Zoning Department shall notify neighbors within a 300-foot
radius, parties in interest, and place notification in the newspaper within ten
days. All notifications shall be done in accordance with the provisions
contained in §§
153.040 through
153.055 of this code.
   (J)   Time limit for staff review. Upon the receipt of a complete
application for a golf course, the Planning/Zoning Department shall have a
maximum of 45 days to act on the application. Staff’s failure to act on the
application within 45 days will result in the applicant being granted a zoning
permit.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.50, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.171 SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY.
   The following requirements shall apply to solid waste disposal facilities
located in or proposed to be located in the Industrial (I) Zoning District.
   (A)   Solid waste disposal facilities that were legally established before
October 18, 2012 shall be deemed uses permitted by right, as defined in §
153.013 of this code.
   (B)   Any proposed solid waste disposal facilities, except existing solid
waste disposal facilities, shall fall under the special exception procedures of
this chapter.
   (C)   All solid waste disposal facilities shall comply with all of the
requirements contained in the State Waste Policy and Management Act of 1991, as
amended, being S.C. Code §§ 44-96-10 et seq.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.51, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.172 CONTAINER STORAGE FACILITIES.
   Facilities for or including container storage (whether temporary or
permanent), shall be subject to the following additional standards:
   (A)   Uses shall be separated from any adjoining uses or public or private
rights-of-way, excluding points of ingress or egress, by way of one of the
following:
      (1)   A suitably landscaped earthen berm sufficient to screen neighboring
or nearby property from the facility; and in no event less than eight feet in
height above finished grade;
      (2)   A solid concrete, brick or masonry wall of not less than ten feet
in height above finished grade and completely screened from view from public
rights-of-way by way of a vegetative buffer; or
      (3)   A minimum vegetative buffer depth of 200 feet along the boundaries
adjacent to any property zoned Residential (R) and a minimum vegetative buffer
depth of 50 feet otherwise. This buffer shall be located within the required
setback as described in §
153.172(B)(2).
   (B)   Storage within a container yard shall be restricted by the following.
      (1)   Container stacking may be permitted, where appropriate, pursuant to
an approved container stacking plan. Such plan shall, at a minimum, include a
site plan showing the location of all abutting streets and sidewalks, all
internal travel-ways, a stagger stacking schedule, and the proposed maximum
stacking heights. A suitable stacking plan shall feature a slope not exceeding
a rise/run of 1/2, shall include a perimeter setback of not less than 30 feet
from the nearest stored container, the nearest sidewalk edge, or right-of-way
edge, and shall indicate how the stacking plan meets all other requirements of
this chapter.
      (2)   Container and chassis storage is not permitted within 350 feet of
the boundary adjacent to any property zoned Residential (R) and within 50 feet
otherwise. In addition, containers stacked in the yard shall not be visible
above the tree line from adjacent residential neighborhoods. Structures may be
allowed in the area beyond the required buffer where container and chassis
storage is prohibited, provided that proposed structures meet all requirements
of this chapter and receive site plan review approval.
   (C)   In those instances which proposed container storage facilities are
viewed by the Zoning Administrator as having a substantially negative impact on
a surrounding area(s) or adjoining property(ies), based on the facility’s
location, proposed use, permitted use, or actual use of the property, the
Zoning Administrator shall bring the matter to the next available meeting of
the Board of Zoning Appeals for hearing and decision, pursuant to §
153.052.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.52, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.173 CEMETERIES.
   Cemeteries require a minimum five-acre lot area, a minimum 25-foot
landscaped buffer from adjacent properties, and completion of the site plan
review process. Non-commercial, family cemeteries shall be allowed. Cemeteries
on the same lot as or on a lot adjacent to a religious facility shall be
allowed as a use of right.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.53, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.174 KENNEL.
   Kennels shall be subject to the following standards.
   (A)   Minimum lot size. The lot size shall contain a minimum of five acres.
   (B)   Exception to minimum lot size. This use may be approved for a lot that
is at least two acres in size through the special exception procedures
contained in this chapter.
   (C)   Required screening and landscaped buffer and site plan review.
      (1)   A minimum 100-foot screened and landscaped buffer from all adjacent
properties is required.
      (2)   All kennel uses shall comply with the site plan review requirements
of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.54, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.175 DROP-OFF RECYCLING COLLECTION.
   Facilities providing recycling collection drop-off centers shall comply with
the site plan review procedures contained within this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.55, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.176 AIRPORTS, HELIPORTS, AND OTHER AIRCRAFT FACILITIES.
   Facilities providing landing and/or takeoff areas, service, hanger, or
storage for aircraft, helicopters, lighter than air aircraft, hot-air balloons,
or other similar craft, must comply with the planned development procedures
contained within this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.56, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.177 SPECIALIZED MANUFACTURING.
   (A)   In zoning districts subject to condition (C), a structure or
structures used for specialized manufacturing shall have a maximum floor area
of 2,000 square feet and shall have no more than five non-resident employees.
   (B)   All activities related to the specialized manufacturing use shall be
confined to a structure that is entirely enclosed.
   (C)   All specialized manufacturing uses shall comply with the site plan
review requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.57, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013;
Ord. 2016-01, passed 4-21-2016)
§ 153.178 SWEETGRASS BASKET STANDS.
   Vehicle parking for sweetgrass basket stands shall be located entirely out
of all travel lanes with a minimum of four feet of clearance between the edge
of the travel lane and any parked vehicle or sweetgrass basket stand.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.58, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.179 TATTOO FACILITIES.
   (A)   Tattoo facilities shall be prohibited within 1,000 feet of a church,
school, or playground. This distance shall be the shortest route of the
ordinary pedestrian or vehicular travel along the public thoroughfare from the
nearest point of the grounds in use as part of the church, school, or
playground.
   (B)   All proposed tattoo facilities located within 1,000 feet of a property
line of a lot in a residential zoning district, or a lot containing a
residential use shall require review and approval in accordance with the
special exception procedures of this chapter. The distance shall be measured
from the nearest property line of the subject parcel to the nearest property
line of a lot containing a residential use or located in a residential zoning
district.
   (C)   All proposed tattoo facilities may only provide tattooing and may not
engage in any other retail business including, but not limited to, the sale of
goods or performing any form of body piercing other than tattooing.
   (D)   All proposed tattoo facilities shall comply with all regulatory
requirements of the state.
   (E)   Tattoo facility uses shall comply with the site plan review
requirements of this chapter and all other applicable provisions of this
chapter and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
   (F)   When the provisions of this chapter require that neighbor notice be
provided, the requirements of §
153.040(G)(2)(c) shall apply with the exception that all property owners within
1,000 feet of the subject property shall be included in the neighbor notice.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.59, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.180 WINERIES.
   (A)   All winery uses shall comply with the site plan review requirements of
this chapter.
   (B)   Special exception procedures shall apply for parcel(s) totaling less
than five acres in size.
   (C)   Prior to site plan review approval the applicant shall provide a copy
of an approved permit from the State Department of Revenue, Alcohol Beverage
Licensing. All winery uses shall also comply with applicable agency
requirements such as DHEC requirements.
   (D)   The following uses and activities are permitted at a winery after
completion of the site plan review process:
      (1)   On-premise sale of wine and wine consumption; tasting room and
accessory retail limited to 1,500 square feet, days and hours of operation
limited to Monday through Saturday from 10:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.;
      (2)   Daily tours limited to Monday through Saturday from 10:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.; and
      (3)   Special events, including festivals; limited to five special event
permits per calendar year, no more than ten consecutive days. Special events
permits shall be issued only if adequate parking and sanitary facilities are
provided to serve the proposed use or activity in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.4.60, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
§ 153.200 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES ALLOWED.
   (A)    General. Permitted uses and approved special exception uses shall be
deemed to include accessory uses and structures that are necessarily and
customarily associated with, and appropriate, incidental, and subordinate to
the allowed principal use.
   (B)   Accessory uses. An ACCESSORY USE is a use customarily incidental and
subordinate to the principal use of a zoning lot or of a structure. Accessory
uses shall be subject to the same regulations as apply to principal uses in
each zoning district, unless otherwise expressly stated.
   (C)   Accessory structures and buildings. An ACCESSORY STRUCTURE is a
structure that is detached from a principal structure and customarily
incidental and subordinate to the principal structure. Accessory structures
include, but are not limited to, swimming pools, fences, and detached accessory
buildings (barns, garages, sheds, gazebos). If any accessory building is
attached to a principal building with a roof supported by columns or walls, it
shall be deemed part of the principal building provided the  attachment is a
minimum of four feet in width with a minimum length to width ratio of 4:1. In
such cases, the structure shall comply with the setback requirements of the
applicable zoning district.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.5.1, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013; Ord.
2023-04, passed 5-18-2023)
§ 153.201 TIME ESTABLISHMENT.
   Unless otherwise expressly permitted in this chapter, no accessory use shall
be established and no accessory structures shall be allowed on the subject
parcel until after all required permits and approvals for the principal use or
activity have been obtained and there are no current zoning and/or building
code violations on the property.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.5.2, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.202 RESIDENTIAL ACCESSORY USES.
   The following uses and structures shall be allowed as accessory uses and
structures to allowed residential uses:
   (A)   Fences and walls;
   (B)   Garages, carports, and off-street parking areas;
   (C)   Gate houses and guard houses;
   (D)   Home occupations, subject to §
153.210;
   (E)   Playhouses, patios, cabanas, porches, gazebos, and incidental
household storage buildings
   (F)   Radio and television receiving antennas or dishes;
   (G)   Recreational and play facilities for the use of residents;
   (H)   Solar collectors, subject to §
153.217;
   (I)   Tennis courts, swimming pools, hot tubs, and related mechanical
equipment;
   (J)   Barns and farming-related structures even if the subject parcel does
not contain a primary structures or use, provided that no agricultural or farm-
related structure on a parcel of one acre or less in an RSL and RSM District
shall exceed 250 square feet in area;
   (K)   The selling of sweetgrass baskets is allowed as an accessory use in
all agricultural zoning districts and in RSL Zoning Districts; and
   (L)   Other necessary and customary uses determined by the Zoning
Administrator to be appropriate, incidental and subordinate to the principal
use of the property, subject to compliance with any standards contained within
this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.5.3, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.203 AGRICULTURAL ACCESSORY USES.
   Accessory agricultural uses shall include all residential accessory uses and
those accessory uses and activities customarily associated with agricultural
operations, as determined by the Zoning Administrator. Barns and farm-related
structures, including roadside stands selling sweetgrass baskets or indigenous
produce grown or produced on the farm where the roadside stand is located,
shall be allowed on all parcels in agricultural zoning districts, even if the
subject parcel does not contain a primary structure. Manufactured homes,
modular building units, and pre-manufactured container units may be used for
nonresidential purposes only in all agricultural zoning districts subject to
the following requirements as well as those in the Town Building Code, as
amended.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.5.4, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.204 COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL ACCESSORY USES.
   The following uses and structures shall be allowed as accessory uses and
structures to allowed commercial and industrial uses:
   (A)   One dwelling unit for security or maintenance personnel;
   (B)   Fences and walls;
   (C)   Gates and guard houses;
   (D)   Off-street parking areas (which may be located on a separate parcel
pursuant to the requirements contained in §§
153.330 through
153.342);
   (E)   Radio and television receiving antennas or dishes and support
structures;
   (F)   Recreation areas and facilities for the use of employees;
   (G)   Cafeterias, dining halls, and similar food services when operated
exclusively for the convenience of employees, clients, or visitors to the
principal use;
   (H)   Day care facilities when operated exclusively for the convenience of
employees of the principal use;
   (I)   Gift shops, newsstands, and similar commercial activities operated
exclusively for the convenience of employees, clients, or visitors to the
principal use;
   (J)   Solar collectors, subject to §
153.217; and
   (K)   Other necessary and customary uses determined by the Zoning
Administrator to be appropriate, incidental, and subordinate to the principal
use on the lot, subject to compliance with any standards contained within this
chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.5.5, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.205 ACCESSORY RETAIL SALES AND PERSONAL SERVICES.
   Personal services and retail sales established with the express purpose of
providing a convenience for tenants of multi-family or office development shall
be permitted, subject to the following limits: The accessory activity shall be
located on the same zoning lot as the principal use.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.5.6, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.206 INSTITUTIONAL AND CIVIC ACCESSORY USES.
   The following uses and structures shall be allowed as accessory uses and
structures to allowed institutional and civic uses:
   (A)   Refreshment stands and food and beverage sales located in uses
involving public assembly;
   (B)   Cafeterias, dining halls, and similar food services when operated
primarily for the convenience of employees, residents, clients, patients, or
visitors to the principal use;
   (C)   Gift shops, news stands, and similar commercial activities operated
primarily for the convenience of employees, residents, clients, patients, or
visitors to the principal use;
   (D)   Recreation areas and facilities for the use of employees;
   (E)   Solar collectors, subject to §
153.217 of this code; and
   (F)   Other necessary and customary uses determined by the Zoning
Administrator to be appropriate, incidental, and subordinate to the principal
use on the lot, subject to compliance with any standards contained within this
chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.5.7, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.207 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES IN RESIDENTIAL/OR DISTRICTS.
   Unless otherwise expressly stated and in addition to any other applicable
provisions of this chapter, accessory structures in residential and Residential
Office (OR) Zoning Districts shall be subject to the following standards.
   (A)   An accessory structure erected as an integral part of the principal
structure shall be made structurally a part thereof, shall have a common wall
therewith, and shall comply in all respects with the requirements of these and
other regulations applicable to principal structures.
   (B)   A detached accessory structure shall be located:
      (1)   On the rear of the lot, behind the principal structure. This
limitation shall not apply to carports or garages;
      (2)   At least six feet from any existing dwelling or dwelling under
construction;
      (3)   At least three feet (if size of structure is 120 square feet or
under) or at least five feet (if size of structure is over 120 square feet)
from any interior lot line in a residential district; if in an OR District that
abuts a residential district, the accessory structure in the OR District shall
be located at least ten feet from the abutting interior lot line; when an OR
District abuts another O, C, or I district, setbacks for accessory structures
are not required; and
      (4)   If on a corner lot, the accessory structure shall not project in
front of the front building line required or existing on the adjacent lot
unless approved by the Zoning Administrator. Vision clearance triangle must be
maintained.
   (C)   A detached accessory structure may be constructed on an adjacent
vacant lot if both lots are in the same ownership.
   (D)   Accessory structures shall be included in building coverage.
   (E)   Accessory buildings shall not exceed 25 feet in height as measured
from ground level.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.5.8, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013; Ord.
2016-09, passed 9-15-2016; Ord. 2023-04, passed 5-18-2023)
§ 153.208 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES IN GENERAL OFFICE/COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS.
   Unless otherwise expressly stated and in addition to any other applicable
provisions of this chapter, accessory structures in General Office (OG) and
Commercial (CN, CC) zoning districts shall be subject to the following
standards.
   (A)   An accessory structure erected as an integral part of the principal
structure shall be made structurally a part thereof, shall have a common wall
therewith, and shall comply in all respects with the requirements of these and
other regulations applicable to principal structures.
   (B)   A detached accessory structure shall be located:
      (1)   On the rear of the lot, behind the principal structure. This
limitation shall not apply to carports or garages;
      (2)   At least six feet from any existing structure or structure under
construction;
      (3)   If in a zoning district that abuts a residential district, the
accessory structure shall be located at least ten feet from the abutting
interior lot line of the residential district; when in a zoning district that
abuts another OG, CN, CC or I district, setbacks for accessory structures are
not required; and
      (4)   If on a corner lot, the accessory structure shall not project in
front of the front building line required or existing on the adjacent lot.
   (C)   A detached accessory structure may be constructed on an adjacent
vacant lot if both lots are in the same ownership.
   (D)   Accessory structures shall be included in building coverage.
   (E)   Accessory buildings shall not exceed 25 feet in height as measured
from ground level.
(Ord. 2017-09, passed 7-13-2017)
§ 153.209 MANUFACTURED HOUSING UNITS.
   (A)   In agricultural zoning districts, a manufactured housing unit may be
used for one caretaker’s quarters. It shall not be permitted for other than
residential use unless authorized elsewhere in this chapter.
   (B)   Applications to use manufactured housing units for temporary use while
construction is in progress on a permanent structure shall be submitted to the
Zoning Administrator for a construction permit in accordance with temporary
zoning permit requirements of this chapter. Such a temporary unit shall be
removed from the premises within 30 days of issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for the permanent structure.
   (C)   Manufactured housing units may be utilized for classroom and related
use for a two-year period or as otherwise expressly provided in the approval of
a special exception. The period of use may be extended upon application and
proper findings by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (D)   Where needed for the general welfare of the public, governmental
entities may utilize manufactured housing units as classrooms, clinics,
offices, and caretaker’s quarters, provided special exception approval has been
obtained.
   (E)   Manufactured housing units, modular building units, and pre-
manufactured container units shall not be allowed as accessory uses nor as
accessory structures for purposes of permanent storage units unless they are
located in an AGR, AG-5, Community Commercial (CC), or Industrial (I) Zoning
District and comply with the provisions of §
153.216.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.5.10, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.210 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   (A)   General. Some types of work can be conducted at home with little or no
effect on the surrounding neighborhood. The home occupation regulations of this
section are intended to permit residents to engage in home occupations, while
ensuring that home occupations will not be a detriment to the character and
livability of the surrounding area. The regulations require that home
occupations (an accessory use) remain subordinate to the principal residential
use of the property and that the viability of the residential use is
maintained. Zoning permits shall be required for all home occupations.
   (B)   Where allowed. Home occupations that comply with the regulations of
this section shall be allowed as an accessory use to any allowed residential or
agricultural principal use.
   (C)   Allowed uses. The home occupation regulations of this section
establish performance standards rather than detailed lists of allowed home
occupations. Uses that comply with all of the standards of this section will be
allowed as home occupations unless they are specifically prohibited.
   (D)   Prohibited uses.
      (1)   Vehicle/equipment repair, rental, or sales. Any type of repair,
rental, sales, or assembly of vehicles or equipment with internal combustion
engines (such as autos, motorcycles, scooters, outboard marine engines, lawn
mowers, chain saws, and other small engines) or of large appliances (such as
washing machines, dryers, and refrigerators) or any other work related to
automobiles and their parts is prohibited as a home occupation in the RSL, RSM,
MHS, and MHP Zoning Districts, unless these types of repairs, rentals, or sales
take place in an enclosed structure and pose no noise or safety concerns.
      (2)   Restaurants. Restaurants and food service establishments are not
allowed as home occupations. Food service for bed and breakfasts shall be
allowed under this chapter.
      (3)   Employee dispatch centers. Dispatch centers, where employees come
to the site to be dispatched to other locations, are not allowed as home
occupations.
      (4)   Animal care or boarding. Animal care or boarding facilities
(including animal hospitals, kennels, stables, and all other types of animal
boarding and care facilities) are not allowed as home occupations in the RSL,
RSM, MHS, and MHP residential zoning districts.
      (5)   Medical offices or clinics. Medical offices and medical clinics are
not allowed as home occupations in the RSL, RSM, MHS, and MHP residential
zoning districts. This includes doctors’ offices, dentists’ offices,
psychologists’ offices, hospitals, and all other medical care facilities. The
prohibition shall not be interpreted as preventing medical practitioners from
seeing patients in the practitioner’s home on an emergency basis.
      (6)   Funeral homes. Funeral homes and funeral service activities are not
allowed as home occupations.
      (7)   Barber shops, beauty shops, and nail salons. Barber and beauty
shops with more than one chair are not allowed as a home occupation.
      (8)   Dancing schools. Dancing schools are not allowed as home
occupations.
   (E)   Employees. Only one full-time or one part-time employee, who is not a
full-time resident of the home where the home occupation is located, is
allowed. The home occupation may have other employees who are not working at
the residence, but work at other off-site locations, if applicable. For the
purpose of this provision, the term NONRESIDENT EMPLOYEE includes an employee,
business partner, co-owner, or other person affiliated with the home
occupation, who does not live at the site, but who visits the site as a part of
the home occupation.
   (F)   Resident operator. The operator of a home occupation shall be a full-
time resident of the dwelling unit.
   (G)   Customers. Customers may visit the site of a home occupation only
during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., with no more than an average of one
customer or client per hour being allowed.
   (H)   Floor area. No more than 25% of the total floor area of the dwelling
unit may be used to house a home occupation, except that bed and breakfasts
allowed by this chapter are exempt from this provision. Up to 1,000 square feet
of an accessory structure, such as a garage, may be used for a home occupation.
   (I)   Outdoor activities. All activities and storage areas associated with
home occupations must be conducted in completely enclosed structures.
   (J)   Exterior appearance. There shall be no visible evidence of the conduct
of a home occupation when viewed from the street right-of-way or from an
adjacent lot. Signs for a home occupation are expressly prohibited. There may
be no change in the exterior appearance of the dwelling unit that houses a home
occupation or the site upon which it is conducted that will make the dwelling
appear less residential in nature or function. Examples of such prohibited
alterations include construction of parking lots, paving of required setbacks,
adding additional entrances to the dwelling unit, or adding signs or
commercial-like exterior lighting.
   (K)   Operational impacts. No home occupation or equipment used in
conjunction with a home occupation may cause odor, vibration, noise, electrical
interference, or fluctuation in voltage that is perceptible beyond the lot line
of the lot upon which the home occupation is conducted. No hazardous substances
may be used or stored in conjunction with a home occupation.
   (L)   Trucks. Not more than one truck, truck cab, or van used in conjunction
with a home occupation may be parked at the site of the home occupation in any
RSL, MHS, or MHP Zoning District. No semi-truck trailers or full trailers shall
be allowed in these zoning districts.
   (M)   Deliveries. No more than four deliveries or pick-ups of supplies or
products associated with home occupations are allowed between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
   (N)   Sales. No article, product, or service may be sold in connection with
a home occupation, other than those produced on the premises or comprise 25% or
less of the gross receipts.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.5.11, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.211 ANIMALS.
   (A)   The keeping of household pets shall be allowed as an accessory use in
all zoning districts in which residential dwelling units are permitted.
   (B)   The keeping of exotic or wild animals shall not be allowed as an
accessory use and shall only be allowed if approved as a special exception in
accordance with the procedures contained in §§
153.040 through
153.055 of this code.
   (C)   The keeping of chickens shall be allowed as an accessory use in
accordance with the conditions contained in §
90.17 of this code.
   (D)   The town may issue a special permit to allow for more chickens
otherwise prohibited by §
90.17 with consideration given to the following:
      (1)   The number of chickens allowed by §
90.17 based on the size of the requesting party's residential lot, number of
additional chickens the party is requesting to house beyond the chickens
allowed by §
90.17 and geographical location (including the suburban/rural character of the
surrounding neighborhood) of the residential lot where the requesting party
desires to house more chickens than allowed by §
90.17 and the requesting party's means of isolating all chickens on their
property so as to not become a nuisance to the surrounding homeowners.
      (2)   Homeowners within 150 feet of the property (closest property line
to closest property line) of the requesting party must sign a letter consenting
to the number of additional chickens to be housed at that location.
      (3)   The town may revoke the special permit at its sole discretion.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.5.12, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013;
Ord. 2016-10, passed 10-20-2016; Ord. 2016-11, passed 1-19-2017)
§ 153.212 ACCESSORY STORAGE OF MAJOR RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT.
   No such equipment shall be used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping
purposes when parked or stored on a residential lot or in any location not
approved for such use.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.5.13, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.213 STORAGE AND REPAIR OF OPERABLE AND INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   In all zoning districts, the open storage and or repair of inoperable
motor vehicles is not permitted within the required front setback.
   (B)   In all zoning districts, the open storage or repair of inoperable
motor vehicles must be screened by a fence, wall, building, or vegetative
buffer that completely shields the vehicles from view from the public right-of-
way and adjacent properties.
   (C)   The open storage and repair of more than two inoperable motor vehicles
is prohibited on all lots in residential, office, commercial or industrial
zoning districts unless specifically authorized for a use such as a salvage
yard or motor vehicle repair shop.
   (D)   In all suburban residential zoning districts, storage of motor vehicle
parts is permitted only within a completely enclosed accessory structure
located on the same lot as the principal dwelling unit.
   (E)   Storage of commercial vehicles in residential zoning districts, unless
otherwise expressly authorized by this chapter, is limited to one vehicle used
as personal transportation.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.5.14, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013;
Ord. 2017-11, passed 1-18-2018)
§ 153.214 VEHICLE SALES.
   Not more than two operable or inoperable motor vehicles may be offered for
sale upon any lot unless such sales activities are otherwise expressly
authorized by this chapter. A vehicle for sale upon a lot in a residential
zoning district must be owned by the owner of the subject lot and must comply
with §
153.213.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.5.15, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.215 TEMPORARY PORTABLE STORAGE UNITS.
   Temporary portable storage units are permitted if located on the same zoning
lot as the permanent structure subject to the following conditions.
   (A)   If the temporary portable storage unit is located on a lot with a
nonresidential use or zoning district designation for a period exceeding 15
days, the limited site plan review procedures of §
153.046 of this code shall apply.
   (B)   The maximum size of a temporary portable storage unit shall not exceed
160 square feet of indoor storage.
   (C)   A maximum of 160 square feet of indoor temporary portable storage
shall be permitted per zoning lot in residential zoning districts.
   (D)   Temporary portable storage units are allowed for a period not to
exceed a total of 60 days in one calendar year. Temporary zoning permits shall
be required for temporary portable storage units that remain on a property for
a time period exceeding 15 consecutive days.
   (E)   Temporary portable storage units shall not be placed in any right-of-
way, retention area, septic field, easement, or on public property and shall
not create a site obstruction for any vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
   (F)   Temporary portable storage units shall conform to the accessory
structure requirements contained in this chapter.
   (G)   The maximum area of a temporary portable storage unit dedicated to
signage shall be limited to 27 square feet per side or 58 square feet total.
   (H)   Temporary portable storage units shall be kept in good condition, free
from evidence of deterioration, weathering, mildew, discoloration, rust,
ripping, tearing, or other holes or breaks.
   (I)   Temporary portable storage units shall not be used for the storage of
hazardous or flammable substances, live animals, or human habitation.
   (J)   All vendors providing service related to the transportation of
household goods and/or rental/delivery of portable storage containers shall be
in compliance with the state’s regulatory laws and licensing requirements
through the Public Service Commission. Proof that the liability insurance of
the company owning the temporary portable storage unit is equal to the minimum
amount required by the Public Service Commission shall be required at the time
of permitting.
   (K)   The regulations listed above in this section shall not apply to
temporary storage units that are:
      (1)   Placed for construction purposes and in conjunction with building
permits, which may exceed the permitted time period, as long as the building
permit remains active with continuous construction; and
      (2)   Placed during any period of declared emergency by federal, state,
or local official action.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.5.16, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.216 PERMANENT STORAGE UNITS.
   Permanent storage units are permitted subject to the following conditions.
   (A)   Applicability. This section applies to any permanent storage unit, as
defined in division (C) below.
   (B)   Location.
      (1)   Permanent storage units may be established as an accessory use to
any principal use in an AGR, AG-5, Community Commercial (CC), or Industrial (I)
Zoning District. Permanent storage units are not permitted in any other zoning
district.
      (2)   Permanent storage units are permitted only in the rear yard.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      MANUFACTURED HOUSING UNIT, MODULAR BUILDING UNIT, and PRE- MANUFACTURED
CONTAINER UNITS. As defined in §
153.013.
      PERMANENT STORAGE UNIT. Any manufactured housing unit, modular building
unit, or pre-manufactured container unit exceeding 120 square feet in size that
is used solely for nonresidential purposes.
      REAR YARD. The area between the rear of the principal building and the
rear lot line.
   (D)   Permitting. Permanent storage units shall not be established or placed
on lots or parcels unless the Zoning Administrator has issued a zoning permit
authorizing the unit. (See §
153.047.)
   (E)   Screening.
      (1)   Permanent storage units shall be completely screened from view
along any lot line except the rear lot line, and along any lot line abutting a
waterway. The screening must conform to division (E)(2) below.
      (2)   Screening shall include at least one of the following:
         (a)   The principal building and any existing vegetation on the lot;
or
         (b)   If the methods in division (E)(1)(a) above are not sufficient to
provide complete screening, a minimum Residential Class A buffer (refer to §
153.335(D)(2)(e)) or a minimum six-foot high masonry wall must be provided
between the permanent storage unit and the required lot lines.
      (3)   The Zoning Administrator may waive the screening requirements if
the permanent storage unit complies with the building design standards in
division (F) below.
   (F)   Building design.
      (1)   Applicability. Divisions (F)(2)(a) through (F)(2)(e) below apply to
all permanent storage units, regardless of screening.
      (2)   Standards.
         (a)   The building footprint of the permanent storage unit shall not
occupy more than 500 square feet.
         (b)   The building height of the permanent storage unit shall not
exceed 12 feet.
         (c)   Permanent storage units must be installed, underskirted, and
anchored in the same manner as the principal building.
         (d)   All moving or towing apparatus must be removed or concealed with
skirting, including hitch, wheels, and axles.
         (e)   Bare, unfinished metal is prohibited as an exterior building
material.
   (G)   Existing permanent storage units. Permanent storage units in existence
prior to July 19, 2006 shall be considered to be existing legal nonconforming
structures.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.5.17, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.217 SOLAR COLLECTORS.
   Solar collectors shall be permitted provided that the following performance
standards are met.
   (A)   Roof-mounted residential building solar collectors located on front or
side building roofs visible from the public right-of-way shall not extend above
the peak of the roof plane where it is mounted, and no portion of any such
solar collector shall extend more than 24 inches as measured perpendicularly to
the roof at the point where it is mounted.
   (B)   Roof-mounted residential building solar collectors located on the rear
or interior side building roofs shall not extend above the peak of the roof
plane where it is mounted and no portion of any such solar collector shall
extend more than four feet as measured perpendicularly to the roof at the point
where it is mounted.
   (C)   Ground-mounted solar collectors shall not exceed eight feet in total
height and shall be located to meet all setback requirements.
   (D)   All utility service lines serving a ground- mounted solar system shall
be located underground.
   (E)   Any system incorporated into a nonresidential building shall be
integrated into the basic form and main body of the building. If roof mounted,
all collector panels shall fit into the form of the roof; if the building’s
roof is sloped or if “rack” mounting is used on a flat roof, the mounting must
be concealed from view at street level. Exposed rack supports and free-standing
collectors apart from the main building shall not be permitted.
   (F)   Roof mounted solar energy systems mounted on accessory or detached
buildings are allowed on detached garages or swimming pool equipment buildings.
Detached greenhouses are also acceptable. No free-standing panels shall be
allowed.
   (G)   If an active solar or photovoltaic solar system is utilized, all
components servicing the collector panels shall be concealed, including
mechanical piping and conduits.
   (H)   All exposed metal shall be of a color that will blend into its
surroundings.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.5.18, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
TEMPORARY USES
§ 153.230 TEMPORARY ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES ALLOWED.
   The Zoning Administrator shall be authorized to approve the temporary
placement and use of a manufactured housing unit as an accessory dwelling unit
in accordance with the following standards:
   (A)   Administrative permit approval shall be required in accordance with
the procedure contained in §§
153.040 through
153.055 of this code.
   (B)   The administrative permit shall be restricted to the temporary use of
a manufactured housing unit for residential purposes on the same zoning lot
with a single-family detached residential dwelling or a manufactured housing
unit, or on an individual abutting zoning lot. The following criteria shall be
utilized to determine the need for the temporary variance:
      (1)   The person who will occupy the manufactured housing unit is a
relative by blood or marriage.
      (2)   The accommodations (manufactured housing unit) proposed are of a
temporary nature which can be easily removed after expiration of the permit.
      (3)   The physical and/or mental conditions of the person who will occupy
the manufactured housing unit shall be certified by a physician.
      (4)   Written approval of all abutting landowners shall be required.
      (5)   The proposed manufactured housing unit installation shall meet
State Department of Health and Environmental Control (DHEC) standards and have
their written approval.
   (C)   The Zoning Administrator may revoke or terminate the administrative
permit at the request of the initiating applicant or upon finding that permit
conditions are being violated. The temporary accommodations, together with any
associated services, shall be removed from the premises within 30 days after
notice of termination.
   (D)   Administrative permits for such use shall be valid for a maximum of
one year, with renewal subject to the provisions contained within §§
153.040 through
153.055 of this code.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.6.1, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.231 TEMPORARY SALES.
   (A)   Auctions or garage sales of second-hand merchandise which has been
used on the premises may be conducted on a zoning lot where permitted as an
accessory use elsewhere in these regulations. Such sales may be conducted only
twice in a calendar year from the same zoning lot, and no more than two
consecutive days each during daytime hours.
   (B)   The sale of Christmas trees, fireworks, and turkey shoots are
authorized where permitted as an accessory use and shall not exceed a total
time period of 60 days during a one-year period. This time period shall
commence from the first date that such uses, individually or collectively, are
approved or established, whichever is first.
   (C)   Other temporary sales of merchandise shall be permitted as a
temporary, accessory use to an approved principal use (such as in an off-street
parking lot), provided that the maximum term for such permit shall not exceed
ten consecutive days, and no more than four such permits may be issued per lot,
per calendar year.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.6.2, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013; Ord.
2016-01, passed 4-21-2016; Ord. 2017-12, passed 1-18-2018)
§ 153.232 SALE OF INDIGENOUS PRODUCE.
   A temporary administrative permit may be issued for a period not to exceed
six months each year, allowing the sale of produce grown in the county at
temporary locations by county residents. The Zoning Administrator will issue a
temporary agricultural sales permit for a lot of record after being satisfied
that the sale of indigenous produce is occurring out of the road right-of-way,
that there are not traffic safety problems caused by the sale, that at least
two cars can be safely parked near the vendor, and that the vendor has obtained
the permission of the property owner prior to selling the indigenous produce.
The purpose of this provision is to ensure pedestrian and vehicle safety at
roadside stands. Site plan review will be performed by the Planning/Zoning
Department. Temporary hookup of electricity may be allowed during the six-month
period of time that the permit is in effect each year. Temporary agricultural
sales permits are to be issued by the Zoning Administrator, and are not
renewable or transferable. A temporary agricultural sales permit for a lot of
record shall only be permitted one time per year. No permits of any nature are
necessary for roadside stands selling sweetgrass baskets or indigenous produce
that are produced or grown on the property where the roadside stand is located.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.6.3, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.233 ASSEMBLY USES AND PARKING FOR SPECIAL EVENTS.
   Temporary public assembly use and events of public interest, such as
cultural events, circuses, outdoor concerts, and parking for special events,
shall require a temporary administrative permit from the Zoning Administrator.
Such permit shall not be issued for periods in excess of ten consecutive days,
and no more than five such permits may be issued per lot, per calendar year.
Temporary permits shall be issued only if adequate parking and sanitary
facilities are provided to serve the proposed use or activity. Any temporary
event utilizing 25 acres of land area or more shall require special exception
approval in accordance with the procedures contained in §§
153.040 through
153.055 of this code.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.6.4, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.234 CONSTRUCTION FACILITIES.
   (A)   Accessory construction facilities shall be permitted to establish an
operations base in any zoning district upon obtaining special exception
approval after it is determined that such construction facilities area
incidental to an necessary for such construction or installation within a
three-mile radius of the operations base.
   (B)   Each such permit shall specify the location of the proposed facility
and define the area and boundaries thereon to be served. The permit shall be
granted for not more than one year and upon proper application be extended a
similar period of time for the same site. Upon termination of the permit, all
materials used in the construction or installation shall be removed from the
premises.
   (C)   Ingress and egress from such facilities shall be only from major
arterials or collector streets which give rise to the least traffic through
residential areas.
   (D)   Included in accessory construction facilities are temporary batching
plants for asphaltic or portland cement concrete, temporary buildings, field
storage of materials and/or equipment.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.6.5, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
SPECIAL EVENT USES
§ 153.250 PURPOSE.
   The intent of this subchapter is to provide regulations that guide the use
of unincorporated properties for the purpose of hosting special events of
varying sizes and functions. This subchapter intends to create a balance of
greater flexibility for special event uses, while protecting the surrounding
community. The regulations of this subchapter shall apply in conjunction with
any other standards contained within this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.7.1, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.251 PRIVATE SPECIAL EVENTS.
   The following are exempt from the requirements of this subchapter: private
parties and gatherings that do not meet the definition of special event, as
defined in this chapter, auctions of private real estate, and estate auctions.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.7.2, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.252 SPECIAL EVENTS IN COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS AND
PUBLIC FACILITIES.
   (A)   Use of vacant or undeveloped properties for the establishment of a new
outdoor special events principal use in the CN, CC, and I Zoning Districts
shall comply with the site plan review requirements, §
153.046, of this code.
   (B)   With the exception of special events at federal, state, and county
parks and legally established fairgrounds, any accessory, outdoor special event
consistent with the definition of special event, as defined in this chapter,
must comply with §
153.233 of this code and a zoning permit shall be required.
   (C)   A zoning permit shall not be required when hosting an indoor special
event in legally established commercial or civic facilities such as: hotels/
motels, convention centers; social lodge; assembly halls; religious facilities;
fairgrounds; federal, state, and county parks; and similar facilities legally
established and authorized to hold special events. This exemption does not
apply to events held at town facilities.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.7.3, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013; Ord.
2018-14, passed 12-20-2018)
§ 153.253 SPECIAL EVENTS IN RESIDENTIAL AND AGRICULTURAL ZONING DISTRICTS.
   A special events use may be established as a principal use on any parcel in
the AG-5, AGR, and RSL Zoning Districts subject to special exception approval
and the following standards:
   (A)   Application.
      (1)   Compliance with the site plan review requirements, §
153.046, of this code. All applications must be signed by the property owner or
designated agent.
      (2)   Letters of coordination from the following agencies shall be
submitted during site plan review: State Department of Health and Environmental
Control (DHEC), County Sheriff’s Department, the County or Town Building
Inspections Department, County Emergency Medical Services (EMS), the
appropriate fire service provider for the subject property, and a designated
solid waste collection/disposal company or a letter indicating a private method
of waste collection/disposal.
   (B)   Requirements. Special event sites shall comply with the following
standards:
      (1)   The subject property or properties shall contain a minimum of two
combined acres of highland area.
      (2)   All structures shall comply with the requirements of this chapter
including but not limited to the density, intensity, and dimensional standards
and accessory structure requirements.
      (3)   All parking shall be contained on the subject property or on an
adjacent parcel. A recorded, parking agreement shall be required, if temporary
off-street parking is provided on a parcel other than the subject property. At
no time shall associated event parking be allowed in a public or private right-
of-way.
      (4)   One on-premise sign, which identifies the subject property, shall
be allowed in accordance with
Table 153.341.E of this chapter. Off-premises signs are not allowed.
      (5)   The maximum occupancy of an individual permanent structure shall
comply with the occupancy standards of the Town Building Code.
      (6)   All events shall adhere to the town of and/or county noise
regulations and any other applicable town ordinances.
      (7)   In residential zoning districts, any existing or proposed structure
shall retain a residential character.
      (8)   Special events on properties with less than five acres of highland
and located in the AGR or RSL Zoning Districts shall be limited to the
following types of special events: weddings, receptions, recitals, art
exhibits, book readings, wine/food tasting events, and executive retreats. The
Zoning Administrator shall be authorized to determine whether a proposed event
not listed above is substantially similar to the aforementioned approved types
of special events.
   (C)   Special exception approval criteria.
      (1)   Section
153.045(E)(1), Special exception approval criteria, shall not be used for
special events use requests. Special events use requests may be approved only
if the Board of Zoning Appeals finds that the proposed use:
         (a)   Will not adversely affect the general welfare or character of
the immediate community;
         (b)   Does not hinder or endanger vehicular traffic and pedestrian
movement on adjacent roads;
         (c)   Includes adequate provisions for items such as: setbacks and
buffering (including fences and/or landscaping) to protect adjacent properties
from the possible adverse influence of the proposed use, such as noise,
vibration, dust glare, odor, traffic congestion, and similar factors;
         (d)   Where applicable, will be developed in a way that will preserve
and incorporate any important natural features;
         (e)   The setup and disassembly of special events will not be
detrimental to the surrounding community; and
         (f)   Includes sufficient safeguards for the use of temporary
structures, if applicable.
      (2)   If the Board of Zoning Appeals (BZA) approves a special events use,
the BZA may attach to it such conditions regarding the location, character, or
other features of the proposed building or structure as the Board may consider
advisable to protect established property values in the surrounding area or to
promote the public health, safety, or general welfare. Additionally, the Board
of Zoning Appeals may require additional conditions of approval including, but
not limited to: event days and hours, the number of events per calendar year,
limitations on outdoor activities, parking, buffers, and use and location of
temporary structures.
      (3)   If the proposed use is approved by the BZA, the Zoning/Planning
Department shall provide written notification to the agencies listed in
division (A)(2) above.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.7.4, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.254 ZONING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   A zoning permit shall be required prior to commencing special events and
shall be maintained for the duration of the special events use, following site
plan review and special exception approval. Additionally, a valid, county or
town business license is required following zoning permit approval.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.7.5, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
§ 153.255 BUSINESS LICENSE; LAPSE OF APPROVAL.
   A valid town business license must be maintained for a principal special
events use. If this business license is not renewed annually or is
discontinued, for any reason, for a period of at least six consecutive months,
then the use shall be considered abandoned. Once abandoned, the special
exception approval and the zoning permit for the special events use shall be
deemed null and void. Renewal of the special events use shall require the
approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals (BZA) and compliance with the
regulations of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 6.7.6, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-18-2013)
[RESERVED]
§§ 153.270 – 153.285 RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
§ 153.300 GENERAL; PURPOSE, APPLICABILITY, EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. The public health, safety, economy, good order, appearance,
convenience, and general welfare require the harmonious, orderly, and
progressive development of land within the town. In furtherance of this general
intent, the subdivision regulations are authorized for the following purposes,
among others:
      (1)   To implement the goals, objective, and policies of the town’s
Comprehensive Plan;
      (2)   To facilitate the adequate provision or availability of
transportation, police and fire protection, water, sewage, schools, parks and
other recreational facilities, affordable housing, disaster evacuation, and
other public services and requirements;
      (3)   To ensure the provisions of needed public open spaces and building
sites in new land developments through the dedication or reservation of land
for recreational, educational, environmental, transportation, and other public
purposes;
      (4)   To ensure, in general, the wise and timely development of new areas
and redevelopment of previously developed areas in harmony with the adopted or
amended Comprehensive Plan for the town and any adopted or amended municipal
comprehensive plan within or adjacent to the town;
      (5)   To implement land use policies that will preserve agricultural uses
of land and the rural character of the town;
      (6)   To identify, protect, and preserve scenic, historic, and
ecologically sensitive areas;
      (7)   To prevent overcrowding of land, avoiding undue concentration of
population and lessening congestion in the streets;
      (8)   To regulate the density and distribution of populations and the
uses of buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry, recreation,
agriculture, forestry, conservation, airports and approaches thereto, water
supply, sanitation, individual onsite wastewater systems or offsite sewer
lateral connection provided to each lot, protection against floods, public
activities, and other purposes; and
      (9)   To ensure protection from fire, flood, and other dangers, and
furthering the public welfare in any other regard specified by a local
governing body.
   (B)   Applicability. Unless expressly exempted, no subdivision shall be
made, platted, or recorded for any purpose nor shall parcels resulting from
such subdivisions be sold, unless such subdivision meet all applicable
standards of this chapter and has been approved in accordance with the
procedures of this chapter.
      (1)   All lots shown on plats, whether subdivided or not, shall have the
Planning Commission stamp of either approval or exemption on said plat; the
Register of Mesne Conveyance shall not record any plat without such stamp. The
plat for an individual lot exempted by virtue of pre-existence must be
accompanied by a surveyor’s statement on the plat that the lot is a single,
individual lot, and not newly created.
      (2)   Parcels that were recorded by deed or plat prior to the adoption of
the county’s original subdivision regulations on January 1, 1955, will receive
automatic approval under a grandfather clause, provided the parcel involved is
still the same size and shape as when recorded prior to 1955 and is properly
platted in accordance with present standards. The recorded information must be
provided and attested to by the surveyor or attorney involved.
      (3)   Preliminary plats submitted for approval shall expire two years
from the date of preliminary approval if all conditions for preliminary plat
approval have not been met. The Zoning Administrator shall be authorized to
grant a one-time extension of this time frame if a written request is submitted
by the applicant prior to the expiration date. The time period of the extension
shall not exceed one year.
      (4)   Upon submission of a subdivision application, no additional
subdivision applications shall be accepted for the subject property until the
original application has been withdrawn or the decision-making body has
rendered its final decision and all applicable time limits on refiling have
expired.
   (C)   Exemptions.
      (1)   Procedures. The following shall be exempt from the subdivision plat
procedures, if the Zoning Administrator determines that all engineering and
survey standards of this chapter have been met:
         (a)   The combination or re-combination of portions of previously
platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased. When the plat is
finalized, it shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for recording.
Deeds and plats shall be recorded simultaneously.
         (b)   The public acquisition of land for right-of-way or drainage
easements or any lot or parcel created therein.
         (c)   Contiguous properties that are to be divided for the purpose of
exchanging or trading parcels of land. When the plat is finalized, it shall be
submitted to the Zoning Administrator for recording. Deed and plats shall be
recorded simultaneously.
         (d)   A parcel of land that is proposed to be used as the site for a
utility substation, power line easements or right-of-way, pumping station,
pressure regulating station, electricity regulating substation, gas pressure
control station, or similar facilities.
         (e)   The combination or re-combination of entire lots of record when
no new street or change in existing streets is involved.
         (f)   The division of land into parcels of five acres or more, where
no new street or easement is involved. Plats of these exceptions must be
received as information by the Zoning Administrator, which fact shall be
indicated on the plats.
      (2)   Standards. Lots created and recorded prior to August 15, 1971 shall
be exempt from compliance with the standards of this chapter, provided that the
subject property:
         (a)   Was or is surveyed and platted in accordance with prescribed
standards;
         (b)   Has the approval of the State Department of Health and
Environmental Control (DHEC); and/or the Public Service District.
         (c)   Contains no drainage ways or easements needed to drain
surrounding properties, as determined by the Public Works Director.
   (D)   Town road construction standards.
      (1)   The regulations and standards of this chapter are intended to
supplement the town’s road construction standards, as amended, in Appendix A of
the chapter, which shall be considered the minimum design standards for roads
and drainage systems in the town.
      (2)   Note: C Funds cannot be used to construct a ROW or drainage
easement. Approved constructed ROW or constructed easements can be maintained
by C Funds.
   (E)   Relationship to development review procedures of §§
153.040 through
153.055. The “general” procedural requirements and standards of §
153.040 of this code shall apply to the subdivision plat procedures of this
subchapter.
   (F)   Survey compliance. All land surveys in the town shall be in accord
with the land use designated for the proposed subdivision of property and the
criteria specified in urban land surveys as promulgated by the S.C. Code of
Regulations, 1991, Chapter 49, Article 3, R. 400-490, as amended, and described
as the “Minimum Standards Manual for the Practice of Land Surveying in South
Carolina.”
(Ord. 2012-06, § 8.1, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-06, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 153.301 PRE-APPLICATION INFORMATION; CONFERENCE.
   Pre-application conferences offer an opportunity for Planning, Public Works,
and other affected agencies to familiarize applicants with applicable
procedure, submittal requirements, development standards, and other pertinent
matters before finalizing the development proposal or laying out the proposed
subdivision. Applicants requesting minor subdivisions are suggested to schedule
a pre-application process before submittal of an application. Applicants for a
major subdivision are required to have a pre-application conference before
submittal of an application. Applicants shall be responsible for scheduling
pre-application conferences with the Zoning Administrator who shall be
responsible for contacting the Public Works Director and other affected
agencies.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 8.2, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-06, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 153.302 MINOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   Minor subdivision; general. A MINOR SUBDIVISION is a division of any
tract of land into three or fewer lots, provided that:
      (1)   No public street right-of-way dedications are involved;
      (2)   The Public Works Director does not require a preliminary plat for a
drainage easement;
      (3)   The lots meet State Department of Health and Environmental Control
(DHEC) requirements for an acceptable sewage disposal system, including systems
deemed to be properly functioning by DHEC and those grandfathered by DHEC
regulations; off-site sewage disposal systems must be approved by DHEC and an
off-site utility easement must be shown along with the lots served by the off-
site system; and/or the town PSD;
      (4)   Off-site sewerage disposal systems must be approved by DHEC and/or
the public provider and an off-site utility easement must be shown along with
all lots served by the off-site system if public sewer is (accessible and is
provided to each lot) provided, then sewer lateral connection will be provided
to each lot; and
      (5)   No new or residual parcels will be created that do not comply with
all applicable requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Minor subdivision process. Applications for minor subdivisions shall
be submitted to the Zoning Administrator on forms available in the Planning/
Zoning Department. There is one required step in the minor subdivision process
which is final plat review and approval. Generally, minor subdivisions are
reviewed in the Planning/Zoning Department and approved by the Zoning
Administrator. However, the Zoning Administrator may send minor subdivisions
applications to the Planning Commission for approval in order to determine
whether or not the proposed subdivision is consistent with the goals and
objective of the Comprehensive Plan. Applicants for minor subdivisions are
strongly encouraged to schedule and attend a pre-application conference prior
to filing a minor subdivision.
(Ord. 2012-06, §§ 8.3.1 and 8.3.2, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-06, passed 10-
17-2013)
§ 153.303 MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   Major subdivision; general. Any land divisions that are not a minor
subdivision shall be processed as major subdivisions.
      (1)   Conference. All major subdivisions applicants are required to
attend a pre-application conference.
      (2)   Subdivision roads and utilities. A zoning permit is required for
grading, drainage, or the construction of roads and utilities in a subdivision,
provided a subdivision plat has been approved. The permit shall be posted on
the site prior to commencing work.
   (B)   Major subdivision process.
      (1)   Applicants for major subdivisions are required to schedule and
attend a pre-application conference prior to filing a major subdivisions
application.
      (2)   After the pre-application conference, there are three required
steps in the process:
         (a)   Preliminary plat review and approval;
         (b)   Letters of coordination; and
         (c)   Final plat review and approval.
      (3)   Each step of the process shall be completed before initiating the
next step.
      (4)   Applications for major subdivisions shall be submitted to the
Zoning Administrator and shall include a completed application form (available
from the Planning/Zoning Department). Additional components for consideration
of a major subdivision that are necessary at the pre-application conference
are:
         (a)   A plat or survey of the subject property, if available, or a tax
map that identifies the subject property; and
         (b)   A concept plan that includes the following information:
            1.   The proposed means of access to a public road;
            2.   Surrounding land uses;
            3.   All adjacent roads;
            4.   A preliminary map and analysis of natural resources present on
the subject property and surrounding property; and
            5.   A conceptual layout of the proposed subdivisions, which shall
be overlaid on the preliminary site analysis and which shall show streets,
drainage, lots, parks, and other facilities located to protect natural resource
areas.
 
COMMENTARY:
Approval from other local, state, or federal agencies may be necessary in the
development of land in the town, particularly in regard to environmental
concerns. Pre-application conferences should be held with these agencies,
including the State Department of Health and Environmental Control, Ocean and
Coastal Resource Management, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service. Traffic studies may be requested to determine the post
development effect the increased density may have on existing or planned
streets and highways.
 
(Ord. 2012-06, §§ 8.3.3 and 8.3.4, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-06, passed 10-
17-2013)
§ 153.304 LETTERS OF COORDINATION FOR MAJOR AND MINOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   Letters of coordination are required that acknowledge that the town and
other agencies will be able to provide necessary public services, facilities,
and programs to service the development proposed, at the time the subdivision
plat is processed.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 8.3.5, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-06, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 153.305 PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   (A)   Applicability. Preliminary plats shall be required for all major
subdivisions.
   (B)   Application; requirements. The following shall be submitted.
      (1)   Submission. Completed applications for preliminary plat approval
shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator on forms available in the
Planning/Zoning Department. Ten copies of the Preliminary Plat shall be filed
with the application.
      (2)   Scale. Preliminary plats shall be drawn to engineer’s scale no
smaller than one inch equals 200 feet. Where large areas are being platted,
they may be drawn on one or more sheets, 22 inches by 34 inches in size. For
small areas being platted, a scale of one inch equals 100 feet shall be used.
      (3)   Layout. Even if the applicant intends to subdivide only a portion
of a parcel or tract of land initially, the preliminary plat shall show a
proposed street and lot layout, drainage plan, and other requirements for the
entire parcel or tract of land in which such portion is contained; except that
the Zoning Administrator, with the recommendation of the Public Works Director,
may waive this requirement on a finding that such a complete layout is not
necessary to carry out the purposes of these regulations.
      (4)   Required information. The following information shall be required
on each plat.
         (a)   The courses and distances of the perimeter of the land involved
shall be indicated on the plat shown with all courses marked to show which
actual field observations are and which are computed.
         (b)   References to a known point or points such as street
intersections and railroad crossings shall be shown.
         (c)   The total acreage of the land involved in the subdivision and
the acreage of high land above the Office of Ocean and Coastal Resource
Management critical line. Date of critical line certification shall be
indicated. (Aerial photography may not be used to determine OCRM critical line
location.)
         (d)   The names of adjacent landowners and streets where known or
available shall be given (with the tax parcel numbers), and all intersecting
boundaries or property lines shall be shown.
         (e)   Proposed divisions to be created shall be shown, including
building envelopes for each lot, right-of-way widths, roadway widths, road
surface types, sidewalks (if applicable), proposed drainage easements and names
of streets; the locations of proposed utility installations and utility
easements; lot lines, dimensions, and angles; sites reserved or dedicated for
public uses and sites for apartments, civic/institutional, commercial, and
industrial uses. The status of the existing lot access and the concept of the
type of road construction being proposed shall be indicated (e.g., ingress/
egress easement, private road constructed or unconstructed, public secondary or
primary rural road, public secondary or primary town road, and other details as
appropriate; i.e., curb and gutter, asphalt swales, inverted crown, roadside
open ditch, and the like).
         (f)   The title, scale (including graphic scale), north arrow
(magnetic, grid, or true), date, name of applicant, and the name and seal of
the engineer or surveyor with state registration number shall be shown.
         (g)   All existing structures and physical features of the land,
including contours (contours not required on proposed private subdivisions and
only within the rights-of-way of proposed rural public streets), drainage
ditches, roads, and wooded areas shall be shown. The contour interval shall be
one foot unless otherwise approved in advance of submission by the Public Works
Director. All contour information shall be based on mean sea level datum and
shall be accurate within one-half foot. The benchmark, with its description and
the data used for the survey, shall be clearly noted on the plat.
         (h)   General drainage features, including proposed drainage easements
and detention/ retention basins. Also the proposed direction of drainage on
each street, ditch, and lot shall be indicated by the use of arrows and
proposed street names.
         (i)   The location of required landscape buffers as specified in §§
153.330 through
153.341 of this code, which shall not be located within drainage easements
unless expressly approved by the Public Works Director.
         (j)   U.S. Army Corps of Engineers jurisdictional wetlands must be
delineated with the date of certification, on lots of five acres or less in
size and within all publicly dedicated rights-of-way and easements. Include
Army Corps of Engineers SAC number.
         (k)   A notation shall be made on the plat clearly indicating the
applicable OCRM critical line buffers and setbacks.
         (l)   Tree surveys on lots of one acre or less are to include grand
trees on the entire lot. Tree surveys of grand trees may be requested upon site
inspection if lots greater than one acre appear to be unbuildable due to the
presence of grand trees.
         (m)   Tree surveys of all grand trees are required within access
easements, drainage easements, and rights-of-way.
         (n)   A signature block on the plat signed by the owner(s) of the
property and notarized indicating that the proposed preliminary plat being put
forth is an action of the owner(s), heirs thereto, or assigns.
         (o)   A vacant block shall be provided on each page of the plat that
is three inches by eight inches in dimension for town approval stamps and
notation.
         (p)   A statement that any easements for utilities or other
encroachments in the area to be dedicated for streets, highways, drainage, or
other public or private use are subject to binding provision that the costs of
future relocation of any such encroachments due to the construction or
maintenance of public improvements shall be borne by the holder of the easement
and/or utility company.
      (5)   Accompanying data.
         (a)   The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by a statement as to
the availability of and specific indication of the distance to and location of
the nearest public water supply and public sanitary sewers.
         (b)   The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by a statement
indicating what provisions are to be made for water supply and sewage disposal.
         (c)   Proposed subdivisions encom passing 100 or more acres of land
area shall provide a master plan showing the general layout of future
development of the entire tract and on adjacent lands that are under common
ownership or control. This master plan shall provide a generalized description
and plan that addresses the following future development considerations:
traffic circulation, drainage, environmental preservation, utility placement,
land use, density, and any areas that are to remain undeveloped.
         (d)   The engineer and/or surveyor who prepared the preliminary plat
shall affix their seal(s), name(s) and state registration number(s). Only
engineers or surveyors registered in the State of South Carolina shall attest
and fix their seal on the preliminary plat.
 
COMMENTARY:
For the purpose of preliminary plat applications, a complete application means
one that includes all required information and fees and that addresses the
findings of the inspection report and has received all approvals from other
agencies that are a prerequisite to preliminary plat approval.
 
   (C)   Zoning Administrator; review and report. Upon receipt of a complete
application for preliminary plat approval, the Zoning Administrator shall have
30 calendar days to:
      (1)   Review the proposed preliminary plat;
      (2)   Compile a staff report on the proposed plat, which includes the
comments and recommendations of the Public Works Director and other affected
agencies; and
      (3)   Forward the report and any recommendations to the Planning
Commission.
   (D)   Planning Commission; review and report.  Within 30 calendar days of
receipt of a report from the Zoning Administrator, the Planning Commission
shall review the proposed preliminary plat and act to approve, approve with
conditions or deny the preliminary plat based on whether it complies with all
applicable requirements of this chapter and the adopted Town Comprehensive
Plan.
   (E)   Effect of preliminary plat approval. Approval of a preliminary plat
shall constitute general acceptance of the overall planning concepts for the
proposed subdivision and is a prerequisite for the filing of a final plat
application.
 
COMMENTARY:
Appeals of Zoning Administrator and other subdivisions-related administrative
decisions, including decisions to reject applications as incomplete, shall be
processed in accordance with §
153.053 described in this chapter.
 
   (F)   Lapse of preliminary plat approval. An approved preliminary plat shall
lapse and be of no further force and effect if a final plat for the subdivision
(or a phase of the subdivision) has not been approved within two years of the
date of approval of the preliminary plat. If the subdivision is to be developed
in phases, a phasing plan, including a timetable for development of the entire
subdivisions, shall be approved as part of the preliminary plat approval. No
final plats shall be accepted and no construction shall be allowed for any
phase not approved as part of the preliminary plat.
   (G)   Appeals of Zoning Administrator’s preliminary plat decision. Any party
in interest in a preliminary plat decision of the Zoning Administrator
regarding a complete or incomplete application may appeal the decision of the
Planning Commission by filing an appeal with the Zoning Administrator within 30
calendar days of the date of the decision.
      (1)   Appeal powers. In exercising its appeal power, the Planning
Commission may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision
on appeal. In acting upon the appeal, the Planning Commission shall be
authorized only to determine whether the decision of the Zoning Administrator
was made in error. The Planning Commission shall not be authorized to approve
modifications or waivers of chapter standards through the appeal process. If
the Planning Commission determines that it is necessary to obtain additional
evidence in order to resolve the matter, it may remand the matter to the Zoning
Administrator with directions to obtain such evidence and to reconsider the
decision in light of such evidence.
      (2)   Consideration of evidence. The decision of the Planning Commission
shall be a matter of record; it shall consider only the same application,
plans, and related project materials that were the subject of the original
decision and only the issues raised by the appeal.
      (3)   Burden of persuasion of error. In acting on the appeal, the
Planning Commission shall grant to the decision of the Zoning Administrator a
presumption of correctness, placing the burden of persuasion of error on the
appellant.
      (4)   Approval criteria. An appeal shall be sustained only if the
Planning Commission finds that the decision of the Zoning Administrator was in
error.
      (5)   Vote required. A quorum of the Planning Commission shall be
achieved when the number of members in attendance equals more than one-half of
its total membership. At least two-thirds of the members present and voting
shall be required to reverse a final plat decision of the Zoning Administrator.
   (H)   Appeals of Planning Commission preliminary plat decision. Any party in
interest in a preliminary plat decision of the Planning Commission or any
officer, board, or bureau of the town may appeal the Planning Commission
decision to the Circuit Court. Appellants shall file with the Court Clerk a
written petition plainly and fully setting forth how such decision is contrary
to law. Such appeal shall be filed within 30 calendar days after actual written
notice of the Planning Commission’s decision.
   (I)   Construction plans. After approval of a preliminary plat and before
commencing any work within the proposed subdivision, including land clearing
and grading, road and drainage plans prepared by an engineer registered in the
state shall be submitted to the Public Works Director for review and approval
in accordance with the town road construction standards in Appendix A of
Ordinance 2012-06, as amended.
   (J)   Inspections.
      (1)   Subdivision plats that are submitted for review are field inspected
by Planning and Public Works staff to ensure compliance with any applicable
ordinance requirements and town standards.
      (2)   Prior to submitting a preliminary plat where no public sewer is
provided to any proposed lot, the applicant shall contact a representative of
the State Department of Health and Environmental Control (DHEC) and arrange for
a test of the soil on any proposed lot. DHEC staff will inspect the proposed
lot(s) in order to identify areas that meet minimum septic system requirements
required by the state. The results of this test shall be submitted by the
applicant at the same time of the preliminary plat application.
      (3)   Where subdivision streets and/or drainageways are being
constructed, the Public Works Director or the authorized representative will
make periodic visits to the site as indicated in the town road construction
standards, Appendix A of Ordinance 2012-06, as amended, to ensure construction
compliance with the town-approved road and drainage plans. The Public Works
Director’s or the authorized representative’s certification that all roads and
drainage systems have been constructed in compliance with the plans is required
prior to final approval of the development. This approval is only necessary for
public subdivisions.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 8.4, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-06, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 153.306 FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   Applicability. Final plats shall be required for all subdivisions.
   (B)   Application.
      (1)   Final plat application requirements.
         (a)   Applications for final plat approval shall be submitted to the
Zoning Administrator on forms available in the Planning/Zoning Department. Ten
copies of the final plat shall be filed with the application.
         (b)   Written certification from the design engineer that the
subdivision’s road and drainage infrastructure and any other required
improvements have been constructed in accordance with the approved plans.
         (c)   The final plat shall be drawn in ink on a material specified by
the Register of Mesne Conveyance for recording on sheets 22 inches by 34 inches
in size and at an engineer’s scale of one inch equals 100 feet or larger. Where
necessary the plat may be on several sheets accompanied by an index sheet or
key map insert showing the entire subdivision.
      (2)   Information. The final plat shall show the following:
         (a)   All proposed divisions of land shall be shown, including each
lot showing lot lines with bearings and distances; all rights-of-way; all
drainage easements; names of all streets; the locations of all utility rights-
of-way and utility easements; all structures; and all sites reserved or
dedicated for public uses;
         (b)   The title, scale (including graphic scale), north arrow
(magnetic, grid or true), date, name of applicant, and the name of the engineer
or surveyor with state registration number shall be shown;
         (c)   Block and lot numbers suitably arranged by simple system;
         (d)   The names of adjacent landowners and streets, where known or
available, shall be given (with the tax parcel numbers), and all intersecting
boundaries or property lines shall be shown;
         (e)   Certificates:
            1.   The signature and seal of the registered land surveyor in
accordance with the current Minimum Standard Manual for the Practice of Land
Surveying in South Carolina;
            2.   A statement of dedication by the property owner of streets,
rights-of-way, easements, and any other sites for public or private use and
warranty of title of property offered for dedication. If any change in
ownership is made subsequent to the submission of the plat and prior to the
granting of final approval, the statement of dedication shall be corrected
accordingly;
            3.   For any public dedication, a warranty deed for the transfer of
the right(s)-of-way(s), easement(s), or other sites for public use to the town
on legal documents of the form suitable to the town must be provided; and
            4.   A statement that any easements for utilities or other
encroachments in the area to be dedicated for streets, highways, drainage, or
other public or private use are subject to a binding provision that the costs
of future relocation of any such encroachments due to the construction or
maintenance of public improvements shall be borne by the holder of the easement
and/or utility company;
         (f)   All easements shall include their location, width, and center
line;
         (g)   The approved Office of Ocean and Coastal Resource Management
(OCRM) critical line with signed approval statement on the final plat;
         (h)   At the Zoning Administrator’s discretion, the applicant/surveyor
may be required to show buffers and setbacks on lots less than one acre in size
or on newly created lots that may appear to have encroachment or structures
into a buffer or setback;
         (i)   U.S. Army Corps of Engineers jurisdictional wetlands must be
delineated with date of certification, on lots of five acres or less in size
and within all publicly dedicated rights-of-way and easements. Include Army
Corps of Engineers SAC number;
         (j)   High land acreage and low land acreage (freshwater wetlands or
acreage below the Office of Ocean and Coastal Resource Management critical
line);
         (k)   Tree surveys on lots of one acre or less are to include grand
trees on the entire lot. Tree surveys of grand trees may be requested upon site
inspection if lots greater than one acre appear to be unbuildable due to the
presence of grand trees;
         (l)   Tree surveys of all grand trees are required within access
easements, drainage easements, and rights-of-way;
         (m)   Ownership and maintenance status of the lot access shall be
indicated for any newly created lots; and
         (n)   A vacant block shall be provided on each page of the plat that
is three inches by eight inches in dimension for town approval stamps and
notations.
      (3)   Accompanying data.
         (a)   A certificate of title or a sworn affidavit establishing the
ownership of the land to be recorded. If any change in ownership occurs
subsequent to the date of the certificate of title or affidavit and prior to
the granting of final approval, a new certificate of title or sworn affidavit
establishing the ownership of the land shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator.
         (b)   In subdivision where existing public water and public sewer
systems have been extended and/or a new system installed, a certification of
inspection and associated operating permits from the State Department of Health
and Environmental Control (DHEC) shall be submitted.
         (c)   Restrictive covenants affidavit(s) signed by the applicant or
current property owner(s) in compliance with state law.
         (d)   Should the landowner/developer decide to utilize Article A.2,
Private road standards, of Appendix A of Ordinance 2012-06, as amended, the
following five notes shall be placed on the plat.
            1.   Any future subdivision of this parcel, or road construction or
extension of the existing roads shown hereon shall require compliance with the
town ordinances. Before the town will consider acceptance of any dedication of
roads into the town road system, the property owner(s) shall construct the
roads to town road construction standards.
            2.   It is hereby expressly understood by the property owner,
developer, or any subsequent purchaser of any lots shown on the plat that the
town is not responsible for the maintenance of the streets, roads, common
areas, drainage systems, and any other municipal services which include, but
are not limited to, garbage disposal, public sewage, fire protection, or
emergency medical service.
            3.   Be aware that the town is not responsible for drainage and
flooding problems relevant to the real property, and that emergency vehicles
may have difficulty accessing the property.
            4.   No public funds shall be used for the maintenance of the roads
shown on the plat.
            5.   This approval in no way obligates the town to maintain the 50-
foot right-of-way until it has been constructed to town standards and accepted
for maintenance by Town Council.
         (e)   Letters of coordination are required which acknowledge that the
County and other agencies will be able to provide necessary public services,
facilities, and programs to service the development proposed, at the time the
subdivision plat is processed.
      (4)   Certification of approval. When the Zoning Administrator has
approved the plat, a certificate noting such approval and carrying the
signature of the Zoning Administrator shall be placed on the original drawing
of said plat.
   (C)   Zoning Administrator; review and decision. Within 45 days of receipt
of a complete final plat application, the Zoning Administrator shall review the
proposed final plat and the reports from the Public Works Director and other
affected agencies and act to approve, approve with conditions or deny the final
plat, based on whether it complies with the approved preliminary plat, all
applicable requirements of this chapter, and the purposes and intent of §
153.005.
   (D)   Acceptance of dedications.
      (1)   Approval of a Final Plat shall not constitute acceptance of any
public improvements. Such acceptance will require Town Council acceptance of
dedication.
      (2)   Documents or instruments granting easements within the area to be
dedicated must provide that:
         (a)   Future relocation or replacement costs of any encroachments,
including but not limited to utilities, due to maintenance or construction of
public improvements, is to be borne solely by the easement holder/utility
company; and
         (b)   The town will not be responsible for costs relating to future
relocation or replacement of utilities or other encroachments made necessary by
maintenance and/or construction of public improvements;
         (c)   All expenses pertaining to said relocation shall be paid for by
the easement holder/utility company; and
         (d)   Relocation shall be completed within 90 days from receipt of
written request by the town or as otherwise agreed to by the town.
   (E)   Recording. Approved final plats shall be recorded by the Zoning
Administrator with the Register of Mesne Conveyance within 30 days of final
approval. Notice to the applicant shall be sent within a reasonable time
following the date of the recording with the Register of Mesne Conveyance.
   (F)   Appeals of Zoning Administrator’s final plat decision. Any person with
a substantial interest in a final plat decision of the Zoning Administrator may
appeal the decision to the Planning Commission by filing an appeal with the
Zoning Administrator within 30 calendar days after the actual notice of the
decision.
      (1)   Appeal powers. In exercising the appeal power, the Planning
Commission may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision
being appealed. In acting upon the appeal, the Planning Commission shall be
authorized only to determine whether the decision of the Zoning Administrator
was made in error. The Planning Commission shall not be authorized to approve
modifications or waivers of chapter standards through the appeal process. If
the Planning Commission determines that it is necessary to obtain additional
evidence in order to resolve the matter, it may remand the matter to the Zoning
Administrator, with directions to obtain such evidence and to reconsider the
decisions in light of such evidence.
      (2)   Consideration of evidence. The Planning Commission’s decision shall
be on the record; it shall consider only the same application, plans, and
related project materials that were the subject of the original decision and
only the issues raised by the appeal.
      (3)   Burden of persuasion or error. In acting on the appeal, the
Planning Commission shall grant to the Zoning Administrator’s decision a
presumption of correctness, placing the burden of persuasion of error on the
appellant.
      (4)   Approval criteria. An appeal shall be sustained only if the
Planning Commission finds that the Zoning Administrator erred.
      (5)   Vote required. A quorum of the Planning Commission shall be
achieved when the number of members in attendance equals more than one-half of
the total membership of the Planning Commission. At least two-thirds of the
members present and voting shall be required to reverse a final plat decision
of the Zoning Administrator.
 
COMMENTARY:
Appeals of Zoning Administrator and other subdivision decisions [including
decisions to reject applications as incomplete], shall be processed in
accordance with §
153.053 described in this chapter.
 
   (G)   Appeals of Planning Commission’s decision.
      (1)   Any person with a substantial interest in a final plat (appeal)
decision of the Planning Commission may appeal the Planning Commission decision
at the Circuit Court. Appellants shall file with the Court Clerk a written
petition plainly and fully setting forth how such decision is contrary to law.
Such appeal shall be filed within 30 calendar days after actual notice of the
Planning Commission’s decision.
      (2)   At any time prior to appeal of a Planning Commission decision on a
final plat (appeal) decision, the appellant may request that the Planning
Commission enter mediation. When mediation is requested, the Planning
Commission shall assign one of its members as a representative in mediation
proceedings. A vote of the Planning Commission in a public meeting shall be
required to accept any mediated settlement. An accepted mediated settlement
cannot waive the standards of this chapter. Prior to beginning talks,
applicable time limits for review and action on complete applications must be
extended by mutual agreement of the applicant and Planning Commission.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 8.5, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-06, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 153.307 MARKERS.
   (A)   Placement. A marker shall be set on the right-of-way line at the ends
of the block for every block length of street. When blocks occur that have a
curve or curves in them, markers shall be set on both sides of the street at
the ends of tangents. Markers shall also be set on right-of-way lines (on each
side of the center line) at angle points when curves are not used. All interior
lot corners shall be marked. The location and type of markers used shall be
indicated on the final plat.
   (B)   Timing. Markers shall be installed prior to the submission of and
approval of the final plat.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 8.6, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-06, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 153.308 LOTS; LAYOUT AND DESIGN.
   (A)   Layout and design generally. Lots shall be laid out and designed to
provide buildable area on each lot, while complying with all other standards
and requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Size.
      (1)   Lots shall comply with the lot area standards of the underlying
zoning district and all other applicable standards of this chapter.
      (2)   Depth of residential lots shall not exceed five times the width of
the lot (a 1:5 ratio).
      (3)   The Zoning Administrator may allow the lot width to depth ratio of
1:5 to be exceeded when any of the following conditions occur:
         (a)   When attached dwellings are proposed;
         (b)   Where additional depth is provided for marsh frontage lots when
the lot width depth ratio is met and the property line is extended into the
marsh or the property is bisected by or fronts on freshwater wetlands; or
         (c)   A minor subdivision of a parent tract, provided the following
requirements are met:
            1.   The minimum lot frontage for each lot is not less than 250
feet;
            2.   In no case shall the average lot width be less than 250 feet
with the minimum lot width at any one point less than 200 feet;
            3.   The property to be subdivided is located in an NRM or
agricultural zoning district; and
            4.   Prescribed lot width requirements shall be for at least two-
thirds of the depth of the lot.
   (C)   Access.
      (1)   Double-frontage lots shall be avoided except where essential to
provide separation of residential development from major roadways or to
overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. An easement with
a minimum width of ten feet may be required to restrict access from the major
street or other area.
      (2)   All lots shall be provided with a means of access in conformance
with the standards and specifications of this chapter.
      (3)   The minimum frontage of any flag lot or cul-de-sac lot access shall
be 20 feet.
      (4)   All lots, all flag lots, cul-de-sac lots, and privately accessed
lots shall comply with the International Fire Code, as adopted by Town Council
(20 feet in width, 13 feet six inches in height unobstructed).
   (D)   Flag lots. The Zoning Administrator shall be authorized to allow the
use of flag lots only when the Zoning Administrator determines that such lot
configurations are necessary to address development constraints that are
present on the site, e.g., lot width or wetland issues.
      (1)   Permitted use of flag lots. Flag lots may be authorized when the
Zoning Administrator determines that they will:
         (a)   Facilitate subdivision of a long narrow parcel that has
sufficient area but insufficient width to be otherwise subdivided;
         (b)   Eliminate multiple access points to collector or arterial roads;
and/or
         (c)   Allow reasonable development when the buildable area of a parcel
is restricted due to the presence of a natural resource or the irregular shape
of a parcel.
      (2)   Prohibited use of flag lots.
         (a)   Flag lots shall not be used to avoid the development of streets
otherwise required by this chapter when the effect of such flag lots would be
to increase the number of access points (driveways) on a publicly dedicated
road right-of-way.
         (b)   Flag lots may be denied when an adjoining parcel also has
sufficient area but insufficient width to otherwise be subdivided. In such
cases, platting can be accomplished by landowners of adjoining parcels joining
together to provide a full width right-of-way and road section.
      (3)   Standards for flag lots.
         (a)   Flag lots shall take direct access to streets that comply with
this chapter.
         (b)   The area within the flagpole portion of a flag lot shall not be
counted as lot area for the purpose of meeting the minimum lot area
requirements of this chapter.
         (c)   The flagpole portion of a flag lot shall have a minimum width of
20 feet for its entire depth, and the depth or length of the flagpole shall not
exceed 450 feet.
         (d)   As a condition of approval for a flag lot, an encroachment
permit must be obtained from the appropriate agency governing access, and an
access easement agreement for shared access between the owner of the flag lot
and the lot from which the flag lot was created is recorded in the Office of
the County Register of Mesne Conveyance.
         (e)   Dwelling groups on flag lots shall meet the requirements of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 8.7, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-06, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 153.309 TREE PRESERVATION; GRAND TREES.
   (A)   Definition. For this and all sections regarding the protection of
GRAND TREES, the meaning shall be for all trees except pine and sweet gum
having a diameter at breast height of 18 inches or greater.
   (B)   Tree surveys. Tree surveys shall comply with the following.
      (1)   Lots within subdivisions shall be laid out and designed to provide
a buildable area on each lot that does not require the removal of grand tree.
      (2)   Tree protection standards are described in §§
153.330 through
153.341 of this code.
      (3)   Tree surveys on lots of one acre or less are to include grand trees
on the entire lot. Tree surveys of grand trees may be requested upon site
inspection if lots greater than one acre appear to be unbuildable due to the
presence of grand trees.
      (4)   Tree surveys of all grand trees are required within access
easements, drainage easements, and rights-of-way.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 8.8, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-06, passed 10-17-2013; Ord.
2024-04, passed 6-20-2024)
§ 153.310 TREES AND SHRUBS; SETBACK FROM PAVEMENT.
   (A)   Minimum offset of trees and shrubs from road pavement. Trees and
shrubs shall be set back from street and road pavement in accordance with the
following minimum requirements:
                             Offset from Edge of Pavement (feet)
Roadside Feature Speed (mph) Canopy Trees Understory Trees/Shrubs Behind Guard
                                          Rail
                                Offset from Edge of Pavement (feet)
Roadside Feature Speed (mph)    Canopy Trees Understory Trees/Shrubs Behind
                                             Guard Rail
All curbs        40 and less    5*           3*
                45 to 50       8*           5*
                55 and greater 12*          5*
Guide rail       All            5*           3*
Open shoulder    40 and less    10           5
                45 to 50       15           7
                55 and greater 20           10
*Tree limbs hanging below 15 feet in height shall be trimmed so that they do
not encroach beyond the back of the curb. Provided approval by the town and
a permit is obtained.
Minimum overhead clearance of 14 feet should be maintained for safe passage.
When a barrier curb or guide rail exists, off set is measured from the face
of the curb or guide rail to the face of the tree at ground level.
 
   (B)   Understory trees. Understory trees may be located five feet from the
edge of pavement with the approval of the Zoning Administrator and Public Works
Director.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 8.9, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-06, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 153.311 PEDESTRIAN WAYS.
   (A)   Where required. Pedestrian ways shall be provided in all major
subdivisions within the urban and suburban area of the town. If development
characteristics warrant, the Zoning Administrator may waive this requirement
for any portion of the proposed subdivision. Requests for such waivers shall be
submitted along with written justification to the Zoning Administrator for
approval.
   (B)   Placement. Paved pedestrian ways within publicly dedicated rights-of-
way shall conform to the construction details for paved sidewalks contained in
the town’s road construction standards, Appendix A of Ordinance 2012-06, as
amended. Unpaved, alternative surface walkways that are not within a right-of-
way or drainage easement and bike trails or walking trails that are designed to
connect neighborhoods and provide access to common areas may be provided when
approved by the Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 8.10, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-06, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 153.312 STREET NAMES; STREET NAME SIGNS; ADDRESSES.
   (A)   Street names. No street names shall be used that will duplicate or be
confused with the names of existing streets. Street names proposed by the
applicant shall be approved by the Zoning Administrator.
   (B)   Street name signs. Street name signs shall be installed by the
development in accordance with the town’s road construction standards in
Appendix A of Ordinance 2012-06, as amended.
   (C)   Effect of subdivision on existing addresses and/or street names. The
process of subdividing property and/or creating access to a lot(s) may affect
the addresses on the subject property and/or adjacent properties and may affect
the names of roads and/or easements. It is the responsibility of the applicant
to ascertain from the Planning/Zoning Department and County Consolidated
Dispatch Center (CDC) if the proposed subdivision will impact addresses or
road/easement names and comply the following requirements prior to final plat
approval.
      (1)   If the proposed subdivision will affect addresses on the subject
property and/or adjacent properties, the applicant must submit affidavits
signed by all owners of all affected properties stating they are aware of the
pending address changes and understand that their addresses will be changed by
the CDC following approval and recording of the proposed subdivision.
      (2)   If the proposed subdivision requires roads or easements to be named
or renamed, the applicant must work with affected property owners to file a
road name/name change petition, along with a plat showing the proposed location
of the road/easement to be named/renamed, with the CDC for review/approval.
Upon approval of a name by the CDC, the applicant shall submit to the Planning/
Zoning Department a revised plat showing the road/easement name in the location
along with the road name/name change petition and CDC approval documentation.
If such road naming/renaming results in the changing of address changes, the
requirements of division (C)(1) above shall apply.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 8.11, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-06, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 153.313 UNDERGROUND UTILITIES AND SERVICES.
   All electrical, telephone, cable television, and similar distribution lines
providing service to a development site should be installed underground.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 8.12, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-06, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 153.314 WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   In accordance with State Department of Health and Environmental Control
(DHEC) regulations, all subdivisions shall be served by approved public water
and sewer systems, (if accessible for connection), public water and sewer
lateral connection are provided to each lot, or if in the opinion of DHEC, the
public’s health and the environment would best be protected by the installation
of such systems. Where public sewer is not available, all new lots must meet
minimum soil requirements established by DHEC for the installation of an
individual on-site wastewater system. This provision shall not be interpreted
to require that subdivisions be annexed in order to obtain public water or
sewer service. All new lots created are to have a means of wastewater disposal,
either by individual wastewater systems or physical sewer lateral connection to
each lot.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 8.13, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-06, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 153.315 MAINTENANCE GUARANTEES.
   Street and storm water management/drainage systems that are to be dedicated
to the town for public maintenance shall be under warranty for all defects and
failures for a period of two years. Prior to final plat approval, the developer
shall provide written verification of financial responsibility for the
correction of any defects and/or failures in those related improvements that
will be dedicated to the town. The warranty (minimum 10% of the construction
costs) shall be in an amount satisfactory to the Public Works Director and
effective for a period of two years from the date of acceptance by the Town
Council. The financial warranty shall be in the form of a no-contest,
irrevocable bank letter of credit, a performance and payment bond, underwritten
by an acceptable state licensed corporate surety, or a cashier’s check. Payment
is subject to Town Attorney approval of the guarantee to determine that the
interests of the town are fully protected, except when a cashier’s check is
utilized, opinion of counsel may be waived. The Public Works Director shall
identify defects not considered to be a public safety issue and notify the
developer of such defects. The developer shall then have 30 days to prepare a
schedule of corrective actions and begin such corrective actions. If not
completed within the approved schedule, the Public Works Director shall make
the repairs and bill the bonding company. Public safety defects shall be
addressed immediately by the Public Works Director, with reimbursement from the
bonding company. The town is not required to accept for maintenance any road,
street, or drainage element.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 8.14, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-06, passed 10-17-2013)
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
§ 153.330 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   The purpose of the regulations contained in this subchapter is to
protect the public health, safety, and general welfare; to promote harmonious
and orderly development and to foster civic beauty by improving the appearance,
character, and economic value of civic, commercial, and industrial development
within the town.
   (B)   The development standards are authorized for the following purposes,
among others:
      (1)   Implement the goals, objectives, and policies of the Town
Comprehensive Plan;
      (2)   Facilitate safe transportation, access, vehicular circulation, and
parking;
      (3)   Ensure the protection and preservation of natural resources, such
as trees and wetlands;
      (4)   Implement the use of vegetated buffers in order to mitigate the
effects of incompatible adjacent uses, to provide transition between
neighboring properties and streets, to moderate climatic effects, and to
minimize noise and glare;
      (5)   Implement basic architectural standards, right-of-way buffer
standards, and sign standards that will promote attractive, well-designed
development, foster balanced streetscapes, and reduce visual clutter along
major roadways, thus enhancing safe traffic flow; and
      (6)   Ensure protection from fire, flood, and other dangers, and
furthering the public welfare in any regard specified by a local governing
body.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 9.1, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-07, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 153.331 APPLICABILITY.
   Unless expressly stated, the sections in this subchapter apply to
development occurring on property within the town.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 9.2, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-07, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 153.332 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Applicability.
         (a)   New development. The off-street parking and loading standards of
this section apply to any new building constructed and to any new use
established.
         (b)   Expansions and alterations. The off-street parking and loading
standards of this section apply when an existing structure or use is expanded
or enlarged. Additional off-street parking and loading spaces will be required
only to serve the enlarged or expanded area, not the entire building or use,
provided that, in all cases, the number of off-street parking and loading
spaces provided for the entire use (pre-existing + expansion) must equal at
least 75% of minimum ratio established in Off-Street Parking Schedule A in this
section.
      (2)   Timing of installation. Required parking spaces and drives shall be
ready for use and approved by the Zoning Administrator prior to issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.
      (3)   Reduction below minimums.
         (a)   The Zoning Administrator shall be authorized to reduce the
number of required parking spaces by no more than 10% when more than ten spaces
are required with the following conditions:
            1.   The site can support the minimum required number of parking
spaces and meet all development standards in this chapter including buffers and
landscaping requirements; or
            2.   The reduction is necessary to meet the tree protection and
preservation regulations contained in §
153.334 of this code.
         (b)   This allowable reduction excludes medical offices and restaurant
uses. Any change in use that increases applicable off-street parking or loading
requirements will be deemed a violation of this chapter unless parking and
loading spaces are provided in accordance with the provisions of this section.
   (B)   Off-Street Parking Schedule A. Unless otherwise expressly allowed,
off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the following
table:
Use Table Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required (Minimum)
Use Table                               Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces
                                        Required (Minimum)
RESIDENTIAL
Adult/child group home or residential   1 per 3 beds, plus 1 per employee in
care facility                           single shift
Congregate living                       1 per 3 beds
Farm labor housing (dormitory)          0.5 per bed
                                        1.5 per 1-bedroom unit; 2 per 2-bedroom
Multi-family                            unit; 2.5 per 3-bedroom and larger
                                        units
                                        0.75 per 1-bedroom unit; 1 per 2-
Retirement housing                      bedroom unit; 1.5 per 3-bedroom and
                                        larger units
Single-family:
Detached and attached, including        2 per dwelling unit
dwelling groups, duplexes, and
manufactured housing units
CIVIC/INSTITUTIONAL
Adult or child day care facilities      1 per employee plus 1 per 5 children/
                                        adults
Archives or museums                     1 per 500 square feet of display area
Cemetery                                1 per full time employee
                                        1 per 100 square feet classroom plus 1
College or university facility          per 300 square feet office/
                                        administrative plus 1 per 3 beds
Community recreation                    1 per 250 square feet of gross floor
                                        area
Convalescent services                   1 per 5 beds
Counseling service                      1 per 150 square feet
                                        1 per employee plus 1 per every 3 seats
Court of law                            of seating available to the public in
                                        the courtroom
Health care related services:
Including home health agency,           1 per 200 square feet of gross floor
laboratory, outpatient services and     area with a minimum of 4 spaces
rehabilitation facilities
Historical sites, libraries             1 per 300 square feet
                                        1 per 2 beds plus 1 per 300 square feet
Hospital                                of floor area of administrative and
                                        medical offices
Intermediate care facility for the      1 per bed plus 1 per employee in single
mentally handicapped                    shift
Nature exhibition or botanical gardens  1 per employee in single shift plus 2
                                        spaces per acre
Parks and recreation                    1 per 5,000 square feet of land area
                                        plus outdoor recreation requirements
Personal improvement education          1 per every 3 students plus 1 per
                                        employee
Postal Service, United States           1 per 150 square feet of floor area
Pre-school or educational nursery       1 per employee in single shift plus 1
                                        per 1,000 sf of classroom area
                                        1 per 5 fixed seats or 1 per every 3
                                        persons in structures with non-fixed
Public assembly:                        seating of the maximum occupancy load
Including conference centers, concert   as established by building code. The
halls, religious assemblies,            number of spaces required may be
professional, labor or political        reduced a maximum of 50% if the
organizations and social clubs or       assembly area is located within 500
lodges                                  feet of any public or commercial
                                        parking lot where sufficient spaces are
                                        available by parking agreement.
Railroad freight depot                  1 per 2,400 square feet
Recycling collection, drop-off          1 per recycle collection container
Safety services                         1 per 2 employees
                                        1 space for each vehicle owned and
School, primary                         operated by the school plus two per
                                        employee (including faculty,
                                        administrative, and the like)
                                        1 space for each vehicle owned and
                                        operated by the school plus two per
School, secondary                       employee (including faculty,
                                        administrative, and the like) plus 1
                                        per 8 students
Utility service, major                  1 space per employee plus 1 per stored
                                        vehicle
Utility service, minor                  None
Zoo                                     10 plus 1 per employee in single shift
COMMERCIAL
                                        1 per 500 square feet of floor area
Agricultural sales/service              plus 4 per acre outdoor sales/display/
                                        storage area
Banks and financial services            1 per 300 square feet of floor area,
                                        also see drive-through requirements
                                        1 per 75 square feet indoor seating
Bar or lounge                           area plus 1 per 200 square feet outdoor
                                        seating area
Bed and breakfast                       1 per guest room
Boat yard                               1 per employee
Building materials or garden equipment  1 per 200 square feet of floor area not
and supplies retailers                  including storage plus 1 per employee
                                        1 per 100 square feet classroom plus 1
Business or trade school                per 300 square feet business/
                                        administrative office
Catering service                        1 per 400 square feet of floor area
Charter boat or other recreational      1 per rental boat or watercraft plus 1
watercraft rental services              per employee
Communication:
Including data processing and           1 per 300 square feet of floor area
publishing services
Construction tools, commercial or       1 per 250 square feet of floor area not
industrial equipment rental             including storage areas
Convenience store                       1 per 200 square feet of floor area
Convention center or visitors bureau    4 per 1,000 square feet of floor area
Fishing or hunting guide service        5 per employee
Fishing or hunting lodge (commercial)   1 per visitor plus 1 per 5 members
Food sales and grocery stores           1 per 175 square feet
Funeral services                        1 per 4 seats or 1 per employee,
                                        whichever is greater
                                        1 per 200 square feet of gross floor
Gasoline service station                area plus vehicle stacking spaces per
                                        division (H) of this section
                                        1 per employee plus 4 per golf green,
Golf courses or country clubs           plus 1 per 4 seats for accessory
                                        restaurant or bar use
Hair, nail, or skin care service        2 per employee or work station,
                                        whichever is greater
Heavy construction service, general     1 per 400 square feet indoor floor area
contractor, or special trade            plus 4 spaces per acre outdoor storage/
contractors                             display/sales area
Heavy duty truck or commercial vehicle  1 per rental vehicle plus 1 per
rental or leasing                       employee in single shift
                                        1 per room plus spaces as required for
Hotel-motel                             associated restaurants, bars, and
                                        offices
Kennel                                  1 plus 1 per employee
Liquor sales, beer or wine sales        1 per 200 square feet of floor area
                                        1 space per 200 square feet of office
Marina                                  area plus 1 per 3 wet slips and 1 per 5
                                        dry stack storage
Nonstore retailers                      1 per employee plus 2 spaces for
                                        deliveries
Office, business/professional/          1 per 300 square feet of floor area
administrative
Office, medical                         1 per 150 square feet of floor area
Office, parole or probation             1 per employee plus 1 per 200 square
                                        feet of floor area
Office, resort real estate              1 per 200 square feet of floor area
Office/warehouse complex                1 per employee in shift plus 1 per 2000
                                        square feet of office space
Outpatient clinic                       1 per 200 square feet of floor area
                                        with a minimum of 4 spaces
Parking, lot or garage                  1 per employee
Pawn shop                               1 per 200 square feet of floor area
Personal improvement service            1 per 200 square feet of floor area
Pet stores, grooming salons, or small   1 per 300 square feet of floor area
animal boarding
Recreational vehicle park or campground 1 per employee plus 1 per recreational
                                        vehicle and camp site
Recreation and entertainment, indoor    1 per 3 seats or 1 per 200 square feet
                                        of floor area, whichever is greater
Recreation and entertainment, outdoor   1 per 200 square feet of public
                                        activity area, plus:
                                       Athletic field: 15 spaces per diamond
                                        or field
                                       Basketball: 5 spaces per court
                                       Swimming pool: 1 per 200 square feet of
                                        water surface area
                                       Tennis: 2 spaces per court
Recreation or vacation camp             1 per employee plus 1 per camp vehicle
                                        or camp site
Repair service, consumer                1 per 300 square feet of floor area
                                        1 per 75 square feet indoor seating
Restaurant, fast-food                   area plus 1 per 200 square feet outdoor
                                        seating area plus vehicle stacking
                                        spaces per division (H) of this section
                                        1 per employee plus 1 per 200 square
Restaurant, fast-food (no inside        feet outdoor seating area plus vehicle
seating)                                stacking spaces per division (H) of
                                        this section
                                        1 per 75 square feet indoor seating
Restaurant, general                     area plus 1 per 200 square feet outdoor
                                        seating area
                                        1 per 300 square feet indoor floor area
Retail sales and service, general       plus 5 spaces per acre outdoor storage/
                                        display/sales area
Rooming or boarding house               1 per guest room
Scrap and salvage service               1 per employee plus 2 per acre
Self-service storage/mini warehouse     3 spaces plus 1 space per employee and
                                        1 space per 100 units
Services to buildings and dwellings     1 per employee plus 1 space for
                                        deliveries
Shopping center (mixed retail, office,  1 space per 200 square feet
food sales, restaurant)
Stable (boarding or commercial for      1 per 2 stalls
hire)
                                        1 per employee plus truck space parking
Truck stop                              plus any parking required in this table
                                        when restaurant or motel is included
Vehicle parts, accessories, or tire     1 per 300 square feet of floor area (10
stores                                  space minimum)
Vehicle repair, consumer                2 per employee or service bay
Vehicle sales or vehicle rental or      1 per 2,500 square feet of display, 1
leasing                                 per 250 square feet indoor enclosed
                                        floor space
Vehicle storage                         1 per 2 employees
Veterinary services                     3 spaces per each veterinarian or
                                        allied professional
INDUSTRIAL
Dry cleaning plant, carpet cleaning     1 per employee plus 1 per 3 washing/
plant, or commercial laundry            drying machines if provided for
                                        customer use
Manufacturing and production            1 per 400 square feet of office area
                                        plus 1 per 2 employees
Photo finishing laboratory              1 per 200 square feet of floor area
Repair service, commercial              1 per 400 square feet office area plus1
                                        per 2 employees
                                        1 per 300 square feet office area plus
                                        1 per 600 square feet for first 12,000
Warehouse and distribution facilities   square feet warehouse/storage area plus
                                        1 per 900 square feet for remaining
                                        warehouse/storage area (over 12,000
                                        square feet)
                                        1 per 600 square feet for first 12,000
Wholesale sales                         square feet plus 1 per 900 square feet
                                        for remaining area (over 12,000 square
                                        feet)
AGRICULTURAL AND OTHER USES
Agricultural processing                 1 per employee
Animal production                       None
                                        1 space per 5 aircraft tie down or
Aviation                                storage plus 1 space per 4 seats in
                                        waiting room areas
Commercial timber operations            None
Communications towers                   None
Crop production                         None
Horticulture, greenhouse or hydroponics 1 per employee
production
                                        1 per employee plus 1 per commercial
Lumber mills, planing or saw mills      vehicle plus 1 per 400 square feet of
                                        floor area
Recycling center or waste related use   1 per employee
Resource extraction                     1 per 2 employees
Roadside stands                         3 per stand
Sightseeing transportation, land or     1 per 2 seats of sightseeing vehicle
water
Taxi or limousine service               1 per employee plus one per vehicle
                                        that provides service
                                        1 per 100 square feet of public waiting
Urban transit service                   area plus 1 per two employees and 1 per
                                        transit vehicle
Water transportation                    1 per two seats of transportation
                                        vehicle plus 1 per employee
 
   (C)   Rules for computing parking and loading requirements. The following
rules apply when computing off-street parking and loading requirements.
      (1)   Multiple uses. Lots containing more than one use must provide
parking and loading in an amount equal to the total of the requirement for all
use.
      (2)   Fractions. When measurements of the number of required spaces
result in a fractional number, any fraction of one-half or less will be rounded
down to the next lower whole number and any fraction of more than one-half will
be rounded up to the next higher whole number.
      (3)   Area measurements. Unless otherwise expressly stated, all square-
footage-based parking and loading standards must be computed on the basis of
gross floor area. Storage areas or common areas incidental to the principal use
shall be exempt from this measurement when the following conditions are met.
         (a)   The storage area or common area is a minimum of 250 square feet.
         (b)   The applicant has provided documentation that such areas will
not be used as space for employees, customers, or residents.
      (4)   Occupancy-based standards. For the purpose of computing parking
requirements based on employees, students, residents, or occupants,
calculations shall be based on the largest number of persons working on any
single shift, the maximum enrollment, or the maximum fire-rated capacity,
whichever is applicable and whichever results in the greater number of spaces.
      (5)   Unlisted uses. Upon receiving a development application for a use
not specifically listed in an off-street parking schedule, the Zoning
Administrator shall apply the off-street parking standard specified for the
listed use that is deemed most similar to the proposed use or require parking
spaced in accordance with a parking study prepared by the applicant.
   (D)   Location of required parking.
      (1)   On-site parking.
         (a)   Except as expressly stated in this division (D), all required
off-street parking spaces must be located on the same lot as the principal use
and shall be arranged and laid out so as to ensure that no parked or
maneuvering vehicle will encroach upon a sidewalk, public right-of-way, or
property line.
         (b)   Parking lots in office (O) and commercial (C) districts
containing more than ten parking spaces shall be located to the side or rear of
the principal structure’s front facade or within a courtyard surrounded by a
structure on at least three sides.
      (2)   Off-site parking.
         (a)   OFF-SITE PARKING is defined as the required parking not located
on the parcel which the principal use is located. SHARED PARKING is parking for
uses with different operating hours or peak business periods that share
required off-street parking spaces. Shared parking may or may not be off-site
parking. Off-site and shared parking are allowed provided they meet the
following standards. If any one of the following applicable standards cannot be
met, special exception approval shall be required.
         (b)    A maximum of 50% of the required parking spaces may be off-
site, except for Civic/Institutional Uses that may have a maximum of 75% of the
required parking spaces off-site; however, off-site parking may not be used to
satisfy the off-street parking standards for residential uses (except for guest
parking), restaurants, convenience stores, or other convenience-oriented uses
unless approved as part of a mixed use development. Required parking spaces
reserved for persons with disabilities shall not be located off site.
            1.   Shared or off-site parking must be located within 600 feet
from the primary entrance of the use served, unless shuttle bus service is
provided to the remote parking area. Shared or off-site parking spaces may not
be separated from the use that it serves they serve by a street right-of-way
with a width of more than 80 feet, unless a grade-separated pedestrian walkway
is provided, or other traffic control or shuttle bus service is provided to the
remote parking area.
            2.   An applicant requesting shared parking shall submit a shared
parking analysis to the Zoning Administrator that clearly demonstrates the
feasibility of shared parking. The shared parking analysis must be approved by
the Zoning Administrator and made available to the public. It must address, at
a minimum, the size and type of the proposed development, the composition of
tenants, the anticipated rate of parking turnover, and the anticipated peak
parking and traffic loads for all uses that will be sharing off-street parking
spaces. Approvals will only pertain to the specific uses addressed in the
analysis and any change in use(s) will require a new shared parking analysis.
            3.   Off-site parking areas serving uses located in nonresidential
zoning districts must be located in nonresidential zoning districts. Off-site
parking areas serving uses located in residential or agricultural zoning
districts may be located in residential, agricultural, or nonresidential zoning
districts.
            4.   In the event that an off-site parking area is not under the
same ownership as the principal use served, a written agreement will be
required. An attested copy of the agreement between the owners of record must
be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for recording on forms made available
in the Planning/Zoning Department. Recording of the agreement with the Register
of Mesne Conveyance must take place before issuance of a zoning permit,
building permit, or certificate of occupancy for any use to be served by the
off-site parking area. An off-site parking agreement may be revoked only if all
required off-site parking spaces will be provided in accordance with this
section.
            5.   Shared parking areas must be connected by a continuous network
of sidewalks and pedestrian crosswalks.
   (E)   Accessible parking for physically disabled persons. The parking
standards of this section are intended to ensure compliance with the Americans
with Disabilities Act (ADA), being 42 U.S.C. §§ 1201 et seq. A portion of the
total number of required off-street parking spaces in each off-street parking
area shall be specifically designated, located, and reserved for use by persons
with physical disabilities.
      (1)   Number of spaces. The minimum number of accessible spaces to be
provided shall be a portion of the total number of off-street parking spaces
required, as determined by the following schedule. Parking spaces reserved for
persons with disabilities shall be counted toward fulfilling off-street parking
standards.
Total Parking Spaces Minimum Number of Minimum Number of Minimum Number of
Provided             Accessible Spaces Van-Accessible    Car-Accessible Spaces
                                       Spaces
Total Parking Spaces Minimum Number of   Minimum Number of Minimum Number of
Provided             Accessible Spaces   Van-Accessible    Car-Accessible
                                         Spaces            Spaces
1 – 25             1                   1                 0
26 – 50            2                   1                 1
51 – 75            3                   1                 2
76 – 100           4                   1                 3
101 – 150          5                   1                 4
151 – 200          6                   1                 5
201 – 300          7                   1                 6
301 – 400          8                   1                 7
401 – 500          9                   2                 7
501 – 1,000        2% of total spaces  1 out of every 8  7 out of every 8
                                         accessible spaces accessible spaces
Over 1,000           20 + 1 per each 100                   
                     spaces over 1,000
 
      (2)   Minimum dimensions. All parking spaces reserved for persons with
disabilities shall comply with the parking space dimension standards of this
section, provided that access aisles shall be provided immediately abutting
such spaces as follows:
         (a)   Car-accessible spaces shall have at least a five-foot wide
access aisle located abutting the designated parking space; and
         (b)   Van-accessible spaces shall have at least an eight-foot wide
access aisle located abutting the designated parking space.
   (F)   Parking space and parking lot design.
      (1)   Parking lot design. Dead end type of parking layouts that cause or
contribute to poor vehicular circulation will not be allowed unless all other
site configurations and parking options of the required number of parking
spaces have been exhausted.
      (2)   Aisle widths and parking space dimensions. Drive aisle widths
adjoining off-street parking spaces shall comply with the standards in the
following table. Twenty percent of the minimum number of required parking for a
development may utilize compact and sub-compact vehicle parking dimensions.
These dimensions shall be a minimum of seven feet, six inches by 15 feet and
clearly marked for compact vehicles only.
X Stall Width A Stall Depth B Aisle Width C Skew Width D
X          Stall Width A Stall Depth B Aisle Width C    Skew Width D
60 degrees 8 ft. 0 in.   19 ft. 7 in.  19 ft. 0 in.     9 ft. 3 in.
           8 ft. 6 in.   18 ft. 0 in.  18 ft. 0 in.     9 ft. 10 in.
           9 ft. 0 in.   17 ft. 0 in.  17 ft. 0 in.     10 ft. 5 in.
                                       One way
45 degrees 8 ft. 0 in.   18 ft. 5 in.  12 ft. 0 in.     11 ft. 4 in.
           8 ft. 6 in.   18 ft. 8 in.  11 ft. 0 in.     12 ft. 0 in.
           9 ft. 0 in.   19 ft. 1 in.  11 ft. 0 in.     12 ft. 9 in.
                                       One way
30 degrees 8 ft. 0 in.   15 ft. 11 in. 11 ft. 0 in.     16 ft. 0 in.
           8 ft. 6 in.   16 ft. 5 in.  10 ft. 0 in.     17 ft. 0 in.
           9ft. 0 in.    16 ft. 10 in. 9 ft. 0 in.      18 ft. 0 in.
                                       One way
0 degrees  8 ft. 0 in.   22 ft. 0 in.  11 ft. 0 in.     N/A
           8 ft. 6 in.   22 ft. 0 in.  11 ft. 6 in.     (Parallel)
           9 ft. 0 in.   23 ft. 0 in.  12 ft. 0 in.
                                       One way
90 degrees 8 ft. 0 in.   18 ft. 0 in.  23 ft. to 32 ft. N/A
           8 ft. 6 in.   18 ft. 0 in.  25 ft. to 29 ft.
           9 ft. 0 in.   18 ft. 0 in.  23 ft. to 22 ft.
                                       Two way
Note: Two-way drive aisles shall always require a minimum width of 23 feet.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/cbb4cb52629993459358aebd28fe6c3dee2bdafa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1015.jpg]
 
      (3)   Parking lot landscaping. See §
153.335 of this code.
      (4)   Markings.
         (a)   In paved parking areas, each off-street parking space shall be
identified by surface markings at least four inches in width. Markings shall be
visible at all times. Such markings shall be arranged to provide for orderly
and safe loading, unloading, parking, and storage of vehicles. In unpaved
parking lots, all parking spaces must have a curb stop (minimum height of four
inches) to delineate the location of the space and to prevent the encroachment
of parking onto adjoining properties, rights-of-way, or landscaped areas.
         (b)   One-way and two-way accesses into required parking facilities
shall be identified by directional arrows.
         (c)   Unpaved parking lots must have an all-weather surface, such as
gravel, slag, or other pervious surface, not including asphalt shingles.
Entrance and exit drives serving unpaved parking lots accessed from a paved
street must be paved from the edge of the street pavement to a distance of 20
feet into the property. No more than 120% of the required number of off-street
parking spaces may be paved and no more than 70% of all developable land within
parcels may be paved, unless approved by the Zoning Administrator.
      (5)   Access.
         (a)   Required parking spaces shall not have direct access to a street
or highway. Access to required parking spaces shall be provided by on-site
driveways. Off-street parking spaces shall be accessible without backing into
or otherwise re-entering a public right-of-way.
         (b)   Parking lot entrance and exit drive curb cuts will not be more
than 30 feet in width. Entrances or exits which include a median strip to
separate traffic flow in opposite directions may be expanded to 60 feet. Curb
cuts shall be allowed in accordance with the following table:
 
Length of Frontage     Maximum Number of Driveways
250 feet or less       1 *
251 feet to 1,500 feet 2
1,500 feet or more     3
*On frontages of 250 feet or less, a pair of one-way driveways may be
substituted only if the internal circulation on the site is compatible with
the one-way driveways and wrong-way movements on the driveways are rendered
impossible or extremely difficult for motorists. Refer to the State Department
of Transportation’s Access and Roadside Management Standards Manual for
recommended spacing of driveways based on speed of traffic.
 
         (c)   Entrance and exit drives shall be located at least 100 feet from
the edge of the right-of- way of any street intersection. If the subject lot
has less than 100 feet of frontage, the Zoning Administrator shall be
authorized to alter these requirements. Suitable provisions will be made to
prevent ingress or egress at other than designated entrance or exit drives.
         (d)   The Zoning Administrator shall be authorized to require that
driveways providing access to dwelling units provide a minimum vertical
clearance of up to 13-1/2 feet when deemed necessary to ensure emergency
vehicle access.
         (e)   Shared access between parcels may be allowed with written
agreement among all owners of record. An attested copy of the access agreement
between the owners of record must be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for
recording on forms made available in the Planning/Zoning Department. Recording
of the agreement with the Register of Mesne Conveyance must take place before
issuance of a zoning permit or certificate of occupancy for any use to be
served by shared access. Any shared access must meet all dimensional
requirements of this chapter and any applicable SCDOT requirements.
   (G)   Use of required parking spaces. Required off-street parking areas
shall be used solely for the parking of licensed motor vehicles in operating
condition. Required spaces may not be used for the display of goods for sale or
lease, for motor vehicle repair or service work of any kind, or for long-term
storage of vehicles, boats, motor homes, campers, manufactured housing units,
or building materials.
   (H)   Vehicle stacking areas.
      (1)   Minimum number of spaces. Off-street stacking spaces shall be
provided as follows:
Activity Type Minimum Spaces Measured From
Activity Type               Minimum Spaces Measured From
Automated teller machine    3              Teller
Bank teller lane            4              Teller or window
Carwash stall, automatic    6              Entrance
Carwash stall, self-service 3              Entrance
Gasoline pump island        2              Pump island
Restaurant drive-through    6              Order box
Restaurant drive-through    4              Order box to pickup window
Other                       Determined by Zoning Administrator
 
      (2)   Parking area design and layout. Required stacking spaces are
subject to the following design and layout standards.
         (a)   Stacking spaces must be a minimum of eight feet by 20 feet in
size.
         (b)   Stacking spaces may not impede on or off-site traffic movements
or movements into or out of off-street parking spaces.
         (c)   Stacking spaces must be separated from other internal driveways
by raised medians if deemed necessary by the Public Works Director for traffic
movement and safety.
         (d)   The Zoning Administrator may require pick-up and drop-off loop
drives with sufficient vehicle stacking lanes to prevent vehicle backups into
internal travel lanes and parking lots for school uses, adult and child day
care facility uses, public assembly uses, and conference facility uses.
   (I)   Off-street loading.
      (1)   Spaces required. For every retail sales, service, wholesaling,
warehousing, or manufacturing establishment and each bus or truck terminal,
there shall be provided sufficient space to accommodate the maximum number of
trucks that will be loading, unloading, or standing at any one time.
      (2)   Size of space. Each off-street loading space shall be of a size
commensurate with the building to be accommodated. In no case shall required
off-street loading space encroach upon off-street parking space required under
this section.
      (3)   Location. All required off-street loading spaces shall be located
on the same lot as the building which they are intended to serve.
      (4)   Entrances and exits. Off-street loading entrance and exit drives
shall be located at least 25 feet from any street intersection.
      (5)   Loading spaces adjacent to sidewalks. Where a loading space is
adjacent to a public sidewalk or other public pedestrian way, it shall be so
located, arranged, and improved with curbs or other barriers, as to provide
adequate protection for pedestrians.
      (6)   Maneuvering areas. All off-street loading spaces shall be provided
with adequate off-street maneuvering areas.
      (7)   Landscaping, buffers, and screening. See §
153.335 of this code.
   (J)   Bicycle parking.
      (1)   Purpose. Bicycle parking encourages customers, employees, and other
visitors to use bicycles by providing a convenient, safe and readily accessible
place to park bicycles. Bicycle parking should serve the main entrance of a
building and should be visible to pedestrians and bicyclists.
      (2)   Rate of provision. One bicycle parking space shall be required per
every ten off-street required parking spaces, rounding bicycle parking spaces
up when the number is not a of multiple of ten. (Six automobile parking spots
required = one bicycle parking space: 12 automobile parking spots required =
two bicycle parking spaces.)
      (3)   Standards. Required bicycle parking must meet the following
standards:
         (a)   Location. Bicycle parking must be:
            1.   Outside a building; and within 50 feet of the main entrance to
the building as measured along the most direct pedestrian access route, or no
further from the building's main entrance than the closest automobile parking
space, whichever is closer;
            2.   At the same grade as the sidewalk or at a location that can be
reached by an accessible route; and
            3.   If required bicycle parking is not visible from the street or
main building entrance, a sign must be posted at the main building entrance or
in a highly visible and used location indicating the location of the parking.
         (b)   Design. Bicycle parking must meet the following standards:
            1.   Bicycle lockers. Where required bicycle parking is provided in
lockers, the lockers must be securely anchored.
            2.   Required bicycle parking may be provided in floor, wall, or
ceiling racks. Where required bicycle parking is provided in racks the racks
must meet the following standards:
               A.   The bicycle frame and one wheel can be locked to the rack
with a high security, U-shaped shackle lock if both wheels are left on the
bicycle;
               B.   A space two feet by six feet must be provided for each
required bicycle parking space, so that a bicycle six feet long can be securely
held with its frame supported so that the bicycle cannot be pushed or fall in a
manner that will damage the wheels or components; and
               C.   The rack must be securely anchored and coated in a material
that will not damage the bicycle.
            3.   Parking and maneuvering areas.
               A.   Each required bicycle parking space must be accessible
without moving another bicycle;
               B.   There must be an aisle at least five feet wide in front and
behind all required bicycle parking to allow room for bicycle maneuvering.
Where the bicycle parking is adjacent to a sidewalk, the maneuvering area may
extend into the right-of-way; and
               C.   The area devoted to bicycle parking must be permeable hard
surface.
            4.   Covered bicycle parking. Covered bicycle parking, as required
by this section, can be provided inside buildings, under roof overhangs or
awnings, in bicycle lockers, or within or under other structures. Where
required covered bicycle parking is not within a building or locker, the cover
must be:
               A.   Permanent;
               B.   Designed to protect the bicycle from rainfall; and
               C.   At least seven feet above the floor or ground.
            5.   Lighting shall be provided for bicycle parking facilities so
that the bicycle parking area is thoroughly visible and illuminated.
(Ord. 2012-06, §§ 9.3.1 through 9.3.9, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-07, passed
10-17-2013; Ord. 2020-01, passed 3-19-2020; Ord. 2022-03, passed 10-20-2022)
§ 153.333 PEDESTRIAN WAYS.
   (A)   Where required.
      (1)   Paved pedestrian ways shall be provided in all nonresidential
development within the urban and suburban areas of the town; and
      (2)   Paved pedestrian ways shall link surrounding roadways with the
front entrance and shall provide pedestrian linkages between the proposed
development and uses on adjoining lots.
   (B)   Placement. Paved pedestrian ways within publicly dedicated rights-of-
way shall conform to the construction details for paved sidewalks contained in
Appendix A of Ordinance 2012-06, as amended. Alternative surface walkways may
be used outside of rights-of-way when deemed appropriate to surrounding
development characteristics by the Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 9.3.10, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-07, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 153.334 TREE PROTECTION AND PRESERVATION.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Findings. Trees are an essential natural resource, an invaluable
economic resource, and a priceless aesthetic resource. Trees play a critical
role in purifying air and water, providing wildlife habitat, and enhancing
natural drainage of storm water and sediment control. They also help conserve
energy by providing shade and shield against noise and glare. Trees promote
commerce and tourism by buffering different land uses and beautifying the
landscape. The tree protection and preservation regulations of this section are
intended to enhance the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the
town.
      (2)   Applicability and exemptions.
         (a)   Applicability. The provisions of this section in their entirety
shall apply to all real property in the town, except as expressly exempted.
         (b)   Exemptions.
            1.   Single-family detached residential lots of record shall be
exempt from all provisions in this section except for the grand tree
documentation, protection, and replacement provisions. This exemption does not
include protected trees in major subdivisions or applications for major or
minor subdivisions for which landscape buffers may be required per § 153.335
(D).
            2.   The Zoning Administrator shall be authorized to modify or
reduce the standards of this section for commercial nursery operations.
            3.   This section shall not restrict public utilities and electric
suppliers from maintaining safe clearance around existing utility lines and
existing easements in accordance with applicable state laws. Siting and
construction of future and existing gas, telephone, communications, electrical
line, or other easements shall not be exempt from any provisions of this
section.
            4.   Removal of trees for the purpose of conducting bona fide
forestry operations shall be exempt from the provisions of this section except
for removal of live oak species of grand trees.
            5.   Removal of trees for the purpose of establishing bona fide
agricultural uses, as specified in §
153.047(B)(1) of this code, shall be exempt from the provisions of this section
except for the grand tree documentation, protection, and replacement
provisions.
            6.   Removal of trees for the purposes of maintaining safe
clearance for aircraft as required by federal law or the establishment of
facilities exclusively dedicated to aviation operations on property owned or
leased and in use by the County Aviation Authority will be exempt from the
provisions of this section.
            7.   All invasive tree species as referred by Clemson Extension and
the South Carolina Exotic Pest Plant Council shall be exempt from all
provisions of this section.
      (3)   Definition of tree removal. For the purpose of this section, the
term TREE REMOVAL shall include, but not be limited to, damage inflicted to the
root system by machinery, girding, storage of materials and soil compaction,
changing the natural grade above or below the root system or around the trunk;
damage inflicted on the tree permitting fungus infection or pest infestation;
excessive pruning; excessive thinning; paving with concrete, asphalt, or other
impervious material within such proximity as to be harmful to the tree; or any
act of malicious damage to a tree. Excessive pruning or thinning shall be
pruning or thinning that exceeds more than 25% of the leaf surface on both the
lateral branch and the overall foliage of a mature tree that is pruned within a
growing season. Additionally, one-half of the foliage of a mature tree is to
remain evenly distributed in the lower two-thirds of the crown and individual
limbs upon completion of any pruning.
      (4)   Measurements and definitions. For the purpose of this section, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
         CALIPER. The diameter of a tree trunk measured six inches above the
ground on trees with calipers of four inches or less. For trees between four
inches and 12 inches caliper, the trunk is measured 12 inches above the ground.
         DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT (DBH). The DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) of a
tree is the total diameter, in inches, of a tree trunk or trunks measured four
and one-half feet above existing grade (at the base of the tree). In measuring
DBH, the circumference of the tree shall be measured with a standard diameter
meter, and the circumference shall be divided by 3.14. If a tree trunk splits
at ground level and does not share a common base (separated by earth at natural
base), then each trunk shall be measured as a separate tree. If a multi-trunk
tree splits below the four and one-half foot mark, all
trunks shall be measured separately added together and count as one tree. Any
trunk measuring less than eight inches DBH is not included in the calculation.
         GRAND TREE. Any species of tree measuring 18 inches or greater
diameter breast height (DBH) except pine and sweet gum. All GRAND TREES are
prohibited from removal unless a grand tree removal permit is issued.
         PROTECTED TREES. Any tree on a parcel with a diameter breast height of
eight inches or greater prior to development and all trees within required
buffers or required landscape areas. Limited removal is allowed only when
specified by the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Administration.
      (1)   Zoning permit required.
         (a)   Tree removal. Removal of required trees is prohibited prior to
the issuance of a zoning permit by the Zoning Administrator. Zoning permits
will be issued only after a tree plan is approved by the Zoning Administrator
as outlined below.
         (b)   Excess canopy (limb) removal.
            1.   Removal of three or more limbs with an individual diameter of
six inches or greater shall require a zoning permit.
            2.   Removal of any size limbs which contribute to more than 100
continuous linear feet of canopy over public roadways shall require variance
approval from the Board of Zoning Appeals. This requirement shall not preclude
the SCDOT, CCPW, or other entities from maintaining height clearances of 14
feet or less and width clearances within designated travel ways and from
removing unprotected trees along rights-of-way for road widening projects.
      (2)   Documentation. Tree plans, prepared by licensed registered
surveyor, civil engineer, or landscape architect, shall be required on all non-
exempt parcels before any permits are issued.
   (C)   Tree plans and surveys.
      (1)   General. Tree plans of the same scale as, and superimposed on, a
development plan or preliminary plat shall include location, number, size (DBH
or caliper), and species with a scaled graphic representation of each grand
tree, canopy size and shape, and the trunk location. All required tree surveys
shall include the name, address, signature, and seal of a licensed surveyor,
landscape architect, or civil engineer registered in the state. The survey
shall include all trees to be protected or preserved and those scheduled to be
removed, including dead and damaged trees. In cases where a landscape
architect, civil engineer, forester, or surveyor utilizes previously approved
recorded plats prepared by surveyors for the purpose of showing a tree plan,
the name, address, signature, and seal of the licensed landscape architect,
civil engineer, forester, or surveyor registered in the state, who shall be
responsible for the accuracy of the information provided, shall be included on
the tree survey. A scaled infrared or high resolution black and white aerial
photograph or print of equal quality may be substituted in cases where the
Zoning Administrator determines that it would provide the same information as a
tree plan. However, all grand trees within 40 feet of proposed construction and
land disturbance areas and trees within required buffers must be surveyed and
mapped.
      (2)   Major and minor subdivisions preliminary plats. Refer to §
153.305(B)(4), Preliminary plat application, in the subdivision regulations of
this chapter.
      (3)   Commercial, industrial, multi- family and major subdivisions. All
tree surveys must show the location, number, size, and species of all trees
eight inches or greater DBH (diameter breast height), including those scheduled
to be removed. When there are no trees eight inches or greater DBH,
documentation of this fact shall be provided from a registered surveyor,
engineer, or landscape architect.
 
COMMENTARY:
Assistance in tree identification and condition should be provided by a
forester or qualified arborist.
 
      (4)   Single-family detached residential parcels. Single-family detached
residential parcels shall show all grand trees within the area of construction
and land disturbance and in conjunction with the subdivision regulations of
this chapter at the time a zoning or building permit application is made.
   (D)   Required tree protection.
      (1)   General.
         (a)   All grand trees and any other trees required to remain on a site
as outlined in this chapter must be protected during construction and
development of the parcel. Tree protection must be shown on all development
plans prior to site plan approval. A site inspection of the tree barricades
must be scheduled by the applicant with the Planning/Zoning Department for
approval prior to the issuance of permits or the start of development
activities.
         (b)   Prior to commencement of development activities, a pre-
construction planning conference for tree preservation shall be held on-site
with the Zoning Administrator’s representative, the applicants, and any parties
deemed appropriate for the purpose of determining if there is a need for
additional tree protection techniques and for designating placement of tree
barricades, construction employee parking, temporary construction office, and
dumpster.
      (2)   Tree protection during development and construction. Protective
barricades shall be placed around all required trees in or near development
areas on all zoning parcels, including residential, as approved by the Zoning
Administrator, prior to the start of development activities. These barricades,
constructed of wood or plastic fencing or other approved materials, shall be
erected in accordance with standards provided by the Zoning Administrator and
placed beneath the canopy drip-line or 1.5 feet times the DBH of the tree.
Other protective devices or construction techniques may be used as approved by
the Zoning Administrator. The barricades shall remain in place until
development activities are complete. The area within the protective barricade
shall remain free of all building materials, dirt, fill, or other construction
debris, vehicles, and development activities. All required trees are also
subject to the provisions of §
153.335(F) of this code and subject to the enforcement criteria of §§
153.375 through
153.383 and
153.999.
      (3)   Partial exception for limited clearing. Limited clearing and
grubbing may be authorized by the Zoning Administrator prior to the
installation of protective tree barricades on sites that exhibit unusually
heavy undergrowth where access to the interior of the site and its protected
trees would be otherwise highly impractical; if permitted, this clearing shall
be done by hand with hand tools or gas powered push type or walk behind
equipment designed for brush and undergrowth clearing. Under no circumstances
will metal tracked bulldozers, loaders, or similar rider/operator types of
equipment be allowed on the site until the protective barricades are erected
and a zoning permit is issued.
      (4)   Separation of trees from pavement, grading, and structures. Paved
areas shall be separated from trees by a minimum distance of the drip-line or
one and one-half times the DBH or as modified by the Zoning Administrator as
deemed necessary to protect the root system of the tree. Paved areas shall not
constitute more than 25% of the protected area beneath a tree. Any paving,
grading, trenching, or filling within the remaining 75% of the protected area
must be approved by the Zoning Administrator and may require specific
construction techniques be used in order to preserve the health of the tree.
Refer to §
153.343 for examples. When grading and construction within the protected area
of
a tree has been approved, all damaged roots shall be severed clean and
inspected by the Town Landscape Architect or Inspector prior to the receipt of
a zoning permit.
      (5)   Quantity and location of trees to be protected.
         (a)   Before the issuance of a zoning permit for commercial,
industrial, multi-family, civic/institutional uses and major subdivisions, the
following number of trees with a diameter breast height of eight inches or
greater shall be preserved and protected in accordance with the provisions of
division (D)(2) above. All trees located within required buffers as outlined in
§ 153.335.
            1.   Twenty trees per acre; or
            2.   Any number of trees with a combined diameter breast height of
at least 160 inches per acre.
         (b)   Required drainage improvements such as detention and retention
ponds and wetlands may be subtracted from the area used to calculate tree
preservation requirements.
   (E)   Tree removal.
      (1)   Generally. Permits for tree removal may be approved where one or
more of the following conditions are deemed to exist by the Zoning
Administrator:
         (a)   Trees are not required to be retained by the provisions of this
section;
         (b)   Trees are diseased, dead, or dying (as determined by the Zoning
Administrator or a qualified arborist);
         (c)   Trees pose a safety hazard to nearby buildings or pedestrian or
vehicular traffic (as determined by the Zoning Administrator or a qualified
arborist); and/or
         (d)   Removal of grand trees has been approved by the Board of Zoning
Appeals.
         (e)   The location and configuration of protected trees required by
this section create an unreasonable burden on the use of the parcel and
protected trees removed will be replaced and/or mitigated according to a
schedule determined by the Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Variances. Grand trees that do not meet the above criteria may be
removed only where approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals, and shall be
replaced according to a schedule determined by the Zoning Administrator.
      (3)   Emergency provisions. In the event that a tree poses a serious and
imminent threat to public safety due to death, disease, or damage resulting
from emergencies including, but not limited to, fires, flooding, storms, and
natural disasters, the Zoning Administrator may waive requirements of this
section. Documentation must later be submitted for review outlining the threat
to public safety which initiated the removal. Documentation must include any
written findings by a qualified arborist and photographs supporting the tree
removal emergency. The Zoning Administrator may require replacement of required
trees that are removed where it is determined that death or disease resulted
from negligence.
      (4)   Violations and penalties. Violations and penalties are specified in
§§ 153.375 through 153.383 and 153.999 of this code.
   (F)   Tree replacement.
      (1)   Generally. Tree replacement shall be required accompanying
development on all non-exempt properties in the manner described below.
         (a)   When replacement canopy trees are required in fulfillment on the
requirements of this section, they shall be no smaller than two inches caliper.
         (b)   The Zoning Administrator is empowered to require trees of larger
caliper as determined appropriate for site-specific conditions and the
circumstances, lawful or illegal, under which removal occurred.
      (2)   Protected trees removed in violation. When trees of eight inches
DBH or greater have been removed in violation of this chapter, the trees shall
be replaced and/or mitigated according to a replacement schedule approved by
the Zoning Administrator.
      (3)   Sites with less than 160 inches per acre combined DBH. When lots
lack a sufficient number of trees to meet the requirement for DBH/number of
trees per acre, all trees six inches DBH or greater shall be preserved and
protected in accordance with division (D)(2) above during development and must
equal no less than 40 inches per acre combined DBH. On lots with less than 40
inches per acre combined DBH, additional trees shall be planted on the lot
equaling or exceeding 40 inches per acre combined DBH. Planting schedules shall
be approved by the Zoning Administrator.
      (4)   Previously cleared sites. Where sites were completely cleared of
trees prior to adoption of this section or have been cleared subsequently for
activities exempted from this section, replacement trees shall be planted, the
combined caliper of which equals or exceeds 40 inches per acre. Replacement
schedules, including number, species, caliper, and placement shall be approved
by the Zoning Administrator.
      (5)   Tree Fund. The Tree Fund is a fund established to receive monies
exacted from tree removal violations fines to include, but not limited to,
removal, damage, destruction, or as defined in division (A)(4) above, and as a
form of mitigation when planting of the required trees is determined to be
detrimental to the overall health of existing trees or impractical for the
intended site design. The Zoning Administrator shall impose a tree mitigation
fee based on the current market retail value of two- to three-inch caliper
trees installed to the American Association of Nurserymen Standards. If the
applicant disagrees with the amount of the tree mitigation fee imposed, he or
she may file appeal with the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with the
provisions contained in this chapter. All tree mitigation fees collected shall
be paid to the town and placed in an account established for public
beautification through the planting and maintenance of trees on James Island.
      (6)   Bankruptcy or abandonment of site. When trees have been removed
through an approved mitigation program and the project will not be completed
for any reason, i.e., bankruptcy, abandonment, change in ownership, and the
like, the owners of the subject property are responsible for the mitigation of
the removed trees as outlined and agreed or subject to division (F)(5) above.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 9.4, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-07, passed 10-17-2013; Ord.
2014-08, passed 8-21-2014; Ord. 2014-12, passed 11-20-2014; Ord. 2016-01,
passed 4-21-2016; Ord. 2016-06, passed 7-21-2016; Ord. 2024-04, passed 6-20-
2024)
§ 153.335 LANDSCAPING, SCREENING, AND BUFFERS.
   (A)   Applicability. Unless expressly exempted, the landscaping, screening,
and buffering standards of this section shall apply to all nonresidential
development and all new major roadways that serve residential major
subdivisions (four or more lots). Minor subdivisions (those with fewer than ten
lots) may be required to provide landscaping, screening, or buffering on major
roadways when the Zoning Administrator determines that such landscaping,
screening, or buffering is necessary to ensure that the purposes of this
chapter are met. When modifications or additions are being made to an existing
nonresidential building or site, the standards of this section shall apply to
those portions of the subject parcel that are directly affected by the proposed
improvements as determined by the Zoning Administrator, provided that when
modifications or additions are proposed that would increase the number of
parking spaces, the area of vehicular use areas or gross floor area of
buildings by more than 25% (above existing), then the entire parcel shall be
brought into compliance with all applicable standards of this section. Before
calculating the percentage of area for re-development and improvement, any
proposed demolition of structures and parking is subtracted from the existing
gross floor area of buildings and number of parking spaces.
   (B)   Exhibits. Drawings included as exhibits §
153.343 are meant to compliment the language of the chapter. In the event of a
conflict with the text of the chapter, the text shall apply.
   (C)   Parking, loading, and vehicular use area landscaping.
      (1)   Parking, loading, and vehicular area perimeters. Unless otherwise
expressly stated, perimeter landscaping shall be required around the outer
perimeter of all off-street, surface parking, loading, and vehicular use areas.
Parking areas for the exclusive use of single-family or agricultural uses shall
be exempt from these requirements. Any off-street parking, loading, or
vehicular use area that will be entirely screened from view by an intervening
building or structure or by a buffer provided to satisfy the standards of this
subchapter shall also be exempt from these (parking, loading, and vehicular use
area) perimeter landscaping requirements.
         (a)   A perimeter landscape area at least eight feet in depth shall be
provided at the perimeter of all off-street parking, loading, and vehicular use
areas, except when permitted driveway openings are to be provided. Where
drainage or other utility easements exist along property lines, the perimeter
landscape area shall be located adjacent to the easement.
         (b)   Required perimeter landscape areas shall be planted in
accordance with the following minimum standards:
            1.   One canopy tree shall be provided for each 50 linear feet of
parking, loading, or vehicular use area perimeter. These trees may be used to
satisfy the interior parking lot landscaping requirements;
            2.   A hedge or other landscape material of at least three feet in
height, at maturity, shall be planted within the perimeter landscape area to
provide a continuous landscape element or a combination of trees, hedge, other
durable landscape material or approved wall, fence, or earth berm may be used
to form the continuous landscape element;
            3.   All portions of the perimeter landscape area not planted with
shrubs or trees or covered by a wall or fence barrier shall be planted in grass
or ground cover; and
            4.   Parked vehicles may overhang a landscaped area if curbing or
wheel stops are installed to prevent any damage to plants within the required
perimeter landscape area. Landscaping, walls, fences, and earth berms will be
so located as to prevent their damage and/or destruction by overhanging
vehicles.
      (2)   Interior areas. The following interior parking lot landscaping
requirements shall apply to all parking lots except those exclusively serving
single- family residential or agricultural uses:
         (a)   A minimum of one landscape island shall be provided for each ten
parking spaces within an off-street parking area. Required landscape islands
shall have a minimum of 325 square feet, variably dependent upon the species of
the canopy tree proposed by the designer. Each parking lot bay must terminate
with a tree island.
         (b)   Each required landscaping island shall contain at least one
canopy tree and there shall be no more than ten parking spaces in a row between
tree islands. Interior parking landscape islands that separate double loaded
parking bays shall be a minimum of nine feet wide. Canopy trees planted in
these islands must be planted in line with the parking stripes (between
vehicles) and may be used to satisfy the parking lot tree requirements;
however, all parking lot bays must terminate with a tree island. Example shown
in §
153.343.
         (c)   Curbs, wheel stops, or other approved protective barriers shall
be installed around all required landscape islands, as approved the Zoning
Administrator.
         (d)   Landscaping provided to meet the right-of-way buffer standards
of division (D) below may not be used to satisfy interior parking lot
landscaping requirements. Canopy trees provided to meet perimeter adjacent use
buffer landscaping requirements may be counted to satisfy interior parking lot
landscaping requirements.
   (D)   Landscape buffers.
      (1)   Right-of-way buffers.
         (a)   Applicability. Right-of-way buffers shall be required adjacent
to road rights-of-way for all uses except for the agricultural and existing
residential uses. Minor subdivisions may not have to comply with the
requirements of this section if the Zoning Administrator determines that
compliance is not necessary to satisfy the purposes of this chapter.
         (b)   Buffer reductions. The Zoning Administrator shall be authorized
to reduce the depth of a required right-of-way buffer as follows:
            1.   General. A required right-of- way buffer may be reduced by up
to one-third its depth when the following circumstances exist:
               a.   The parcel is located on a corner lot with required right-
of-way buffers of 35 feet or more; or
               b.   The area of all the required buffers, including land use
buffers and tree protection area, exceeds 30% of the site.
            2.   Folly Road. A required right- of-way buffer not located within
the Folly Road Overlay District may be reduced as follows.
               a.   When no parking or vehicular use area is located between
the building and the right-of-way, the required buffer may be reduced to no
less than eight feet (type A land use buffer) provided there is a direct
connection with the street and the front entrance with a pedestrian way.
               b.   When no more than ten parking spaces are located between
the building and the right-of-way, the required buffer may be reduced to no
less than 15 feet (S2 buffer) provided there is a direct connection with the
street and the front entrance with a pedestrian way.
               c.   Buffers required on parcels that are part of redevelopment
that preserves existing structures may be reduced up to a depth no less than
ten feet (type A land use buffer) in order to meet the parking and tree
preservation requirements of this chapter.
         (c)   Buffer types by roadway. Landscape buffers shall be required
along roadways in accordance with the following table. Streets and roads not
indicated in the table shall comply with the S2 buffer requirements. This
division (D) describes buffer types and planting requirements.
         (d)   Development within buffer areas.
            1.   No development may occur within required buffer areas; with
the exception of sidewalks, bus stops, and permitted drives and signs;
            2.   All buffer areas shall accommodate required plant material
within the buffer;
            3.   Drainage swales and stormwater detention ponds may be placed
in the buffer only when trees are not endangered and only when they meander
through the buffer in a natural manner; and
            4.   Stormwater detention ponds may not occupy more than 25% of the
buffer area.
Roadway Buffer Type
Roadway Buffer                                Type
Central Park Road                             S3
Folly Road                                    S3
Fort Johnson Road [1]                         S4
Grimball Road (Folly Road to Riverland Drive) S3
Harborview Road                               S1
James Island Connector                        S4
Maybank Highway (James Island)                S1
Riverland Drive [1]                           S4
[1] Denotes scenic road designation that shall require protection under the
provisions of this chapter of all trees six inches or greater in diameter
breast height (DBH) which are located within rights-of-way.
 
         (e)   Buffer depth and planting standards.
         Buffer Type
Standard S1 S2 S3 S4 S5 S6
                                                             Buffer Type
Standard                                                     S1 S2 S3 S4 S5 S6
Min. buffer depth (feet from right-of-way) [1]               15 20 25 50 75 200
Min. buffer landscaping (plants per 100 linear feet) [2] [3]
   Canopy trees [4]                                       2  2  3  6  9  21
   Shrubs                                                 30 35 40 50 60 75
   Street trees (may be counted toward canopy tree req.)  2  2  2  2  2  NA
   Understory trees (at least 50% evergreen)              3  4  5  9  12 20
All trees with a diameter breast height (DBH) of six inches or greater within
buffers shall be preserved.
[1] Buffers may be traversed by permitted driveways and pedestrian ways.
[2] The retention of natural buffers shall be required along designated scenic
roadways and encouraged along all other roadways. The Zoning Administrator
shall be authorized to waive/modify minimum buffer planting requirements when
an undisturbed natural buffer exists that is the same depth as that which is
required.
[3] Bradford pears cannot be used to fulfill any of the tree requirements of
this chapter. Any exotic species which are proposed by the designer are subject
to the approval of the Zoning Administrator.
[4] When existing overhead utility lines are located such that they may pose
interference with required canopy trees, Palmetto trees may be substituted to
fulfill the canopy tree requirement. These trees are to be planted at a ratio
of three Palmetto trees to one canopy tree and are to be planted in groupings
of three.
Note: The Zoning Administrator shall be authorized to require the installation
of berms within required buffers where deemed necessary to protect the visual
quality of a road corridor or ensure land use compatibility.
 
      (2)   Land use buffers.
         (a)   Applicability.  
            1.   Land use buffers shall be provided in accordance with the
standards of this section, provided that the Zoning Administrator shall be
authorized to modify or waive buffer or landscape planting requirements if it
is determined that:
               a.   Buffers will not serve any useful purpose due to the fact
that fences, walls, berms, or landscaping of at least equivalent height,
opacity, and maintenance already exist on the adjacent parcel;
               b.   Buffers will not serve any useful purpose due to the
location of uses, vehicles, buildings, structures, or storage, loading,
display, or service areas; or
               c.   The area of required buffers would exceed 25% of the site
proposed for development.
            2.   When landscape buffer requirements are modified or waived, the
Zoning Administrator may require that additional plant material be added within
remaining buffers or elsewhere on the site.
         (b)   Exemptions. Single-family development on individual lots shall
be exempt from the land use buffer requirements of this section.
         (c)   Determination of required buffers. The following procedure shall
be used in determining which of the buffer types in the land use buffer table
in division (D)(2)(d) below apply:
            1.   Determine the type of use proposed for the site that is being
developed. This is the “proposed use” (column 1);
            2.   Determine the residential use type that exists on the adjacent
parcel (if residential) or the zoning district classification that applies to
the adjacent parcel. This is the “adjacent site’s use or zoning;”
            3.   Identify the type of landscape buffer required along the
developing site’s boundary (A, B, C, D, E, or F); and
            4.   Refer to division (D)(2)(e) below to identify the buffer depth
and landscaping standards for the required buffer type.
         (d)   Land use buffer table. Land use buffers shall be provided
alongside and rear yards in accordance with the following minimum requirements.
             Use or Zoning of Adjacent Site
             Residential Type Zoning District     Agricultural Use
Proposed Use 1 2 3            R [1] OR OG CN CC I
                    Use or Zoning of Adjacent Site
                    Residential Type Zoning District     Agricultural Use
Proposed Use        1 2 3            R [1] OR OG CN CC I
Residential Type 1  - A B            -     A  B  B  C  D F
Residential Type 2  A - A            -     A  B  B  C  D F
Residential Type 3  B A -            -     A  A  B  C  D F
Civic/Institutional B B A            A     -  -  -  -  - -
Commercial Type 1   B B B            B     -  -  -  -  - -
Commercial Type 2   C C C            C     C  B  B  -  - -
Industrial Type 1   E E D            D     D  D  C  B  - -
Industrial Type 2   F F F            F     E  E  D  C  A -
[1] Applies to undeveloped (vacant) R and AGR zoned property.
Residential use types: Type 1 = single-family detached; Type 2 = duplex
and single-family attached; Type 3 = multi-family and all other
residential use types, including manufactured housing parks.
Commercial use types: Type 1 = any commercial use allowed by right in an
OR, OG, or CN District; Type 2 = all other commercial uses that are
allowed in Commercial (C) Zoning Districts (Commercial uses are those
listed in the “commercial” rows of Use Table 153.110).
Industrial use types: Type 1 = any industrial or commercial use that is
first allowed in an Industrial (I) Zoning District; Type 2 = waste-
related uses, resource extraction uses, and recycling centers.
 
         (e)   Buffer depth and landscaping standards.
         Buffer Type
Standard A B C D E F
                                                           Buffer Type
Standard                                                   A  B  C  D  E  F
Min. buffer depth (feet from property line)                10 15 25 40 60 100
Minimum land use buffer landscaping (plants per 100 linear            
feet) [1] [2]
   Canopy trees                                         2  3  3  5  7  9
   Shrubs                                               20 20 25 30 40 50
   Understory trees (at least 50% evergreen)            3  4  4  7  9  11
[1] The Zoning Administrator shall be authorized to require the installation
of fences, walls, or berms within required buffers where deemed necessary to
ensure land use compatibility or otherwise protect the visual quality of an
area.
[2] All trees with a diameter breast height (DBH) eight inches or greater
within buffers shall be preserved.
 
      (3)   General.
         (a)   Location of buffers. Buffers shall be located along the
perimeter of a lot or parcel and shall extend to the boundary of the lot or
parcel. They shall not be located on any portion of public right-of-way. Where
drainage or other utility easements exist along property lines, required
landscape buffers shall be located adjacent to the easement and may be reduced
in width by the width of the easement, but in no case shall the buffer be less
than ten feet. Required buffers shall be noted on all plats, plans, and permit
requests submitted for review and approval under this chapter.
         (b)   Use of buffers. The Zoning Administrator shall be authorized to
allow on-premises signs, fences, walls, berms, mailboxes, access to community
boat ramps, permitted driveways, and sidewalks within required buffers. Other
improvements maybe allowed within buffers if the Zoning Administrator
determines that such improvements will not detract from the intended purpose
and function of the buffer or have any adverse effect on adjacent property.
         (c)   Plant material within buffers. Plant material within required
buffers shall be selected and spaced properly to allow plant material to thrive
considering site specific conditions. Plant material to be located adjacent to
public drainage easements and rights-of-way shall be selected and placed to not
create future access or maintenance impediments including low lying lateral
branches. Additionally, plant material within required buffers that contain
utility easements shall be selected and sited to minimize pruning for future
maintenance and clearance of such utilities. The Zoning Administrator must
approve all selections and may require modifications (substitutions and
relocation) of plant material on proposed landscape plans when necessary to
ensure access and ease of maintenance to any easements and rights-of-way and to
preserve the public health, safety, and welfare.
   (E)   Landscape plans. Landscape and planting plans submitted to meet the
requirements of the chapter are to be drawn to the same scale as the site plan
depicting proposed shrubs and trees at maturity. It is strongly encouraged that
all landscape plans be prepared by a licensed registered landscape architect or
landscape designer familiar with the growth habits and characteristics of plant
material available in the town’s area. Landscape plans shall be prepared by a
licensed, registered landscape architect whenever the area of land disturbance
or
development activity exceeds one acre or when the total area of proposed
building footprint exceeds 5,000 square feet.
   (F)   Landscape material standards. Landscape and plant material used to
satisfy the standards of this chapter shall comply with the minimum standards
of this section.
      (1)   Plant material.
         (a)   Existing plant material. Vegetation and plant material that
exists on a parcel prior to its development may be used to satisfy the
landscaping standards of this division (F) provided that it meets the size and
locational requirements of this section.
         (b)   Size. Unless otherwise expressly stated, all plant materials
used to satisfy the requirements of this chapter shall meet the following
minimum size standards:
 
Plant Type                   Minimum Size
Canopy tree                  2-1/2 inches caliper and 12 feet in height
Evergreen/conifer tree       5 feet (height)
Shrubs                       3 gallon and 18 to 24 inches in height or spread
Understory/ ornamental trees 8 feet (height)
Note: At least 50% of required understory trees shall be evergreens. Any plant
material that grows to an ultimate height of less than 18 inches shall be
considered a groundcover and cannot be used to fulfill any of the shrub
requirements of this chapter.
 
         (c)   Species. Species of plant material used to satisfy the
requirements of this section shall be indigenous to the town’s area or are
cultivated to survive in the climate of this area. No single plant species
shall represent more than 40% of total landscape plantings, except for projects
whose landscape requirements for canopy trees are lower than ten.
         (d)   Quality. Plants installed to satisfy the requirements of this
division (F) shall meet or exceed the plant quality standards of the most
recent edition of American Standard for Nursery Stock, published by the
American Association of Nurserymen. Plants shall be nursery-grown and balled
and burlapped or container-grown.
         (e)   Additional landscape treatment. All required landscape areas,
including drainage ways and detention/retention ponds, and buffers not
dedicated to trees, shrubs, or preservation of existing vegetation shall be
landscaped with grass, ground cover, or other landscape treatment, not
including sand, rock, or pavement. All grass areas are to be installed using
proper and accepted landscape methods to ensure germination and erosion
control.
      (2)   Berms and landscape structures. Berms and landscape structures
shall comply with the following minimum standards:
         (a)   Fences and walls. Fences and walls used as a screen shall be at
least 95% opaque with a minimum height of six feet.
         (b)   Berms. Earthen berms shall have a minimum height of three feet
with a slope not to exceed 3:1, variable dependent upon the plant materials and
soil type used. The toe of any berm shall be located at least three feet from
the ultimate right-of-way or property line.
   (G)   Installation, maintenance, and replacement.
      (1)   Installation. All landscaping shall be installed according to
American Association of Nurserymen Standards and sound nursery practices in a
manner designed to encourage vigorous growth. Site for plant material shall be
repaired or improved in accordance with American Association of Nurserymen
Standards for soil preparation and drainage. Subsurface drainage shall be
provided where berms, elevated planting areas, or other suitable means for
providing proper drainage do not exist.
      (2)   Irrigation. The Zoning Administrator shall be authorized to require
the installation of automatic irrigation (sprinkler) systems when deemed
necessary to ensure plant survival and proper growth.
      (3)   Maintenance and replacement.  Required trees, shrubs, walls, and
other landscape features shall be considered as elements of the project in the
same manner as parking, building materials, and other details are elements of
the plan.
         (a)   The land owner or successors in interest shall be jointly and
severally responsible for the following:
            1.   Regular maintenance of all landscaping in good condition and
in a way that presents a healthy, neat, and orderly appearance. All landscaping
shall be maintained free from disease, pests, weeds, and litter. This
maintenance shall include weeding, watering, fertilizing, pruning, mowing,
edging, mulching, or other maintenance, as needed and in accordance with
acceptable horticultural practices, including ANSI Standards for Tree Care
Operations and American Association of Nurserymen Standards;
            2.   The repair or replacement of required landscape structures
(e.g., fences) to a structurally sound condition;
            3.   The regular maintenance, repair, or replacement, where
necessary, of any landscaping required by this section; and
            4.   Continuous maintenance of the site as a whole.
         (b)   When replacement of trees, plant material, or other landscape
features is required, such replacement shall be accomplished within one growing
season, one year or such time-frame as required by the Zoning Administrator,
whichever is shorter.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 9.5, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-07, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 153.336 ARCHITECTURAL AND LANDSCAPE DESIGN GUIDELINES.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of these standards is to promote attractive,
well-designed development that is built to human scale; to promote and protect
the appearance, character, and economic value of new development; to encourage
creativity in new development (as opposed to homogeneity or “look-alike”
projects); and to foster attractive streetscapes and pedestrian environments,
while accommodating safe vehicular movements and access.
   (B)   Applicability. These standards shall apply to all developments that
are subject to site plan review (see §
153.046).
   (C)   Architectural design guidelines. The intent of the architectural
design guidelines is to ensure respect for the character, integrity, and
quality of the built and natural environments of the town; it is not intended
to stifle innovative architecture. The following criteria shall be used in
evaluating applications:
      (1)   General design.
         (a)   Single, large building masses shall be avoided. Structures with
walls of more than 1,500 square feet shall incorporate fascias, canopies,
arcades, building setbacks of three feet or more, or other multi-dimensional
design features to break up large wall surfaces on their street-facing
elevations. Wall structures shall be visually divided by such features into
areas of 750 square feet or less.
         (b)   All elevations of a structure shall be in harmony, one with
another, in terms of scale, proportion, detail, material, color, and high
design quality.
         (c)   The side and rear elevations of buildings shall be as visually
attractive as the front elevation, especially where those side or rear
elevations are most often viewed by the public. Rooflines and architectural
detailing shall present a consistency in quality design.
         (d)   All structures within a proposed development, including gasoline
canopies, shall utilize a uniform architectural theme and shall be designed to
create a harmonious whole. It is not to be inferred that buildings must look
alike to achieve a harmony of style. Harmony of style can be created through
property considerations of scale, proportion, detail, materials, color, site
planning, and landscaping.
         (e)   The scale of buildings and accessory structures, including
canopies, shall be appropriate to the scale of structures located in the
surrounding area. Canopies designed as domineering or overpowering
architectural features are strongly discouraged.
         (f)   Long, monotonous facade design, including, but not limited to,
those characterized by unrelieved repetition of shape or form or by unbroken
extension of line, shall not be permitted.
         (g)   The architectural design and material finish of buildings,
signage, gasoline pump canopies, and other necessary structures shall be
compatible with one another and with adjacent and surrounding structures where
such structures are substantially in compliance with these requirements.
         (h)   Structures which are of symbolic design for reasons of
advertising shall not be permitted. A symbol or symbols attached to a building
shall not be allowed unless it is secondary in appearance to the structure and
landscape and is an aesthetic asset to the building and surrounding area.
         (i)   The location and dimension of wall signs shall be indicated upon
the architectural elevations of proposed structures and shall maintain
compatibility with the architectural features of the structure.
      (2)   Building materials.
         (a)   Concrete finishes or pre-cast concrete panels (tilt wall) that
are not exposed aggregate, hammered, sandblasted, or covered with a cement-
based acrylic coating shall be prohibited as an exterior building material
along any building elevation visible from public rights-of-way.
         (b)   Unpainted or bare metal panels, regardless of depth or
thickness, shall be prohibited as an exterior building material.
         (c)   Corrugated of sheet metal, except stainless steel, copper, or
galvanized metal shall be prohibited as an exterior building material along any
building elevation visible from public rights-of-way.
         (d)   Mirrored glass with a reflectance greater than 40% shall be
prohibited from covering more than 40% of the exterior walls of any building.
         (e)   Materials shall express their function clearly and honestly and
shall not appear as materials which are foreign to the character of the rest of
the building.
         (f)   Any building exterior elevation shall consist of architectural
materials which are equal in quality, appearance, and detail to all other
exterior elevations of the same structure. Nothing in this section shall
preclude the use of different materials on different exterior elevations of the
same structure so long as those materials maintain the architectural unity and
integrity of the entire structure.
         (g)   Shingles, metal standing seam, tile, or other roofing materials
with similar appropriate texture and appearance shall be utilized. Flat roofs
will not be discouraged where they are appropriate to the design theme of a
structure.
      (3)   Building color.
         (a)   Color shades shall be used to unify the development.
         (b)   Color combinations of paints shall be complimentary. In no case
shall garish colors be permitted. In general, no more than three different
colors per building shall be allowed.
      (4)   Multiple building developments. Each individual building within a
development shall feature predominant characteristics including, but not
limited to, consistent rooflines, use of compatible proportions in building
mass and outdoor spaced, complementary relationships to the street, similar
window and door patterns, and the use of complimentary building materials in
terms of color, shades, and textures. Monotony of identically designed multiple
building projects shall be avoided. Variation of detail, form, and siting shall
be used to provide visual interest. The use of different textures, shadow
lines, and contrasting shapes may also be used to provide visual interest.
      (5)   Building orientation.
         (a)   Facades and entries. To the maximum extent feasible, primary
facades and entries should face the adjacent street or a connecting walkway
with a direct pedestrian connection to the street without requiring pedestrians
to walk through parking lots or cross driveways.
         (b)   Views. Where it is reasonably practical, proposed structures
shall not impede scenic rural views from the main road, from existing
structures, or from natural settings.
         (c)   Loading areas. Structures shall be oriented so that loading
areas are in no manner visible from residential districts, from existing
rights-of-way, or from planned future public rights-of-way. Loading areas may
be oriented toward adjoining developed properties which are commercially zoned
or toward adjoining properties eligible for future commercial development if
and only if they are entirely screened from view by the use of fencing which is
compatible with the overall architectural scheme of the project and/or are
appropriately landscaped.
         (d)   Corners. All corner developments shall have buildings located
close to the corner with majority of parking to the side and rear.
         (e)   Siting. All buildings shall be sited so that a direct
relationship with the primary street is established. The architecture,
landscaping, and building siting must work in concert to create a unified
appearance.
         (f)   Gas stations. Buildings shall be sited so that gasoline pump
dispensers are located to the side of the building or located behind the
buildings so that the building is between the pumps and the primary street
frontage. If located on a corner lot, the building would have to be situated in
the corner of the lot at the intersection.
      (6)   Mechanical equipment and trash receptacle screening. Locations of
all mechanical equipment and dumpsters shall be shown on all site plans. All
mechanical equipment and trash receptacles shall be shielded and screened from
public view, Mechanical equipment shall be shielded with walls, fencing, or
landscaping that screens the equipment entirely. Dumpsters shall be screened
with a minimum six-foot opaque fence or wall on all four sides and located
toward the side or rear of the principal structure.
      (7)   Drive-through services. All order boxes, menu stands, pickup
windows, service/teller windows, and required vehicle stacking associated with
drive-through services shall be located to the side or rear of buildings. For
the purpose of this section, the SIDE OR REAR shall mean the area behind a
projected line running parallel from the front (street facing) side(s) of the
structure to the side property lines. This concept is depicted in the graphic
below:
   (D)   Landscaping design guidelines. The purpose and intent of landscaping
design guidelines is to reduce the visibility of paved areas from adjacent
properties and streets, moderate climatic effects, minimize noise and glare,
and enhance public safety by defining spaces to influence traffic movement.
Landscaping will reduce the amount of stormwater runoff and provide transition
between neighboring properties. The following criteria shall be used in
evaluating applications:
      (1)   General design.
         (a)   Landscaping shall be required between buildings and sidewalks
and parking lots and driveways. The scale of the proposed landscaping shall be
in proportion to the building.
         (b)   Landscaping does not only include trees and plantings but also
paving, benches, fountains, exterior lighting fixtures, fences, and any other
item of exterior furniture. All items of the landscape are to be selected not
only for their functional value but for their aesthetic value and must
compliment the whole.
         (c)   All utility lines in the suburban areas such as electric,
telephone, CATV, or other similar lines serving individual sites, as well as
all utility lines necessary within the property, shall be placed underground.
All junction and access boxes shall be screened with appropriate landscaping.
All utility pad fixtures and meters should be shown on the site plan. The
necessity for utility connections, meter boxes, and the like should be
recognized and integrated with the architectural elements of the site plan. All
properties shall comply with the town’s right-of-way management ordinance where
applicable.
         (d)   Ease of pedestrian access between proposed developments and
adjacent developments shall be a required consideration in the development of a
proposed project’s site and circulation plans.
      (2)   Parking; drives.
         (a)   Parking areas and driveways shall be paved with material which
is appropriate to the comprehensive design scheme of the project and to the
intensity of use to which parking areas and driveways will be subject.
         (b)   Buildings shall be sited so that the majority of parking is
located to the side and rear of the building. The placement of the major
portion of a proposed development’s parking area to the rear of a main
structure’s corridor facade or within a courtyard surrounded on three sides by
a proposed structure is strongly encouraged. The rationale for this guideline
is to promote good proportional spatial definition for the corridors to be
accomplished through a reduction in the distance required for a building’s
setback.
         (c)   Drive-through access shall be integrally designed with the
building and not dominate the design. Only single lane drive-throughs are
allowed. Multi-lane drive-throughs are only allowed for banks (or similar
financial institutions), post office, or utilities.
      (3)   Site lighting. Site lighting shall be from a concealed light source
fixture and shall not interfere with the vision of vehicular traffic. A
lighting plan with photo-metrics shall be stamped and signed by a registered
professional engineer and comply with the following criteria:
         (a)   Maximum average foot-candles shall not exceed five foot candles
as depicted on photometric plans with a maximum not to exceed 12 foot candles
close to light sources. Maximum foot candles under gasoline canopies and
outdoor sales lots shall not exceed 30 foot candles.
         (b)   All exterior lights shall be arranged and installed so that the
direct of reflected illumination does not exceed 0.5 foot candles above the
background measured at the lot line of any adjoining residential or
agricultural parcel and public right-of-way.
         (c)   Lighting shall enhance the overall aesthetics of the site.
         (d)   Security lighting shall be provided, particularly at pedestrian
walkways.
         (e)   Lighting shall be integrated with the architectural design of
the buildings.
         (f)   Light sources (light bulbs) shall not be visible. They shall be
shielded to reflect down onto the ground and not out onto the streets or
neighboring property.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 9.6, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-07, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 153.337 WETLANDS, WATERWAYS, AND OCRM CRITICAL LINE.
   (A)   Wetland buffers and setbacks.
      (1)   Intent. The buffer standards of this section are intended to
provide a natural vegetated area between the furthermost projection of a
structure, parking or driveway area, or any other building elements and all
saltwater wetlands, waterways, and OCRM (saltwater) critical lines. The purpose
of these required buffers is to provide a visual, spatial, and ecological
transition zone between development and the town’s saltwater wetlands and
waterways and to protect water quality and wildlife habitat.
         (a)   Standards. The following minimum wetland/waterway buffers/
setbacks shall be required:
 
Minimum Buffers/Setbacks (feet) NRM-25 AG-5 AGR RSL RSM
OCRM critical line buffer       35     35   35  15  15
Setback from OCRM critical line 50     50   50  35  35
 
 
Minimum Buffers/Setbacks (feet) MHS OR OG CN CC I
OCRM critical line buffer       15  35 35 35 35 35
Setback from OCRM critical line 35  50 50 50 50 50
 
      (2)   Measurement. Required OCRM critical line buffers and setbacks shall
be measured from the OCRM critical line, whether the critical line or wetland/
waterway is located on, adjacent to, or near the subject parcel.
      (3)   Lot width. The minimum lot width standards of the underlying zoning
district shall apply at the required buffer or setback line.
   (B)   Prohibited activities. The following activities are specifically
prohibited in a buffer area:
      (1)   Removal excavation or disturbance of the soil, except for minimal
disturbance associated with the planting of shrubs or trees for landscaping;
      (2)   Grassed lawns requiring regular maintenance such as herbicides,
pesticides, fertilizers, and frequent mowing;
      (3)   Gardens, fences or structures, except for permitted crossings;
      (4)   Paved or other impervious surfaces; and
      (5)   Destruction or addition of plant life which would alter the
existing pattern of vegetation.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 9.7, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-07, passed 10-17-2013; Ord.
2024-10, passed 11-21-2024)
§ 153.338 HISTORIC PRESERVATION.
   (A)   Intent. The standards of this section are intended to safeguard the
integrity of historic structures, sites, and their context and to protect
public views of these resources along public rights-of-way.
   (B)   Applicability. The standards of this section shall apply to all sites
(existing and future) listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
   (C)   Demolition. No demolition of a historic structure or site may occur
until a special exception has been approved in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.
   (D)   Moving. No relocation of a historic structure or site may occur until
a special exception has been approved in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. Relocation should not be considered, except as a final alternative to
demolition.
   (E)   New construction; exterior alterations. No new construction located on
a historic structure or site or significant exterior alteration of a historic
structure of site may occur until a special exception has been approved in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The applicant must demonstrate
that all proposed renovations are consistent with the National Register of
Historic Places (NRHP) such that the structure shall remain listed on the NRHP
following the completion of the proposed new construction and exterior
alterations.
   (F)   Nearby development. Subdivision plats for multi-family, office,
commercial, or industrial development or residential subdivisions proposed to
be located within 300 feet of a historic structure or site should be reviewed
to determine their impact on the historic site. The Zoning Administrator shall
require that potential negative impacts be minimized through the location of
vehicular access points, screening, buffering, and other site design tools.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 9.8, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-07, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 153.339 TRAFFIC IMPACT STUDIES.
   (A)   Applicability. A traffic impact study shall be required with
applications for zoning map amendments, preliminary plats, and planned
developments that are projected to generate 20 or more peak hour vehicle trips,
based on trip generation rates from the latest edition of the Institute of
Transportation Engineers trip generation manual. The Planning or Public Works
Director shall also be authorized to require traffic impact studies when it is
determined that a proposed development is likely to have a significant impact
on transportation capacity, transportation levels of service, or traffic safety
in the vicinity of the proposed development.
   (B)   Study scope. When a traffic impact study is required, the type and
scope of the study shall be determined during a scoping meeting with the
Planning and Public Works Directors. The meeting may also involve
representatives of or request assessments from other agencies and departments.
The elements to be determined during the scoping session shall include:
      (1)   Type of study. The possible types of reports include: a letter
report, full traffic impact analysis report, or special report (e.g., sight
distance survey);
      (2)   Definition of impact area. The points of access and key streets and
intersections that may be affected by development of the subject tract
constitute the impact area. Traffic recorder and turning movement assessment
locations shall be determined;
      (3)   Period of analysis. Periods of analysis may include: daily traffic,
a.m., p.m., or weekend peak hour;
      (4)   Analysis scenarios. Scenarios for analysis include: existing
conditions, opening year conditions with and without development, and ten years
after opening with and without development;
      (5)   Process. Process for determining trip generation and distribution
including: trip generation category, diversion assumptions, and distribution
assumptions;
      (6)   Growth rate assumption. The rate of growth assumed in background
traffic assumptions; and
      (7)   Pipeline development. Developments in the area that have been
approved or are under review.
   (C)   Traffic study elements. A letter report or special report shall
include those elements agreed upon in the scoping meeting. A full traffic study
shall include the following elements.
      (1)   Existing condition survey.
         (a)   Street system description. The street system shall be described
including geometric features, lane usage, traffic control, signage, sight
distances and adjacent uses, and curb cuts.
         (b)   Traffic volumes. Existing traffic volumes shall be provided for
the impact area including both AADT (average annual daily traffic) and “design”
peak hour volumes. AADT may be derived from current counts of the State
Department of Transportation (if available) and peak hour volumes shall be
determined from field counts. Data shall be adjusted for daily and seasonal
variations. Turning movement counts for the peak hour shall be provided for
critical intersections. Peak hour periods shall be as determined at the scoping
meeting.
         (c)   Capacity analysis. Existing capacity of signalized and
unsignalized intersections.
         (d)   Other. Other items may be required at the discretion of the
Public Works Director depending upon the type and scale of the project. These
may include, but are not limited to: queue length analysis, pedestrian counts,
accident data, traffic speeds (both fiftieth and eighty-fifth percentile) and
stopping sight distance.
      (2)   Future without development. Capacity analysis is to be provided for
opening year and plus ten-year for key intersections (and roadway segments
where appropriate) without the development but including any planned
developments. The analysis shall be based upon the Highway Capacity Manual or
other methodologies approved in advance by the Public Works Director.
      (3)   Future with development.
         (a)   Projection of the daily and peak hour traffic generation of the
project shall be made using the latest edition of the Institute of
Transportation Engineers trip generation manual unless the Public Works
Director determines that locally derived data will provide more accurate
forecasts. Data from similar facilities may be used where the information is
not available from the Institute of Transportation Engineers.
         (b)   The projected trips shall be distributed onto the road network
as agreed in the scoping meeting.
         (c)   Capacity analysis for opening year and plus ten-year for key
intersections (and roadway segments where appropriate.
         (d)   Special analysis as may be required to determine warrants for
signalization, minimum safe sight distances, gap analysis, turning radius
requirements, queue length analysis, turning lane length analysis, curb cut
locations, or similar requirements.
      (4)   Mitigation plan. Where the analysis indicates that the project will
create deficiencies in the impact area, improvements shall be recommended which
shall include projected cost estimates. The design of improvements shall be in
accordance with specifications of the Public Works Director and, where
appropriate, the State Department of Transportation. Where a decision-making
body determines that a mitigation plan is not adequate to address the traffic
impacts of the project, it may serve as a basis for denial of the rezoning,
preliminary plat, or planned development request.
      (5)   Consultants. The Public Works Director may require that a mutually
agreed upon independent consultant be hired by the town to perform required
traffic impact studies or to review all or part of a study prepared by the
applicant’s consultants. The Public Works Director is authorized to administer
the contract for such consultants.
         (a)   The Public Works Director shall determine the scope of services
to be performed by the independent consultant and receive a cost estimate of
such services.
         (b)   The applicant shall provide an amount equal to the estimate to
the Public Works Director, who will deposit the amount in an escrow or special
account set up for this purpose. Any funds not used for the independent
consultant shall be returned to the applicant in a timely manner without
interest.
         (c)   The Public Works Director may require additional fees for the
independent review if: the decision-making body expands the scope of the
required review; the applicant substantially amends the application; additional
meetings involving the consultants are requested by the applicant; the
consultant’s appearance is requested at Planning Commission or Town Council
meetings beyond what was initially anticipated; or the consultant’s attendance
is required at meetings with regional, state, or federal agencies or boards
which were not anticipated in the earlier scope of services.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 9.9, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-07, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 153.340 VISION CLEARANCE ON ROADWAYS.
   (A)   Major roadways. Corner lots on major roadways shall have not structure
or obstruction that obscures travel visions from 30 inches to ten feet above
ground level in a triangular area formed by measuring from the point of
intersection to the front and side lot lines a distance of 40 feet along the
lot lines and connecting the points to form a triangle.
   (B)   Collector streets. On collector streets, the triangular area formed by
measuring from the point of intersection of the front and side lot lines is 30
feet.
   (C)   Sub-collector streets. On sub-collector streets, the triangular area
formed by measuring from the point of intersection of the front and side lot
lines is 20 feet.
   (D)   Private drives and private lanes. On private driveways of commercial
or industrial activities, the triangular area formed by measuring from the
point of intersection of the drive edge is 15 feet.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 9.10, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-07, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 153.341 SIGNS.
   (A)   General provisions.
      (1)   Purpose. This section provides comprehensive regulations for
signage in the town designed to promote public safety and welfare by highways,
facilitating the efficient transfer of information and thus enhancing traffic
flow and the ability to locate needed goods and services.
      (2)   Administration and enforcement.
         (a)   Non-commercial copy. Any sign authorized in this division (A) is
allowed to contain non-commercial copy in lieu of any other copy. Non-
commercial on-premises signs are permitted in any zoning district provided that
such signs comply with the regulations of that district.
         (b)   Building and Electrical Code standards. All permanent signs must
meet the structural and installation standards of the Standard Building Code
and electrical standards of the National Electrical Code as enforced by the
Town Building Inspector.
         (c)   Permit required. No signs, except real estate signs shall be
erected unless a zoning permit has been issued by the Zoning Administrator in
accordance with the procedures of this chapter.
         (d)   Fees. An applicant for a zoning permit shall pay such fees as
determined necessary for application processing. These fees are due upon
submission of an application and shall be determined by the Town Council.
         (e)   Documentation of signs. Upon request, the owner of any existing
sign shall provide the town’s Zoning Administrator with evidence that documents
the size, location, and date of construction of all existing signs on the
premises.
      (3)   Prohibited signs.
         (a)   Except as otherwise permitted by this chapter, the following
signs will be prohibited:
            1.   Flashing signs;
            2.   Pennants, streamers, and other animated signs;
            3.   Signs imitating traffic devices (signal);
            4.   Signs imitating traffic signs;
            5.   Signs in marshes;
            6.   Signs in rights-of-way;
             7.   Snipe signs (except when permitted per division (E) below);
            8.   Vehicle signs;
            9.   Roof signs;
            10.   Banners (except when permitted per division (E) below);
            11.   Flutter feather banner flags;
            12.   LED message boards (except for civic/institutional uses when
approved by Zoning Administrator); and
            13.   Inflatables used for advertisement purposes.
         (b)   Note: Campaign signs are not considered snipe signs and are not
regulated by this chapter provided they are located outside any right-of-way.
However, all campaign signs must be removed within 15 days after the election.
      (4)   House numbers. All permanent, free-standing, on-premises signs
shall contain house numbers containing numbers at least four inches in height.
The area devoted to required house numbers shall not be included in the
calculation of maximum sign area.
      (5)   Illumination. All lighted on-premises signs shall comply with all
dimensional standards set forth in this chapter. Additionally, internally
illuminated signs on property not adjacent to commercial or industrial uses
shall have an opaque background on the sign face with a maximum of 80 watts per
bulb and no more than one bulb per foot in height of the sign face.
      (6)   Signs in disrepair. Signs in disrepair shall be repaired,
renovated, or removed from the premises within 60 days following notice by the
Zoning Administrator.
      (7)   Abandoned signs. Signs advertising a person, business, service,
event, or other activity that is no longer available or other signs that
contain inaccurate or outdated information shall be considered abandoned.
Remedial action shall be taken within 30 days after a sign becomes abandoned.
If no remedial action is taken, the Zoning Administrator shall give notice to
the owner of record who shall have 30 days to remove the sign prior to any
further enforcement action being pursued. This provision shall apply to all
abandoned signs, including those abandoned before April 21, 1999.
      (8)   Signs interfering with vehicular vision.
         (a)   In the area near the entrance of a driveway, no sign shall
obscure the travel vision from 30 inches to ten feet above ground level in
triangular areas formed by measuring from the point of intersection of any
front lot line and driveway, a distance of 15 feet along the front lot line and
driveway and connecting the points to form a triangle.
         (b)   No sign or structure shall be erected so as to interfere with
the vision of vehicles operated along any highway, street, road, or driveway or
at any intersection of any street, highway, or road with a railroad track.
Signs determined by the Zoning Administrator to be in violation shall be
removed or relocated immediately upon notice.
   (B)   Standing signs.
      (1)   Reserved.
      (2)   A maximum of one reader board shall be allowed per zoning lot for
single or multi-tenant structures containing office, commercial, or industrial
uses if attached to permanent, free-standing signs. The area of the reader
board shall be included in the site’s total sign area allowance.
      (3)   Maximum six-foot height and 40 square feet in OR, CN, and CT Zoning
Districts.
      (4)   Maximum eight-foot height and 50 square feet in the CC Zoning
District.
      (5)   The predominant materials used for free-standing signs, excluding
copy material or materials not visible from the public right-of-way, must
incorporate the following:
         (a)   If the predominant building materials, colors, and design
elements on the principal building conform to §
153.336(C)(2) of this code, the exterior sign materials must complement those
found on the principal structure as reviewed and approved through the site plan
review process.
         (b)   Materials, design, and color of the sign do not need to be the
same as those found on the principal structure to be considered complimentary.
      (6)   Signs that are located in parking lots (such as directional signs)
may be internally lit when constructed with routed letters or an opaque
background.
      (7)   The hanging or attachment of objects is not permitted unless they
are shown on the drawings approved for sign construction and meet all the
requirements of this chapter.
      (8)   Shared shopping center signs shall be allowed and required with a
maximum ten-foot height and 100 square feet.
      (9)   Sign regulations for properties located in overlay districts can be
found in §§
153.090 through
153.093.
   (C)   Wall/facade signs.
      (1)   Number. A maximum of two signs shall be allowed per wall/facade,
with a maximum of four per building. Total area of all signs shall not exceed
square footage of
Table 153.341.C.
      (2)   Size. Maximum size of wall/facade signs is dependent upon building
frontage and setback, in accordance with
Table 153.341.C.
      (3)   Objects. The hanging or attachment of objects is not permitted
unless they are shown on the drawings approved for sign construction and meet
all the requirements of this chapter.
      (4)   Awning signs.
         (a)   The use of awnings for the purpose of providing signage will be
considered a wall sign. The awning signage must meet all dimensional and
intensity standards applicable to wall signs in this section.
         (b)   For purposes of division (C)(4), an AWNING SIGN is a sign used
for the purpose of providing signage and must be located above a display window
or entryway.
         (c)   Text or graphic shall be limited to the face of an awning.
Table 153.341.C
Wall/Facade Signs
Building Length Facing Street Setback (ft.) Maximum Size
                                            (sq. ft.)
Table 153.341.C
Wall/Facade Signs
Building Length Facing Street Setback (ft.) Maximum Size
                                            (sq. ft.)
                              0 – 99      50
50 feet or less               100 – 399   100
                              400 or more   150
                              0 – 99      Bldg. frontage x 1
More than 50 feet             100 – 399   Bldg. frontage x 2
                              400 or more   Bldg. frontage x 3
 
   (D)   Special signs. Maximum size, number, location and height of special
signs shall conform with
Table 153.341.D and the following standards:
      (1)   Flags used as signs.
         (a)   A permit shall be required for the installation of all flagpoles
or flag display devices erected on lots zoned for multi-family, office,
commercial, or industrial use or occupied by a multi-family, office,
commercial, or industrial use.
         (b)   Applicants must submit with the permit application a scaled site
plan giving the location of all flagpoles and complete dimensional and
installation engineering data.
         (c)   Applicants must provide documentation of minimum clearance from
electric, telephone, or cable TV lines as certified by the proper utility prior
to issuance of permit or installation.
         (d)   Maximum size and number of flags used as signs and height of
flagpoles shall conform with
Table 153.341.D of this chapter.
         (e)   The American flag and the flag of the state are exempt from the
provisions for maximum size of flags and maximum size of flagpoles in
Table 153.341.D of this chapter.
      (2)   Sandwich board/sidewalk sign. A permit may be issued for a maximum
of two sandwich board signs per lot or business provided the signs comply with
the following criteria:
         (a)   The sign is located within the commercial zoning districts on
the subject parcel or in front of the business being advertised;
         (b)   It is a maximum of three feet in height with a maximum of nine
square feet per sign face;
         (c)   The sign is erected only during the hours of operation of the
subject business and must be removed daily after close of business; and
         (d)   The sign is not located within any rights-of-way or within any
pedestrian ways which would impede or interfere with vehicular or pedestrian
use of roads, sidewalks, or seating areas.
      (3)   Shared free-standing signs.
         (a)   Off-premises shared free-standing signs are allowed in the
commercial and industrial zoning districts for the advertisement and
identification of two or more businesses or residential developments located on
separate parcels.
         (b)   One shared sign is allowed at the location of a jointly shared
curb cut/entry drive.
         (c)   Multiple businesses may participate on multiple shared signs;
however, a business that participates on a shared free-standing sign shall not
be allowed to erect a single tenant on-premise free-standing sign.
         (d)   Participating businesses must either share a property boundary
on at least one side or be part of an approved multi-parcel development.
         (e)   Shared free-standing signs must meet all other setback and
dimensional standards for nonresidential free-standing signs including all
architectural standards and overlay district requirements of this chapter.
      (4)   Off-premises bona fide agricultural use signs. Off-premises signs
advertising products from bona fide agricultural uses, related activities, and
farm identification may be permitted on properties located in agricultural or
commercial zoning districts, subject to the following requirements.
         (a)   A maximum of one off-premises sign is permitted per bona fide
agricultural use.
         (b)   The applicant shall submit a plan drawn to scale showing the
proposed location of the sign on the property on which the sign is to be
placed.
         (c)   The sign shall comply with the setback and dimensional
requirements of Section 9.11.2 of Ordinance 2012-06. The applicable
requirements of Section 9.11.2 of Ordinance 2012-06shall be determined based on
the zoning district of the property where the sign is to be located.
         (d)   The sign shall be located outside of any rights-of-way and
easements, shall comply with the requirements of §
153.340, Vision clearance, of this code, and shall not be internally or
externally illuminated.
         (e)   The applicant shall submit a signed letter of intent and
supporting documentation indicating that the primary use of the property being
advertised is a bona fide agricultural use as defined in this chapter and that
the products and events advertised are grown, produced, and/or will occur on
the bona fide agricultural use property.
         (f)   The applicant shall submit a signed letter of agreement from the
property owner of the parcel on which the sign is to be located stating that
the property owner will allow the sign to be erected at the location indicated
on the site plan.
         (g)   The sign shall comply with all other applicable sections of this
chapter.
         (h)   Off-premises bona fide agricultural use sign permits shall be
assigned to the property on which the sign is to be located.
 
Table 153.341.D
Special Signs
Type                Maximum Size      Maximum Number   Minimum Setback Maximum
                                                       Height
                                                       Minimum setback: 5 ft.
                    100 sq. ft.                        Maximum height: 12 ft.
                    50 sq. ft. in                      Sign must have opaque
Civic/institutional residential or    1 per zoning lot background except the
                    agricultural uses                  marquee. Marquee cannot
                                                       exceed 25% of total sign
                                                       size
Directional         3 sq. ft.         Unlimited        4 ft.
Flags               60 sq. ft.        3 per zoning lot 35 ft. or 15 ft. above
                                                       highest point of roof
Subdivision/multi-  32 sq. ft.        2 per entrance   Minimum setback: 5 ft.
family I.D. signs                                      Maximum height: 12 ft.
 
   (E)   Temporary signs.
      (1)   All temporary signs, unless expressly exempt, require a zoning
permit and shall comply with all other regulations of this chapter. Maximum
size, number, duration, location, and height of temporary signs shall conform
with
Table 153.341.E and the following standards:
         (a)   Portable signs are permitted in accordance with standards of the
National Electrical Code and anchoring provisions of the International Building
Code where applicable.
         (b)   A site plan and letter of intent indicating the type, amount,
and location of balloons, pennants, streamers, banners, and portable signs must
be submitted for review. The application will be reviewed to ensure that all
proposed signage will not pose any pedestrian or vehicular danger as determined
by the Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Special sales event signs.
         (a)   A legally established business may submit an application for
temporary signs for the advertisement of one grand opening and five special
sales events per calendar year.
         (b)   Permitted signs for grand openings or special sales events shall
be removed no later than ten consecutive days after being installed.
      (3)   Permitted temporary special events.
         (a)   A permitted special event is allowed one special event sign per
event.
         (b)   Signs for permitted special events shall be removed no later
than ten consecutive days after being installed.
      (4)   Real estate signs.
         (a)   Signs less than 12 square feet do not require a zoning permit.
         (b)   All signs shall be removed no later than 15 days after the
property is sold.
         (c)   Signs shall face a maximum of two directions, and may be mounted
back-to-back or V’ed.
         (d)   Where signs are V’ed, the space between panels shall not exceed
three feet at the point at which panels are closest, and the interior angle
formed by signs shall not exceed 60 degrees. For purposes of these
requirements, V’ed signs shall be counted as one sign.
         (e)   Where signs face two directions, whether back-to-back or V’ed,
both signs must be the same standard size.
      (5)   Snipe signs.
         (a)   Signs less than 12 square feet do not require a zoning permit.
         (b)   All snipe signs shall be removed no later than ten consecutive
days after being installed and are only allowed for civic/institutional uses.
      (6)   Nonconforming signs. Refer to §§
153.355 through
153.361, Nonconformities.
 
Table 153.341.E
Temporary Signs
Type                Maximum Size     Maximum Number      Minimum Setback
                                                         Maximum Height
                                     2 per zoning lot
Permitted grand                      including banners,
opening and special 50 sq. ft.       Balloons (max. 2    Minimum setback: 5
sales event signs                    square ft.),        ft.
                                     pennants, streamers
                                     allowed
                    100 sq. ft.,                         Minimum setback: 5
                    50 sq. ft. in                        ft.
Permitted temporary residential and                      Maximum height: 12
special event signs agricultural     1 per zoning lot    ft.
                    districts and no                     Maximum 6 ft. height
                    internal                             in residential zoning
                    illumination                         districts
                                                         Minimum setback: 5
                                                         ft.
                                     1 per 1,500 ft.     Maximum height: 12
Real estate signs   48 sq. ft.       frontage            ft.
                                     Maximum: 3 per lot  Maximum 6 ft. height
                                                         in residential zoning
                                                         districts
 
(Ord. 2012-06, § 9.11, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2012-21, passed 12-20-2012; Ord.
2013-07, passed 10-17-2013; Ord. 2014-09, passed 7-17-2014; Ord. 2017-01,
passed 2-16-2017; Ord. 2019-04, passed 8-15-2019; Ord. 2025-02, passed 3-20-
2025)
§ 153.342 DRAINAGE DESIGN.
   Refer to the County Stormwater Management Ordinance No. 1518 approved on
August 14, 2007 and found in Appendix B of Ordinance 2012-06, as amended.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 9.12, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-07, passed 10-17-2013)
§ 153.343 EXHIBITS.
   The following exhibits are for illustration purposes only. In case of any
difference of meaning or implication between the text of this chapter and any
heading, drawing, table, figure, or illustration, the text shall control.
NONCONFORMITIES
§ 153.355 PURPOSE.
   (A)   It is the general policy of the town to allow uses, structures, lots,
signs, and other situations that came into existence legally – in conformance
with then-applicable requirements – to continue to exist and to be put to
productive use, but to bring as many aspects of such situations into compliance
with existing regulations as is reasonably possible. This subchapter
establishes regulations governing uses, structures, lots, and signs that were
legally established but that do not comply with one or more existing
requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   The regulations of the subchapter are intended to:
      (1)   Recognize the interests of property owners in continuing to use
their property;
      (2)   Promote reuse and rehabilitation of existing buildings; and
      (3)   Place reasonable limits on the expansion of nonconformities that
have the potential to adversely affect surrounding properties and the town as a
whole.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 10.1.1, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-09, passed 8-15-2013)
§ 153.356 EXISTING NONCONFORMITIES.
   (A)   Authority to continue. Any nonconformity that legally existed on
October 18, 2012 or that becomes nonconforming upon the adoption of any
amendment of this chapter may be continued in accordance with the provisions of
this subchapter.
   (B)   Determination of nonconformity status. The burden of establishing that
a nonconformity is a legal nonconformity shall, in all cases, rest solely upon
the owner of such nonconformity.
   (C)   Repairs and maintenance. Incidental repairs and normal maintenance of
nonconformities shall be permitted unless such repairs are otherwise expressly
prohibited by this chapter. Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to
prevent structures from being structurally strengthened or restored to a safe
condition, in accordance with an official order of the Director of Building
Inspection or his or her designee.
   (D)   Change of tenancy or ownership. The status of nonconformity is not
affected by changes of tenancy, ownership, or management.
(Ord. 2012-06, §§ 10.1.2 through 10.1.5, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-09,
passed 8-15-2013)
§ 153.357 NONCONFORMITIES CREATED BY PUBLIC ACTION.
   When lot area or setbacks are reduced as a result of conveyance to a
federal, state, or local government for a public purpose and the remaining area
is at least 50% of the otherwise applicable minimum standard, then that lot
shall be deemed to be in compliance with the minimum lot area and setback
standards of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 10.1.6, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-09, passed 8-15-2013)
§ 153.358 NONCONFORMING USES.
   (A)   Definition. A NONCONFORMING USE is a use that was legally established
but which is no longer allowed by the use regulations of the zoning district in
which it is located.
   (B)   Expansion. A nonconforming commercial or industrial use shall not be
enlarged or expanded unless one of the following conditions exists:
      (1)   Such expansion eliminates or reduces the nonconforming aspects of
the situation; or
      (2)   The expansion is into a part of the building or structure that was
lawfully and manifestly designed or arranged for such use, provided that no
such expansions shall be allowed if displaces a conforming use.
   (C)   Change of use.
      (1)   A nonconforming use may not be changed to any use other than a use
allowed in the zoning district in which it is located, provided that the Board
of Zoning Appeals shall be authorized to approve a change to another
nonconforming use in accordance with the special exception procedures of this
chapter. In acting upon such requests, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall not be
guided by the special exception approval criteria of this chapter, but rather
shall approve the change of use only upon a finding that the new use will be
less detrimental to adjacent property and general area than the existing
nonconforming use.
      (2)   When a conforming use becomes nonconforming as result of a zoning
map amendment initiated by the applicant, the nonconforming use shall then be
removed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the conforming
use.
   (D)   Loss of legal nonconforming status.
      (1)   Abandonment. If a nonconforming use is replaced with another use or
is discontinued for any reason for a period of more than 12 consecutive months
or 18 months in cumulative total within any three-year period, the use shall be
considered abandoned. Once abandoned, the use’s legal nonconforming status
shall be lost and re-establishment of a nonconforming use shall be prohibited.
Any subsequent use of the property shall comply with the regulations of the
zoning district in which it is located.
      (2)   Damage or destruction.
         (a)   No nonconforming commercial or industrial use that is damaged by
fire or any other cause shall be restored if the cost of the repair equals 50%
or more of the use’s total physical replacement cost, which shall consist
solely of labor and materials. Determination of physical replacement costs
shall be made by the Director of Building Inspection. When such repairs are
allowed to be made, they shall be in full compliance with the regulations of
this chapter.
         (b)   A nonconforming residential use that is damaged by fire or any
other cause may be restored. In such cases, the use may be re-established to
the extent that existed before the time of damage, within the pre-existing
structure boundaries (footprint and height), provided that the repairs or
rebuilding do not increase the degree of nonconformity and provided that such
repairs, restoration, or reconstruction begin within 12 months of the date of
such damage.
   (E)   Accessory uses and structures. No use or structure that is accessory
to a principal nonconforming use or structure shall continue after such
principal use or structure shall have ceased or terminated, unless it complies
with all regulations of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 10.2, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-09, passed 8-15-2013)
§ 153.359 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Definition. A NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE is any building or structure
that was legally established but which no longer complies with the density,
intensity, and dimensional standards of the underlying zoning district. For
NONCONFORMING REGISTERED ADU regulations, see §
153.362.
   (B)   Use. A nonconforming structure may be used for any use allowed in the
underlying zoning district.
   (C)   Expansion. A nonconforming residential structure may be enlarged or
expanded if such residential expansion follows the outside wall at ground
level, other than porches, decks, or canopies. The outside wall (other than
porches, decks, or canopies) of a nonconforming residential structure that does
not meet current dimensional standards (setbacks), shall only be allowed to
expand vertically from ground level provided that such expansion does not
exceed the maximum building height requirements for that zoning district or
encroach into any setback. All other expansion shall meet all other applicable
portions of the chapter including density, intensity, and dimensional
standards.
   (D)   Moving. A nonconforming structure may be moved in whole or in part to
another location if the movement or relocation does not increase the extent of
nonconformity.
   (E)   Subdivision. If a lot is occupied by a nonconforming structure, it may
be subdivided provided that subdividing does not create a new nonconformity or
increase the degree of nonconformance of the structure.
   (F)   Loss of legal nonconforming status; damage or destruction.
      (1)   No nonconforming commercial or industrial structure that is damaged
by fire or any other cause shall be restored if the cost of the repair work
equals 50% or more of the structure’s total physical replacement cost.
Determination of physical replacement costs shall be made by the Director of
Building Inspection. When such repairs are allowed to be made, they shall be in
full compliance with the regulations of this chapter.
      (2)   A nonconforming residential structure that is damaged by fire or
any other cause may be restored. In such cases, the structure may be re-
established to the extent that existed before the time of damage, within the
pre-existing structure boundaries (footprint and height), provided that the
repairs or rebuilding do not increase the degree of nonconformity and provided
that such repairs, restoration, and reconstruction begin within 12 months of
the date of such damage.
      (3)   Nothing in this section shall conflict with the requirements of the
Federal Emergency Management Agency’s Flood Plain Management Regulations.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 10.3, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-09, passed 8-15-2013; Ord.
2025-10, passed 11-20-2025)
§ 153.360 NONCONFORMING LOTS.
   (A)   Definition. A NONCONFORMING LOT is a tract of land, designated on a
duly recorded subdivision plat, by a duly recorded deed or by other lawful
means, that complied with the lot area, lot width, and lot depth standards of
the zoning district in which it was located at the time of its creation, but
which does not comply with the minimum lot area, lot width, or lot depth
requirements of the zoning district in which it is now located.
   (B)   Vacant lots. If a nonconforming lot or parcel was vacant on the date
on which this chapter became applicable to it, then the owner may use the
property for uses allowed by the underlying zoning district, provided that the
use shall comply with the applicable setback to the maximum extent possible. If
the underlying zoning district permits a variety of uses or a variety or
intensities or uses and one or more uses or intensities would comply with
setback standards, while others would not, then only the uses or intensities
that would comply with the applicable setback standards shall be permitted.
   (C)   Lot with building or structure. If a nonconforming lot or parcel
contains a building or structure on the date on which this chapter became
applicable to it, then the owner may continue the use of that building or
structure and may reasonably expand the structure in any way that does not
increase the degree of nonconformity; an increase in building size shall not be
deemed to increase the degree of nonconformity unless it increases the
encroachment on a required setback.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 10.4, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-09, passed 8-15-2013)
§ 153.361 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   (A)   Definition. A NONCONFORMING SIGN is any sign that was legally
established but which no longer complies with the sign regulations contained in
§§
153.330 through
153.342 of this code.
   (B)   On-premises signs. All legal nonconforming permanent on-premises signs
in place prior to October 18, 2012, shall be removed or replaced by August 15,
2014. All other on-premises signs not in conformance with the standards of this
chapter shall be removed or otherwise brought into compliance with the
standards of this chapter.
   (C)   Off-premises signs.
      (1)   All legally existing nonconforming off- premises signs shall be
removed, altered, or otherwise made to conform to the provisions of this
chapter.
      (2)   All other off-premises signs shall be removed, altered, or brought
into compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 10.5, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-09, passed 8-15-2013)
§ 153.362 NONCONFORMING REGISTERED ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS (ADUs).
   (A)   Definition. A NONCONFORMING REGISTERED ADU is an ADU that existed on
or before October 18, 2012, but which no longer complies with the density,
intensity, and dimensional standards of the underlying zoning district, yet has
met the following requirements to be considered a registered and allowed
(legal) ADU.
   (B)   Determination. The burden of establishing that a nonconforming ADU
existed before October 18, 2012, and that all requirements contained in this
section are satisfied, in all cases, rests solely upon the owner of such
nonconformity. Acceptable documentation for proving that a nonconforming ADU
existed on or before October 18, 2012 may consist of sworn affidavits from
adjacent property owners and others who have personal knowledge, and/or other
evidence deemed necessary and/or sufficient by the Zoning Administrator.
   (C)   Requirements.
      (1)   Must apply for nonconforming registered ADU approval through the
application, and receive approval from the Zoning Administrator in order to
continue occupancy.
      (2)   Only one nonconforming registered ADU shall be permitted per lot.
      (3)   Full-time property owner must reside on property. Proof of full-
time residency must be provided at the time of application with owner- occupied
legal residence tax bill, driver’s license, voter registration, vehicle
registration, and any other documentation requested by the Zoning Administrator
and listed on the application.
      (4)   Separate electrical meters shall not be allowed for nonconforming
registered ADUs.
      (5)   Nothing in this section shall conflict with the requirements of the
Federal Emergency Management Agency’s Flood Plain Management Regulations or the
current adopted flood ordinance.
      (6)   There shall be no adding to the existing footprint (expansion) of
the nonconforming registered ADU.
      (7)   If structure does not have a certificate of occupancy for
habitation, retroactive building permits from Charleston County Building
Services and applicable zoning permits must be obtained. This may include
updating the structure to comply with current building code, inspections, flood
regulations, and any other applicable federal and state regulations including
all requirements of the applicable code of ordinances.
      (8)   Applicant must notify all appropriate government, utility and
emergency service providers (including but not limited to JIPSD, CWS, 911, and
Charleston County Addressing), and provide letters of coordination from each
entity, per application.
(Ord. 2025-10, passed 11-20-2025)
VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 153.375 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No activity regulated by this chapter shall be undertaken except in
full compliance with the express provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   No activity that is the subject of any permit or approval issued
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be undertaken except in full
compliance with the subject permit or approval, including any attached
conditions.
   (C)   The commencement or continuation of any activity regulated by this
chapter that is not in compliance with the express provisions of this chapter,
or that is not in compliance with the express provisions of any permit or
approval, including any attached conditions, shall be a violation of this
chapter, and subject to enforcement under the terms of this subchapter, §
153.999, and state law.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 11.1, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-10, passed 8-15-2013)
Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.376 VIOLATIONS.
   All of the following constitute violations of this chapter:
   (A)   To use or attempt to use land or a building in any way not consistent
with the requirements of this chapter;
   (B)   To erect or attempt to erect a building or other structure in any way
not consistent with the requirements of this chapter;
   (C)   To engage or attempt to engage in the development or subdivisions of
land in any way not consistent with the requirements of this chapter;
   (D)   To transfer title to any lots or parts of a development unless the
subdivision has received all approvals required under this chapter and an
approved plan or plat, if required, has been filed in the appropriate town
office;
   (E)   To submit for recording with a town office any subdivision plat that
has not been approved in accordance with the requirements of this chapter;
   (F)   To install or use a sign in any way not consistent with the
requirements of this chapter;
   (G)   To engage in the use of a building or land, the use or installation of
a sign, the subdivision or development of land, or any other activity requiring
one or more approvals or permits under this chapter without obtaining all such
required approvals or permits;
   (H)   To engage in the use of a building or land, the use or installation of
a sign, the subdivision or development of land, or any other activity requiring
one or more approvals or permits under this chapter in any way inconsistent
with any such approval or permit and any conditions imposed;
   (I)   To violate the terms of any approval or permit granted under this
chapter or any condition imposed on such approval or permit;
   (J)   To obscure or obstruct any notice required to be posted or otherwise
given under this chapter;
   (K)   To violate any lawful order issued by any person or entity under this
chapter; or
   (L)   To continue any violation as defined above, with each day of continued
violation to be considered a separate violation for purposes of computing
cumulative civil or criminal penalties.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 11.2, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-10, passed 8-15-2013)
Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.377 ENFORCEMENT RESPONSIBILITY; NOTICE; COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   Responsibility. The responsibility for the enforcement of this chapter
is delegated to the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator may utilize
other town departments/agencies as necessary to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   Notice. If the Zoning Administrator finds that any of the provisions
of this chapter are being or have been violated, the Zoning Administrator shall
notify the person responsible for such violation, verbally and/or in writing,
setting forth the nature of the violation and the action necessary to correct
it, or issue a uniform ordinance summons for the violation.
   (C)   Complaints.
      (1)   Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs or is alleged to have
occurred, any person may file a complaint with the town. Such complaint shall
state fully the causes and basis thereof.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator shall properly record such complaint,
immediately investigate to determine the validity of the charge, and take
whatever action is necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter.
   (D)   Authority. Any staff member of the Planning/Zoning Department who is
authorized by Town Council shall have the authority to enforce the provisions
of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 11.3, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-10, passed 8-15-2013)
§ 153.378 REMEDIES AND ENFORCEMENT POWERS; MISDEMEANOR.
   (A)   On behalf of the town, the Zoning Administrator may take any one or
more of the following actions as a remedy for any violation of this chapter:
      (1)   Withholding and/or revocation of any approvals or permits required
by this chapter or direct other officials to withhold such approval or permits;
      (2)   Issuing stop orders against any work undertaken by an entity not
having a proper approval or permit required by this chapter;
      (3)   Issuing stop orders against any actions in violation of this
chapter;
      (4)   Bringing an action for an injunction or, in appropriate cases, for
mandamus, to prevent the violation and/or to prevent the occupancy or use of
any site or structure involved in the violation;
      (5)   Bringing an action for injunction or mandamus to abate a violation;
      (6)   Issuing the violator a uniform ordinance summons for each separate
violation(s); and/or
      (7)   Deferral or postponement of zoning applications scheduled for
public meetings or hearings in accordance with §
153.383.
   (B)   A violation of this chapter is considered a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 11.4, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-10, passed 8-15-2013)
Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.379 PRIVATE ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS.
   Any individual who is specifically damaged by any violation may, in addition
to other remedies, institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action
or proceeding to prevent the unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, conversion, maintenance, or use, or to correct or abate the
violation, or to prevent the occupancy of the building, structure or land. This
is in addition to the right of the town to bring an enforcement action.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 11.5, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-10, passed 8-15-2013)
§ 153.380 TREE PROTECTION AND PRESERVATION VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Trees removed without permits.
      (1)   Generally. If commercial sites are cleared of protected trees prior
to obtaining a zoning permit (a violation), trees shall be replaced in
accordance with a replacement schedule approved by the Zoning Administrator.
The Zoning Administrator’s replacement schedule shall specify the number,
species, caliper, and location of replacement trees, according to the following
minimum criteria:
         (a)   Combined caliper of which equals or exceeds 80 inches per acre;
and
         (b)   One-half of individual replacement trees are four inches or
greater caliper.
      (2)   Grand trees.
         (a)   Where grand trees have been removed in violation of this chapter
or where removal is necessitated at any time due to acts of negligence, trees
shall be replaced in accordance with a replacement schedule approved by the
Zoning Administrator. The replacement schedule shall establish the number,
species, caliper, and location of replacement trees, and at a minimum shall
require:
            1.   That the combined caliper of replacement trees is equal to or
greater than three times the caliper of the grand tree removed; and
            2.   Individual replacements of trees are of the largest
transplantable caliper available or equal to the loss of DBH inches.
         (b)   Where grand tree removal is necessitated by emergencies as
defined in §§
153.330 through
153.342 of this code, or death and disease of trees due to natural causes, as
determined by the Zoning Administrator, replacement shall not be required.
   (B)   Recovery from tree violations.
      (1)   Should violations be noted during the course of a project or at
final inspection, the Zoning Administrator shall take appropriate actions,
including, but not limited to, the following:
         (a)   Requiring replacement of illegally removed trees and vegetative
buffer;
         (b)   Requiring replacement of required trees and vegetative buffer
that are damaged, diseased, dying, or dead;
         (c)   Requiring protection of trees and vegetative buffer during
construction;
         (d)   Revoking zoning permits; and
         (e)   Denying certificates of occupancy.
      (2)   Nothing herein shall prevent the town from taking such other lawful
action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violations.
(Ord. 2012-06, §§ 11.6.1 and 11.6.2, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-10, passed 8-
15-2013) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.381 SIGN VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Signs subject to impoundment. In addition to other remedies and
enforcement powers of this subchapter, the Zoning Administrator shall have the
authority to remove and hold any of the following types of signs or sign
structures:
      (1)   Any prohibited signs are subject to impoundment without notice to
the owner; and
      (2)   Any sign that is installed or used in any way that is not
consistent with the requirements of this chapter, provided that notice has been
given as set forth in §
153.377(B) and no action has been taken by the owner within the specified time
frame.
   (B)   Recovery of impounded signs. The owner of an impounded sign or sign
structure may recover same upon the payment of $50 for each sign. In the event
it is not claimed within ten days from the date of impoundment, the Zoning
Administrator shall have authority to dispose of such sign or sign structure
without notification and without compensation to the owner.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 11.7, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-10, passed 8-15-2013)
§ 153.382 CONTINUING VIOLATIONS.
   Any violation of the previous zoning ordinance or subdivision ordinance will
continue to be a violation under this chapter and be subject to penalties and
enforcement under this subchapter and §
153.999, unless the use, development, construction, or other activity complies
with all applicable provisions of this chapter, in which case enforcement
action shall cease, except to the extent of collecting penalties for violations
that occurred before October 7, 2003. Any prior lack of enforcement shall not
constitute any degree of recognition, approval, or other entitlement.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 11.8, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-10, passed 8-15-2013)
§ 153.383 OTHER ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS.
   (A)   Zoning map amendment requests. An application (along with related
documents and fees) for a zoning map amendment shall not be accepted or
processed when the property owner(s) has been notified, pursuant to §
153.377(B), that a violation of this chapter exists on or in the use of land
that is the subject of the requested change. The Zoning Administrator may,
however, after consideration of the specific case, waive this requirement and
direct staff to process the application if it is found that a zoning map
amendment serves to remedy the violation. However, this waiver does not release
the property owner, applicant, and/or designated agent from compliance with
this subchapter nor does it guarantee approval of the requested zoning map
amendment. If the zoning map amendment is disapproved by Town Council, the
property owner, applicant, and/or designated agent has a maximum of 30 calendar
days from the date of disapproval to bring the subject property into
compliance.
   (B)   Board of Zoning Appeals requests. An application (along with related
documents and fees) to go before the Board of Zoning Appeals (BZA) shall not be
accepted or processed when the property owner(s) has been notified that a
violation of this chapter exists on or in the use of land that is the subject
of the request. The Zoning Administrator may, after consideration of the
specific case, waive this requirement and direct staff to process the
application, if the BZA request serves as a remedy for the violation. However,
this waiver does not release the property owner, applicant, and/or designated
agent from compliance with this subchapter.
   (C)   Contempt before the Board of Zoning Appeals. In case of contempt by
any party, witness, or other person before the Board of Zoning Appeals, such
Board may certify such fact to the Circuit Court of the town wherein such
contempt occurs and the judge of the court, after hearing, may impose such
penalty as the facts authorize or require.
   (D)   Other actions. Nothing herein shall prevent the town from taking such
other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 11.9, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-10, passed 8-15-2013)
§ 153.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   General. Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is provided shall be subject to the penalty provisions in §
10.99.
   (B)   Tree protection and preservation violations. Any person, firm,
organization, society, association, corporation, or any agent or representative
thereof who commits, participates, or assists in a violation of the tree
protection and preservation standards of this chapter may each be found guilty
of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. Each
unauthorized removal, destruction, or failure to replace a tree shall
constitute a separate offense. Failure to pay all or any part of the Tree Fund
mitigation fee within 30 days of the fee’s imposition is a violation of the
Tree Fund provision of this chapter. Failure to pay fees may result in a
collection action in the same manner as prescribed by law for the collection of
other fees. Failure to pay the mitigation fee may also result in a criminal
proceeding. If a matter is brought in criminal court, upon conviction, the
maximum penalty is $500 per violation and/or 30 days imprisonment and
restitution of the Tree Fund mitigation fee. Restitution shall be paid to the
Finance Officer who will place all funds in the Tree Fund Account.
(Ord. 2012-06, § 11.6.2, passed 10-18-2012; Ord. 2013-10, passed 8-15-2013)
APPENDIX A: ROAD CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
Section
Article A.1 - General Information
   
A.1.1   Abbreviations
   
A.1.2   Definitions
   
A.1.3   Introduction
   
A.1.4   Objective
   
A.1.5   Scope
   
A.1.6   Property access
   
A.1.7   Landowner/developer responsibilities
   
A.1.8   Design professional/land surveyor responsibilities
   
A.1.9   Coordination with other reviewing agencies
   
A.1.10   Stormwater management and sediment control
   
A.1.11   Road classifications
   
A.1.12   Applying road classification
Article A.2 - Private Road Standards
   
A.2.1   General information
   
A.2.2   Ingress/egress easement (maximum of 4 lots)
   
A.2.3   Private right-of-way dedicated to an HOA with no road construction
required (maximum of 10 lots)
   
A.2.4   Private right-of-way constructed and dedicated to an HOA
   
A.2.5   Design professional responsibility
   
A.2.6   Construction plan submission
   
A.2.7   Town inspection
   
A.2.8   Certification from the design professional
Article A.3 - Public Road Standards
   
A.3.1   General information
   
A.3.2   Secondary rural road standards (maximum of 10 lots)
   
A.3.3   Primary rural road standards
   
A.3.4   Secondary town road standards
   
A.3.5   Primary town road standards
   
A.3.6   Non-standard town road standards
Article A.4 - Design and  Construction Requirements
   
A.4.1   Road design
   
A.4.2   Drainage design
Article A.5 - Encroachments
   
A.5.1   Encroachments and work within rights-of-way and drainage easements
Article A.6 - Standard Construction Details
   
A.6.1   Introduction
   
A.6.2   Index of drawings
ARTICLE A.1 - GENERAL INFORMATION
§ A.1.1 ABBREVIATIONS.
   For the purpose of these regulations, abbreviations relating to streets and
drainage are defined as follows:
   AASHTO. American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
   ADA. Americans with Disabilities Act.
   ADAAG. Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines.
   ASTM. American Society for Testing Materials.
   CTC. County Transportation Committee.
   CTC (SS). The Charleston County Transportation Committee publication
Standard Specifications for Local Governments Road and Street Construction,
latest edition.
   HOA. Homeowners’ association.
   MLW. Mean low water.
   MSL. Mean sea level (elevation 0.0 as determined by the NGVD 29 datum).
   MUTCD. Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
   NGVD 29. National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929.
   SCDHEC/OCRM. South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control/
Office of Ocean and Coastal Resource Management.
   SCDOT. South Carolina Department of Transportation.
   SCDOT (SS). South Carolina Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications for Highway Construction, latest edition.
   USACOE. United States Army Corps of Engineers.
§ A.1.2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of these regulations, terms relating to streets and drainage
are defined as follows:
   BASE COURSE. The layer or layers of specified or selected material of
designated thickness or rate of application placed on a sub base or subgrade to
comprise a component of the pavement structure to support the pavement or
subsequent layer of construction.
   BRIDGE. A structure, including supports, erected over a depression or an
obstruction; e.g., water, highway, or railway, and having a track or passageway
for carrying traffic or other moving loads.
   CAUSEWAY. An earthen structure with at least one side adjacent to a
depression, wetland, or marsh that supports a track or passageway for carrying
traffic or other moving loads.
   CUL-DE-SAC. The radial turnaround area at the end of a dead-end street.
   CULVERT. Any structure which provides an opening under any roadway or any
other structure so named in the plans, excluding bridges.
   DESIGN PROFESSIONAL. An individual or firm appropriately licensed and
registered in the State of South Carolina.
   DETENTION. The temporary restriction of stormwater that is released at a
predetermined or controlled rate.
   DEVELOPER. The legal or beneficial owner of a lot or of any land proposed
for development; the holder of an option or contract to purchase; or any other
person having an enforceable contractual interest in such land.
   DRAINAGE EASEMENT. The right of access of stormwater runoff from adjacent
drainage basins into the drainage way within the defined easement.
   EARTH ROADS. Those roads constructed of compacted earth material.
   EASEMENT. A privilege or right of use, access or enjoyment granted on,
above, under, or across a particular tract of land by the landowner to another
person or entity.
   HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION or  PROPERTY OWNERS' ASSOCIATION. A formally
constituted, non-profit association or corporation made up of the property
owners and/or residents of a defined area. The HOMEOWNERS' OR PROPERTY OWNERS'
ASSOCIATION may take responsibility for costs and upkeep of common open space
or facilities, or enforce certain covenants and restrictions.
   MAIN UTILITY LINES. Those facilities, including piping, conduits, outlets,
and other appurtenances necessary for the proper functioning of essential
services to a development including water, electricity, gas, sanitary sewer,
storm sewer, cable, communications, etc.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. Elevation 0.0 as determined by the NGVD 29 datum.
   PAVED STREETS. Those streets for which the riding surface is constructed of
a layer or layers of materials usually comprised of Portland cement concrete or
asphaltic concrete.
   PAVEMENT. The uppermost layer of material placed on the street usually as
the wearing or riding surface. The term is used interchangeably with "surface
course" or "surfacing" and will usually imply Portland cement concrete or
asphaltic concrete.
   PLAT. A diagram drawn to an engineering scale showing all essential data
pertaining to the boundaries and subdivision of a tract of land as determined
by a professional land surveyor.
   PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR. The Director of the Department of Public Works for
the Town of James Island or his authorized representative.
   RESPONSIBLE ENTITY. The unit of local government responsible under South
Carolina law for the maintenance of the roadway and/or drainage system; or, in
the case of private roadways and/or  drainage systems, the owner of the
property upon which the roadway and/or drainage system is located; or, if
existing, a homeowners' association previously created to maintain the roadway
and/or drainage system.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. Land that has been or is being dedicated for the construction
and maintenance of a road or street. RIGHT-OF-WAY may also be used to identify
an area dedicated for use as part of a drainage system or utility corridor.
   ROADWAY. The entire area between the outside limits of construction,
including structures, slopes, ramps, intersections, utilities, side ditches,
channels, waterways, etc. necessary for proper drainage. This term shall, in
general, be considered synonymous with street or road.
   ROCK ROADS. Those roads in which the riding surface is constructed of a
layer or layers of material usually comprised of compacted rock or other
aggregate materials.
   STREET. A vehicular way, which may also serve in part as a way for
pedestrian traffic, whether called a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway,
throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, alley, mall, or other
designation, including the entire area within the right-of-way.
   STUB STREET. A street that intersects another local street and extends,
usually one lot deep, to the property line of the development or rear of the
block being developed.
   SUBGRADE. The top surface of a roadbed upon which the roadway structure and
shoulders are constructed.
§ A.1.3 INTRODUCTION.
   These standards provide specific information and design parameters regarding
the construction of roads, ingress/egress easements, and drainage facilities.
This document defines risks and responsibilities that are accepted by the
responsible entity pertaining to the maintenance of the roads and drainage
systems.
§ A.1.4 OBJECTIVE.
   The primary objective is to ensure that property being subdivided is
provided with access.
§ A.1.5 SCOPE.
   These regulations shall apply in all unincorporated portions of the Town of
James Island.
§ A.1.6 PROPERTY ACCESS.
   It is the responsibility of the landowner/developer to provide access to the
property being subdivided. Access to those properties shall be maintained and
either privately or publicly owned. The ownership and maintenance status of the
access shall be indicated on all submitted plats.
§ A.1.7 LANDOWNER/DEVELOPER RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The landowner/developer is responsible for selecting the type of access to
be provided for their subdivision. The classification of access will determine
the party responsible for maintenance and the town's associated
responsibilities, if any.
§ A.1.8 DESIGN PROFESSIONAL/LAND SURVEYOR RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The design professional-of-record must be currently registered to practice
in the State of South Carolina. The designs must either be prepared by, or
under their direct supervision, in accordance with the Code of Laws of South
Carolina, 1976, Title 40, Chapter 22, and Rules of Professional Conduct,
including any revisions made thereto. The designs shall be based on sound
engineering judgment and these standard specifications.
§ A.1.9 COORDINATION WITH OTHER REVIEWING AGENCIES.
   (A)   The design professional-of-record shall provide a list of all
regulatory permits required for the construction of all road and drainage
systems. This list shall include the status of each permit, along with
corresponding application numbers and dates.
   (B)   The design professional-of-record shall provide a copy of all approved
permits deemed essential by the Public Works Director to the Public Works
Department prior to final approval of the construction plans.
§ A.1.10 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND SEDIMENT CONTROL.
   (A)   All land-disturbing activities shall be in conformance with the Town
of James Island Stormwater Management and Sediment Control Ordinance and all
state and/or federal regulations that may be applicable.
   (B)   The design professional shall prepare appropriate sediment and erosion
control designs and show sufficient data, including material lists, details,
and time schedules, to ensure best management practices are followed. The
developer shall be responsible for ensuring that the design professional's
designs are constructed in a timely manner and properly maintained throughout
the duration of the development's construction period. If sediment is carried
downstream as a result of inadequate design, improper construction, or
maintenance neglect, the developer shall ensure that the eroded soil is removed
from the downstream properties and legally disposed.
§ A.1.11 ROAD CLASSIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Private roads. Any road dedicated to an individual or entity other
than the Town of James Island with an ingress/egress easement (maximum of 10
lots) or a right-of-way dedicated to a homeowners' association. The easement
holder retains ownership and maintenance responsibility for access and
drainage.
   (B)   Public roads (minimum standards).
      (1)   Non-standard town roads (maximum of 10 lots):
         (a)   Surface: earth.
         (b)   Minimal drainage.
         (c)   Travel way minimum width determined on a per road basis.
         (d)   Lot drainage is each owner's responsibility.
      (2)   Secondary rural road (maximum of 10 lots):
         (a)   Surface: earth.
         (b)   Minimal drainage (only roadside or sheet flow).
         (c)   Travel way minimum width of 18'.
         (d)   Lot drainage is each owner's responsibility.
      (3)   Primary rural road:
         (a)   Surface: earth, rock, or pavement.
         (b)   Minimal drainage with outfall (only for the roadway).
         (c)   Travel way minimum width of 20'.
         (d)   Lot drainage is each owner's responsibility.
      (4)   Secondary town road:
         (a)   Surface: rock or pavement.
         (b)   Drainage plan required for property and roadway system.
         (c)   Open ditch drainage system.
         (d)   Travel way minimum width of 22'.
      (5)   Primary town road:
         (a)   Surface: paved.
         (b)   Curb and gutter.
         (c)   Drainage plan required for property and roadway system.
         (d)   Enclosed pipe with limited open ditch drainage system.
         (e)   Travel way minimum width of 24'.
§ A.1.12 APPLYING ROAD CLASSIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Private road. The landowner/developer shall have the option to utilize
any of the private road classifications for property subdivision regardless of
region (see below).
   (B)   Public road.
      (1)   Roads that are to be constructed, dedicated, and accepted into the
town maintenance system shall be constructed in accordance with one of the
public road classification standards. The minimum required classification for
the road would be determined by its location within the unincorporated portions
of the Town of James Island. For road classification purposes, the
unincorporated portions of town are divided into three regions.
         (a)   Rural. Areas within the town that have a zoning classification
of AGR, AG-10, AG-15, RM, and NRM.
         (b)   Transitional. Areas within the town that have a zoning
classification of M-12, RR-3, and AG-8.
         (c)   Urban/suburban. Areas within the town that have a zoning
classification of RSL, RSM, MHP, OR, OG, CN, CT, CR, CC, and I.
      (2)   Secondary rural roads will only be allowed in the rural region.
      (3)   Primary rural roads will be allowed in the rural region and within
the transitional region when the following conditions are met to the
satisfaction of the Public Works Director:
         (a)   The proposed road is a cul-de-sac or future expansion is
limited.
         (b)   The lots being created are a minimum of 5 acres in size or the
design professional demonstrates adequate lot and roadway drainage can be
provided.
      (4)   Secondary town roads will be allowed in the rural region. They will
also be allowed in the transitional region and urban/suburban region when the
following conditions are met to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director:
         (a)   The proposed road is a cul-de-sac or future expansion is
limited.
         (b)   The design professional demonstrates that stormwater best
management practices can be utilized to satisfactorily address water quality
requirements in conjunction with an open drainage system.
         (c)   The lots are of sufficient size to accommodate an open drainage
system. The road system is an expansion to an existing open drainage system.
      (5)   Primary town roads will be allowed in all regions.
      (6)   Public roads shall connect with an existing public roadway that has
been accepted by a public agency (town, municipality, or state). Public roads
shall not rely upon a right-of-way that has only been dedicated but not
accepted into a public maintenance system.
      (7)   Streets within commercial and industrial developments shall be
designed as primary town standard streets unless approved otherwise, in
writing, by the Public Works Director.
      (8)   Non-standard town roads shall require Town Council authorization.
      (9)   If a land development plan exceeds the non-standard town road 10
lots maximum, construction shall be required to improve the non-standard road
to the required town standards from its point of connection to an existing town
standard or state public road.
ARTICLE A.2 - PRIVATE ROAD STANDARDS
§ A.2.1 GENERAL INFORMATION.
   (A)   Introduction.
      (1)   The private road standards provide the landowner/developer
flexibility to determine the level of access and service provided to lots being
created. The private road standards require the landowner/ developer to be
responsible for the extent and quality of property access and drainage. The
landowner/ developer is responsible for the establishment of standards for
design, construction, and maintenance of the roadway and drainage systems and
for items such as access for emergency service vehicles, school buses, mail
couriers, and coordination of utilities. Note that public services are not
guaranteed by The Town of James Island.
      (2)   The private right-of-way shall be dedicated to a legally recognized
or chartered entity. Private right-of-way shall not be dedicated to the public.
Further, the Town of James Island is neither obligated nor responsible for
private right-of-way maintenance.
   (B)   Landowner/developer responsibilities.
      (1)   The landowner/developer is responsible for determining the type of
access to be provided for his subdivided property. The landowner/developer
shall be responsible for oversight and coordination of design and construction
and for obtaining required approvals or permits from the appropriate agencies.
      (2)   The landowner/developer is responsible for informing prospective
property owners, whether solicited or unsolicited, of all conditions and
responsibilities, or lack thereof, that have been placed on the property.
      (3)   If access or drainage connects with a town right-of-way or
easement, an encroachment permit shall be obtained prior to construction.
§ A.2.2 INGRESS/EGRESS EASEMENT (MAXIMUM OF 4 LOTS).
   The location of proposed ingress/egress easement(s) shall be clearly
depicted and labeled on submitted plats or plans. All ingress/egress easements
must comply with the applicable requirements of this appendix including, but
not limited to, the requirements contained in divisions (A) and (B) below. The
landowner/developer shall secure the necessary licensed, professional personnel
to prepare designs, obtain required approvals and permits, and oversee
construction.
   (A)   Prior to issuance of zoning permits for land development activities
other than construction of ingress/egress easements and private rights-of-way,
installation of required street signs, additions/ renovations to existing
structures that are legally permitted, and new construction of accessory
structures, all ingress/egress easements shall be:
      (1)   Constructed in the location shown on the approved, recorded plat;
      (2)   Constructed to comply with the International Fire Code, as adopted
by Town Council, from their point of connection to an existing publicly owned
and maintained right-of-way to lot(s) proposed for development; and
      (3)   Inspected pursuant to §
A.2.7 of this appendix.
   (B)   The Directors of the Zoning and Planning Department may allow use of a
portion of an ingress/egress easement that was constructed prior to July 18,
2017 that cannot comply with the width clearance requirements of the
International Fire Code when: (a) the Director determines that moving the
ingress/egress easement to a different location is not possible due to site
constraints, property size, Grand Trees, wetlands, etc.; (b) the applicant
submits letters from the providers of emergency services for the subject
properties stating they can access all properties utilizing the ingress/egress
easement; and (c) all future portions of the ingress/egress easement comply
with the International Fire Code.
§ A.2.3 PRIVATE RIGHT-OF-WAY DEDICATED TO AN HOA WITH NO ROAD CONSTRUCTION
REQUIRED (MAXIMUM OF 10 LOTS).
   All rights-of-way shall be clearly depicted on submitted plats or plans. The
landowner/developer is responsible for determining the construction suitability
and the accessibility of the defined right-of-way, provided, however, that all
private rights-of-way must comply with the applicable requirements of this
appendix, including, but not limited to, the requirements contained in
divisions (A) and (B) below. The landowner/developer shall secure the necessary
licensed, professional personnel to prepare designs, obtain required approvals
and permits, and oversee construction.
   (A)   Prior to issuance of zoning permits for land development activities
other than construction of ingress/egress easements and private rights-of-way,
installation of required street signs, additions/ renovations to existing
structures that are legally permitted, and new construction of accessory
structures, all ingress/egress easements shall be:
      (1)   Constructed in the location shown on the approved, recorded plat;
      (2)   Constructed to comply with the International Fire Code, as adopted
by Town Council, from their point of connection to an existing publicly owned
and maintained right-of-way to lot(s) proposed for development; and
      (3)   Inspected pursuant to §
A.2.7 of this appendix.
   (B)   The Directors of the Zoning and Planning Department may allow use of a
portion of an ingress/egress easement that was constructed prior to July 18,
2017 that cannot comply with the width clearance requirements of the
International Fire Code when: (a) the Director determines that moving the
ingress/egress easement to a different location is not possible due to site
constraints, property size, Grand Trees, wetlands, etc.; (b) the applicant
submits letters from the providers of emergency services for the subject
properties stating they can access all properties utilizing the ingress/egress
easement; and (c) all future portions of the ingress/egress easement comply
with the International Fire Code.
§ A.2.4 PRIVATE RIGHT-OF-WAY CONSTRUCTED AND DEDICATED TO AN HOA.
   The landowner/developer shall determine the location and size of rights-of-
way to be provided and the standards for the design and construction of the
roadway and drainage systems, provided that all private rights-of-way comply
with the applicable requirements of this appendix including, but not limited
to, the requirements contained in divisions (A) and (B) below. The landowner/
developer shall secure the necessary licensed, professional personnel to
prepare designs, obtain required approvals and permits, and oversee
construction.
   (A)   Prior to issuance of zoning permits for land development activities
other than construction of ingress/egress easements and private rights-of-way,
installation of required street signs, additions/ renovations to existing
structures that are legally permitted, and new construction of accessory
structures, all private rights-of-way shall be:
      (1)   Constructed in the location shown on the approved, recorded plat;
      (2)   Constructed to comply with the International Fire Code, as adopted
by Town Council, from their point of connection to an existing publicly owned
and maintained right-of-way to lot(s) proposed for development; and
      (3)   Inspected pursuant to §
A.2.7 of this appendix.
   (B)   The Directors of the Zoning and Planning Department may allow use of a
portion of a private right-of-way that was constructed prior to July 18, 2017
that cannot comply with the width clearance requirements of the International
Fire Code when: (a) the Director determines that moving the private right-of-
way to a different location is not possible due to site constraints, property
size, Grand Trees, wetlands, etc.; (b) the applicant submits letters from the
providers of emergency services for the subject properties stating they can
access all properties utilizing the private right-of-way and (c) all future
portions of the private right-of-way comply with the International Fire Code.
§ A.2.5 DESIGN PROFESSIONAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   The design professional-of-record must be currently registered to practice
in the State of South Carolina.
§ A.2.6 CONSTRUCTION PLAN SUBMISSION.
   (A)   Roadway and/or drainage construction plans, and subsequent plan
revisions, shall be submitted to the Public Works Department prior to submittal
of zoning permit applications for land development activities other than
additions/renovations to existing structures that are legally permitted and new
construction of accessory structures. Such plans shall be submitted to the
Public Works Department prior to zoning permit applications for construction of
ingress/egress easements or private rights-of-way and installation of required
street signs. The submission shall include three sets of the construction plans
and specifications, and a copy of all required regulatory permits.
   (B)   Once the Public Works Department approves the roadway and/or drainage
construction plans, the landowner/developer may submit a zoning permit
application(s) for construction of the ingress/egress easement, private right-
of-way, and/or drainage and installation of required street signs. No other
zoning permits (other than zoning permits for additions/renovations to existing
structures that are legally permitted and new construction of accessory
structures) shall be issued for the property until the ingress/egress easement,
private right-of-way, and/or drainage, as well as the installation of required
street signs, have been inspected and approved by the Public Works Department
pursuant to §
A.2.7 of this appendix.
§ A.2.7 TOWN INSPECTION.
   (A)   All roadway and drainage work shall be inspected by the Public Works
Director for compliance with the submitted plans and specifications prior to
the issuance of zoning permits for land development activities other than:
construction of ingress/egress easements or private rights-of-way; installation
of required street signs; additions/ renovations to existing structures that
are legally permitted; and new construction of accessory structures. The
inspections will be performed to: provide construction documentation; review
ingress/egress easements and private rights-of-way construction according to
the International Fire Code, as adopted by Town Council; ensure that ingress/
egress easements, private rights-of-way, and drainage, have been constructed in
compliance with this appendix; and, if applicable, to ensure street signs have
been installed in the correct locations and are in compliance with applicable
town ordinances.
   (B)   After the required town inspection and approval, the landowner/
developer may submit zoning permit application(s) for subsequent land
development activities.
   (C)   The landowner/developer shall give a one-week notice prior to
beginning work at the site. After the initial notice, a 24-hour notice shall be
given prior to beginning each operation (or continuing an operation when the
work has been disrupted for more than one work-day).
§ A.2.8 CERTIFICATION FROM THE DESIGN PROFESSIONAL.
   The design professional shall provide a written statement certifying that to
the best of his knowledge, the road and drainage infrastructure has been
constructed in accordance with the submitted plans.
ARTICLE A.3 - PUBLIC ROAD STANDARDS
§ A.3.1 GENERAL INFORMATION.
   (A)   Landowner/developer responsibility.
      (1)   The landowner/developer is responsible for providing the town
complete roadway and/or drainage system plans for the proposed development.
      (2)   The landowner/developer shall secure licensed, professional
personnel to prepare designs acceptable to the town.
      (3)   The landowner/developer shall oversee and coordinate the
presentations, reviews, and revisions of the designs with the appropriate
agencies, and obtain required approvals and permits.
      (4)   The landowner/developer shall provide field staking of the designs
during the construction phase.
      (5)   The landowner/developer shall coordinate town inspections.
      (6)   The landowner/developer shall provide required as-built records,
record plats, etc.
      (7)   The landowner/developer is responsible for providing competent
construction personnel with appropriate equipment and skills to complete
construction of the roadway and/or drainage systems in a manner acceptable to
the town. The roadway and/or drainage systems must be constructed in accordance
with approved plans, specifications, permits, codes, and any other documents
referred to herein.
   (B)   Coordination with other reviewing agencies.
      (1)   The design professional-of- record shall provide a list of all
regulatory permits required for the construction of all road and drainage
systems. This list shall include the status of each permit along with
corresponding application numbers and dates.
      (2)   The design professional-of-record shall provide a copy of all
approved permits, deemed essential by the Public Works Director, to the Public
Works Department prior to final approval of the construction plans.
   (C)   Coordination with other developments. Prior to acceptance of a
proposed system which is dependent upon a contiguous system within an adjacent
development, the town must have previously accepted or simultaneously accept
the contiguous system.
   (D)   Right-of-way width. The minimum right-of-way width for a roadway to be
accepted into the town maintenance system is 50' unless otherwise approved by
the Public Works Director.
   (E)   Pedestrian ways within publicly dedicated right-of-way. When
pedestrian ways are provided within the publicly dedicated right-of-way, they
shall be constructed in accordance with § A.4.1(C) unless otherwise approved by
the Public Works Director. For roadways with open roadside drainage systems,
pedestrian ways shall be placed behind the swales or ditches. Additional right-
of-way may be required to accommodate proposed pedestrian ways.
   (F)   Fee schedule. Filing fees as established by Town Council shall be
submitted with the construction plans. These fees are nonrefundable. Previously
unapproved plans that are significantly altered in concept and resubmitted must
be accompanied by the appropriate fees.
   (G)   General requirements for construction plan approval.
      (1)   When preliminary subdivision approval has been granted by the Town
of James Island Planning Commission, the design professionals shall prepare and
submit one copy of street plans and profiles, including typical sections,
drainage data, etc., to the Public Works Department for review and approval
prior to beginning construction of the street and drainage systems. The
designer's seal, signature, and South Carolina registration number shall be
affixed to the plans and specifications.
      (2)   After reviewing the proposed documents for conformance with
applicable town ordinances, the Public Works Director shall affix the
appropriate stamp on the original drawing.
      (3)   Prior to final plat approval, the landowner/developer shall furnish
the Public Works Department with two sets of blueprints and one reproducible
set of the approved stamped plans before initiating work.
      (4)   Also, the landowner/developer shall furnish one (1) set of record
drawing prints upon completion of the project.
      (5)   When available, the Public Works Department requests an electronic
data file of the approved plans including layout, road/right-of-way location,
drainage easements, and other pertinent information that may be used to augment
the Town GIS. The landowner/developer is not responsible for ensuring that
electronic data is compatible with the Town's GIS system.
   (H)   Expiration date for town's approval of construction plans.
Construction plan and specification approvals have the same duration as the
preliminary plat approval. Refer to §§
153.300 et seq. for approval duration information.
   (I)   Town inspection. 
      (1)   All work required by the town for the development being considered
shall be inspected by the Public Works Director for compliance with the
approved plans and specifications.
      (2)   The Public Works Director will make inspections when:
         (a)   The Public Works Director has approved construction plans and
specifications.
         (b)   Sufficient notice is given. The landowner/developer shall give a
one-week notice prior to beginning work at the site. After the initial notice,
a 24-hour notice shall be given prior to beginning each operation (or
continuing an operation when the work has been disrupted for more than one
workday).
      (3)   A final project inspection shall be performed prior to scheduling
Council acceptance.
      (4)   The Public Works Inspector shall have the authority to:
         (a)   Certify that the construction and materials comply with the
approved construction plans and these regulations;
         (b)   Certify that material quantities comply with the approved
construction plans.
         (c)   Approve or reject materials and/or their installation in
accordance with the approved construction plans, specifications, and these
regulations;
         (d)   Suspend work with the concurrence of the Public Works Director.
   (J)   Site cleanup and finish grading. Prior to street and drainage system
acceptance, the right-of-way and drainage easements shall be cleared of all
construction trash and debris. Lots or other areas designated on the approved
plans requiring fill or grading shall also be completed.
   (K)   Maintenance guarantees. Street and stormwater management/drainage
systems that are to be dedicated to the Town of James Island for public
maintenance shall be under warranty for all defects and failures for a period
of two years. Prior to final plat approval, the developer shall provide written
verification of financial responsibility for correction of defects and/or
failures to systems to be dedicated to the town. The warranty (minimally
established at 10% of the construction cost) shall be in an amount satisfactory
to the Public Works Director and effective for a period of two years from Town
Council's acceptance date. The financial warranty shall be in the form of a no-
contest, irrevocable bank letter of credit, a performance and payment bond
underwritten by an acceptable South Carolina licensed corporate surety, or a
cashier's check. Payment is subject to Town Attorney approval of the guarantee
to determine that the interests of the Town of James Island are fully
protected. If a cashier's check is utilized, then the opinion of counsel may be
waived. The Public Works Department shall maintain surveillance over the system
and provide written notification to the landowner/developer if repair work is
required during the warranty period. The Public Works Department shall identify
defects not considered to be a public safety issue and notify the landowner/
developer of such defects. The landowner/developer shall have 30 days to
prepare and submit a schedule of corrective actions for approval by the Public
Works Director. If defects are not satisfactorily repaired within the approved
schedule, the Public Works Department will resolve the defects and bill the
bonding company accordingly. The Public Works Department shall address public
safety defects immediately. Subsequently, the bonding company will be billed
for reimbursement.
§ A.3.2 SECONDARY RURAL ROAD STANDARDS (MAXIMUM OF 10 LOTS).
   (A)   General design requirements.
      (1)   Required right-of-way: The minimum right-of-way width is 50'.
      (2)   Required minimum street section: Streets shall be constructed to
minimum earth street standards and have a minimum travel way width of 18'.
      (3)   Required minimum street elevations: The minimum street centerline
elevation at finish grade shall be 6.5' above mean sea level.
      (4)   Required minimum profile gradient: The minimum street profile
centerline gradient shall be 0.4% except for causeways where land areas
adjacent to the road embankment are jurisdictional wetlands or critical area.
      (5)   Street centerline minimum curve radius criteria: Street centerline
curve radii shall meet AASHTO guidelines for the design speed limit.
      (6)   Where streets are designed for less than a 30 mph speed limit, the
design professional shall provide supporting design data, including traffic
control signage.
      (7)   All roads shall be designed with a minimum road centerline radius
of 125'. Horizontal sight distances shall be considered in the design process.
Vertical curves shall have a minimum length of 100'.
   (B)   Roadway drainage design. The roadway drainage design must show, at a
minimum, how the drainage is directed away from the travel way.
   (C)   Construction plans and specifications.
      (1)   The construction plans shall clearly show all work to be performed
in plan view, profile, cross section, details, and specifications.
Specifications providing written descriptions of the work, workmanship,
appearance, materials, etc., and/or special provisions may either be shown on
the drawings or presented in booklet form separate from the drawings.
Specifications shall comply with the CTC (SS) or SCDOT (SS), unless otherwise
directed by the Public Works Director.
      (2)   The following standards shall be observed and the information
listed below shall be provided in the design and preparation of plans,
profiles, details, drainage plans, and written specifications for construction:
         (a)   Include a copy of the approved preliminary plat.
         (b)   Plans and profiles shall be prepared on 24" x 36" or 22" x 34"
sheets, having a profile at the bottom and a plan view at the top, with both
the plan and profile stationing oriented in the same direction.
         (c)   All elevations shall be referenced to the mean sea level datum
for NGVD 29.
         (d)   Scales shall be: vertical 1" = 2' and horizontal 1" = 50' or
larger.
      (3)   The following shall be shown in the plan view:
         (a)   Stations along the centerline of the proposed road with
appropriate ties at intersecting streets.
         (b)   The width of the right-of-way and names of proposed roads and
existing roads.
         (c)   Alignment information, curve data with P.C., P.T., and P.I.
angle points, as well as angles at intersections.
         (d)   Arrows indicating the direction of drainage flow within the
right-of-way.
         (e)   Size, type, and location of trees proposed to remain within the
clearing limits of the road right-of-way.
         (f)   DHEC/OCRM Critical Line and USACOE jurisdictional wetland
delineations which relate to the right-of-way or easements.
         (g)   Benchmarks with locations, descriptions, coordinates, datum,
etc.
         (h)   Details shall show sight distances, traffic control devices,
design speeds for roads and other related information.
         (i)   Other general construction details required to define the scope
of work.
      (4)   Profiles shall show:
         (a)   Existing street centerline elevations showing all breaks in
grade, but in no case more than 100' apart. Profiles shall include existing
streets to which ties are being made with elevations extending approximately
200' from the intersection.
         (b)   Proposed street centerline profile with centerline elevations
every 50' on vertical curves and at 100' along tangents and at intersections.
         (c)   Statement to be placed by design professionals on road and
drainage plans: "ALL MATERIALS AND WORKMANSHIP SHALL BE IN ACCORDANCE WITH
REQUIREMENTS OF THE TOWN OF JAMES ISLAND ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
REGULATIONS."
         (d)   Statement to be signed by the owner or the authorized agent of
the owner: "I certify as an agent for or as a record owner, lessee, or record
easement holder, I have, or will have prior to undertaking the work the
necessary approval or permission from all other persons with a legal interest
in said property to conduct the work proposed in the approved subdivision
construction plans."
   (D)   Clearing and grubbing. Except as otherwise stated herein, all
secondary rural road rights-of-way shall be cleared and grubbed for a minimum
width of 40'. Any/all tree canopies shall be pruned to a minimum height of 15'.
This work shall include the removal and disposal of all trees, stumps, brush,
rubbish, roots, and other objectionable materials.
§ A.3.3 PRIMARY RURAL ROAD STANDARDS.
   (A)   General design requirements.
      (1)   Required right-of-way: The minimum right-of-way width is 50'.
      (2)   Required minimum street section: Streets shall have a minimum
travel way width of 20'. The travel surface shall be at least equal to the type
of surface with which it is being connected (pavement, rock, or earth). If
development characteristics warrant, the Public Works Director can approve a
reduction in the surface type. Written requests for a reduction in surface type
shall be directed to the Public Works Director with an accompanying
justification statement.
      (3)   Required minimum street elevations: The minimum street centerline
elevation at finish grade shall be 6.5' above mean sea level.
      (4)   Required minimum profile gradient: The minimum street profile
centerline gradient shall be 0.4% except for causeways where land areas
adjacent to the road embankment are jurisdictional wetlands or critical areas.
      (5)   Street centerline minimum curve radius criteria: Street centerline
curve radii shall meet AASHTO guidelines for the design speed limit.
      (6)   Where streets are designed for less than a 30 mph speed limit, the
design professional shall provide supporting design data, including traffic
control signage.
      (7)   All roads shall be designed with a minimum road centerline radius
of 125'.
      (8)   Horizontal sight distances shall be considered in the design
process. Vertical curves shall have a minimum length of 100'.
   (B)   Roadway drainage design. For roadways with open roadside swale
ditches, the swale ditches shall be graded as shown on details in Article A.6.
The drainage plan shall show how the roadway drainage will be conveyed to an
outfall or wetland. Roadside swale drainage ditches and driveway pipes shall be
designed for a five (5) year average return frequency storm (minimum driveway
pipe size shall be 15" in diameter). Cross drains, outfall ditches and piped
systems shall be designed for a 10 year average return frequency storm. Average
return frequencies are defined in § A.4.2(D). Roadside ditch inverts shall
parallel the finished road longitudinal gradient except as otherwise approved
by the Public Works Director. Drainage shall not be carried in roadside ditches
for a distance exceeding 700' (accumulated distance) except as otherwise
approved by the Public Works Director.
   (C)   Construction plans and specifications.
      (1)   The construction plans shall clearly show all work to be performed
in plan view, profile, cross section, details, and specifications.
Specifications providing written descriptions of the work, workmanship,
appearance, materials, etc., and/or special provisions may either be shown on
the drawings or presented in booklet form separate from the drawings.
Specifications shall comply with the CTC (SS) or SCDOT (SS), unless otherwise
directed by the Public Works Director.
      (2)   The following standards shall be observed and the information
listed below shall be provided in the design and preparation of plans,
profiles, details, drainage plans, and written specifications for construction:
         (a)   Include a copy of the approved preliminary plat.
         (b)   Plans and profiles shall be prepared on 24" x 36" or 22" x 34"
sheets, having a profile at the bottom and a plan view at the top, with both
the plan and profile stationing oriented in the same direction.
         (c)   All elevations shall be referenced to the mean sea level datum
for NGVD 29.
         (d)   Scales shall be: vertical 1" = 2' and horizontal 1" = 50' or
larger.
      (3)   The following shall be shown in the plan view:
         (a)   Stations along the centerline of the proposed road with
appropriate ties at intersecting streets.
         (b)   The width of the right-of-way and names of proposed roads and
existing roads.
         (c)   Alignment information, curve data with P.C., P.T., and P.I.
angle points, as well as angles at intersections.
         (d)   Arrows indicating the direction of drainage flow within the
right-of-way.
         (e)   Size, type, and location of trees proposed to remain within a
road right-of-way or drainage easement.
         (f)   Existing and proposed drainage structures and drainage easements
along with rights-of-way and drainage way cross sections.
         (g)   DHEC/OCRM Critical Line and USACOE jurisdictional wetland
delineations which relate to the right-of-way or easements.
         (h)   Benchmarks with locations, descriptions, coordinates, datum,
etc.
         (i)   Details shall show pond outfall structures, sight distances,
traffic control devices, design speeds for roads, and other related
information.
         (j)   Other general construction details required to define the scope
of work.
      (4)   Profiles shall show:
         (a)   Existing street centerline elevations showing all breaks in
grade, but in no case more than 100' apart. Profiles shall include existing
streets to which ties are being made with elevations extending approximately
200' from intersections.
         (b)   Proposed street centerline profile with centerline elevations
every 50' on vertical curves and at every 100' along tangents and at
intersections.
         (c)   Vertical curve data.
         (d)   Proposed and existing storm drains, sanitary sewers, water
mains, pipe under drains, and cross line pipes.
         (e)   Statement to be placed by design professionals on road and
drainage plans: "ALL MATERIALS AND WORKMANSHIP SHALL BE IN ACCORDANCE WITH
REQUIREMENTS OF THE TOWN OF JAMES ISLAND ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
REGULATIONS."
         (f)   Statement to be signed by the owner or the authorized agent of
the owner: "I certify as an agent for or as a record owner, lessee, or record
easement holder, I have, or will have prior to undertaking the work the
necessary approval or permission from all other persons with a legal interest
in said property to conduct the work proposed in the approved subdivision
construction plans."
   (D)   Clearing and grubbing. Except as otherwise stated herein, all primary
rural road rights-of-way shall be cleared and grubbed for a minimum width of
50'. Any/all tree canopies shall be pruned to a minimum height of 15'. This
work shall include the removal and disposal of trees, stumps, brush, rubbish,
roots, and other objectionable materials.
   (E)   Clearing of drainage easements. The full width of all drainage
easements shall be cleared of trees, buildings, fences, stumps, brush, logs,
rubbish, roots, overhanging tree limbs, overhanging utility wires or cables, or
any other item that may, in the judgment of the Public Works Director,
interfere with the drainage facility or the maintenance of the facility.
Existing obstacles may be left in place upon approval of the Public Works
Director provided that all of the following criteria are met: a) the drainage
system or the obstacle cannot be easily relocated; b) adequate and safe
operational easement space for maintenance by mechanized equipment is provided;
c) the drainage way is not obstructed; and d) the drainage easement width is
increased to accommodate the obstructions.
§ A.3.4 SECONDARY TOWN ROAD STANDARDS.
   (B)   General design requirements.
      (1)   Required right-of-way:
         (a)   The minimum right-of-way width is 50'; however
         (b)   The road right-of-way must be of sufficient width to provide for
the following:
            1.   Drainage;
            2.   Pavement or rock travel way;
            3.   Shoulders;
            4.   Signage;
            5.   Trees; and
            6.   Utilities such as street lights and overhead/underground
utility lines (electric, telephone, cable TV, gas, water, and sewer).
      (2)   Required minimum street section: Streets shall have a minimum
travel way width of 22'. The travel surface shall be at least equal to the type
of surface with which it is being connected (pavement or rock). If development
characteristics warrant, the Public Works Director can approve a reduction in
the surface type. Written requests for a reduction in surface type shall be
directed to the Public Works Director with an accompanying justification
statement.
      (3)   Required minimum street elevations: The minimum street centerline
elevation at finish grade shall be 6.5' above mean sea level.
      (4)   Required minimum profile gradient: The minimum street profile
centerline gradient shall be 0.4% except for causeways where land areas
adjacent to the road embankment are jurisdictional wetlands or critical areas.
      (5)   Street centerline minimum curve radius criteria: Street centerline
curve radii shall meet AASHTO guidelines for the design speed limit.
      (6)   Where streets are designed for less than a 30 mph speed limit, the
design professional shall provide supporting design data, including traffic
control signage.
      (7)   All roads shall be designed with a minimum road centerline radius
of 125'. Horizontal sight distances shall be considered in the design process.
Vertical curves shall have a minimum length of 100'.
   (B)   General requirements for design of drainage systems. The design of
drainage facilities for a development must be done with consideration being
given to the entire drainage basin. Provisions must be made to receive and
manage runoff from upstream areas and to ensure that downstream areas are not
adversely impacted by discharges or runoff. The current zoning of upstream
properties and associated runoff factors representing that land use, assumed to
be fully developed, shall be used in determining design runoff rates and
quantities. It is not to be assumed that existing developed properties without
stormwater detention systems will have them in the future.
   (C)   Roadway drainage design.
      (1)   For roadways with open roadside swale ditches; the swale ditches
shall be graded as shown on details in Article A.6. The drainage plan shall
show the drainage basin areas contributing stormwater runoff to the roadside
ditches. Roadside swale drainage ditches and driveway pipes shall be designed
for a five (5) year average return frequency storm (minimum driveway pipe size
shall be 15" in diameter). Cross drains, outfall ditches and piped systems
shall be designed for a 10 year average return frequency storm. Average return
frequencies are defined in §
A.4.2(D). The invert elevation of the roadside swale ditch shall be no less
than 18" and no greater than 24" inches below the corresponding centerline
street finish grade elevation and longitudinal grades shall be no less than
0.4% nominal grade, unless otherwise approved by the Public Works Director.
Roadside ditch inverts shall parallel the finish road longitudinal gradient
except as approved by the Public Works Director. Drainage shall not be carried
in roadside ditches for a distance exceeding 700' (accumulated distance) except
as approved by the Public Works Director.
      (2)   Outfall ditches to wetland areas shall be piped for a minimum
length of 20' at their outfall ends; or an alternative means of defining
wetlands' limits for maintenance identification purposes shall be submitted for
consideration.
   (D)   Maintenance plan. 
      (1)   When detention or retention facilities are required by local or
state agencies or proposed by the design professional, a comprehensive
stormwater management system maintenance plan must be submitted for approval by
the Public Works Director. The maintenance plan shall address: frequency of
maintenance, disposal of material, access to the facility, and other site
specific data. The responsible entity shall acknowledge in writing their
maintenance obligation and their assent to the maintenance plan. All stormwater
runoff and maintenance requirements described herein shall be applicable.
      (2)   The Town of James Island will maintain public detention facilities
to ensure that public drainage systems function as designed (stage-storage
capacity of the ponds remain adequate). Any facility not maintained by the Town
of James Island shall be maintained by another responsible entity. Acceptable
arrangements for proper and perpetual maintenance shall be presented to the
Town of James Island at the time of the project's final construction
inspection. Detention ponds, lakes, or impoundments which function as a
conveyance of stormwater downstream of the proposed development require
dedicated drainage easements and maintenance shelves constructed along those
systems in accordance with these regulations, unless otherwise approved by the
Public Works Director.
   (E)   Construction plans and specifications.
      (1)   The construction plans shall clearly show all work to be performed
in plan view, profile, cross section, details, and specifications.
Specifications providing written descriptions of the work, workmanship,
appearance, materials, etc., and/or special provisions may either be shown on
the drawings or presented in booklet form separate from the drawings.
Specifications shall comply with the CTC (SS) or the SCDOT (SS), unless
otherwise directed by the Public Works Director.
      (2)   The following standards shall be observed and the information
listed below shall be provided in the design and preparation of plans,
profiles, details, drainage plans, and written specifications for construction:
         (a)   Include a copy of the approved preliminary plat.
         (b)   Plans and profiles shall be prepared on 24" x 36" or 22" x 34"
sheets, having a profile at the bottom and a plan view at the top, with both
the plan and profile stationing oriented in the same direction.
         (c)   All elevations shall be referenced to the mean sea level datum
for NGVD 29.
         (d)   Scales shall be: vertical 1" = 2' and horizontal 1" = 50' or
larger.
      (3)   The following shall be shown in the plan view:
         (a)   Stations along the centerline of the proposed road with
appropriate ties at intersecting streets.
         (b)   The width of the right-of-way and names of the proposed roads
and existing roads.
         (c)   Alignment information, including curve data with P.C., P.T., and
P.I. angle points, as well as angles at intersections.
         (d)   Arrows indicating the direction of drainage flow within the
right-of-way, along drainage ways, through lots, and at intersections.
         (e)   Existing and proposed utility lines and utility easements.
         (f)   Size, type, and location of trees proposed to remain within a
road right-of-way or drainage easement.
         (g)   Road cross sections with sidewalks (when required).
         (h)   Existing and proposed drainage structures and drainage easements
along with rights-of-way and drainage way cross sections.
         (i)   DHEC/OCRM Critical Line and USACOE jurisdictional wetlands.
         (j)   Details shall show pond outfall structures, sight distances,
traffic control devices, design speeds for roads, and other related
information.
         (k)   Benchmarks with locations, descriptions, coordinates, and datum,
etc. Other general construction details required to define the scope of work.
      (4)   Profiles shall show:
         (a)   Existing street centerline elevations showing all breaks in
grade, but in no case more than 100' apart. Profiles shall include existing
streets to which ties are being made with elevations extending approximately
200' from intersections.
         (b)   Proposed street centerline profile with centerline elevations
every 50' on vertical curves and at every 100' along tangents and at
intersections.
         (c)   Vertical curve data.
         (d)   Proposed and existing storm drains, sanitary sewers, water
mains, pipe under drains, and cross line pipes.
         (e)   Proposed grades of all ditches and swales on or off site. Show
existing grades of incoming and outfall drainage ways for 200' upstream/
downstream if no grade changes are proposed.
         (f)   An overall drainage plan shall be submitted along with the plans
and profiles and detail sheets.
            1.   The drainage plan sheet shall show the street layout and the
entire drainage system to be constructed or improved along with the sizes and
invert elevations of drainage pipes, the widths of proposed and existing
drainage easements, the direction of drainage flow (using arrows), detention
ponds, outfall structures, lot drainage, and existing canals, tidal streams,
etc.
            2.   The drainage plan shall include pertinent drainage data such
as drainage areas, runoff coefficients, times of concentration (with
computations), runoff volumes, soils data, detention pond routing, pond crest
elevations, and other related information.
      (5)   Statement to be placed by design professionals on road and drainage
plans: "ALL MATERIALS AND WORKMANSHIP SHALL BE IN ACCORDANCE WITH REQUIREMENTS
OF THE TOWN OF JAMES ISLAND ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS."
      (6)   Statement to be signed by the owner or the authorized agent of the
owner: "I certify as an agent for or as a record owner, lessee, or record
easement holder, I have, or will have prior to undertaking the work the
necessary approval or permission from all other persons with a legal interest
in said property to conduct the work proposed in the approved subdivision
construction plans."
   (F)   Clearing and grubbing. Except as otherwise stated herein, all
secondary town road rights-of-way shall be cleared and grubbed for the full
width of the right-of-way. Any/all tree canopies shall be pruned to a minimum
height of 15'. This work shall include the removal and disposal of all trees,
stumps, brush, rubbish, roots, and other objectionable materials.
   (G)   Clearing of drainage easements. The full width of all drainage
easements shall be cleared of all trees, buildings, fences, stumps, brush,
logs, rubbish, roots, overhanging tree limbs, overhanging utility wires or
cables, or any other item that may, in the judgment of the Public Works
Director, interfere with the drainage facility or the maintenance of the
facility. Existing obstacles may be left in place upon approval of the Public
Works Director provided that all of the following criteria are met: a) the
drainage system or the obstacle cannot be easily relocated; b) adequate and
safe operational easement space for maintenance by mechanized equipment is
provided; c) the drainage way is not obstructed; and d) the drainage easement
width is increased to accommodate the obstructions.
§ A.3.5 PRIMARY TOWN ROAD STANDARDS.
   (A)   General design requirements.
      (1)   Required right-of-way:
         (a)   The minimum right-of-way width is 50'; however
         (b)   The road right-of-way must be of sufficient width to provide for
the following:
            1.   Drainage;
            2.   Pavement and curb and gutter;
            3.   Shoulders;
            4.   Trees;
            5.   Signage;
            6.   Sidewalks where installed (or required); and
            7.   Utilities such as street lights and overhead/underground
utility lines (electric, telephone, cable TV, gas, water, and sewer).
      (2)   Required minimum street section:
         (a)   Streets shall be constructed as paved streets and conform to
details in Article A.6.
         (b)   Streets shall be constructed with curb and gutter; and
         (c)   Streets shall have a minimum travel way width of 24'.
      (3)   Required minimum street elevations: The minimum street centerline
elevation at finish grade shall be 6.5' above mean sea level.
      (4)   Required minimum profile gradient:
         (a)   The minimum street profile centerline gradient shall be 0.4%
except for causeways where land areas adjacent to the road embankment are
jurisdictional wetlands or critical areas.
         (b)   Additionally, for streets using an asphalt gutter, a minimum
centerline gradient of 0.5% is required.
      (5)   Street centerline minimum curve radius criteria:
         (a)   Street centerline curve radii shall meet AASHTO guidelines for
the design speed limit.
         (b)   Where streets are designed for less than a 30 mph speed limit,
the design professional shall provide supporting design data, including traffic
control signage.
         (c)   All roads shall be designed with a minimum road centerline
radius of 125'.
         (d)   Horizontal sight distances shall be considered in the design
process.
         (e)   Vertical curves shall have a minimum length of 100'.
   (B)   Type of curb and gutter.
      (1)   Concrete curb and gutter:
         (a)   Either upright curb and gutter or roll curb and gutter may be
used (see details in Article A.6). The minimum width for the upright curb and
gutter shall be 1" and 2' for roll curb and gutter. The maximum If upright curb
and gutter is utilized, driveway entrances for subdivision lots shall be shown
on the construction plans and constructed as part of the development.
         (b)   The distance between expansion joints unless specified otherwise
herein, shall be in accordance with the CTC (SS) or the SCDOT (SS).
      (2)   Asphalt curb and gutter: Asphalt curb and gutter sections shall be
submitted for approval. All work, materials, methods, and equipment, unless
specified otherwise herein, shall be in accordance with the CTC (SS) or the
SCDOT (SS).
   (C)   General requirements for design of drainage systems.
      (1)   The design of drainage facilities for a development must be done
with consideration being given to the entire drainage basin. Provisions must be
made to receive and manage runoff from upstream areas and to ensure that
downstream areas are not adversely impacted by discharges or runoff. The
current zoning of upstream properties and associated runoff factors
representing that land use, assumed to be fully developed, shall be used in
determining design runoff rates and quantities. It is not to be assumed that
existing developed properties without stormwater detention systems will have
them in the future.
      (2)   Also, drainage design requirements for the entire development shall
conform to §
A.4.2.
   (D)   Roadway drainage design.
      (1)   Stormwater systems conveying flow to or from streets shall be piped
unless otherwise approved by the Public Works Director.
      (2)   Curb inlet structures shall be located so that drainage shall not
be carried in gutters for a distance exceeding 500' (accumulated distance). The
five (5) year average return frequency storm shall not cause water to flow onto
the road for a width greater than 5'. Culvert piping running longitudinally
with the street shall not be located under the pavement or curb and gutter, nor
shall it conflict with the normal location of under drains.
   (E)   Subsurface drainage.
      (1)   Where pipe under drains are required, their centerline shall be
located 2.5', at a minimum, behind the back of the curb and they shall be
properly connected to a permanent drainage outlet, such as a catch basin,
junction box, or a manhole.
      (2)   Piped under drains shall conform to the under drain details in
Article A.6. Under drain inverts shall be a minimum of 24" below the bottom of
the curb and above any static lake/pond elevation.
      (3)   Suitable outlets for the pipe under drains shall be provided in the
drainage system design.
      (4)   Pipe under drains shall be installed at low points in the grade on
both sides of the street for a minimum distance of 100' in each direction along
the street; except at locations where the design engineer can demonstrate to
the satisfaction of the Public Works Director that the water table will not be
within 24" of centerline subgrade elevation.
      (5)   Pipe under drains, where required, shall be installed before the
base course is placed.
      (6)   Pipe under drains shall be placed in other locations as determined
by the design professional or as required by the Public Works Director during
construction.
      (7)   Pipe under drains shall be properly laid on grade and in accordance
with these specifications and the CTC (SS) or the SCDOT (SS) and shall not be
covered until they have been inspected and approved by the Town of James Island
Public Works Department.
      (8)   Alternative under drain designs shall be presented to the Public
Works Director for review and approval.
   (F)   Maintenance plan.
      (1)   When detention or retention facilities are required by local or
state agencies or proposed by the design professional, a comprehensive
stormwater management system maintenance plan must be submitted for approval by
the Public Works Director. The maintenance plan shall address: frequency of
maintenance, disposal of material, access to the facility, and other site
specific data. The responsible entity shall acknowledge in writing their
maintenance obligation and their assent to the maintenance plan. All stormwater
runoff and maintenance requirements described herein shall be applicable.
      (2)   The Town of James Island will maintain public detention facilities
to ensure that public drainage systems function as designed (stage-storage
capacity of the ponds remain adequate). Any facility not maintained by the Town
of James Island shall be maintained by another responsible entity. Acceptable
arrangements for proper and perpetual maintenance shall be presented to the
Town of James Island at the time of the project's final construction
inspection. Detention ponds, lakes, or impoundments which function as a
conveyance of stormwater downstream of the proposed development shall require
dedicated drainage easements and maintenance shelves constructed along those
systems in accordance with these regulations, unless otherwise approved by the
Public Works Director.
   (G)   Construction plans and specifications.
      (1)   The construction plans shall clearly show all work to be performed
in plan view, profile, cross section, details, and specifications.
Specifications providing written descriptions of the work, workmanship,
appearance, materials, etc., and/or special provisions may either be shown on
the drawings or presented in booklet form separate from the drawings.
Specifications shall comply with the CTC (SS) or the SCDOT (SS), unless
otherwise directed by the Public Works Director.
      (2)   The following standards shall be observed and the information
listed below shall be provided in the design and preparation of plans,
profiles, details, drainage plans, and written specifications for construction:
         (a)   Include a copy of the approved preliminary plat.
         (b)   Plans and profiles shall be prepared on 24" x 36" or 22" x 34"
sheets, having a profile at the bottom and a plan view at the top, with both
the plan and profile stationing oriented in the same direction.
         (c)   All elevations shall be referenced to the mean sea level datum
for NGVD 29).
         (d)   Scales shall be: vertical 1" = 2' and horizontal 1" = 50' or
larger.
         (e)   The following must be shown in the plan view:
            1.   Names of the proposed roads and existing stations along the
centerline of the proposed road with appropriate ties at intersecting streets.
            2.   The width of the right-of-way and roads.
            3.   Alignment information, including curve data with P.C., P.T.,
and P.I. angle points, as well as angles at intersections.
            4.   Arrows indicating the direction of drainage flow within the
right-of-way, along drainage ways, through lots, and at intersections.
            5.   Existing and proposed utility lines and utility easements.
            6.   Size, type, and location of trees proposed to remain within a
road right-of-way or drainage easement.
            7.   Road cross sections with pedestrian paths (when required).
            8.   Existing and proposed drainage structures and drainage
easements along with rights-of-way and drainage way cross sections.
            9.    DHEC/OCRM Critical Line and USACOE jurisdictional wetlands.
            10.   Benchmarks with locations, descriptions, coordinates, and
datum, etc.
            11.   Details shall show pond outfall structures, sight distances,
traffic control devices, design speeds for roads, and other related
information.
            12.   Other general construction details required to define the
scope of work.
         (f)   Profiles shall show:
            1.   Existing street centerline elevations, showing all breaks in
grade, but in no case more than 100' apart. Profiles shall include existing
streets to which ties are being with elevations extending approximately 200'
from intersections.
            2.   Proposed street centerline profile with centerline elevations
every 50' on vertical curves and at every 100' along tangents and at
intersections.
            3.   Vertical curve data.
            4.   Proposed and existing storm drains, sanitary sewers, water
mains, pipe under drains, and cross line pipes.
            5.   Proposed grades of all ditches and swales on or off site. Show
existing grades of incoming and outfall drainage ways for 200' upstream/
downstream if no grade changes are proposed. An overall drainage plan shall be
submitted along with the plans and profiles and detail sheets.
         (g)   An overall drainage plan shall be submitted along with the plans
and profiles and detailed sheets.
            1.   The drainage plan sheet shall show the street layout and the
entire drainage system to be constructed or improved, along with the sizes and
invert elevations of drainage pipes, the widths of proposed and existing
drainage easements, the direction of drainage flow (using arrows), detention
ponds, outfall structures, lot drainage, and existing canals, tidal streams,
etc.
            2.   The drainage plan shall include pertinent drainage data such
as drainage areas, runoff coefficients, times of concentration (with
computations), runoff volumes, soils data, detention pond routing, pond crest
elevations, and other related information.
         (h)   Statement to be placed by design professionals on road and
drainage plans: "ALL MATERIALS AND WORKMANSHIP SHALL BE IN ACCORDANCE WITH
REQUIREMENTS OF THE TOWN OF JAMES ISLAND ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
REGULATIONS."
         (i)   Statement to be signed by the owner or the authorized agent of
the owner: "I certify as an agent for or as a record owner, lessee, or record
easement holder, I have, or will have prior to undertaking the work the
necessary approval or permission from all other persons with a legal interest
in said property to conduct the work proposed in the approved subdivision
construction plans."
   (H)   Piping and easements. Unless justification is provided, to the
satisfaction of the Public Works Director, all drainage easements within the
urban areas of the town shall be required to be piped except: a) swales with
depths less than 24" having 5:1 side slopes and wholly contained within the
easement, and b) canals (designed for a capacity exceeding that of an
equivalent 36" diameter pipe).
   (I)   Clearing and grubbing.
      (1)   Except as otherwise stated herein, all primary town road rights-of-
way shall be cleared and grubbed for the full width of the right-of-way. Any/
all tree canopies shall be pruned to a minimum height of 15'. This work shall
include the removal and disposal of trees, stumps, brush, rubbish, roots, and
other objectionable materials.
      (2)   For streets constructed with upright or roll curb and gutter,
selected specimen trees may be permitted to remain within the right-of-way when
the following conditions are met:
         (a)   Trees are healthy, of aesthetic value, and are firmly rooted
with the base of the tree being at or near the elevation of the curb or edge of
pavement.
         (b)   The distance from the back of the curb to the nearest face of
the tree is not less than 5'.
         (c)   Additional right-of-way is provided where necessary.
      (3)   Where under drains are required, the tree(s) shall be removed or
the right-of-way shall be relocated.
   (J)   Clearing of drainage easements. The full width of all drainage
easements shall be cleared of all trees, buildings, fences, stumps, brush,
logs, rubbish, roots, overhanging tree limbs, overhanging utility wires or
cables, or any other item that may, in the judgment of the Public Works
Director, interfere with the drainage facility or the maintenance of the
facility. Existing obstacles may be left in place upon approval of the Public
Works Director provided that all of the following criteria are met: a) the
drainage system or the obstacle cannot be easily relocated; b) adequate and
safe operational easement space for maintenance by mechanized equipment is
provided; c) the drainage way is not obstructed; and d) the drainage easement
width is increased to accommodate the obstructions.
§ A.3.6 NON-STANDARD TOWN ROAD STANDARDS.
   (A)   General design requirements.
      (1)   Required right-of-way: The minimum right-of-way width shall be the
width of the traveled way plus 5' on either side.
      (2)   Required minimum road section: Roads are not constructed to minimum
earth road standards.
      (3)   Required minimum road elevations: The minimum road centerline
elevation at finish grade shall be 6.5' above mean sea level, if possible.
      (4)   Required minimum profile gradient: N/A.
      (5)   Road centerline minimum curve radius criteria: N/A.
   (B)   Roadway drainage design. The roadway drainage design must show, at a
minimum, how the drainage is directed away from the travel way.
   (C)   Construction plans and specifications. N/A.
ARTICLE A.4 - DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS
§ A.4.1 ROAD DESIGN.
   (A)   Street intersection layout. Street intersections shall not include
more than four street approaches. Streets shall be designed to intersect at
right angles whenever possible. Sight distance easements shall be shown and
dedicated on the record drawings of the development, and should reflect a
triangular area as determined by details in Article A.6. Within this triangle,
there shall be no sight-obscuring or partial sight-obscuring wall, fence, sign,
or full-grown foliage higher than 30" above the edge of pavement. In the case
of trees, there shall be no foliage lower than 15' above the top of curb grade
when foliage is saturated with rain. Vertical measurement shall be made by the
Public Works Director from the top of the nearest curb or, if no curb exists,
from the edge of the nearest traveled roadway finish-grade surface. Offsets of
local streets shall have a minimum of 125' between centerlines.
   (B)   Traffic control and road name signs.
      (1)   All traffic control and road name signs shall be installed at no
cost to the town as part of the development. The design professional shall show
the location and type of signs to be installed on the construction plans and
specifications. All traffic control signs shall conform to the requirements of
the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways. All
road name signs in proposed publicly maintained rights-of-ways should be
constructed as indicated by details in Article A.6.
      (2)   In the event a road name sign is request on a town non-standard
road, approval must be obtained from the Town Public Works Department. Details
and color-coding are indicated in Article A.6.
   (C)   ADA requirements. All pedestrian ways and curb construction shall be
in accordance with the latest edition of the Americans with Disabilities Act
Accessibility Guidelines (ADAAG).
   (D)   Specific right-of-way information.
      (1)   Causeways. Streets to be constructed on causeways shall meet all of
the requirements contained within these specifications and the causeway shall
also meet the following requirements:
         (a)   The minimum street centerline elevation at finish grade shall be
6.5' above mean sea level.
         (b)   The minimum side slopes shall be 2:1, preferably 3:1(horizontal/
vertical).
         (c)   The minimum top width of the roadway shall be as defined by the
road classification plus 6' wide shoulders (as measured from the edge of travel
way to the face of the guide rail) if SCDOT standard guide rails are
constructed. If no guide rails are constructed, 9' wide shoulders shall be
required on each side of the travel way.
         (d)   The developer shall provide copies of the approved permits or
application ID numbers from all applicable regulatory agencies should expanding
the causeway roadbed beyond the toe of the original roadbed be required.
      (2)   Bridges. Bridges shall be designed in accordance with the AASHTO
Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges, current edition and interims, as
well as meet the following requirements:
         (a)   Live load: HS 20-44 loading or an alternate military loading,
whichever produces the greatest stress.
         (b)   The minimum travel way centerline elevation shall be 6.5' above
mean sea level.
         (c)   The minimum width of the bridge shall be 24' clear roadway
width.
         (d)   The minimum clear width for all bridges on streets with curbed
approaches should be the same as the curb to curb width of the approaches, but
not less than 24' clear roadway width.
         (e)   For streets with shoulders and no curbs, the clear bridge width
preferably should be the same as the roadway width. However, in no case should
it be less than 24' or the travel way width plus 2' each side, whichever is
greater.
         (f)   Pedestrian ways on the approaches shall be carried across all
new structures.
         (g)   SCDOT standard guide rails shall be required.
         (h)   All bridges shall be concrete structures supported on concrete
piles.
         (i)   The developer shall provide copies of approved permits from
applicable regulatory agencies for the construction of bridges.
         (j)   The Public Works Director may consider design alternatives to
the aforementioned standards. Any request for design alternatives must be
submitted in writing and include details and justifications for each requested
alternative. Written approval by the Public Works Director of the requested
alternative is required prior to proceeding with construction.
      (3)   Stub streets. Stub streets extending to the boundary or property
line of the subdivision shall be constructed simultaneously with the other
streets in the development and shall be constructed in the same manner.
      (4)   Cul-de-sac streets. Cul-de-sacs shall be provided at the terminus
of closed end streets with minimum dimensions as indicated below.
         (a)   Circular turnaround: See details in Article A.6.
         (b)   Y or T turnaround: Permissible only where a cul-de-sac street
serves 20 dwelling units or less and upon approval by the Public Works
Director. The design engineer must demonstrate that the road configuration will
allow both emergency and service vehicles to turn around.
      (5)   Temporary cul-de-sacs. Temporary cul-de-sacs shall be provided when
incremental road construction and/or phasing is requested by the developer.
Temporary cul-de-sacs shall be constructed as required by this section. Unpaved
temporary cul-de-sacs shall require an additional 2" (compacted depth) of base
course.
      (6)   Construction access. The design professional shall identify the
development's construction access routes and submit its proposed road section
and surface course design for approval by the Public Works Director.
      (7)   Inverted crown roads. The use of inverted crown roads will require
the written approval of the Public Works Director. Requests for the use of an
inverted crown road shall be in writing and include an explanation of why a
typical crown roadway section cannot be used. Inverted crown roads shall only
be considered for paved road surfaces.
   (E)   Pedestrians ways within publicly dedicated right-of-way. When placed
within the public right-of-way, pedestrian ways shall be constructed as
specified below:
      (1)   Asphalt sidewalk:
         (a)   An asphalt sidewalk shall have a minimum asphalt thickness of 1-
1/2" inches and a minimum base course thickness of 4". The minimum width for
pedestrian ways shall be 4'. All work, materials, methods, and equipment,
unless specified otherwise herein, shall be in accordance with the CTC (SS) or
the SCDOT (SS).
         (b)   For additional ADA requirements see division (D)(2) above.
      (2)   Concrete sidewalk: A concrete sidewalk shall have a minimum
thickness of 4" except at driveways where the minimum thickness shall be 6".
Transverse expansion joints shall be placed at intervals of not more than 50'.
The minimum width for pedestrian ways shall be 4'. All work, materials,
methods, and equipment, unless specified otherwise herein, shall be in
accordance with the CTC (SS) or the SCDOT (SS).
   (F)   Road surfaces types.
      (1)   Earth roads.
         (a)   The town standard earth roadway is identical in cross section to
a town standard paved road except that roadbed stabilization may require that
material be mixed into the existing soil material, as needed, to a depth of 6"
to achieve suitable compaction. The crown shall be 6". Town Public Works'
inspectors will determine whether the prepared subgrade material and earth road
overlay soil are acceptable.
         (b)   A suitable soil is required for a minimum depth of 18" to
provide a street that will serve the traffic needs in extremely dry, normal,
and in wet weather. Where necessary, a stabilizing type soil shall be added and
properly mixed with the soil in place for a depth of not less than .6".
         (c)   Earth roads, when intersecting with an existing paved road,
shall have a paved apron extending to the paved road's right-of-way and when
intersecting with a rocked road, shall have a rocked apron extending to the
rocked road's right-of-way.
      (2)   Rock roads.
         (a)   The town standard rock roadway is also identical in cross
section to a town standard paved road except that the subgrade is mixed with a
4" minimum aggregate base course worked into the top 2" of the existing
subgrade, creating a 6" deep compacted rock surface, meeting the CTC (SS) or
the SCDOT (SS). The road crown shall be a minimum of 6". The rock material
shall be Crusher-Run granite aggregate unless otherwise approved by the Public
Works Director.
         (b)   Rocked roads, when intersecting with an existing paved road,
shall have a paved apron extending to the edge of the paved road's right-of-
way.
      (3)   Paved roads. The town standard paved roadway is shown in detail in
Article A.6. The town standard asphalt pavement is a minimum 2"compacted hot
plant mix asphaltic concrete meeting the CTC (SS) or the SCDOT (SS) type one,
or equal. Asphaltic concrete material is to be placed on a minimum compacted
base course meeting the CTC (SS) or the SCDOT (SS), and an approved subgrade
(see pavement design below).
   (G)   Pavement design.
      (1)   Pavement base and surface courses.
         (a)   The base course shall meet the CTC (SS) or the SCDOT (SS). The
width of the base course shall be 12" greater than the width of the surface
course; i.e., 6" on each side of the roadway. The compacted depth of the base
course shall be 6" or greater as approved by the Public Works Director. After
the base course has been properly blended, mixed, wetted, shaped, and compacted
to the approved typical section and has been seasoned sufficiently and proof-
rolled, the surface course shall be applied. Proof-rolling shall be
accomplished as described in the CTC (SS) or the SCDOT (SS) for the proof-
rolling of the subgrade except that the minimum total weight of the testing
vehicle shall be in the 30-35 ton range.
         (b)   The surface course materials, placement, and protection shall
meet the requirements of the SCDOT (SS) type C or equal. The compacted depth of
the surface course shall be no less than 2" or greater as approved by the
Public Works Director. Weather and seasonal restrictions to placement of the
bituminous materials are described in the CTC (SS) or the SCDOT (SS).
      (2)   Pavement section for typical residential roadway.
         (a)   The town standard asphalt pavement section for use on
residential roadways is a minimum 2" compacted hot plant mix asphaltic concrete
meeting the CTC (SS) or the SCDOT (SS), type one or equal. This material is to
be placed on a 6" minimum compacted base course meeting the CTC (SS) Section
306, and an approved subgrade. A prime coat meeting the CTC (SS) or the SCDOT
(SS) is required when the base course will not be paved within two weeks.
         (b)   Roadways serving large residential areas or phased subdivisions
may require pavement designs, exceeding the minimum requirements, as determined
by the Public Works Director.
      (3)   Pavement design for commercial/ industrial use roadways. The design
engineer shall provide a pavement design for all roadways that serve commercial
and industrial uses. The design shall include at a minimum 2" of compacted hot
plant mix asphaltic concrete meeting the CTC (SS) or the SCDOT (SS) type one,
or equal, and a minimum 6" of compacted base course meeting the CTC (SS) or the
SCDOT (SS), with an approved subgrade. The pavement design shall include
information on anticipated traffic counts, traffic loadings, and site-specific
soils. Further, the Public Works Director may require other pertinent
information. A site-specific geotechnical report prepared by a geotechnical
engineer shall be provided to substantiate/justify the proposed design for the
entire length of the roadways to be constructed. A prime coat meeting the CTC
(SS) or the SCDOT (SS) is required when the base course will not be paved
within two weeks.
      (4)   Alternative pavement designs. The town will consider alternative
pavement materials designs. The design professional should present appropriate
design data including laboratory tests of foundation soils to substantiate/
justify the proposal.
   (H)   Road construction.
      (1)   Soil testing.
         (a)   The Public Works Director will determine the quality of
foundation soils by visual observations and adequate soil testing provided by
the design professional. Without such testing, the Public Works Director will
utilize judgment and experience to determine the quality of the foundation
material and shall require appropriate action including, but not limited to,
undercutting or mucking and replacing the excavated material with suitable
earth materials. The soil-testing program shall be presented to, and approved
by, the Public Works Director prior to the beginning of the testing. The
testing program shall show the number and approximate locations of borings,
sampling depths, and type of test to be made. Ample notice of testing schedules
shall be given and a copy of all results, including recommendations, shall be
provided upon completion of the tests.
         (b)   The testing program may establish levels or degrees of testing.
For example, the testing program may call for a minimum number of tests for
determination of general soil classifications and water table data for
preliminary site evaluation. For the design of pavement, the testing program
shall include, but is not limited to, the determination of the maximum
elevation of the groundwater table, the soil classification according to the
Unified Soil Classification System (laboratory test determination), and the
California Bearing Ratio (CBR) (laboratory test determination utilizing 96-hour
saturation). Proctor testing for determination of optimum moisture and maximum
density using the modified Proctor-Test ASTM D l557 Method A, and field
moisture and density tests may be required by the Public Works Director.
      (2)   Grading.
         (a)   Streets shall be graded to the designed typical section in
accordance with the approved plans and profiles. Grade stakes shall be set on
centerlines at intervals of not more than 100' on tangent grades and not more
than 50' on vertical curves. Additional grade stakes may be required to ensure
that the final grade matches the designed typical section in the profile.
         (b)   Grading work, materials, methods, and equipment, unless approved
otherwise, shall be in accordance with the requirements of the CTC (SS) or the
SCDOT (SS).
         (c)   No base or surfacing materials shall be placed before the
subgrade is inspected and approved by the Public Works Director.
         (d)   In general, soils classified lower than "SC," according to the
Unified Soil Classification System, are not acceptable for the upper 24" of the
subgrade.
         (e)   The compacted subgrade shall be proof-rolled prior to placement
of any base or surfacing materials. Testing shall be performed in the presence
of the Public Works Director. The testing procedure shall consist of driving a
loaded tandem truck (10 cubic yard minimum load capacity, 3,035 ton minimum
total weight), or other equivalent vehicle (as determined by the Public Works
Director) at slow-walking speed longitudinally along the length of the roadway
test area. Any areas exhibiting pumping or breaking of the surface shall be
stabilized or removed to appropriate depth and replaced with suitable material,
recompacted, and retested.
      (3)   Subgrade.
         (a)   Work shall consist of the construction and preparation of the
subgrade – that part of the roadway intended to receive the base course,
pavement, pedestrian way, curb, curb and gutter, and/or shoulders.
      (b)   Roads shall be graded to the designed typical section in accordance
with the approved plan and profile, and shall be free of roots, trash, and
other unsuitable materials for a minimum depth of 24" below the finished
subgrade.
      (c)   A suitable soil is required for a minimum depth of 18" immediately
below the base course to provide a road that will serve the traffic needs in
extremely dry, normal, and in wet weather. Where necessary, a stabilizing type
soil shall be added and properly mixed with the soil in place for a depth of
not less than 6".
      (d)   When unstable material is encountered and it is necessary to
perform mucking work, the roadway shall be mucked for its entire width, ditch
line to ditch line or extending 2' beyond the backs of curbs; backfilled with a
suitable, stable-type soil; and properly compacted. All objectionable loose
rock or boulders shall be removed or broken off to a depth of not less than 24"
below the surface of the subgrade.
      (e)   The subgrade is to be sufficiently wetted and shall be compacted
for a width extending 2' outside the edges of the proposed pavement before the
base course is placed.
      (f)   The subgrade, from a distance of 24" outside the area to be
occupied by the pavement or curb and gutter, shall be compacted to not less
than 95% of maximum density. The compaction shall be accomplished by using
suitable construction procedures with the subgrade at optimum construction
moisture content. Sprinkling to secure proper compaction may wet the subgrade.
ASTM D 1557 Method A will determine maximum densities.
      (g)   The subgrade shall be maintained in a smooth and compacted
condition, free from ruts and depressions, and shall be adequately drained. In
no case shall any base, surface course or pavement be placed on a frozen,
muddy, or unstable subgrade. Storing or stockpiling of materials directly on
the subgrade will not be permitted except with the approval of the Public Works
Director.
      (4)   Seeding and mulching. All unpaved areas within the right-of-way
shall be seeded and mulched. The developer shall be responsible for maintenance
of such seeded and mulched areas as described in the CTC (SS) or the SCDOT (SS)
until the street and/or drainage system is accepted into the town maintenance
system.
§ A.4.2 DRAINAGE DESIGN.
   (A)   Design methods and criteria. The design professional may use generally
accepted design procedures to determine runoff quantities. The Modified
Rational Method or the Modified Soil Conservation Service Method is typically
used by the Town of James Island Public Works Department to review submitted
designs. The design professional shall submit data showing the drainage basin,
the location of areas of differing imperviousness, the runoff factors for each
zone of imperviousness, and the data for rainfall and time factors used in the
determination of peak runoff rates. The design should consider seasonal high
water table elevations. The design must take into consideration the channeled
runoff. The design shall comply with water quality standards established by
federal, state, and local regulations.
   (B)   Approved outfalls.
      (1)   All street and development drainage shall be discharged into
either:
         (a)   A tidal stream of adequate size;
         (b)   A running stream with continuous flow (freshwater creek or
river) of adequate size;
         (c)   An existing drainage way (pipe, ditch, or canal) of adequate
size for which there is an adequate easement, and which is maintained by the
Town of James Island or another responsible public agency; or
         (d)   A wetland or critical area capable of receiving the discharge
without it negatively impacting any property adjacent thereto.
      (2)   The outlet or receiving area must be of sufficient size and grade,
etc. to receive the anticipated quantity of runoff from each contributing
drainage basin along the route of the outlet in addition to the anticipated
increase in quantity of runoff from the subject development. Where the proposed
outlet ends, or near the South Carolina DHEC-OCRM Critical Line, the
construction plans shall clearly show that there is an outlet of adequate size
and slope to the final point of discharge. The entire length of the outlet,
except approved portions within the South Carolina DHEC-OCRM Critical Area,
shall be constructed on dedicated drainage easements with cleared, stable
maintenance shelves for continued maintenance of the drainage way. The entire
development's outlet, from sources of collection of runoff to final point of
discharge, shall be evaluated by the design professional and upgraded by the
developer as deemed necessary by the Public Works Director at no cost to the
town.
   (C)   Drainage and other work involving another public agency. When drainage
is discharged into a drainage way maintained by, or intended for maintenance
by, a public agency other than Town of James Island Public Works, or if work is
to be done within the road right-of-way of a public agency other than the Town
of James Island, written approval must be obtained from that public agency. A
copy of this approval must be furnished to the Public Works Director prior to
commencing work.
   (D)   Rainfall determination.
      (1)   The peak runoff rates shall be determined based on the storm time/
rainfall rate following a pattern Type-III Rainfall Hydrograph as defined in
the Soil Conservation Service Manual TR-55.
      (2)   The design recurrence interval shall be taken to be 10 years for
the collector system within the subject development, 25 years for any channeled
drainage flowing through the development, and 25 years for any primary outfall
drainage way from the development.
      (3)   Average return frequencies (24 hour) are defined as:
         (a)   1-year: 3.8 inches;
         (b)   2-year: 4.6 inches;
         (c)   5-year: 5.9 inches;
         (d)   10-year: 7.0 inches;
         (e)   25-year: 8.0 inches;
         (f)   50-year: 8.9 inches;
         (g)   100-year: 10.2 inches; or
         (h)   As revised by the South Carolina State Climatology Office.
   (E)   Detention pond design criteria.
      (1)   The peak release rate of stormwater from all developments where
detention is utilized shall not exceed the peak stormwater runoff rate from the
area in its pre-developed state for all intensities, up to and including the
25-year frequency storm.
      (2)   The design professional shall provide information required to
support the pond design shown. Calculations shall be signed and sealed by the
design professional and shall include stage-storage volumes, areas, depths,
summary information (to include pond crest information, outfall flow rates, and
computer program information), etc. Pond design shall include the proposed
static water level and the two-year, 10-year, and 25-year frequency storm crest
elevations. These elevations shall be shown on the drainage plans, as well as
the proposed 1' contour lines from the pond bottom to 1' above the 25-year
frequency storm crest elevation.
      (3)   Static water elevation in ponds shall not be less than 3' below the
finished centerline elevation of the road in the general area and ponds shall
not encroach on the road right-of-way at any time.
      (4)   The design should provide outfall structures that are low
maintenance in nature as approved by the Public Works Director.
      (5)   The design shall provide an emergency spillway. The location,
structure, invert elevations, and outlet of the emergency spillway shall be
shown on the construction plans. The design shall address the 50-year and 100-
year frequency storm flow rates through the emergency spillway to an approved
outfall (drainage easements will be required for the emergency outfall route).
Projected flood limits on downstream properties for these storm flow rates are
also to be shown on the drainage plan.
      (6)   All detention facilities that require public maintenance shall be
provided with access for maintenance via a constructed 30' wide drainage right-
of-way from the nearest road to the facility. Plans shall include a barrier
structure at the primary road right-of-way to limit vehicular access. The
detention facility or pond shall include a 20' wide cleared shelf with easement
around the top perimeter of the facility for maintenance access.
      (7)   For all publicly maintained detention facilities, a public drainage
easement shall be dedicated over the entire facility, including the outfall and
emergency spillway. For privately-maintained detention facilities, a private
drainage right-of-way must provide access to the pond, the pond's outfall, and
all areas defined by the pond maintenance plan.
      (8)   Dry ponds shall be designed with 3:1 (horizontal: vertical) side
slopes and shall drain dry within 72 hours.
      (9)   Retention or wet ponds shall be designed with 3:1 (horizontal:
vertical) side slopes above the static water level and 2:1 (horizontal:
vertical) side slopes below the static water level; shall have a minimum depth
of 6'; and shall be stocked with mosquito larvae-eating fish. Town of James
Island Mosquito Control should be consulted regarding fish stocking
information.
   (F)   Infiltration/exfiltration drainage systems.
      (1)   The Town of James Island will discourage any drainage system that
is dependent solely upon infiltration/exfiltration of stormwater runoff for the
proper functioning of the system.
      (2)   Any such system shall be approved only by specific authority of the
Public Works Director shall approve any such system.
      (3)   The Town of James Island will not maintain or be responsible for
any infiltration/exfiltration facilities. Any such facility shall be maintained
by a responsible entity of, or for, the development, and arrangements for
proper and perpetual maintenance shall be guaranteed to the Town of James
Island prior to the approval of the development.
   (G)   Additional road drainage requirements.
      (1)   The Public Works Director will independently evaluate any storm
drainage piping (other than cross-line pipes) designed to be placed at a depth
or location such that the repair of that culvert would adversely impact the
flow of vehicular traffic. Culvert piping crossing under the street shall be at
an angle of not more than 30 degrees from the perpendicular of the street.
      (2)   Pipeline discharge capacities shall exceed maximum peak runoff
rates. Ponding or head pressure shall not be considered in pipeline size
determination. Computations for all drainage way size determinations shall be
provided to the Public Works Director. Drainage ways located laterally off of
the street should be piped to the back lot line or for the first 150' from the
street right-of-way line, whichever comes first.
      (3)   Where a drainage outlet pipe extends into a lake or other similar
outlet, riprap shall be placed under and around the end joint or joints of pipe
as needed and on slopes at the end of the pipe.
      (4)   Minimum longitudinal slope shall be 0.4% except where specifically
approved in writing by the Public Works Director.
      (5)   Submerged piping or partially submerged piping shall not be used
unless where specifically approved in writing by the Public Works Director.
Submerged pipe systems shall require a means of accessing the submerged pipe
for maintenance purposes.
      (6)   Catch basins or junction boxes shall not be located within the
radius portion of street intersections. No manhole covers or water valves will
be located within the curb or gutter area or within the paved area of the
roadway.
      (7)   To allow for backfill and compaction operations, 2' minimum
horizontal clearance between pipelines or structures shall be provided.
Reinforced concrete or riprap of a material and gradation approved by the
Public Works Director shall be placed at the ends of all culverts, bends, or
junction points in drainage ways and/or other locations as determined by the
Public Works Director (see details in Article A.6.).
   (H)   Additional drainageway requirements.
      (1)   Where drainage is directed into an existing ditch, canal, or tidal
stream by use of an open ditch or pipeline, the elevation at the bottom of the
existing ditch, canal, or tidal stream at the point of entry, and approximately
100' upstream and downstream, shall be shown on the drainage plans. In
addition, the elevation of the bottom of the inlet ditch or invert elevation of
inlet pipe at the outlet end shall be shown along with the bottom width of the
existing canal or tidal stream.
      (2)   Where drainage ways are piped, catch basins shall be provided as
required to appropriately receive and discharge incoming drainage. In no case
shall the catch basins be more than 300' apart.
      (3)   Junction boxes with stubs shall be constructed at both ends of
cross-line pipes for cross-ditches, at the outlet end of cross line pipes at
outlet ditches, and at other locations as appropriate. Reinforced concrete
pipes of the required sizes shall be used for all inlet and outlet stubs. Stub
pipes of the required sizes shall be used to convey the street ditch drainage
into the junction boxes and the inlet invert of the stub shall normally be
installed approximately 0.3' below the street ditch grade. Stub pipes shall be
extended a minimum of 20' from the junction box to provide maintenance vehicle
access to maintenance shelves along outfall ditches.
      (4)   For minor swale ditches of 1' depth or less along side or rear lot
lines that only drain a small interior area and where street drainage is not
involved, a drainage easement not less than 15' in width may be utilized.
   (I)   Drainage and erosion control structures and materials.
      (1)   All work, materials, methods, and equipment, unless otherwise
specified herein, shall be in accordance with the requirements of the CTC (SS).
      (2)   All concrete pipes shall conform to ASTM Specifications C-76, Class
III, Wall B. Joints shall conform to ASTM, C-443. Jointing materials shall be
all-weather preformed joint sealant.
      (3)   Metal pipes shall be approved by the Public Works Director and
shall be installed as per the recommendations of the manufacturer for their
intended use. For metal piping subject to saltwater exposure, only approved
aluminum piping may be used.
      (4)   Other piping materials shall be considered. Specifications should
be submitted to the Public Works Director along with the design data and
construction plans showing the specific intended use. Materials and methods
approved by the SCDOT will be considered upon submittal of SCDOT documentation
and recommendations pertaining to the use of such materials.
      (5)   Ample cover shall be provided to properly protect pipelines during
construction as well as for designed usage. Minimum allowable cover for pipe at
subgrade shall be not less than 6" for paved areas, and 12" for unpaved areas
and in no case less than that recommended by the manufacturer.
      (6)   Minimum cover for other materials and usages shall be considered at
the time of submittal of construction plans to the Public Works Director.
      (7)   All structures shall be shown clearly on the construction plans
with details to show all lines, grades, elevations, joints, reinforcing,
materials of construction, etc. All appropriate specification data shall be
shown on the construction plans.
      (8)   Junction boxes, curb inlets, outfall boxes, or any other enclosed
drainage structure exceeding 4'6" in depth shall be constructed with interior
step fixtures.
      (9)   Precast concrete structures will be considered. Design and
specification data should be submitted to the Public Works Director along with
the design and construction plans showing the specific intended use.
      (10)   A performance bond guaranteeing restoration work must be posted
with the Town of James Island and remain in effect for a period of two years
from the date of acceptance of the restoration work (date of release by the
Director of the Department of Public Works). This bond must be in a format
approved by the Town Attorney and in accordance with terms and conditions of §§
153.300 et seq.
   (J)   Open channel baffles. Baffles of an approved design shall be
constructed in open channels where the gradient is 0.70% or greater and shall
be spaced as shown:
 
Gradient (percent) Spacing (feet)
0.70 to 0.99       100 (max)
1.00 to 1.49       75 (max)
1.50 to 1.99       50 (max)
2.00 to 3.00*      50 (max)
* Where the gradient is 2% or greater for an open channel, additional easement
width equal to the maximum depth of the channel shall be provided. For a
gradient greater than 3%, the channel shall be piped unless otherwise approved
by the Public Works Director.
 
   (K)   Easements for storm drainage facilities.
      (1)   Drainage easements shall be provided for all drainage facilities
intended to be included in the maintenance program of the Town of James Island.
The easement shall provide adequate space for access to the facility; adequate
space for the operations involved in cleaning, repairing, reconstructing,
material storage and dewatering, and hauling materials to or from the area;
adequate space for turning and maneuvering of the equipment; and adequate space
for the sloshing and splashing of the materials being handled.
      (2)   The portions of the easement intended for equipment operations
shall have suitable foundations to support the maintenance equipment and shall
be graded to drain the working area but not graded to slopes or elevations
causing difficulty in the operation of the maintenance equipment. Maximum
lateral grade for areas in which draglines may be used in the maintenance
operations shall be 5%.
      (3)   Minimum drainage easement widths shall be no less than the
following:
 
Required Drainage Easement Widths for Piped Drainageways
Pipe Size (Maximum) Minimum Depth to Invert Width of Drainage Easement
18" > and < =24"    5.0'                    12'-16'
24" < and < 42"     5.0'-7.0'               16'-20'
42" < and < 54"     7.0'                    20'-24'
54" < and < 72"     7.0'-9.0'               24'-30'
 
      (4)   For depths greater than shown, larger pipe sizes, or multiple lines
of pipe, additional easement width, as required by the Public Works Director,
shall be provided. Required drainage easement widths for open ditches shall be
as shown on details in Article A.6. The side slope of an open ditch shall not
exceed 2:1, and, subject to soil stability, may be required to be flatter.
ARTICLE A.5 - ENCROACHMENTS
§ A.5.1 ENCROACHMENTS AND WORK WITHIN RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND DRAINAGE EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Introduction. This section is intended to provide a general guideline
for the design and construction of structures that may be located within
rights-of-way or drainage easements that have been, or will be, accepted into
the Town of James Island maintenance system. No work shall be commenced until
an encroachment permit for such work has been obtained from the Public Works
Director.
   (B)   Encroachment permits; general.
      (1)   Any permanent or temporary construction or placement of any
structure or object (sign, fence, etc.) within a Town of James Island drainage
easement or road right-of-way must receive an encroachment permit from the
Public Works Director prior to the beginning of work or emplacement of
structure or object.
      (2)   The encroaching entity will submit all permit requests on the Town
of James Island Application for Encroachment Permit Form for review.
Application fees will be in accordance with current Town of James Island User
Fee schedules. Permits will be approved or denied by the Public Works Director
within 30 days of receipt.
      (3)   If, in the opinion of the Town of James Island, the South Carolina
Department of Transportation, or any other public agency, it should ever become
necessary to relocate or remove the encroachment, or any part thereof, due to
the improvement, relocation, or widening of the road, street, or drainage
system, or for any other reason, such moving or removing will be done on demand
of the Public Works Director at the expense of the permittee.
      (4)   Adequate provisions shall be made for the protection of the
traveling public at all times when performing work under an encroachment
permit. During the progress of the work, all necessary detours, barricades,
warning signs, and flagmen will be provided by, and at the expense of, the
permittee to ensure safety.
      (5)   Restoration work shall be immediately accomplished to return the
road and/or drainage system to prior condition or better. The liability of the
permittee will not be released until all work is inspected and approved by the
Public Works Director.
   (C)   Types of encroachments within public rights-of-way and easements.
      (1)   Sprinkler systems. Water-sprinkling systems shall not be permitted
within the right-of-way except as specified herein. Sprinkler systems may be
placed along the right-of-way (immediately outside the right-of-way) with
appropriate easements conveyed to the agency responsible for such system. The
Town of James Island will not accept responsibility for any such system. At
locations where water supply lines must cross the street right-of-way, such
facilities shall be shown on the street construction plans and specifications.
Such water supply lines shall be placed a minimum of 36" below the centerline
street finish grade elevation and shall be placed in conduit. Sprinkler systems
may be approved at island locations within the right-of-way. At such locations,
the curb shall be upright curb (not roll curb and gutter). The sprinkler heads
shall be in a protected location as approved by the Public Works Director. An
appropriate water cutoff shall be provided in an underground box outside the
street right-of-way. Under-drain systems shall be placed within islands served
by an irrigation system. Encroachment permits shall be required for all
sprinkler systems within the right-of-way.
      (2)   Landscaping and planting. Any proposed landscaping and planting
within a proposed publicly maintained right-of-way should be shown on the
construction plans along with a planting schedule. Plants that may inhibit
maintenance or obstruct sight distances will not be permitted. Encroachment
permits shall be required for all landscaping/planting within the right-of-way.
Planting will not be accepted by the Town of James Island for maintenance; if a
permanent maintenance plan is not submitted, for approval by the Public Works
Director, planting will not be permitted.
      (3)   Subdivision entrance signs.
         (a)   Subdivision name signs at entrances to developments shall be in
compliance with §§
153.330 et seq. Building permits must be obtained prior to installation of such
entrance signs. Subdivision name signs will be located outside the road right-
of-way except those signs located within a roadway median. All signs shall be
located outside of the sight easement.
         (b)   Such signs, foundations for future signs, and conduit for
electrification of signs shall be shown on the construction plans and an
encroachment permit obtained prior to construction. Approval of the plans by
the Public Works Director does not imply or guarantee the approval of other
entities.
      (4)   Utilities.
         (a)   The proposed concept for the location of all underground utility
lines, including water, sanitary sewer, gas, electrical, telephone, or
television cables, shall be shown utilizing typical street plans, cross
sections, and profiles. Non-typical locations, such as areas around trees,
shall be shown in sufficient detail for review and approval. Utility lines
shall be located so that they will not interfere with the proper functioning of
the drainage system. For streets where the curb and gutter section is used,
underground utility main lines shall be a minimum of 5' behind the back of the
curb. For streets where the swale ditch section is used, utility main lines
shall be installed not less than 15' from the centerline of the street and not
less than 5' from the edge of the pavement.
         (b)   The minimum allowable cover over the top of the utility
encroachment or other apparatus shall be 36". Deviations to the 36" cover
requirement must be presented in the cross-section format along with a written
justification and submitted to the Public Works Director for approval.
         (c)   No work on utility lines within the limits of the proposed
publicly maintained rights-of-way shall commence until the street plans showing
the proposed locations of the utility lines have been approved. In case any
utility location is not provided, the developer shall be responsible for
notifying the utility that installation work within the proposed publicly
maintained right-of-way or drainage easement will require the approval of the
Public Works Director.
         (d)   Unapproved utility work within the right-of-way or drainage
easement will result in an immediate supervision of inspections until such time
as the utility plans have been reviewed and approved by the Public Works
Director.
         (e)   Ditches and trenches dug within the street right-of-way for
utilities and/or other purposes shall be properly backfilled. Backfill material
shall be select material, mechanically compacted in 6" layers. Backfill
material shall be mixed or wetted as required by the Public Works Director.
Backfill under areas to be paved or areas within 5' of pavement shall be
compacted to no less than 95% of maximum density. Remaining areas shall be
compacted to 90% of maximum density. ASTM D 1557 Method A will determine
maximum densities.
         (f)   Where utilities have been designed to be placed at a depth or
location such that the repair of that utility would adversely impact the flow
of vehicular traffic, the design professional shall either address such
concerns to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director or redesign the
utility layout.
         (g)   Utilities crossing under the street shall be at an angle of not
more than 30 degrees from the perpendicular to the street.
         (h)   The jetting or uncontrolled tunneling of utility lines under a
paved street is not permitted. The cutting of the pavement is not permitted
except under extreme circumstances and only as permitted by the Public Works
Director.
         (i)   Where utilities are designed to be placed at a depth or location
such that the repair of that utility would adversely impact the flow of
vehicular traffic, the Design Professional shall either address such concerns
to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director or redesign the utility
layout.
         (j)   Proposed street lighting facilities shall be shown on the street
construction plans submitted to the Department of Public Works for approval.
Street light poles shall be placed outside the right-of-way unless specifically
approved by the Public Works Director.
         (k)   Fire hydrants shall be shown on the construction plans, located
at the edge of the right-of-way within a few feet of the property corner of two
adjoining lots, or located as otherwise approved by the Public Works Director.
         (l)   When dry fire hydrants are required, permanent access shall be
shown on the construction plans. Access design must provide adequate space and
suitable surface materials for emergency vehicle maneuverability. The design
professional shall submit written approval of the design from the local fire
service provider.
         (m)   The Public Works Director will only permit utilities other than
drainage facilities within drainage easements upon specific written
authorization.
   (D)   Zoning permits. The Town of James Island Zoning Administrator will
review encroachment permit applications for signs or structures within public
rights-of-way for compliance with this ordinance. No encroachment permits for
signs, other than traffic control, will be issued without the written approval
of the Zoning Administrator. Approval by the Zoning Administrator does not
ensure approval by the Public Works Director.
   (E)   Restoration of roads.
      (1)   Restoration is intended to aid proper town road maintenance. Any
entity performing work within a town right-of-way that will damage an existing
road, drainage system, or structure must ensure that the systems will be
returned to a condition equal to or better than that prior to proposed/current
construction work.
      (2)   Any utility, public agency, or other entity or person performing
work in a town right-of-way or easement must obtain an encroachment permit
prior to beginning any construction. The applicant shall furnish information on
the encroachment permit application detailing all work. Details on restoration
of all disturbed areas or utilities will also be provided on the encroachment
permit application.
      (3)   Restoration work will return the road, drainage system, and any
impacted utilities to prior condition or better. The liability of the permittee
will not be released until all work is inspected and approved by the Public
Works Director.
ARTICLE A.6 - STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAILS
§ A.6.1 INTRODUCTION.
   This section is intended to provide a guideline for the preparation of cross
sections, construction details, and miscellaneous pictorial data required for
the completion of the construction plans and specifications for road and
drainage systems that are intended to be in the maintenance systems of the
town, or in developments that must be constructed to Town standards. These
detail drawings are representative of the minimum standards required by the
town. However, the design engineer is responsible for the preparation of detail
drawings showing clearly what is actually expected to be constructed on the
ground.
§ A.6.2 INDEX OF DRAWINGS.
   (A)   Typical section for roadway with open roadside drainage swale;
   (B)   Typical section for roadway with concrete roll curb and gutter;
   (C)   Typical section for roadway with median island ;
   (D)   Typical section for roadway with asphalt swale;
   (E)   Typical section for roadway with inverted crown;
   (F)   Pavement cut for installation of utilities;
   (G)   Urban street typical cul-de-sac plan view;
   (H)   Typical concrete driveway plan view and profile (roadway with open
ditches);
   (I)   Typical asphalt driveway plan view and profile (roadway with open
ditches);
   (J)   Typical section concrete curb and gutter;
   (K)   Concrete gutter at street intersection plan view;
   (L)   Concrete gutter at street intersections - standard construction;
   (M)   Typical sidewalk section with curb and gutter;
   (N)   Masonry curb inlet drainage structure detail;
   (O)   Masonry junction box detail;
   (P)   Grate type yard inlet detail;
   (Q)   Type Nine yard inlet detail;
   (R)   Typical section - trapezoidal ditch;
   (S)   Typical section - swale type ditch;
   (T)   Pipe outlet to ditch with concrete slab;
   (U)   Pipe outlet to ditch with riprap;
   (V)   Rip rap detail at end of pipe;
   (W)   Rip rap detail at intersection of ditches;
   (X)   Rip rap detail at bend in ditch;
   (Y)   Typical street name sign installation;
   (Z)   Horizontal sight distance detail;
   (AA)   Standard street name sign specifications.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/cbb4cb52629993459358aebd28fe6c3dee2bdafa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1259.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/cbb4cb52629993459358aebd28fe6c3dee2bdafa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1261.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/cbb4cb52629993459358aebd28fe6c3dee2bdafa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1263.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/cbb4cb52629993459358aebd28fe6c3dee2bdafa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1265.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/cbb4cb52629993459358aebd28fe6c3dee2bdafa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1267.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/cbb4cb52629993459358aebd28fe6c3dee2bdafa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1269.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/cbb4cb52629993459358aebd28fe6c3dee2bdafa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1271.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/cbb4cb52629993459358aebd28fe6c3dee2bdafa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1273.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/cbb4cb52629993459358aebd28fe6c3dee2bdafa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1275.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/cbb4cb52629993459358aebd28fe6c3dee2bdafa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1277.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/cbb4cb52629993459358aebd28fe6c3dee2bdafa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1279.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/cbb4cb52629993459358aebd28fe6c3dee2bdafa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1281.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/cbb4cb52629993459358aebd28fe6c3dee2bdafa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1283.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/cbb4cb52629993459358aebd28fe6c3dee2bdafa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1285.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/cbb4cb52629993459358aebd28fe6c3dee2bdafa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1287.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/cbb4cb52629993459358aebd28fe6c3dee2bdafa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1289.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/cbb4cb52629993459358aebd28fe6c3dee2bdafa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1291.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/cbb4cb52629993459358aebd28fe6c3dee2bdafa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1293.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/cbb4cb52629993459358aebd28fe6c3dee2bdafa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1295.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/cbb4cb52629993459358aebd28fe6c3dee2bdafa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1297.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/cbb4cb52629993459358aebd28fe6c3dee2bdafa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1299.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/cbb4cb52629993459358aebd28fe6c3dee2bdafa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1301.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/cbb4cb52629993459358aebd28fe6c3dee2bdafa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1303.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/cbb4cb52629993459358aebd28fe6c3dee2bdafa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1305.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/cbb4cb52629993459358aebd28fe6c3dee2bdafa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1307.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/cbb4cb52629993459358aebd28fe6c3dee2bdafa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1309.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/cbb4cb52629993459358aebd28fe6c3dee2bdafa/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1311.png]
 
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
      Table
         
I.    ANNEXATIONS
         
II.    FRANCHISES
         
III.    INTERLOCAL AGREEMENTS
         
IV.    ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS
TABLE I: ANNEXATIONS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
2012-24  1-17-2013   Annexing certain property located at 1207 Sea Aire Drive.
2013-01  3-21-2013   Annexing certain property.
                     Annexing certain land, to include 157 residential lots and
2014-05  5-15-2014   all adjacent unincorporated roads and other public rights-
                     of-way, including waterways and marsh.
                     Adjusting the boundary between the City of Charleston and
                     the Town of James Island to include a drainage easement
2016-12  1-19-2017   that runs east/west along the southern boundary of parcel
                     TMS #428-03-00-025 between parcel TMS #428-03-00-055 and
                     parcel TMS #428-03-00-27B into the Town of James Island.
                     Adjusting the boundary between the City of Charleston and
                     the Town of James Island to include the property owned by
2018-13  12-20-2018  the James Island Public Service District located at 1104
                     Folly Road and designated as TMS #425-09-00-007 into the
                     Town of James Island.
                    
 
TABLE II: FRANCHISES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
2014-03  5-15-2014   Granting a non-exclusive electric and gas franchise to
                     South Carolina Electric and Gas Company.
                    
 
TABLE III: INTERLOCAL AGREEMENTS
 
Ord. No.  Date Passed Description
                      Agreement with the Municipal Association of South
Agreement 11-16-2012  Carolina for collection of all business license taxes
                      from insurance companies and for administration as
                      municipal agent of municipal brokers premium tax.
                      Authorizing execution of a cost sharing agreement with
2019-06   8-15-2019   James Island Public Service District for solid waste and
                      fire protection services.
                      Approval of $900,000 annual cost share for fiscal year
2020-07   7-16-2020   2020-2021 with the James Island Public Service District
                      for solid waste and fire protection services.
                      Authorizing execution of S.C. Local Revenue Services
2023-02   4-20-2023   Agreement; participation in local revenue service
                      programs; and execution and delivery of participant
                      program supplements.
                     
 
TABLE IV: ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Rezoning the real property location at 1054 and 0 Dills
2014-10  9-18-2014   Bluff Road from Single-Family Residential (RSL) Zoning
                     District to Planned Development Zoning District (PD-101,
                     the Preserve at Dills Bluff).
                     Rezoning the real property located at 527 Harbor View
2015-12  11-19-2015  Circle from Single-Family Residential (RSL) Zoning
                     District to Residential Office (OR) Zoning District.
                     Rezoning the real property located at 521 Harbor View
2015-13  11-19-2015  Circle from Single-Family Residential (RSL) Zoning
                     District to Residential Office (OR) Zoning District.
                     Rezoning the real property located at 541 Harbor View
2015-14  11-19-2015  Circle from Single-Family Residential (RSL) Zoning
                     District to Residential Office (OR) Zoning District.
                     Rezoning the real property located at 1122 Dills Bluff
2017-03  2-16-2017   Road, 1126 Dills Bluff Road and 1109B Camp Road from Low-
                     density Suburban Residential (RSL) to Residential Office
                     (OR) Zoning District.
                     Rezoning the real property located at the rear portions of
2019-05  8-15-2019   809 and 813 Jordan Street from Low-density Suburban
                     Residential (RSL) Zoning District to Community Commercial
                     (CC) Zoning District.
                     Rezoning the real property located at 1622 Camp Road from
2021-11  12-16-2021  General Office (OG) Zoning District to Community
                     Commercial (CC) Zoning District.
                     Rezoning real property located at 1439 Jeffords Street
2023-01  2-16-2023   from the Low- Density Suburban Residential (RSL) Zoning
                     District to the Residential Office (OR) Zoning District.
                     Rezoning the real property located at 849 Harbor View Road
2024-06  10-17-2024  from the General Office (OG) Zoning District to the Low-
                     Density Suburban Residential (RSL) Zoning District.
                     Rezoning real property located at 1129 Hillman Street and
2024-12  12-19-2024  0 Dills Bluff Road from Low-Density Suburban Residential
                     (RSL) Zoning District to Residential Office (OR) Zoning
                     District.
                    
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to South Carolina Code of Laws
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO SOUTH CAROLINA CODE OF LAWS
S.C. Code Section Code Section
S.C. Code Section            Code Section
Title 4, Chapter 9           153.002
4-9-30                       92.03
                             90.01 –
                             90.16,
4-9-30(5)                    90.30 –
                             90.34,
                             90.99
                             10.99,
5-7-30                       51.001,
                             110.19
5-7-40                       32.15
                             110.19,
5-7-300                      110.36,
                             110.37
5-15-20                      30.35
5-15-61                      30.37
5-15-125                     30.39
5-31-10 et seq.              51.001
6-1-730                      33.20
6-9-5 et seq.                150.01
6-9-10                       150.13
                             153.002,
                             153.004,
Title 6, Chapter 29          153.013,
                             153.026,
                             153.027
                             153.040,
                             153.045,
Title 6, Chapter 29, Art. 11 153.046,
                             153.047,
                             153.049
6-29-110                     153.127
6-29-340                     153.026
6-29-350                     153.026
6-29-360                     153.026,
                             153.027
6-29-540                     153.051
6-29-720                     153.078
6-29-800                     153.013
6-29-1145                    153.009
6-29-1200                    153.054
6-31-10 et seq.              153.043,
                             153.055
7-13-190                     30.39
12-21-2720(A)(1),(2),(3)     110.19
12-21-2728                   110.19
12-23-210                    110.19
12-43-220                    153.013,
                             153.143
12-45-180                    51.029
12-56-10 et seq.             33.01
15-1-30                      10.05
15-1-40                      10.05
15-1-50                      10.05
16-11-700                    92.05
20-7-2700                    153.013
22-3-55                      150.99
23-43-10 et seq.             153.013
23-47-60 et seq.             153.054
27-31-130 et seq.            153.127
Title 30, Chapter 4          30.21
30-4-70                      30.21
30-4-80(A)                   30.19
31-15-370                    150.15
38-45-10                     110.37
38-45-60                     110.37
Title 40, Chapter 22         Ch. 153, App. A
40-59-260                    150.12
44-67-10 et seq.             92.03,
                             92.04
44-96-10 et seq.             153.171
                             90.01 –
                             90.16,
47-3-20                      90.30 –
                             90.34,
                             90.99
47-3-610 et seq.             90.11
47-3-710 et seq.             90.12
                             90.01 –
                             90.16,
47-5-10 et seq.           90.30 –
                             90.34,
                             90.99
47-5-130                     90.04
48-14-20                     51.002,
                             51.041
48-14-10 et seq.             51.001
48-18-70                     51.052
Title 48, Chapter 20         51.052
50-11-150                    90.05
51-17-10 et seq.             153.130
56-5-710                     70.03
58-9-2200                    110.19,
                             110.36
58-9-2220                    110.19,
                             110.36
Title 58, Chapter 12, Art. 3 110.35
                             
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.                     Date Passed Code Section
2012-03                      8-9-2012    110.35
2012-07                      9-20-2012   30.15 –
                                         30.20
                                         90.01 –
                                         90.16,
2012-09                      9-20-2012   90.30 –
                                         90.34,
                                         90.99
2012-13                      10-1-2012   110.36
2012-05                      10-18-2012  152.01
2012-06, § 1.1              10-18-2012  153.001
2012-06, § 1.2              10-18-2012  153.002
2012-06, § 1.3              10-18-2012  153.003
2012-06, § 1.4              10-18-2012  153.004
2012-06, § 1.5              10-18-2012  153.005
2012-06, § 1.6              10-18-2012  153.006
2012-06, § 1.7              10-18-2012  153.007
2012-06, § 1.8              10-18-2012  153.008
2012-06, § 1.9              10-18-2012  153.009
2012-06, § 1.10             10-18-2012  153.010
2012-06, § 1.11             10-18-2012  153.011
2012-06, § 1.12             10-18-2012  153.012
2012-06, § 2.1              10-18-2012  153.025
2012-06, § 2.2              10-18-2012  153.026
2012-06, § 2.3              10-18-2012  153.027
2012-06, § 2.4              10-18-2012  153.028
2012-06, § 3.1              10-18-2012  153.040
2012-06, § 3.2              10-18-2012  153.041
2012-06, § 3.3              10-18-2012  153.042
2012-06, § 3.4              10-18-2012  153.043
2012-06, § 3.5              10-18-2012  153.044
2012-06, § 3.6              10-18-2012  153.045
2012-06, § 3.7              10-18-2012  153.046
2012-06, § 3.8              10-18-2012  153.047
2012-06, § 3.9              10-18-2012  153.048
2012-06, § 3.10             10-18-2012  153.049
2012-06, § 3.11             10-18-2012  153.050
2012-06, § 3.12             10-18-2012  153.051
2012-06, § 3.13             10-18-2012  153.052
2012-06, § 3.14             10-18-2012  153.053
2012-06, § 3.15             10-18-2012  153.054
2012-06, § 3.16             10-18-2012  153.055
2012-06, § 4.1              10-18-2012  153.065
2012-06, § 4.2              10-18-2012  153.066
2012-06, § 4.3              10-18-2012  153.067
2012-06, § 4.4              10-18-2012  153.068
2012-06, § 4.5              10-18-2012  153.069
2012-06, § 4.6              10-18-2012  153.070
2012-06, § 4.7              10-18-2012  153.071
2012-06, § 4.8              10-18-2012  153.072
2012-06, § 4.9              10-18-2012  153.073
2012-06, § 4.10             10-18-2012  153.074
2012-06, § 4.11             10-18-2012  153.075
2012-06, § 4.12             10-18-2012  153.076
2012-06, § 4.13             10-18-2012  153.077
2012-06, § 4.14             10-18-2012  153.078
2012-06, § 4.15             10-18-2012  153.079
2012-06, § 5.1              10-18-2012  153.090
2012-06, § 5.2              10-18-2012  153.091
2012-06, § 5.3              10-18-2012  153.092
2012-06, § 5.4              10-18-2012  153.093
2012-06, § 6.1              10-18-2012  153.110
2012-06, Table 6.1-1         10-18-2012  153.110
2012-06, § 6.2              10-18-2012  153.110
2012-06, § 6.3              10-18-2012  153.110
2012-06, § 6.4, introduction10-18-2012  153.120
2012-06, § 6.4.1            10-18-2012  153.121
2012-06, § 6.4.2            10-18-2012  153.122
2012-06, § 6.4.3            10-18-2012  153.123
2012-06, § 6.4.4            10-18-2012  153.124
2012-06, § 6.4.5            10-18-2012  153.125
2012-06, § 6.4.6            10-18-2012  153.126
2012-06, § 6.4.7            10-18-2012  153.127
2012-06, § 6.4.8            10-18-2012  153.128
2012-06, § 6.4.9            10-18-2012  153.129
2012-06, § 6.4.10           10-18-2012  153.130
2012-06, § 6.4.11           10-18-2012  153.131
2012-06, § 6.4.12           10-18-2012  153.132
2012-06, § 6.4.13           10-18-2012  153.133
2012-06, § 6.4.14           10-18-2012  153.134
2012-06, § 6.4.15           10-18-2012  153.135
2012-06, § 6.4.16           10-18-2012  153.136
2012-06, § 6.4.17           10-18-2012  153.137
2012-06, § 6.4.18           10-18-2012  153.138
2012-06, § 6.4.19           10-18-2012  153.139
2012-06, § 6.4.20           10-18-2012  153.140
2012-06, § 6.4.21           10-18-2012  153.141
2012-06, § 6.4.22           10-18-2012  153.142
2012-06, § 6.4.23           10-18-2012  153.143
2012-06, § 6.4.24           10-18-2012  153.144
2012-06, § 6.4.25           10-18-2012  153.145
2012-06, § 6.4.26           10-18-2012  153.146
2012-06, § 6.4.27           10-18-2012  153.147
2012-06, § 6.4.28           10-18-2012  153.148
2012-06, § 6.4.29           10-18-2012  153.149
2012-06, § 6.4.30           10-18-2012  153.150
2012-06, § 6.4.31           10-18-2012  153.151
2012-06, § 6.4.33           10-18-2012  153.153
2012-06, § 6.4.34           10-18-2012  153.154
2012-06, § 6.4.35           10-18-2012  153.155
2012-06, § 6.4.36           10-18-2012  153.156
2012-06, § 6.4.37           10-18-2012  153.157
2012-06, § 6.4.38           10-18-2012  153.158
2012-06, § 6.4.39           10-18-2012  153.159
2012-06, § 6.4.40           10-18-2012  153.160
2012-06, § 6.4.41           10-18-2012  153.161
2012-06, § 6.4.42           10-18-2012  153.162
2012-06, § 6.4.43           10-18-2012  153.163
2012-06, § 6.4.44           10-18-2012  153.164
2012-06, § 6.4.45           10-18-2012  153.165
2012-06, § 6.4.46           10-18-2012  153.166
2012-06, § 6.4.47           10-18-2012  153.167
2012-06, § 6.4.48           10-18-2012  153.168
2012-06, § 6.4.49           10-18-2012  153.169
2012-06, § 6.4.50           10-18-2012  153.170
2012-06, § 6.4.51           10-18-2012  153.171
2012-06, § 6.4.52           10-18-2012  153.172
2012-06, § 6.4.53           10-18-2012  153.173
2012-06, § 6.4.54           10-18-2012  153.174
2012-06, § 6.4.55           10-18-2012  153.175
2012-06, § 6.4.56           10-18-2012  153.176
2012-06, § 6.4.57           10-18-2012  153.177
2012-06, § 6.4.58           10-18-2012  153.178
2012-06, § 6.4.59           10-18-2012  153.179
2012-06, § 6.4.60           10-18-2012  153.180
2012-06, § 6.5.1            10-18-2012  153.200
2012-06, § 6.5.2            10-18-2012  153.201
2012-06, § 6.5.3            10-18-2012  153.202
2012-06, § 6.5.4            10-18-2012  153.203
2012-06, § 6.5.5            10-18-2012  153.204
2012-06, § 6.5.6            10-18-2012  153.205
2012-06, § 6.5.7            10-18-2012  153.206
2012-06, § 6.5.8            10-18-2012  153.207
2012-06, § 6.5.10           10-18-2012  153.209
2012-06, § 6.5.11           10-18-2012  153.210
2012-06, § 6.5.12           10-18-2012  153.211
2012-06, § 6.5.13           10-18-2012  153.212
2012-06, § 6.5.14           10-18-2012  153.213
2012-06, § 6.5.15           10-18-2012  153.214
2012-06, § 6.5.16           10-18-2012  153.215
2012-06, § 6.5.17           10-18-2012  153.216
2012-06, § 6.5.18           10-18-2012  153.217
2012-06, § 6.6.1            10-18-2012  153.230
2012-06, § 6.6.2            10-18-2012  153.231
2012-06, § 6.6.3            10-18-2012  153.232
2012-06, § 6.6.4            10-18-2012  153.233
2012-06, § 6.6.5            10-18-2012  153.234
2012-06, § 6.7.1            10-18-2012  153.250
2012-06, § 6.7.2            10-18-2012  153.251
2012-06, § 6.7.3            10-18-2012  153.252
2012-06, § 6.7.4            10-18-2012  153.253
2012-06, § 6.7.5            10-18-2012  153.254
2012-06, § 6.7.6            10-18-2012  153.255
2012-06, § 8.1              10-18-2012  153.300
2012-06, § 8.2              10-18-2012  153.301
2012-06, § 8.3.1            10-18-2012  153.302
2012-06, § 8.3.2            10-18-2012  153.302
2012-06, § 8.3.3            10-18-2012  153.303
2012-06, § 8.3.4            10-18-2012  153.303
2012-06, § 8.3.5            10-18-2012  153.304
2012-06, § 8.4              10-18-2012  153.305
2012-06, § 8.5              10-18-2012  153.306
2012-06, § 8.6              10-18-2012  153.307
2012-06, § 8.7              10-18-2012  153.308
2012-06, § 8.8              10-18-2012  153.309
2012-06, § 8.9              10-18-2012  153.310
2012-06, § 8.10             10-18-2012  153.311
2012-06, § 8.11             10-18-2012  153.312
2012-06, § 8.12             10-18-2012  153.313
2012-06, § 8.13             10-18-2012  153.314
2012-06, § 8.14             10-18-2012  153.315
2012-06, § 9.1              10-18-2012  153.330
2012-06, § 9.2              10-18-2012  153.331
2012-06, §§ 9.3.1 –9.3.9 10-18-2012  153.332
2012-06, § 9.3.10           10-18-2012  153.333
2012-06, § 9.4              10-18-2012  153.334
2012-06, § 9.5              10-18-2012  153.335
2012-06, § 9.6              10-18-2012  153.336
2012-06, § 9.7              10-18-2012  153.337
2012-06, § 9.8              10-18-2012  153.338
2012-06, § 9.9              10-18-2012  153.339
2012-06, § 9.10             10-18-2012  153.340
2012-06, § 9.11             10-18-2012  153.341
2012-06, § 9.12             10-18-2012  153.342
2012-06, § 10.1.1           10-18-2012  153.355
2012-06, §§ 10.1.2 –10.1.10-18-2012  153.356
2012-06, § 10.1.6           10-18-2012  153.357
2012-06, § 10.2             10-18-2012  153.358
2012-06, § 10.3             10-18-2012  153.359
2012-06, § 10.4             10-18-2012  153.360
2012-06, § 10.5             10-18-2012  153.361
2012-06, § 11.1             10-18-2012  153.375
2012-06, § 11.2             10-18-2012  153.376
2012-06, § 11.3             10-18-2012  153.377
2012-06, § 11.4             10-18-2012  153.378
2012-06, § 11.5             10-18-2012  153.379
2012-06, § 11.6.1           10-18-2012  153.380
2012-06, § 11.6.2           10-18-2012  153.380,
                                         153.999
2012-06, § 11.7             10-18-2012  153.381
2012-06, § 11.8             10-18-2012  153.382
2012-06, § 11.9             10-18-2012  153.383
2012-06, § 12.1             10-18-2012  153.013
2012-06, § 12.2             10-18-2012  153.013
                                         91.04 –
2012-10                      10-18-2012  91.09,
                                         91.99
                                         92.01 –
2012-12                      10-18-2012  92.06,
                                         92.99
2012-11                      11-15-2012  50.01
2012-14                      11-15-2012  70.02,
                                         70.99
2012-15                      11-15-2012  31.01
                                         32.01,
2012-16                      11-15-2012  32.02,
                                         32.04 –
                                         32.13
2012-17                      11-15-2012  110.37
                                         51.001 –
2012-18                      11-15-2012  51.012,
                                         51.999
                                         51.040 –
2012-19                      11-15-2012  51.075,
                                         51.999
2012-20                      11-15-2012  51.025 –
                                         51.029
Agreement                    11-16-2012  T.S.O. III
                                         153.001 –
                                         153.012,
                                         153.025-
2012-21                      12-20-2012  153.028,
                                         153.040-
                                         153.055,
                                         153.079,
                                         153.341
                                         91.04 –
2012-22                      1-17-2013   91.09,
                                         91.99
2012-24                      1-17-2013   T.S.O. I
2013-01                      3-21-2013   T.S.O. I
                                         153.065 –
                                         153.079,
                                         153.090 -
                                         153.093,
                                         153.110,
                                         153.120 -
                                         153.151,
                                         153.153 –
2013-02                      4-18-2013   153.180,
                                         153.200 -
                                         153.207,
                                         153.209 -
                                         153.217,
                                         153.230 -
                                         153.234,
                                         153.250-
                                         153.255
2013-05                      6-20-2013   153.014
2013-09                      8-15-2013   153.355 –
                                         153.361
                                         153.375 –
2013-10                      8-15-2013   153.383,
                                         153.999
2013-11                      8-15-2013   153.013
2013-06                      10-17-2013  153.300 –
                                         153.315
2013-07                      10-17-2013  153.330 –
                                         153.342
2013-12                      11-21-2013  153.093
2013-16                      11-21-2013  70.01
2013-18                      12-19-2013  111.01
2014-01                      2-20-2014   153.026,
                                         153.027
2014-02                      4-17-2014   30.01
2014-03                      5-15-2014   T.S.O. II
2014-05                      5-15-2014   T.S.O. I
2014-06                      5-15-2014   30.35 –
                                         30.42
2014-09                      7-17-2014   153.341
2014-08                      8-21-2014   153.334
2014-10                      9-18-2014   T.S.O. IV
2014-12                      11-20-2014  153.334
2015-01                      2-19-2015   153.110
2015-03                      3-19-2015   32.08
2015-04                      3-19-2015   30.02
2015-06                      7-28-2015   33.30 –
                                         33.34
2015-07                      7-9-2015    152.01
                                         93.01,
2015-10                      10-15-2015  93.02,
                                         93.99
2015-11                      10-15-2015  33.01
2015-12                      11-19-2015  T.S.O. IV
2015-13                      11-19-2015  T.S.O. IV
2015-14                      11-19-2015  T.S.O. IV
2015-15                      12-17-2015  91.01
                                         153.110,
2016-01                      4-21-2016   153.177,
                                         153.231,
                                         153.334
                                         33.15 -
2016-02                      5-19-2016   33.21,
                                         33.99
2016-05                      6-16-2016   153.110
2016-06                      7-21-2016   153.334
2016-07                      7-21-2016   51.025 -
                                         51.029
2016-09                      9-15-2016   153.207
2016-10                      10-20-2016  90.17,
                                         153.211
2016-11                      1-19-2017   153.211
2016-12                      1-19-2017   T.S.O. I
                                         150.01 -
2016-14                      1-19-2017   150.15,
                                         150.99
2017-01                      2-16-2017   153.093,
                                         153.341
2017-02                      2-16-2017   153.110
2017-03                      2-16-2017   T.S.O. IV
                                         32.01,
2017-06                      5-18-2017   32.02,
                                         32.04 -
                                         32.15
2017-09                      7-13-2017   153.208
2017-10                      9-21-2017   30.19
2017-11                      1-18-2018   153.213
2017-12                      1-18-2018   153.231
                                         153.041 -
                                         153.043,
2018-02                      5-17-2018   153.110,
                                         153.140,
                                         153.163
2018-03                      5-17-2018   91.02
2018-04                      6-21-2018   153.093
2018-07                      8-16-2018   153.093
2018-08                      8-16-2018   153.110
2018-11                      10-18-2018  153.157
2018-13                      12-20-2018  T.S.O. I
                                         153.013,
2018-14                      12-20-2018  153.014,
                                         153.252
                                         51.003,
                                         51.009 -
                                         51.011,
                                         51.025,
                                         51.027,
                                         51.044,
                                         51.045,
2018-15                      12-20-2018  51.049 -
                                         51.060,
                                         51.062 -
                                         51.065,
                                         51.068,
                                         51.070,
                                         51.071,
                                         51.073,
                                         51.999
2018-16                      1-17-2019   112.01
                                         153.013,
2019-01                      5-16-2019   153.110,
                                         153.124
                                         70.03 -
2019-03                      7-25-2019   70.05,
                                         70.99
2019-04                      8-15-2019   153.093,
                                         153.341
2019-05                      8-15-2019   T.S.O. IV
2019-06                      8-15-2019   T.S.O. III
2019-09                      11-21-2019  112.01
2019-10                      12-19-2019  30.17
2019-11                      12-19-2019  30.42
2019-12                      12-19-2019  30.19
                                         32.02 -
2019-13                      1-16-2020   32.10,
                                         32.13 -
                                         32.15
2020-01                      3-19-2020   153.093,
                                         153.322
2020-02                      3-19-2020   153.093
E-01-2020                    3-19-2020   30.21
E-03-2020                    4-1-2020    30.21
2020-04                      5-21-2020   153.095
2020-05                      5-21-2020   51.076
E-3-2020                     7-16-2020   30.21
2020-07                      7-16-2020   T.S.O. III
2020-08                      7-16-2020   33.02
2020-09                      7-16-2020   51.006
2020-10                      8-20-2020   30.21
2021-01                      5-20-2021   152.01
–                          - -         Ch. 153, App. A
2021-03                      8-19-2021   30.01
2021-05                      8-19-2021   30.19
2021-06                      10-21-2021  91.03
                                         110.01 -
2021-09                      11-18-2021  110.20,
                                         110.99
2021-10                      11-18-2021  91.03
2021-11                      12-16-2021  T.S.O. IV
2022-01                      4-21-2022   153.110
2022-03                      10-20-2022  153.110,
                                         153.332
2023-01                      2-16-2023   T.S.O. IV
2023-02                      4-20-2023   T.S.O. IV
                                         153.013,
                                         153.066,
2023-04                      5-18-2023   153.110,
                                         153.124,
                                         153.200,
                                         153.207
2023-06                      10-19-2023  110.20
2024-01                      2-15-2024   112.01
                                         32.03 -
2024-02                      3-21-2024   32.10 
                                         32.13 -
                                         32.15
                                         153.013,
2024-04                      6-20-204    153.309,
                                         153.334
2024-06                      10-17-2024  T.S.O. IV
2024-07                      9-19-2024   51.076
2024-08                      10-17-2024  151.01
2024-10                      11-21-2024  153.066,
                                         153.337
2024-12                      12-19-2024  T.S.O. IV
2025-01                      2-20-2025   30.42
                                         153.013,
2025-02                      3-20-2025   153.066,
                                         153.341
2025-05                      6-19-2025   153.014
                                         153.013,
2025-10                      11-20-2025  153.359,
                                         153.362
                                        
 
