KINGSTREE, SOUTH CAROLINA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-32 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through 3-17-2025
 
Published by:
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
TOWN OFFICIALS OF KINGSTREE, SOUTH CAROLINA
Council Members
Darren Tisdale, Mayor
Michelle Butterworth, Mayor Pro Tempore
C.M. (Bubba) Hammet, Jr.
Frankie White
Derek Fitts
Chris Williams
Stan Williamson
Town Officials
Town Manager     Kippton W. Coker
Town Clerk       Erica Goodwin
Police Chief     Kimberly Marlow
Fire Chief       Timothy Duke
Finance Director Merianne Cowley
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE 99-1
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR
THE TOWN OF KINGSTREE AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 1999 S-2 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Town of
Kingstree, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and permanent
nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Town
of Kingstree; and
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision or
addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make reference to sections of the South Carolina Code; and
WHEREAS, it is the intent of Town Council to accept these updated sections in
accordance with the changes of the law of the State of South Carolina; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY TOWN COUNCIL OF THE TOWN OF KINGSTREE
Section 1.   That the 1999 S-2 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Town
of Kingstree as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as set out in its entirety.
Section 2.   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by Town Council and the Clerk of the Town of Kingstree is
hereby authorized and ordered to insert such supplement into the copy of the
Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the Clerk.
Section 3.   This Ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare
of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
PASSED AND ADOPTED by Town Council of the Town of Kingstree on this 19th day of
July 1999.
ATTEST:
J. Russell Kellahan /s/
J. Russell Kellahan, Mayor
Cornelia G. Bell /s/
Cornelia G. Bell, Town Clerk
First Reading: June 21, 1999
Second Reading: July 19, 1999
ORDINANCE 2006-09
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCE FOR
THE TOWN OF KINGSTREE, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2006 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Town of
Kingstree, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and permanent
nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Town
of Kingstree; and
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision or
addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make reference to sections of the South Carolina code; and
WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Legal Authority to accept these updated
sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of South
Carolina; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY OF THE TOWN OF
KINGSTREE:
Section 1.   That the 2006 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Town of
Kingstree as submitted by the American Legal Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio,
and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by references as if
set out in its entirety.
Section 2.   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Legislative Authority and the Clerk of the Town of
Kingstree is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such supplement into the
copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the Clerk.
Section 3.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare
of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
PASSED AND ADOPTED BY THE TOWN COUNCIL OF THE TOWN OF KJNGSTREE ON 27TH DAY OF
NOVEMBER 2006.
James W. Kirby /s/
James W. Kirby, Mayor
ATTEST:
Patricia A. Graham /s/
Patricia A. Graham, Town Clerk
CHARTER
Editor's note:
   In 1975, the South Carolina Legislature enacted into law Act 283, which has
become known as the Home Rule Act. The Act revised Article VIII (Local
Government) of the South Carolina Constitution.
   The municipalities of this state were required to adopt by ordinance one of
three prescribed forms of local government: the Mayor-Council form, the Council
form, or the Council-Manager form. The form adopted was required to be ". . .
the form most nearly corresponding to the form in effect in the particular
municipality on March 1, 1974, as determined by the municipal governing body."
(S.C. Code 5-5-10) The Town Council adopted the Council-Manager form of
government. Statutory authority for this form of government is found at S.C.
Code Title 5, Chapter 13.
   On November 25, 1978, the Secretary of State issued a Certificate of
Incorporation to the Town of Kingstree, with all the "privileges, powers and
immunities, and subject to the limitations prescribed in Act No. 283 of 1975."
The Certificate of Incorporation supersedes all charters formerly issued. A
copy of the Certificate is available for public inspection at town offices
during regular town business hours.
   Prior to the 1978 Certificate of Incorporation, the Town of Kingstree was
granted a charter under Act No. 4865 of 1866, and also issued a charter on
September 27, 1905.
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
      Chapter
         
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
         
11.   MUNICIPAL SEAL
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances
   
10.03   Severability
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Liability of corporations and agents
   
10.08   Effect of repeal or expiration of ordinance
   
10.09   Amendments to code
   
10.10   Altering code
   
10.11   Prosecution where different penalties exist for same offense
   
10.12   Reference to other sections
   
10.13   Reference to offices
   
10.14   Errors and omissions
   
10.15   Official time
   
10.16   Ordinances repealed
   
10.17   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.18   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.19   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.20   Uniform ordinance summons
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   The ordinances embraced in this and following chapters and sections
constitute and are designated as "The Code of Ordinances of Kingstree, South
Carolina" and may be so cited. They may be cited also as the "Kingstree Town
Code" or "The Town Code of Kingstree."
('86 Code, § 1.201)
§ 10.02 PROVISIONS CONSIDERED AS CONTINUATION OF EXISTING ORDINANCES.
   The provisions appearing in this code, as far as they are the same as those
ordinances existing at the time of the adoption hereof, shall be considered as
a continuation thereof and not as new enactments.
('86 Code, § 1.202)
§ 10.03 SEVERABILITY.
   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Mayor and Council, that if
any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this code shall be
declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of
competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the
remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this code
since the same would have been enacted without the incorporation in this code
of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section.
('86 Code, § 1.203)
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AND/OR. The word "and" may be read as "or" and the word "or" may be read as
"and" where the sense requires it.
   BOND. When bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a street when
50% or more of the frontage thereon for a distance of 300 feet or more is
occupied by buildings in use for business.
   CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, MUNICIPALITY, or TOWN. The Town of Kingstree,
South Carolina. MUNICIPALITY may be used interchangeably with town and shall
mean the entire area within the corporate limits.
   CLERK. The Municipal Clerk. However, the title may be used interchangeably
with "Clerk," "Town Clerk" or "Clerk-Treasurer," if one person holds both
positions.
   CODE,   THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as
modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or
sections.
   COUNTY. Williamsburg County, South Carolina.
   COMPUTATION OF TIME. The time within which an act is to be done and be
computed by excluding the first day and including the last, and if the last day
be Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, that shall be excluded.
   COUNCIL or TOWN COUNCIL. The Mayor and Council as defined in S.C. Code § 5-
13-20.
   EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Vehicles of the fire and police departments, ambulances
and/or emergency vehicles or public service corporations as are designated or
authorized by the South Carolina Department of Highways and Transportation or
by the Town Council.
   MAY. Shall be permissive.
   MONTH. A calendar month, unless defined otherwise.
   OATH, SWEAR, SWORN. Shall be construed to include an affirmation in all
cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in
such cases, the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be the equivalent to words
"affirm" and "affirmed" and vice versa.
   OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT . An officer, office,
employee, commission, or department of this municipality unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
   OWNER. When applied to a structure or land, the holder of the title in fee
simple, any part-owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant
by the entirety, and/or every mortgagee of record, of the whole or part of such
structure or land.
   PERSON. Shall include a corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization and any other group as a unit, as well as an individual or
individuals.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Shall include every species of property, except real
property, as defined in this section.
   PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
   PROPERTY. Shall include real and personal property.
   REAL PROPERTY AND REAL ESTATE. Lands, tenements and the hereditaments.
   RESIDENCE DISTRICT. Territory contiguous to and including a street not
comprising a business district when the property on such street for a distance
of 300 feet or more is in the main improved with dwellings or dwellings and
buildings in use with residences.
   ROADWAY. That portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel.
   SHALL. Shall be mandatory.
   SIDEWALK. Any portion of a street between the curb line, or the lateral
lines of a roadway where there is no curb and the adjacent property line
intended for the use of pedestrians.
   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Shall mean a mark, when a person cannot write.
   STATE. The State of South Carolina.
   STREET. Shall include streets, avenues, boulevards, highways, roads, alleys,
lanes, bridges and all other public thoroughfares and shall mean the entire
width thereof between abutting property lines. It shall be construed to include
a sidewalk or footpath, unless the contrary is expressed or unless such
construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council.
   SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in
the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have subchapters.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. When applied to a building or land, shall include any
person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether alone
or with others.
   TOWN. All the area lying within the corporate limits.
   WRITING or WRITTEN. Shall include printing and any other mode of
representing words and letters.
   YEAR. A calendar year unless otherwise defined.
('86 Code, § 1.205) (Ord. 2014-03, passed 5-12-14)
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   As used in this code and all ordinances, in all cases in which the spirit
and intent may require it, the following shall apply:
   (A)   Any word importing the singular number shall be held to include the
plural and all words in the plural shall apply also to the singular.
   (B)   All words importing the masculine gender shall apply to females also
and words in the feminine gender shall apply to males.
   (C)   All words importing the present tense shall apply to the future, also.
('86 Code, § 1.206)
§ 10.07 LIABILITY OF CORPORATIONS AND AGENTS.
   (A)   Any violation of this code by any officer, agent or other person
acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or
organization while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall
in every case also be deemed to be a violation by such corporation, association
or organization.
   (B)   Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any
corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and
liable to punishment as well as such corporation or unincorporated association
or organization for the violation by it of any provision of this code, where
such violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act, omission or
order of any such person.
('86 Code, § 1.209)
§ 10.08 EFFECT OF REPEAL OR EXPIRATION OF ORDINANCE.
   The repeal of an ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision
contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued, any offense committed,
any penalty or punishment incurred or any proceeding commenced before the
repeal took effect or the ordinance expired.
('86 Code, § 1.210)
§ 10.09 AMENDMENTS TO CODE.
   (A)   All ordinances adopted subsequent to the adoption of this code of
ordinances, which amend, repeal or in any way affect this code of ordinances,
shall be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this code and
printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and
subsections, or any part thereof by subsequent ordinances, such repealed
portions may be excluded from the code by omission from reprinted pages
affected thereby.
   (B)   Amendments to any of the provisions of this code shall be made by
amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this
code in substantially the following, but not necessarily the exact language:
"that Section of the Town Code of the Town of Kingstree is hereby amended as
follows: ...." The new provisions shall then be set out as enacted.
   (C)   In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the code is to
be added, the following language may be used: "...that the Kingstree Town Code,
is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered (number to be inserted)
which section shall read as follows: ...." The new section shall then be set
out in full as enacted, and the sections of this code may be renumbered to
accomplish such intention.
   (D)   All sections, articles, chapters or provisions to be repealed shall be
specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may
be.
('86 Code, § 1.211)
§ 10.10 ALTERING CODE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or
deletions, any part or portion of this code, or to insert or delete pages, or
portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such code in any manner
whatsoever, which will cause the laws of this municipality to be misrepresented
thereby. Any person, firm or corporation violating this section shall be
punished as provided in §
10.99.
('86 Code, § 1.212)
§ 10.11 PROSECUTION WHERE DIFFERENT PENALTIES EXIST FOR SAME OFFENSE.
   In all cases where the same offense may be created by different clauses or
sections of the ordinances of this code, the prosecuting officer may elect
under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the
same person for the same offense.
('86 Code, § 1.213)
§ 10.12 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, such
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.13 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this municipality exercising the powers,
duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.14 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and such word
or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
such error.
§ 10.15 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be
the official time within this municipality for the transaction of all municipal
business.
§ 10.16 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.17 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.18 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from
their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.19 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending ordinances,
if any, are listed following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10,
passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-80; Am.
Ord. 25, passed 1-1-85)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (S.C. Code 5-13-20) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-80; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-
85).
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a "statutory reference"
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information.
Example:
   § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
      This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
   Statutory reference:
      For provisions concerning the inspection of public records, see S.C. Code
§§ 30-1-10 et seq.
   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the city published in 1986 and subsequently amended, the 1986
code section number shall be indicated in the history by "('86 Code, §      )."
§ 10.20 UNIFORM ORDINANCE SUMMONS.
   (A)   The town does adopt a uniform ordinance summons for use in the
enforcement of municipal ordinances. Any municipal law enforcement officer or
code enforcement officer is authorized to use the uniform ordinance summons.
The town shall be responsible for the printing, distributing, monitoring and
auditing of the ordinance summons to be used by the town.
   (B)   The uniform ordinance summons may not be used to perform a custodial
arrest. The uniform ordinance summons may not be used to enforce any municipal
ordinance which regulates the use of motor vehicles on the public roads of the
State of South Carolina.
   (C)   (1)   The summons must cite only one violation per summons and must
contain at least the following information:
         (a)   Name and address of person or entity charged;
         (b)   Name and title of issuing officer;
         (c)   Time, date and location of the hearing;
         (d)   A description of the ordinance the person or entity is charged
with violating;
         (e)   Procedure to post bond; and
         (f)   Any other notice or warning otherwise required by law.
      (2)   The uniform ordinance summons shall be consecutively and discreetly
numbered. The ordinance summonses shall be audited as part of the annual
independent audit required by S.C. Code Annotated § 5-7-240 (1976), as amended,
and a separate copy of each audit must be furnished to the Town Administrator.
   (D)   Service of a uniform ordinance summons vests the town’s smunicipal
court with jurisdiction to hear and dispose of the charge for which the uniform
ordinance summons was issued and served.
   (E)   Any municipal law enforcement officer or code enforcement officer who
serves a uniform ordinance summons must allow the person served to proceed
without first having to post bond or to appear before a magistrate or municipal
judge. Acceptance of a uniform ordinance summons constitutes a person's
recognizance to comply with the terms of the summons. Any person who fails to
appear before the municipal court as required by a uniform ordinance summons,
without first having posted such bond as may be required or without having been
granted a continuance by the municipal court, is guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction must be fined not more than $200 nor imprisoned for more than
30 days. The town police officer processing an arrest made pursuant to this
section must furnish such information to the state law enforcement division as
is required by S.C. Code Title 23, Chapter 3 as amended.
   (F)   The attached form is hereby adopted as the town’s uniform ordinance
summons.
   (G)   The municipal court shall maintain a record of all cases heard which
are charged on an ordinance summons.
   (H)   This section shall not prohibit the town from enforcing ordinances by
any means otherwise authorized by law.
(Ord. 2014-08, passed 8-18-14)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Whenever in this code or in any ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or
order promulgated by any agency or officer thereof under authority duly vested
in him or it, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an
offense or misdemeanor, or the doing of any act is required, where no specific
penalty is provided for the violation thereof, the violation of any such
provisions of this code, ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order shall
be punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment for a period not
exceeding 30 days, or both; provided, however, that no penalty shall exceed the
penalty provided by state law for similar offenses. Each day any violation of
this code or any ordinance, rule or regulation shall continue shall constitute
a separate offense.
('86 Code, § 1.207) (Am. Ord. 97-7, passed 8-18-97)
Cross-reference:
   Imposition of penalty by Municipal Judge, see §
35.05
Statutory reference:
   S.C. Code § 14-25-65
CHAPTER 11: MUNICIPAL SEAL
Section
   
11.01   Municipal seal
§ 11.01 MUNICIPAL SEAL.
   The municipality shall have a common seal, to be in the custody of the
Clerk, which shall be affixed to all official documents of the municipality as
may be directed by the Council.
('86 Code, § 1.214)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
      Chapter
         
30.   TOWN COUNCIL
         
31.   TOWN OFFICIALS
         
32.   FIRE AND POLICE DEPARTMENTS
         
33.   BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
         
34.   FINANCE AND TAXATION
         
35.   MUNICIPAL COURT
         
36.   MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS
CHAPTER 30: TOWN COUNCIL
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Form of government
   
30.02   Composition and election of Council
   
30.03   Terms of office
   
30.04   Compensation and expenses
   
30.05   Mayor Pro Tempore
   
30.06   Oath of office required
   
30.07   Councilmembers not to hold other office or position
   
30.08   Council to establish departments, offices and agencies
Council Meetings
   
30.20   Time of meetings; open to public; notice
   
30.21   Presiding officer
   
30.22   Agenda
   
30.23   Minutes
   
30.24   Quorum; rules of order
   
30.25   Order of proceedings
   
30.26   How often members may speak
   
30.27   Appearance of citizens; unlawful to interrupt meetings
   
30.28   Executive sessions
   
30.29   Motions
   
30.30   Voting
   
30.31   Committees
Ordinances
   
30.40   Ordinances required
   
30.41   Emergency ordinances
   
30.42   Codification of ordinances
   
30.43   Notice required
   
30.44   Form of ordinance; enacting clause
   
30.45   Introduction of ordinances
   
30.46   Ordinance to be entered in book; notation of amending or repealing
ordinances
   
30.47   Enactment of ordinances
   
30.48   Resolutions
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   Pursuant to the Code of Laws of South Carolina, 1976, the Kingstree form of
government shall be the Council-Manager form.
('86 Code, § 2.101)
Statutory reference:
   Council-Manager form of government, see S.C. §§ 5-5-10(c), 5-13-10 et seq.
§ 30.02 COMPOSITION AND ELECTION OF COUNCIL.
   The Town Council shall be composed of a Mayor and six members of Council all
of whom shall be residents and qualified electors of the town.
('86 Code, § 2.102)
Statutory reference:
   Election of Mayor and Council, see S.C. Code § 5-15-20
§ 30.03 TERMS OF OFFICE.
   The Mayor and all members of Council shall be elected to serve four-year
staggered terms.
('86 Code, § 2.103)
Statutory reference:
   Terms of office of Mayor and Council, see S.C. Code § 5-15-40
§ 30.04 COMPENSATION AND EXPENSES.
   (A)   The Mayor shall be paid an annual salary of $9,800. Each member of
Council shall be paid an annual salary of $4,900.
   (B)   Increases in compensation shall not become effective until the
commencement date of the terms of two or more members elected at the next
general election following the adoption of the ordinance, at which time it will
become effective for all members whether or not they were elected in such
election.
   (C)   The Mayor and members of Council may receive payment for actual
expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties when supported by
official expense vouchers.
('86 Code, § 2.104) (Am. Ord. 2021-04, passed 6-21-21)
Statutory reference:
   Salaries and expenses of Mayor and Council, see S.C. Code § 5-7-170
§ 30.05 MAYOR PRO TEMPORE.
   Immediately after any general election of the Council, the Council shall
elect from its membership a Mayor Pro Tempore for a term of not more than two
years. He shall act as Mayor during the absence or disability of the Mayor. In
case of a vacancy in the office of Mayor, the Mayor Pro tempore shall serve
until a successor is elected.
('86 Code, § 2.105)
Statutory reference:
   Mayor pro tempore, see S.C. Code § 5-7-190
§ 30.06 OATH OF OFFICE REQUIRED.
   The Mayor and each member of Council, before entering upon the duties of
their respective offices, shall take the following oath, to-wit:
I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I am duly qualified, according to the
Constitution of this State, to exercise the duties of the office to which I
have been elected and that I will, to the best of my ability, discharge the
duties thereof, and preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of this State
and of the United States.
(S.C. Constitution)
As Mayor (Councilman) of The Town of Kingstree I will equally, fairly, and
impartially, to the best of my ability and skill, exercise the trust reposed in
me, and I will use my best endeavors to preserve the peace and carry into
effect according to law the purposes for which I have been elected. So help me,
God.
('86 Code, § 2.106)
Cross-reference:
   Swearing falsely when taking oath, see §
134.06
Statutory reference:
   Oath of Mayor and Council, see S.C. Code § 5-15-150
§ 30.07 COUNCILMEMBERS NOT TO HOLD OTHER OFFICE OR POSITION.
   No member of Town Council shall serve as a regular or volunteer member of
the Town Fire Department, or hold any other town office or town employment.
Volunteer members of the Town Fire Department shall be subject to the authority
of the Town Manager in the same manner as regular employees.
(Ord. 94-11, passed 7-18-94)
§ 30.08 COUNCIL TO ESTABLISH DEPARTMENTS, OFFICES AND AGENCIES.
   The Council may establish departments, offices and agencies and prescribe
the functions thereof.
('86 Code, § 2.405)
COUNCIL MEETINGS
§ 30.20 TIME OF MEETINGS; OPEN TO PUBLIC; NOTICE.
   The regular meetings of Council shall be held on the third Monday of each
month at Municipal Complex at 6:30 p.m. Meeting dates may be changed by a
majority vote of members present at any regular or special meeting. Notice of
all changed meetings and special meetings shall be given to all available
members and the news media by the Town Clerk. Special meetings shall be held
whenever called by the Mayor in cases of emergency or when, in his judgement,
the good of the municipality requires it, or when notice is given in writing by
four members of the Council. All Council meetings shall be open to the public
and public notice given 24 hours prior to special meetings, as required by the
Freedom of Information Act of 1972 as amended.
('86 Code, § 2.201) (Am. Ord. 89-22, passed 1-15-90; Am. Ord. 2003-15, passed
9-15-03)
Statutory reference:
   Notice of meetings of public bodies, see S.C. Code § 30-4-80
§ 30.21 PRESIDING OFFICER.
   The Mayor shall preside at all Council meetings, when present. In the
absence of both the Mayor and Mayor Pro Tempore the duties of the Mayor shall
be performed by such member of the Council as the Council may designate.
('86 Code, § 2.212)
§ 30.22 AGENDA.
   Matters to be considered by Council at a regular meeting shall be placed on
a written agenda and publicly posted by the Town Clerk at least 24 hours prior
to the meeting. Matters not on the agenda may be considered upon request of a
member unless at least two members object. Agendas, etc. shall be delivered to
Council by 5:00 p.m. on Friday prior to the meeting.
('86 Code, § 2.202)
Statutory reference:
   Notice of meetings of public bodies, S.C. Code § 30-4-80
§ 30.23 MINUTES.
   The Clerk shall keep the minutes of all public meetings of the Council which
shall be a matter of permanent public record. At each Council meeting, the
minutes of the previous meeting or meetings shall be presented for approval.
Minutes shall not be considered the official record of a meeting until approved
by the Council. Any member of Council desiring to express a position in the
minutes on a matter voted upon by Council may do so by presenting the position
in writing to Council not later than the next regular meeting. No person shall
make any change in the minutes or remove same from Town Hall, without prior
approval of the Mayor or Council.
('86 Code, § 2.203)
§ 30.24 QUORUM; RULES OF ORDER.
   A majority of the Council shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of
business at any meeting. Except as otherwise provided by state law or this
code, all proceedings of Council shall be governed by Robert's Rules of Order.
The Town Attorney shall act as parliamentarian. In his absence, all questions
of order shall be decided by the Mayor or, in his absence, the presiding
officer, without debate, subject to an appeal to the Council.
('86 Code, § 2.204)
§ 30.25 ORDER OF PROCEEDINGS.
   The order of proceedings of Council meetings may be substantially as
follows:
   (A)   Calling the roll.
   (B)   Approval of the minutes.
   (C)   Petitions and communications.
   (D)   Reports of committees.
   (E)   Old business.
   (F)   New business.
   (G)   Adjournment.
('86 Code, § 2.206)
§ 30.26 HOW OFTEN MEMBERS MAY SPEAK.
   No member shall speak more than twice on the same question except to explain
his position, without concurrence of a majority of the Council.
('86 Code, § 2.209)
§ 30.27 APPEARANCE OF CITIZENS; UNLAWFUL TO INTERRUPT MEETINGS.
   (A)   Any citizen of the town shall be entitled to be placed on the agenda
of any regular meeting to discuss any municipal matter, with the exception of
personnel matters. Persons desiring to be placed on the agenda shall notify the
Clerk in writing, stating the item he wishes to discuss, by 5:00 p.m. the
Thursday prior to the meeting.
('86 Code, § 2.207)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to interrupt the
proceedings of Council, the Court or any other official body while in session.
('86 Code, § 2.205)
Cross-reference:
   Disturbing or interfering with gatherings, see §
133.02
Statutory reference:
   Contempt of court, see S.C. Code § 14-1-150
§ 30.28 EXECUTIVE SESSIONS.
   (A)   Council may hold executive sessions as permitted by the South Carolina
Freedom of Information Act at such times and places as Council may deem
necessary and in the public interest.
   (B)   A majority vote of Council shall be necessary to call such sessions.
   (C)   Any formal action taken in executive session shall be ratified
thereafter in public session, prior to such action becoming effective.
('86 Code, § 2.213)
Statutory reference:
   Open meetings, see S.C. Code § 30-4-60
   When meetings may be closed, see S.C. Code § 30-4-70
§ 30.29 MOTIONS.
   (A)   Motions to be in writing. All motions shall be reduced to writing at
the request of the Mayor or of any member of Council.
('86 Code, § 2.217)
   (B)   Motions not debatable. The following motions shall be without debate:
      (1)   To adjourn;
      (2)   To lay on the table;
      (3)   To read any paper;
      (4)   To take the yeas and nays for the previous question, and
      (5)   To reconsider.
('86 Code, § 2.218)
   (C)   Precedence of motions during debate.
      (1)   When a question is under debate, no motion shall be received except
a motion:
         (a)   To adjourn;
         (b)   To lay on the table;
         (c)   For the previous question;
         (d)   To postpone to a certain day; or
         (e)   To commit, to amend or to postpone indefinitely.
      (2)   The above motions shall have precedence in the order in which they
are set forth.
('86 Code, § 2.219)
   (D)   Motions to reconsider. A motion to reconsider shall not be entertained
unless it be made by a member of Council who voted with the majority, and such
motion shall be made only at the same or next succeeding meeting.
('86 Code, § 2.220)
§ 30.30 VOTING.
   (A)   A show of hands or a voice vote shall be sufficient to record votes.
During the voting, no member shall leave the Council chamber, without
permission of the presiding officer.
   (B)   All actions of Council shall be by majority vote of the members
present.
   (C)   The result of each vote on every question shall be recorded in the
minutes by the Clerk. The "yeas" and "nays" on any question shall be recorded,
when requested by any member.
   (D)   Every member of Council, including the Mayor, shall have one vote on
every question, except when required to refrain from voting by state law.
   (E)   The Mayor may offer a motion, or second a motion without relinquishing
the chair.
   (F)   Members voting "present" shall not be recorded as in favor or opposed
to the motion.
('86 Code, § 2.208)
   (G)   Any member shall have his reasons for voting for or against any
measure recorded in the minutes, at his request.
('86 Code, § 2.210)
   (H)   Neither the Mayor nor any member of Council shall vote on any question
of a private nature in which he is personally or pecuniarily interested.
('86 Code, § 2.211)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state laws, see S.C. Code §§ 8-13-700 through 8-13-795
§ 30.31 COMMITTEES.
   (A)   Council may appoint a committee to assist in or hold a public hearing
for Council at any time upon any matter pending before it unless otherwise
prohibited by law. Minutes or reports of hearings held by such committees shall
be filed with the Clerk as public records.
('86 Code, § 2.214)
   (B)   Committee reports may be in writing and signed by a majority of the
committee. Any report involving the expenditure of money shall be in writing
and include the amount to be expended, or an approximation thereof, and the
reasons therefor.
('86 Code, § 2.215)
   (C)   Reports of committees, in the order of business, shall be rendered as
the presiding officer may determine.
('86 Code, § 2.216)
ORDINANCES
§ 30.40 ORDINANCES REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Council to pass, from time to time, such
ordinances as in its judgment shall best promote the interests of the citizens
and property owners of the municipality.
('86 Code, § 2.107)
   (B)   The Council shall act by ordinance in all matters required by law to
be done by ordinance, in order to:
      (1)   Adopt or amend an administrative code or establish, alter or
abolish any department, office or agency;
      (2)   Provide for a fine or other penalty or establish a rule or
regulation in which a fine or other penalty is imposed for violations;
      (3)   Appropriate funds and adopt a budget;
      (4)   Grant, renew or extend franchises, licenses or rights in public
streets, or in public property and close abandoned streets;
      (5)   Authorize the borrowing of money or the issuance of bonds;
      (6)   Levy taxes, assess property for improvements or establish charges
for services
      (7)   Annex areas;
      (8)   Convey or lease or authorize the conveyance or lease of any lands;
and
      (9)   Amend or repeal any ordinance described in divisions (1) through
(8) above.
   (C)   In all other matters, the Council may act either by ordinance,
resolution, or on motion, written or oral, which shall be recorded in the
minutes.
('86 Code, § 2.109)
Statutory reference:
   Acts required to be done by ordinance, see S.C. Code § 5-7-260
   Powers of municipalities, see S.C. Code § 5-7-30
§ 30.41 EMERGENCY ORDINANCES.
   Emergency ordinances shall conform to the provisions of S.C. Code § 5-7-250
(d) and §
30.47(C) hereof.
('86 Code, § 2.110)
§ 30.42 CODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   All ordinances amending this code and any other ordinances or portions
of ordinances, as may be required by Council, shall be codified at least
annually in this code.
   (B)   Standard codes, technical regulations, business license ordinances and
zoning ordinances may be cited in the code by reference and copies thereof
shall be made available by the Clerk for distribution or for purchase at a
reasonable price.
('86 Code, § 2.111)
Statutory reference:
   Adoption of technical codes, see S.C. Code § 5-7-280
   Ordinances to be codified, see S.C. Code § 5-7-290
§ 30.43 NOTICE REQUIRED.
   Prior to the introduction of an ordinance granting a franchise, license or
right for the use of any street or public property, or for the permanent
closing of any abandoned street, the applicant for such ordinance shall publish
a notice in a newspaper having general circulation in the municipality stating
the nature of the franchise, license, or right sought or a description of the
street sought to be closed, and the date on which the application is to be
presented to Council which shall be at least one week after the last notice.
This requirement shall not apply to the temporary closing of a public street
initiated by Council.
('86 Code, § 2.112)
§ 30.44 FORM OF ORDINANCE; ENACTING CLAUSE.
   (A)   Every proposed ordinance shall be numbered and shall be introduced in
writing and in the form required for final adoption which shall include:
      (1)   A title briefly describing the contents;
      (2)   Findings, reasons or basis for the ordinance, if desired and when
appropriate;
      (3)   An enacting clause;
      (4)   A repealing provision, when appropriate;
      (5)   The provisions of the ordinance including section numbers, when
appropriate;
      (6)   The effective date of the ordinance and dates of first and second
readings and approval of Town Attorney as to form, when asked.
('86 Code, § 2.113)
   (B)   The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be, in substance, as
follows: "Be it ordained by the Council of The Town of Kingstree, South
Carolina:"  
('86 Code, § 2.108)
§ 30.45 INTRODUCTION OF ORDINANCES.
   An ordinance may be proposed by any member of Council or Town Manager. A
proposed ordinance shall be referred to the Town Attorney, when appropriate,
for approval as to legality and form, and he shall render assistance in the
preparation of ordinances when requested to do so. After an ordinance is in
proper form and the required notices have been given, the Clerk shall hold the
ordinance for public inspection. An ordinance shall be deemed to be introduced
when, at a public meeting of Council, its title is read, after appearance on an
agenda.
('86 Code, § 2.114)
Statutory reference:
   For initiative and referendum by the electors, see S.C. Code Title 5,
Chapter 17
§ 30.46 ORDINANCE TO BE ENTERED IN BOOK; NOTATION OF AMENDING OR REPEALING
ORDINANCES.
   (A)   The Clerk shall enter in an ordinance book the original copy of all
ordinances passed by the Council. The book shall be known as the "Ordinance
Book," as required by the 1976 S.C. Legislature, bearing Ratification No. 718,
and it shall be indexed.
('86 Code, § 2.115)
   (B)   The Clerk shall write on the first page of every ordinance, subsequent
to entry in the ordinance book, if the same shall be "amended" or "repealed,"
as the case may be, the words amended, or repealed with a reference on the
ordinance in the ordinance book as to where the amending or repealing ordinance
can be found.
('86 Code, § 2.116)
§ 30.47 ENACTMENT OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   An ordinance to levy a tax, adopt a budget, appropriate funds, grant a
franchise, license or right to use or occupy a public street or public property
for commercial purposes shall be complete in the form in which it is finally
passed, and in such form remain on file with the Clerk for public inspection at
least six days before final adoption.
   (B)   No ordinance shall be adopted until it shall have been read two times
and on two separate days with at least six days between each reading.
   (C)   Emergency ordinances may be adopted on one reading, without notice or
hearing, by affirmative vote of two-thirds of the members present. An emergency
ordinance may not levy taxes, relate to a franchise or a service rate and shall
expire automatically on the sixty-first day following its enactment.
   (D)   The introduction and reading of any ordinance may be by the reading of
the title only unless full reading is requested by a member of Council.
   (E)   After the introduction of an ordinance, any member of Council or any
town citizen-taxpayer interested therein may request a public hearing which
shall be held at a time designated by the Council prior to final adoption.
   (F)   Upon final adoption, by vote of Council, an ordinance shall be signed
by the Mayor, or presiding member in the absence of the Mayor, and attested by
the Clerk.
('86 Code, § 2.117)
§ 30.48 RESOLUTIONS.
   (A)   A voice motion by a member of Council shall be considered to be the
introduction of an oral resolution which shall require no written record other
than a notation by the Clerk in the Council minutes. However, a resolution
proposed in writing shall be introduced in the same manner as an ordinance and
in such form as may be recommended as applicable by the Town Attorney, when
appropriate.
('86 Code, § 2.118)
   (B)   Written or oral resolutions may be adopted on one reading unless a
public hearing is set by a majority of the members of Council present.
('86 Code, § 2.119)
CHAPTER 31: TOWN OFFICIALS
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Enforcement of ordinances, laws
   
31.02   Right of entry
   
31.03   Emergency powers of Mayor
Town Manager
   
31.15   Office created
   
31.16   Qualifications, term, compensation
   
31.17   Powers and duties
   
31.18   Absence or disability of Manager
   
31.19   Bond
Municipal Clerk
   
31.30   Appointment
   
31.31   Bond
   
31.32   Duties
   
31.33   Clerk to act as Treasurer
   
31.34   Treasurer to be bonded
Municipal Attorney
   
31.45   Appointment
   
31.46   Duties
   
31.47   Salary
Public Works Director
   
31.60   Creation of office; duties
Cross-reference:
   For provisions on the Mayor, see
Chapter 30, Town Council
   Public property to be returned upon separation, see §
134.05
   Unlawful for officials or employees to "fix" traffic tickets, see §
70.08
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 ENFORCEMENT OF ORDINANCES, LAWS.
   All officers and employees shall enforce obedience to all state statutes,
provisions of this code or any resolution, rules and regulations or orders
issued thereunder by lawful authority by instituting such procedures as may be
necessary to such enforcement.
('86 Code, § 2.401)
§ 31.02 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   Subject to lawful entry requirements, whenever any officer or employee is
required to enter any premises or vehicle as authorized by statute, the
provisions of this code or any ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order
issued thereunder, he shall have the right to enter any such premises or
vehicle at any reasonable time.
('86 Code, § 2.402)
§ 31.03 EMERGENCY POWERS OF MAYOR.
   (A)   A state of emergency shall be deemed to exist whenever, during times
of great public crises, disaster, rioting, civil disturbances, catastrophe, or
for any other reason, public safety authorities are unable to maintain public
order or afford adequate protection for lives, safety, health, welfare or
property.
   (B)   In the event of a state of emergency threatening or endangering the
lives, safety, health and welfare of the citizenry or threatening damage to or
destruction of property, the Mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to issue
a public proclamation declaring to all persons the existence of such a state of
emergency and, in order more effectively to protect lives, safety and property,
to define and impose a curfew applicable to all persons within the jurisdiction
of the Council.
   (C)   The Mayor is further authorized and empowered to limit the application
of such a curfew to any area specifically designated and described within the
jurisdiction of the Council and to specific hours of the day or night and to
exempt from the curfew policemen, firemen, doctors, nurses and such others as
may be essential to the preservation of public order and immediately necessary
to serve the needs of the people within the corporate limits.
('86 Code, § 2.120)
TOWN MANAGER
§ 31.15 OFFICE CREATED.
   The office of Town Manager is hereby created.
('86 Code, § 2.701) (Ord. passed 4-5-58)
§ 31.16 QUALIFICATIONS, TERM, COMPENSATION.
   The Town Council shall appoint a Manager who shall be the administrative
head of the municipal government under the direction and supervision of the
Council. He shall be appointed with regard to merit only. He need not be a
resident of the town or state when appointed, but during his tenure he shall
reside within the town. He shall be appointed for an indefinite term and may be
removed by a majority vote of the members of the Council. The Manager shall be
given 30 days notice of the intention of Council to remove him. The Manager
shall receive such compensation as the Council shall fix from time to time by
ordinance or resolution.
('86 Code, § 2.702) (Ord. passed 4-5-58)
§ 31.17 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Town Manager shall be the chief executive officer and the head of the
administrative branch of the municipal government. He shall be responsible to
the Council for the proper administration of all affairs of the town, except as
otherwise specifically provided by law. To that end he shall have the power and
shall be required to:
   (A)   Appoint and, when necessary for the good of the administration of
service, remove all employees, except as otherwise provided by law, or as may
be limited by Council or as he may authorize the head of a department or office
to appoint and remove subordinates therein.
   (B)   Recommend to the Council the appointment of officers who are required
to be elected by the Council. He shall recommend the removal or suspension of
any such officers when removal or suspension shall be consistent to the best
interest of the Town. All such recommendations for appointment or approval
shall be based solely upon merit and upon the qualifications of such officer.
Any such officer who shall feel aggrieved by such recommendation for his
removal or suspension or who feels that the Manager has abused his discretion
and power in making such recommendation shall have the right to appear before
the Council to be heard. He shall express in writing his intention to appear
before the Council within ten days from the date of notice of such
recommendation to be heard.
   (C)   See that all ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the Council
are faithfully executed.
   (D)   Prepare the budget annually, submit it to the Council and be
responsible for its administration after adoption.
   (E)   Prepare and submit to the Council as of the end of the fiscal year a
complete report on the administrative activities for the preceding year.
   (F)   Attend all meetings of the Council and recommend for adoption such
measures as he may deem necessary.
   (G)   Make reports to the Council, from time to time, upon the affairs of
the town and keep the Council fully advised on the town's financial conditions
or its future financial needs.
   (H)   Act as Purchasing Agent for the town as provided in §
34.50.
   (I)   Perform such other duties as may be required of him by the Council.
('86 Code, § 2.703) (Ord. passed 4-5-58)
Cross-reference:
   Purchasing Agent, see §
34.50
§ 31.18 ABSENCE OR DISABILITY OF MANAGER.
   In the event of the temporary absence or disability of the Manager, the Town
Council may designate a qualified administrative officer of the town to perform
the duties of the Manager during such temporary absence or disability.
('86 Code, § 2.704) (Ord. passed 4-5-58)
§ 31.19 BOND.
   Before entering upon the duties of office, the City Manager shall enter into
bond in such sum as may be required by Council, with good and sufficient surety
for the faithful performance of his duties. The fee therefore shall be paid by
the municipality.
('86 Code, § 2.705) (Ord. passed 4-5-58; Am. Ord. 97-9, passed 8-18-97)
MUNICIPAL CLERK
§ 31.30 APPOINTMENT.
   The Town Manager shall appoint an officer of the municipality who shall have
the title of Municipal Clerk and who shall serve at the pleasure of the
Manager.
('86 Code, § 2.501)
Statutory reference:
   Appointment and duties of municipal clerk, see S.C. Code § 5-7-220
§ 31.31 BOND.
   Before entering upon the duties of his office, the Clerk shall enter into
bond in such sum as may be required by Council with good and sufficient surety
for the faithful performance of his duties. The fee therefor shall be paid by
the municipality.
('86 Code, § 2.502)
§ 31.32 DUTIES.
   The Clerk shall serve as ex-officio clerk of Council, give notice of
meetings, prepare and post the agenda, attend regular and special meetings,
record votes of Council, attest all ordinances and resolutions, keep minutes of
Council meetings and perform such other duties as may be assigned by Council.
('86 Code, § 2.503)
Statutory reference:
   Duties of municipal clerk, see S.C. Code § 5-7-220
§ 31.33 CLERK TO ACT AS TREASURER.
   In addition to all other duties, the Clerk shall act also as the Treasurer
and perform those duties commonly associated therewith, pursuant to state
statutes and this code.
('86 Code, § 2.504)
§ 31.34 TREASURER TO BE BONDED.
   Should the Treasurer be other than the Clerk, he shall be bonded as provided
for the Clerk in §
31.31.
('86 Code, § 2.505)
MUNICIPAL ATTORNEY
§ 31.45 APPOINTMENT.
   The Council may appoint a Municipal Attorney who shall be a lawyer of good
and reputable standing who shall hold office at the pleasure of Council,
pursuant to S.C. Code § 5-7-230.
('86 Code, § 2.601)
§ 31.46 DUTIES.
   (A)   The Municipal Attorney shall attend all meetings of Council unless
excused by Council. He shall act as parliamentarian. When requested to do so,
he shall draft all ordinances and resolutions and review all ordinances,
resolutions and documents presented to Council. He shall give opinions upon
questions of municipal procedure, form and law to any member of Council and
other municipal officials, when requested.
   (B)   The Attorney shall defend the town against all civil suits.
('86 Code, § 2.602)
§ 31.47 SALARY.
   The Attorney shall be paid such salary as may be fixed by Council.
('86 Code, § 2.603)
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR
§ 31.60 CREATION OF OFFICE; DUTIES.
   A Public Works Department is hereby created, and the position of Director of
Public Works is hereby created to supervise this department, under the
direction of the Town Manager. His duties and responsibilities shall be as
promulgated by the Manager.
('86 Code, § 2.801)
CHAPTER 32: FIRE AND POLICE DEPARTMENTS
Section
Fire Department
   
32.01   Name of fire department
   
32.02   Fire Chief
   
32.03   Members
   
32.04   Fire inspections; compliance with notice
   
32.05   Inquiries into fire origins
   
32.06   Firemen's Insurance and Inspection Fund
   
32.07   Fire calls outside town limits authorized
Police Department
   
32.20   Chief and police officers
   
32.21   Special policemen
   
32.22   Arrest and bail
   
32.23   Police to sell recovered personal property
Cross-reference:
   Resisting police officers; hindering arrest and the like, see §§
134.01 -
134.03
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.01 NAME OF FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   The Fire Department shall be known as the Kingstree Fire Department.
('86 Code, § 5.401)
§ 32.02 FIRE CHIEF.
   The Chief of the Fire Department shall have general superintendence and
control of the Department. During the progress of a fire, he shall have all
rights and powers of a policeman. He shall have power to make rules and
regulations for the discipline of the members and the prevention of fires,
subject to the approval of the Council.
('86 Code, § 5.403)
§ 32.03 MEMBERS.
   (A)   The authority to provide for the employment of fire fighters and to
prescribe their duties and responsibilities shall be as vested by the Council
in the Fire Chief.
('86 Code, § 5.402)
   (B)   All members of the Department shall be subject for call to duty at any
time, day or night, when needed to extinguish fires or for any other emergency
that may arise.
('86 Code, § 5.404)
§ 32.04 FIRE INSPECTIONS; COMPLIANCE WITH NOTICE.
   (A)   A member of the Fire Department, designated by the Chief, may inspect
every structure used for commercial or industrial purposes to determine if the
structure contains any defects constituting a danger to fire prevention or fire
safety. The Chief shall notify promptly the owner and occupant in writing of
any structure found to contain such a defect.
('86 Code, § 5.405)
   (B)   The owner of a structure, within such period as specified in the
notice shall remedy the defect to the reasonable satisfaction of the Fire
Chief.
('86 Code, § 5.406)
§ 32.05 INQUIRIES INTO FIRE ORIGINS.
   The Fire Chief shall hold an inquiry into the origin of every fire occurring
within the corporate limits. He may subpoena witnesses as may magistrates of
the state. The Fire Chief or other municipal officer may be ex-officio
inspector of buildings.
('86 Code, § 5.407)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see S.C. Code, § 5-25-160
§ 32.06 FIREMEN'S INSURANCE AND INSPECTION FUND.
   (A)   The Board of Trustees of the Firemen's Insurance and Inspection Fund
shall consist of the Mayor, the Town Clerk and the Chief of the Fire
Department. The Board shall have the duties and powers specified in S.C. Code
§§ 38-57-10 to 38-57-160, as amended.
('86 Code, § 5.408)
   (B)   The Town Clerk shall deposit promptly all monies received for the
Firemen's Insurance and Inspection Fund in a special checking account.
Disbursements therefrom shall be only upon the signatures of two of the
following: Mayor, Fire Chief, Clerk-Treasurer.
   (C)   The Secretary-Treasurer of the fund shall submit each January a
written statement of funds received and disbursed during the preceding calendar
year to the state, the Council and the Board of Trustees.
('86 Code, § 5.409)
§ 32.07 FIRE CALLS OUTSIDE TOWN LIMITS AUTHORIZED.
   The Fire Department is authorized to respond to fire calls outside the
corporate limits on the basis of mutual aid agreements, or as may be formally
established by the Fire Department.
('86 Code, § 5.410) (Am. Ord. 97-10, passed 8-18-97)
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.20 CHIEF AND POLICE OFFICERS.
   (A)   The police force shall consist of a Chief and as many subordinate
officers and patrolmen as may be deemed necessary by the Mayor and Council.
('86 Code, § 13.101)
   (B)   The Chief of Police and all members of the Department shall be duly
appointed by and hold office at the pleasure of the Town Manager. Authority
shall conform with state statutes.
('86 Code, § 13.102)
   (C)   The compensation of all members of the Department shall be fixed by
the Mayor and Council.
('86 Code, § 13.103)
Statutory reference:
   Administration of departments generally, see S.C. Code § 5-11-40(b)
§ 32.21 SPECIAL POLICEMEN.
   In the event of an emergency, the Chief of Police may appoint such special
policemen as he deems necessary to preserve the peace, and they shall be
compensated as directed by the Mayor and Council. Council also may authorize
uncompensated special policemen whose jurisdiction shall be limited to offenses
committed on a premises controlled by the town.
('86 Code, § 13.104)
§ 32.22 ARREST AND BAIL.
   Any person charged with violation of a town ordinance may be forthwith
arrested and held in custody pending release on bail or pursuant to trial. Bail
shall be promptly set by the Municipal Judge, or pursuant to standards issued
by him; provided, however, that a person charged with an offense involving
intoxication shall be held in custody for a minimum of six hours. Upon the
arrest of a person, all personal property found upon him, other than necessary
clothing, shall be seized, inventoried and safekept pending his release from
custody.
('86 Code, § 13.106)
§ 32.23 POLICE TO SELL RECOVERED PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   This section shall apply to all bicycles, cameras, electronic
equipment, office machines, watches, clocks, jewelry and other items of
personal property which may be recovered by the Police Department in connection
with the performance of its duties, or turned in to the Department, and shall
be referred to herein as personal property.
   (B)   All personal property which has been lost, stolen or abandoned and
which is in the possession of the Department shall be disposed of by the Police
Chief, or an officer appointed by him, if such property remains unclaimed by
the owner. If the owner is unknown, it shall be sold at public auction after
duly posting of public notice of same at least 15 days prior to such sale. The
notice shall contain time, place and terms of the sale and a description of the
property to be sold.
   (C)   The proceeds from the sale of all unclaimed personal property shall be
paid into the General Fund, on the day of sale.
('86 Code, § 13.107) (Ord. 82-10, passed 7-28-82)
CHAPTER 33: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
33.01   Policy on multiple appointments
   
33.02   Policy on absences
Architectural Review Board
   
33.10   Purpose
   
33.11   Proceedings
   
33.12   Powers and duties
   
33.13   Submittal process
   
33.14   ARB Reviews
   
33.15   Architectural guidelines
   
33.16   Maintenance and operations
Beautification Commission
   
33.25   Established
   
33.26   Objectives and purpose
   
33.27   Advisory capacity and administrative authority
   
33.28   Members
   
33.29   Officers
   
33.30   Funds
Planning Commission
   
33.45   Established
   
33.46   Composition
   
33.47   Compensation
   
33.48   Removal of members
   
33.49   Organization and rules of procedure
   
33.50   Public hearings
Cross-reference:
   Creation of Public Works Department, see §
31.60
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.01 POLICY ON MULTIPLE APPOINTMENTS.
   (A)   No citizen appointed by the Town Council or the Town Manager may
simultaneously serve on more than one board, commission, or committee which is
established by federal or state law or by ordinance of the town, except when
the Council creates a specific board, commission, or committee to be made up of
members who are appointed because of their membership on another board,
commission, or committee.
   (B)   Any citizen so appointed as set forth in division (A) may serve on
more than one board, commission, committee, or the like provided that not more
than one falls under division (A).
   (C)   Any citizen serving on the date of this section on more than one
board, commission, committee so constituted as outlined in division (A) may
retain both appointments until such time as the earliest term expires at which
time he/she shall not be reappointed to that board, commission, or committee
until such time as the conditions in division (A) are met.
(Res. 94-4, passed 5-5-94; Am. Ord. 97-11, passed 8-18-97)
§ 33.02 POLICY ON ABSENCES.
   (A)   Any member of any board, commission, committee of the town, who is
absent from three meetings in succession or four meetings in any 12-month
period may be considered to have relinquished his or her appointment unless
such absence is for good cause. Such member shall contact either the
appropriate chair or the Office of the Town Manager to inform them of the
absence and reasons thereof.
   (B)   For the purpose of this resolution, a meeting shall be considered
regular or special.
   (C)   Upon notification by the Town Manager of the circumstances outlined
above, the Town Council may elect to appointment another individual to fill the
unexpired term.
(Res. 94-3, passed 5-16-94)
ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BOARD
§ 33.10 PURPOSE.
   (A)   That in order to achieve the purpose of the Core Commercial District
Plan in accordance with S.C. § 5-23-310, an Architectural Review Board (ARB) is
hereby created. The Review Board shall consist of seven members, who shall be
appointed by Town Council. All members appointed to the Board shall be
residents or affiliated with a business or industry located in the Town of
Kingstree. All members of the Board shall have a demonstrated interest in
historic preservation. If available in the community, the Board shall have at
least one member who is qualified as:
      (1)   A historian knowledgeable in local history;
      (2)   An architect, or if an architect is unavailable to serve, someone
knowledgeable in building design and construction;
      (3)   A member of the Core Commercial Business District;
   (B)   The terms of office for the members shall be staggered terms of four
years. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in
the same manner as the initial appointment. Members shall serve without pay but
may be reimbursed for any expense incurred while representing the ARB.
   (C)   The purpose the ARB is to protect the integrity of the Core Commercial
District and to ensure the level of quality of all constructed projects within
the district. The ARB shall have the authority to request additional
information, suggest revisions, and approve or disapprove plans for proposed
projects, with an accompanying recommendation. Final approval will be made by
the Kingstree Planning and Zoning Commission, leading to the issuance of
building permits.
   (D)   The ARB shall have such other powers and duties as provided in
Chapter 154 (Historic Preservation).
(Ord. 98-15, passed 4-19-99; Am. Ord. 2007-06, passed 8-20-07; Am. Ord. 2008-
07, passed 4-21-08)
§ 33.11 PROCEEDINGS.
   The ARB shall elect a chairperson and vice chairperson from its members who
shall serve for one year, until reelected, or until their successors are
elected. The Board shall appoint a secretary. The Board shall adopt rules,
regulations and bylaws in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter and
with the Codes of Law of South Carolina, 1976. The ARB will hold regularly
scheduled monthly meetings if submittals have been made and are ready for
review. The ARB shall meet quarterly, at a minimum, regardless of the status of
submittals. The ARB may also, at their discretion, call special meetings, to
accommodate the schedules of projects under their review. All meetings of the
Board shall be open to the public. The ARB shall keep minutes of its
proceedings and shall keep records of its examinations and other official
actions, all of which will be immediately filed in the office of the Board for
public record.
(Ord. 98-15, passed 4-19-99)
§ 33.12 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The ARB shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   Demolition. In its consideration of an application to demolish in
whole or in part, remove, or alter the exterior architectural appearance of any
existing structure, the ARB shall primarily consider:
      (1)   The historic architectural and aesthetic arrangement;
      (2)   Color scheme;
      (3)   The composition or features;
      (4)   Relationship between such structures and the surrounding area; and
      (5)   The use of structure and its importance to the core commercial
district.
   (B)   New construction and major renovations. In its consideration of an
application for new construction or major renovations, the ARB will primarily
consider:
      (1)   Character and appropriateness of the design;
      (2)   Scale;
      (3)   Texture;
      (4)   Materials; and
      (5)   Relationship of design elements to similar features of structures
in surrounding areas.
   (C)   Interior renovations. The ARB shall not consider interior arrangement
or interior design, nor shall it make requirements except for the purpose of
preventing developments which are not in harmony with the prevailing character
of the requested construction area or which are obviously incongruous with its
character.
   (D)   Signage. In consideration of an application to create or alter a sign,
the ARB will primarily consider:
      (1)   Character and appropriateness of the design;
      (2)   Scale;
      (3)   Texture;
      (4)   Materials;
      (5)   Relationship of design elements to similar features of structures
in surrounding areas; and
      (6)   Color scheme.
(Ord. 98-15, passed 4-19-99)
§ 33.13 SUBMITTAL PROCESS.
   (A)   Pre-application. For the purpose of expediting applications and
reducing development costs, the developer may request a pre-application
conference and/or concept plan review before the ARB regular meeting.
   (B)   Submittal procedures. Submittal for new construction and major
renovations ($5,000 and over).
      (1)   Submittal requirements:
         (a)   Submit ten copies of each drawing required;
         (b)   Drawings shall be at an appropriate scale;
         (c)   Sheet size shall be a minimum of 11 x 17 to a maximum of 30 x
42;
         (d)   Drawings shall identify the developer, building type and use;
         (e)   Drawings shall show scale of drawing and orientation; and
         (f)   Drawing shall be prepared by a qualified, registered
professional (architect, landscape architect, engineer) according to applicable
state statutes.
      (2)   Drawings required:
         (a)   Preliminary site plan;
         (b)   Elevation of drawings (all sides);
         (c)   Floor plans (all sides);
         (d)   Calculations of building areas, parking required and the like;
and
         (e)   Preliminary materials and color palette.
   (C)   Submittal for cosmetic changes.
      (1)   Written statement describing and outlining cosmetic changes;
      (2)   Drawing if necessary for the clarification of design; and
      (3)   Color scheme if color change is included in the cosmetic change.
   (D)   Submittal for signage.
      (1)   Submit ten copies of drawing of sign;
      (2)   Drawing shall identify scale and orientation;
      (3)   Drawing shall identify materials and color scheme;
      (4)   Sign shall meet the regulations as defined in
Chapter 153, Zoning.
   (E)   Submittal deadline. Submittal of all material and the fee shall be
made to the town by 5:00 p.m. ten working days prior to the ARB meeting, or
according to a schedule made available to the public by the town.
(Ord. 98-15, passed 4-19-99)
§ 33.14 ARB REVIEW.
   (A)   Review process. The ARB will review the submittal and hear any
presentations by the developer or their agents prior to commenting on the
submittal. After discussion, the ARB may accept or reject the plans. In the
case of a rejection or an approval with certain stipulations, the ARB will
provide written comments and additional requirements concerning the proposed
project to the applicant within 15 working days.
   (B)   Rejection of plans. When the ARB deems necessary to reject the plans,
for any reason, the developer may resubmit revised plans for the review at the
next regular meeting of the ARB and may continue submitting plans until the
project is approved. No project may proceed to issue of building permits or
initiation of construction without approval from the ARB.
   (C)    Non-compliance . If a developer proceeds with work without ARB
approval or makes substantial changes to the design after initial approval of
the ARB without seeking ARB approval for said changes, the town may require the
developer to stop work on the project until the necessary approvals or
revisions have been made. In a case as this, the developer will bear all costs,
penalties, interests and loss of revenue resulting from his actions, until such
time as the project can be brought into compliance.
(Ord. 98-15, passed 4-19-99)
§ 33.15 ARCHITECTURAL GUIDELINES.
   (A)   General. The design of all buildings and structures within the Core
Commercial District will be subject to approval by the ARB prior to receipt of
building permits and initiation of construction.
   (B)   Architectural style. It is not the intent of the ARB to be an
inflexible arbiter of style or to require strict adherence of any recognized
architectural stylistic conventions. It is the intent and purpose of the ARB to
ensure that all structures located within the Core Commercial District
reinforce and improve upon the existing features of downtown Kingstree. The
following are palettes which are generally responsive to the intended quality
of the district.
      (1)   General materials palette; generally not allowed in the Core
Commercial District:
         (a)   Mirrored or tinted glass;
         (b)   Chain link fencing;
         (c)   Backlit or moving signs;
         (d)   Outdoor vending machines; and
         (e)   Signage in violation of city ordinances.
      (2)   Mechanical areas. Service yards, garbage containers and the like
must be fully screened from view with an opaque surface which is in keeping
with the overall design solution.
      (3)   Other restrictions. All projects within the district must comply
with all applicable local, state and federal codes.
(Ord. 98-15, passed 4-19-99)
§ 33.16 MAINTENANCE AND OPERATIONS.
   (A)   The town will be responsible for maintaining all public utility
services in proper working order. The town will also be responsible for the
maintenance, operations and improvements to common areas and those areas which
serve the leased parcels, such as parking lots, sidewalks, lighting and the
like.
   (B)   The developer shall be responsible for the maintenance, operations and
improvements of their property, including buildings, plazas, amenities and the
like which are not under the control of the town.
   (C)   The town shall have the authority to issue fines to be levied against
the developer if property is not maintained in an appropriate manner.
(Ord. 98-15, passed 4-19-99)
BEAUTIFICATION COMMISSION
§ 33.25 ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby established a Beautification Commission which shall be known
and designated as "The Kingstree Beautification Commission."
('86 Code, § 4.101) (Ord. passed 11-9-62)
§ 33.26 OBJECTIVES AND PURPOSE.
   The object and purpose of the Beautification Commission shall be to study,
investigate, plan, recommend, develop, organize, initiate and encourage the
beautification and improvement of the appearance of the town and the approaches
thereto by the planting of trees, shrubbery and flowers and by the utilization
of such other improvements that will improve the appearance of the town and its
approaches. The Beautification Commission shall be responsible for the
implementation of the tree protection standards of the Kingstree Zoning
Ordinance. In order to accurately comply with the stated objectives and
purpose, the Beautification Commission shall utilize the expertise of a
certified arborist. Such a professional shall be either on the Commission,
employed by the town and tasked with assisting the Commission in their duties,
or contracted by the town and tasked with assisting the Commission in their
duties.
('86 Code, § 4.106) (Ord. passed 11-9-62; Am. Ord. 2024-03, passed 6-17-24)
§ 33.27 ADVISORY CAPACITY AND ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY.
   The Commission shall act in an advisory capacity to the Town Council. It
shall be the duty of the Commission to make reports and recommendations to the
Council annually and at such times as the Commission shall see fit or upon the
request of the Council. The Commission shall possess the administrative
authority to review and approve tree removal permits per the procedures and
requirements of the Tree Protection Division within Article 9 of the Kingstree
Zoning Ordinance.
('86 Code, § 4.107) (Ord. passed 11-9-62; Am. Ord. 2024-03, passed 6-17-24)
§ 33.28 MEMBERS.
   (A)   The Beautification Commission shall consist of seven members appointed
by Town Council for terms of three years, staggered so that no more than three
members will have terms expiring any given year.
   (B)   The members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.
('86 Code, § 4.104) (Ord. passed 11-9-62; Am. Ord. 93-2, passed 5-17-93; Am.
Ord. 2008-16, passed 10-20-08)
§ 33.29 OFFICERS.
   The members of the Commission shall, at their first meeting, elect from
their number a Chairman, Vice-Chairman, Secretary and Treasurer. Annual
elections shall be held by the Commission for these offices.
('86 Code, § 4.103) (Ord. passed 11-9-62)
§ 33.30 FUNDS.
   The members of the Commission shall incur no obligations for which the town
may be liable, without the specific authorization of the Town Council. The
Commission may solicit and receive funds for carrying out the objectives and
purposes of the Commission as herein defined and may expend such funds so
received, or otherwise made available to it, for such objects and purposes.
('86 Code, § 4.105) (Ord. passed 11-9-62)
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 33.45 ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby established a Planning Commission for the town, which shall
have the powers and duties as provided in S.C. Code § 6-29-310 et seq. as
presented in §§
33.46 -
33.50.
(Ord. 99-03, passed 3-15-99)
§ 33.46 COMPOSITION.
   The Planning Commission shall consist of seven members appointed by Town
Council for terms of three years, staggered so that no more than three members
shall have terms expiring in any given year.
(Ord. 99-03, passed 3-15-99; Am. Ord. 2007-07, passed 8-20-07)
§ 33.47 COMPENSATION.
   Members of the Planning Commission shall serve without compensation.
Reimbursement for actual expenses incurred in the performance of official
duties may be reimbursed from budgeted funds pursuant to reimbursement policies
and procedures for Boards and Commissions.
(Ord. 99-03, passed 3-15-99)
§ 33.48 REMOVAL OF MEMBERS.
   Members of the Planning Commission may be removed at any time by Town
Council for cause. The existence of cause shall be discussed by the Council in
executive sessions as permitted by the Freedom of Information Act, S.C. Code §
30-4-70(a)(I), and the determination of removal shall be by vote in public
session declaring a vacancy in the position without a statement of cause. Any
fact which, in the discretion of Council, is deemed to adversely affect the
public interest, including lack of attendance at meetings, may constitute
cause.
(Ord. 99-03, passed 3-15-99)
§ 33.49 ORGANIZATION AND RULES OF PROCEDURE.
   The Planning Commission shall organize, elect officers, and adopt rules of
procedure as required by S.C. Code § 6-29-360. These shall be published and be
made available to the public and filed with the Clerk to Town Council.
(Ord. 99-03, passed 3-15-99)
§ 33.50 PUBLIC HEARINGS.
   The Planning Commission shall hold all public hearings on amendments to the
zoning ordinance and map pursuant to S.C. Code § 6-29-760(A).
(Ord. 99-03, passed 3-15-99)
CHAPTER 34: FINANCE AND TAXATION
Section
Budget and Finance
   
34.01   Fiscal year; budget and accounting year
   
34.02   Department heads to submit annual budget work program
   
34.03   Preparation of budget
   
34.04   Budget summary
   
34.05   Budget for utilities; contingent expenses
   
34.06   Public hearing on budget; changes
   
34.07   Budget open for inspection; filing
   
34.08   Failure to adopt budget by ordinance
   
34.09   Appropriations
   
34.10   Anticipated revenue
   
34.11   Financial reports; disbursements and deposits
   
34.12   Audit
   
34.13   Borrowing in anticipation of collection of taxes
   
34.14   Payment of notes
Taxation
   
34.25   County of Williamsburg to collect
   
34.26   Due date
   
34.27   Penalty
Purchasing Procedures
   
34.50   Purchasing agent
   
34.51   Competitive bidding
   
34.52   Performance and other bonds
   
34.53   Financial interest of officials, employees
   
34.54   Supplies unsuitable for public use, sale or exchange
   
34.55   Gifts and rebates
   
34.56   Cooperative purchasing; state purchases
Collection Costs
   
34.70   Delinquent debts
Procurement Code
   
34.80   Adoption of South Carolina Consolidated Procurement Code
Insufficient Checks
   
34.90   Stopping payment on check, draft, or order with intent to defraud
   
34.91   Jurisdiction of offenses and penalties
   
34.92   Report of convictions to South Carolina Law Enforcement Division;
release of information
   
34.93   Effect of payment of dishonored check, draft or order after institution
of prosecution
   
34.94   Adverse claimant of deposit must obtain court processor give bond;
exception as to fiduciary deposits
   
34.95   Duty of person drawing postdated check to give notice
   
34.96   Payment of withdrawal value of account to beneficiary upon death of
trustee
BUDGET AND FINANCE
§ 34.01 FISCAL YEAR; BUDGET AND ACCOUNTING YEAR.
   (A)   The fiscal year shall begin on the first day of the month of July and
shall end on the last day of the month of the following June.
('86 Code, § 8.101)
   (B)   The fiscal year also shall constitute the budget and accounting year.
('86 Code, § 8.102)
§ 34.02 DEPARTMENT HEADS TO SUBMIT ANNUAL BUDGET WORK PROGRAM.
   Before the beginning of the budget year, the head of each office or
department shall submit a budget work program for the ensuing year to the Town
Manager.
('86 Code, § 8.103)
§ 34.03 PREPARATION OF BUDGET.
   Each budget year, a budget shall be prepared by the Town Manager prior to
the new fiscal year. For such purpose, he shall obtain from the heads of each
office or department, and in such detail as he may require, estimates of
expenditures and such other supporting data as he may request, together with
estimates of all capital projects pending or which such department head
believes should be undertaken within the budget year and within the next five
succeeding years.
('86 Code, § 8.104)
Statutory reference:
   S.C. Code § 5-11-40(c)
§ 34.04 BUDGET SUMMARY.
   The budget summary shall be in sufficient detail and summarized as to income
and expenditures in such a manner as to present to taxpayers a simple and clear
summary of the budget.
('86 Code, § 8.105)
§ 34.05 BUDGET FOR UTILITIES; CONTINGENT EXPENSES.
   (A)   The anticipated revenues and proposed expenditures of all utilities
shall be stated in a separate section of the budget. All other provisions
relating to the preparation and administration of the budget shall apply to the
budget of the utility.
('86 Code, § 8.107)
   (B)   Separate provisions may be included in the budget for contingent
expenses for the administration, operation and maintenance of the town.
('86 Code, § 8.106)
§ 34.06 PUBLIC HEARING ON BUDGET; CHANGES.
   (A)   The Council shall determine a place and time for a public hearing on
the budget and shall post a notice thereof which shall be not less than five
days before the date of the hearing.
('86 Code, § 8.108)
   (B)   After the conclusion of a public hearing, the Council may insert new
items or may increase, decrease or delete the items of the budget; but, should
the total proposed expenditures be increased, it shall also increase the total
anticipated revenues by an amount at least equal to such proposed total
expenditures, except for items of capital outlay to be financed through sources
not listed or contained in the budget.
('86 Code, § 8.109)
§ 34.07 BUDGET OPEN FOR INSPECTION; FILING.
   (A)   Upon final adoption, the budget shall be in effect for the budget
year. The budget and all supporting schedules shall be a public record in the
office of the Town Clerk and open for public inspection during regular office
hours.
('86 Code, § 8.110)
   (B)   A permanent copy of the budget, as finally adopted, shall be filed in
the office of the Clerk.
('86 Code, § 8.111)
§ 34.08 FAILURE TO ADOPT BUDGET BY ORDINANCE.
   Should the Council fail to adopt a budget by ordinance for the next fiscal
year, on or before its beginning, the budget as initially proposed to the
Council shall be effective until finally adopted.
('86 Code, § 8.112)
§ 34.09 APPROPRIATIONS.
   (A)   From the effective date of the budget, the several amounts stated
therein as proposed expenditures shall be and become appropriated to the
several objects and purposes therein named.
('86 Code, § 8.113)
   (B)   All appropriations shall lapse at the end of the budget year to the
extent that they shall not have been expended or lawfully encumbered.
('86 Code, § 8.115)
   (C)   In the absence of unappropriated available revenues to meet emergency
appropriations, the Council may authorize by ordinance the issuance of notes,
which may be renewed from time to time, but all such notes and renewals thereof
shall be paid not later than the last day of the fiscal year next succeeding
the budget year in which the emergency appropriation was made.
('86 Code, § 8.116)
§ 34.10 ANTICIPATED REVENUE.
   (A)   The Council shall identify in the budget sources of anticipated
revenue, including taxes, necessary to meet the financial requirements of the
budgets adopted as required by S.C. Code § 5-11-40(c).
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Clerk to notify the appropriate county
officials of any change in the tax millage rates.
('86 Code, § 8.117)
§ 34.11 FINANCIAL REPORTS; DISBURSEMENTS AND DEPOSITS.
   (A)   The Clerk shall furnish to the Council regular financial statements of
all receipts and disbursements.
('86 Code, § 8.118)
   (B)   All disbursements shall be by check and signed by at least two of the
following Town Officials: Town Clerk, Treasurer, or Town Manager.
('86 Code, § 8.119) (Am. Ord. 97-12, passed 8-18-97)
   (C)   All excess municipal funds shall be deposited to the credit of the
town in a local bank.
('86 Code, § 8.120)
§ 34.12 AUDIT.
   Prior to the end of each fiscal year, the Council shall designate a
qualified Certified Public Accountant who, at the end of the fiscal year, shall
make an independent audit of the accounts and other evidence of financial
transactions of the municipality and shall submit a report to the Council. Such
accountant shall have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal
affairs of the municipality or of any of its officers. He shall, within
specifications approved by Council, post-audit the books and documents kept by
any office, department, board or agency of the municipality.
('86 Code, § 8.121)
§ 34.13 BORROWING IN ANTICIPATION OF COLLECTION OF TAXES.
   The Council may, during each calendar year, borrow money for its current
expenses and pledge for the payment of any moneys so borrowed the taxes
becoming payable during such calendar year.
('86 Code, § 8.122)
§ 34.14 PAYMENT OF NOTES.
   The power and obligation of the Council to pay notes issued by it pursuant
to this subchapter shall be unlimited, and the Council may levy ad valorem
taxes on all the taxable property within the corporate limits for the payment
of such notes and interest thereon, without limitation of rate or amount. The
full faith and credit of the municipality shall be pledged for the payment of
the principal and interest on any notes issued, pursuant to this subchapter.
('86 Code, § 8.123)
TAXATION
§ 34.25 COUNTY OF WILLIAMSBURG TO COLLECT.
   Beginning with the tax year for 2010, the County of Williamsburg shall be
authorized to handle all aspects of the collection of taxes for the Town of
Kingstree to include determining the assessed value, mailing or notices,
collection of taxes, collection of penalties, execution against defaulting
taxpayers, seizure of real property, levy and sale of property pursuant to the
tax sale.
(Ord. 2009-07, passed 11-16-09)
§ 34.26 DUE DATE.
   All property taxes shall be due and payable without penalty by January 15 of
each year.
(Ord. 2009-07, passed 11-16-09)
§ 34.27 PENALTY.
   All penalties and cost of execution shall be set at the existing
Williamsburg County rate and changes at the time the county rate is changed.
(Ord. 2009-07, passed 11-16-09)
PURCHASING PROCEDURES
§ 34.50 PURCHASING AGENT.
   The Town Manager shall be the Purchasing Agent and shall be responsible for
the purchase of supplies, materials and equipment required by any municipal
office, department or agent. He shall establish and enforce specifications with
respect to supplies, materials and equipment required and be responsible for
the inspection upon delivery thereof to determine quality, quantity and
conformance with specifications or other purchasing procedures that may be
established.
('86 Code, § 8.401)
§ 34.51 COMPETITIVE BIDDING.
   (A)   Before any purchases or contracts for supplies, materials and
equipment are made, whenever possible, the Purchasing Agent shall give ample
opportunity for competitive bidding, but with such exceptions as the Council
may authorize. Emergency purchases shall be exempt from this provision. A
"bidders" list shall be maintained.
('86 Code, § 8.402)
   (B)   Bids shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder, unless the
best interests of the municipality will be served, as determined by Council.
('86 Code, § 8.403)
   (C)   Sealed bids shall be obtained by the Purchasing Agent in all cases,
when required by the Council.
('86 Code, § 8.404)
   (D)   Bids shall be awarded to the local vendor when tie bids are received.
Tie bids from more than one local vendor shall be awarded by drawing lots.
('86 Code, § 8.405)
§ 34.52 PERFORMANCE AND OTHER BONDS.
   Performance bonds shall be obtained by the Purchasing Agent, when required
by Council. He shall have the authority to require Payment, Labor and Material
Bonds, before entering into a contract.
('86 Code, § 8.406)
§ 34.53 FINANCIAL INTEREST OF OFFICIALS, EMPLOYEES.
   No member of the Council nor any officer or employee shall have a financial
interest in any municipal contract, or in a contractor supplying any land or
rights or interests in any land, material, supplies or services, unless a
majority of the Council determines an exception to be in the best interest of
the municipality; provided, that no councilman whose interest is involved shall
vote on the question. Any willful violation of this section shall constitute
malfeasance in office, and any officer or employee found guilty thereof shall
forfeit his office or position. Any violation of this section with the
knowledge, express or implied, of the person or corporation contracting with
the town shall render the contract voidable by the Council.
('86 Code, § 8.407)
§ 34.54 SUPPLIES UNSUITABLE FOR PUBLIC USE, SALE OR EXCHANGE.
   The Purchasing Agent shall have the authority to sell all supplies which
have become unsuitable for public use or to exchange the same for, or trade in
the same on new supplies. Such sales shall be made to the highest bidder at
public auction after public notice is given therefor. All moneys received from
such sales shall be paid into the municipal treasury.
('86 Code, § 8.408)
§ 34.55 GIFTS AND REBATES.
   The Purchasing Agent and all officers and employees are prohibited from
accepting, directly or indirectly, from any person, firm or corporation to
which any purchase order or contract is or might be awarded, any rebate, gift,
money or anything of value whatsoever, except where given for general municipal
use and benefit.
('86 Code, § 8.409)
§ 34.56 COOPERATIVE PURCHASING; STATE PURCHASES.
   (A)   The Purchasing Agent shall have authority to join with other units of
government in cooperative purchasing plans when municipal interests would be
served thereby.
('86 Code, § 8.410)
   (B)   The Purchasing Agent is authorized to make purchases of supplies and
equipment through the Property Division of the State Budget and Control Board,
without the formality of publication and receiving competitive bids.
('86 Code, § 8.411
COLLECTION COSTS
§ 34.70 DELINQUENT DEBTS.
   (A)   The Town of Kingstree may impose a collection cost of up to $25 to
defray its internal costs of collection for any delinquent debts that are
sought to be collected pursuant to the provisions of the Setoff Debt Collection
Act, S.C.§ 12-56-10 et seq. This cost is hereby declared to be a collection
cost that arises by operation of law and shall be added to the delinquent debt
and recovered from the debtor.
   (B)   The Town of Kingstree hereby declares that the administrative fee
charged by the Municipal Association of South Carolina is also a collection
cost to the town, which shall also be added to the delinquent debt and
recovered from the debtor.
(Ord. 2006-07, passed 9-18-06; Am. Ord. 2018-14, passed 11-5-18)
PROCUREMENT CODE
§ 34.80 ADOPTION OF SOUTH CAROLINA CONSOLIDATED PROCUREMENT CODE.
   The South Carolina Consolidated Procurement Code, S.C. Code Title 11,
Chapter 35, is adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein.
(Ord. 2012-01, passed 3-19-12)
INSUFFICIENT CHECKS
§ 34.90 STOPPING PAYMENT ON CHECK, DRAFT, OR ORDER WITH INTENT TO DEFRAUD.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person with intent to defraud to stop
payment on any check, draft or other written order on any bank or depository
for the payment of money or its equivalent when such check, draft or other
written order was given to obtain money, credit, goods or services; provided,
that such money, credit, goods or services were as represented at the time of
the issuance of any check, draft or written order. Any person so convicted
shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment as provided for in §
34.91.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to a postdated check nor to any check,
draft or written order where the payee or holder thereof knows or has good and
sufficient reason to believe that the drawer did not have sufficient funds on
deposit to his credit with the drawee to insure payment thereof.
(Ord. 2017-04, passed 7-17-17)
Statutory reference:
   Stopping payment of check, see S.C. Code § 34-11-80
§ 34.91 JURISDICTION OF OFFENSES AND PENALTIES.
   A person who violates the provisions of this subchapter, upon conviction,
must be punished as follows:
   (A)   If the amount of the instrument is $1,000 or less, it must be tried
exclusively in a magistrate's court (Town of Kingstree Municipal Court). A
municipal governing body, by ordinance, may adopt by reference the provisions
of this subchapter as an offense under its municipal ordinances and by so doing
authorizes its municipal court to try violations of this subchapter. If the
amount of the instrument is over $1,000, it must be tried in the court of
general sessions or any other court having concurrent jurisdiction.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this division, a person who violates the
provisions of this subchapter, upon conviction for a third or subsequent
conviction, may be tried in either a magistrate's court (Town of Kingstree
Municipal Court) or in the court of general sessions.
   (B)   Convictions in a magistrate's court (Town of Kingstree Municipal
Court) are punishable as follows:
      (1)   For a first conviction, if the amount of the instrument is $500 or
less, by a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $200 or by imprisonment for
not more than 30 days;
      (2)   For a first conviction, if the amount of the instrument is more
than $500 but not greater than $1,000, by a fine of not less than $300 nor more
than $500 or by imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both;
      (3)   For a second or subsequent conviction, if the amount of the
instrument is $500 or less, by a fine of $200 or by imprisonment for not more
than 30 days;
      (4)   For a second or subsequent conviction, if the amount of the
instrument is more than $500 but not greater than $1,000, by a fine of not more
than $500 or by imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both.
   (C)   Convictions in the court of general sessions or any other court having
concurrent jurisdiction are punishable as follows: for a first conviction by a
fine of not less than $300 nor more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for not more
than two years, or both; and for a second or subsequent conviction by a fine of
not less than $500 nor more than $2,000 and imprisonment for not less than 30
days nor more than ten years.
   (D)   After a first offense conviction for drawing and uttering a fraudulent
cheek or other instrument in violation of S.C. Code § 34-11-60 within its
jurisdiction, the court shall, at the time of sentence, suspend the imposition
or execution of a sentence upon a showing of satisfactory proof of restitution
and payment by the defendant of all reasonable court costs accruing not to
exceed $41. For a second or subsequent conviction for a violation of S.C. Code
§ 34-11-60, the suspension of the imposition or execution of the sentence is
discretionary with the court.
   (E)   After a conviction or plea for drawing and uttering a fraudulent check
or other instrument in violation of S.C. Code § 34-11-60 and the defendant is
charged or fined, he shall pay in addition to the fine all reasonable court
costs accruing, not to exceed $41, and the service charge provided in S.C. Code
§ 34-11-70.
   (F)   After a conviction under this section on a first offense, the
defendant may, after one year from the date of the conviction, apply, or cause
someone acting on his behalf to apply, to the court for an order expunging the
records of the arrest and conviction. This provision does not apply to any
crime classified as a felony. If the defendant has had no other conviction
during the one-year period following the conviction under this section, the
court shall issue an order expunging the records. No person has any rights
under this section more than one time. After the expungement the South Carolina
Law Enforcement Division is required to keep a nonpublic record of the offense
and the date of its expungement to ensure that no person takes advantage of the
rights permitted by this section more than once. This nonpublic record is not
subject to release under §
34.92, the Freedom of Information Act, or any other provision of law except to
those authorized law or court officials who need this information in order to
prevent the rights afforded by this division from being taken advantage of more
than once.
   (G)   As used in this section the term CONVICTION shall include the entering
of a guilty plea, the entering of a plea of nolo contendere, or the forfeiting
of bail. A conviction is classified as a felony if the instrument drawn or
uttered in violation of this subchapter exceeds the amount of $5,000.
   (H)   Each instrument drawn or uttered in violation of this subchapter
constitutes a separate offense.
(Ord. 2017-04, passed 7-17-17)
Statutory reference:
   Jurisdiction of offenses and penalties, see S.C. Code § 34-11-90
§ 34.92 REPORT OF CONVICTIONS TO SOUTH CAROLINA LAW ENFORCEMENT DIVISION;
RELEASE OF INFORMATION.
   (A)   A first offense prosecution or second offense resulting in a
conviction for violation of S.C. Code § 34-11-60 shall be reported by the court
hearing the case to the Communications and Records Division of the South
Carolina Law Enforcement Division which shall keep a record of such conviction.
   (B)   The South Carolina Law Enforcement Division, upon request, shall
release all information collected under this section to any law enforcement
agency, court or other authorized person.
(Ord. 2017-04, passed 7-17-17)
Statutory reference:
   Report of convictions to south carolina law enforcement division, see S.C.
Code § 34-11-95
§ 34.93 EFFECT OF PAYMENT OF DISHONORED CHECK, DRAFT OR ORDER AFTER INSTITUTION
OF PROSECUTION.
   After prosecution is initiated as provided in this subchapter, the payment
of a dishonored check, draft or order shall not constitute a defense or grounds
for dismissal of charges brought under this subchapter, but such payment may be
considered in mitigation of the sentence by the trial judge or magistrate.
(Ord. 2017-04, passed 7-17-17)
Statutory reference:
   Effect of payment of dishonored check, see S.C. Code § 34-11-100
§ 34.94 ADVERSE CLAIMANT OF DEPOSIT MUST OBTAIN COURT PROCESSOR GIVE BOND;
EXCEPTION AS TO FIDUCIARY DEPOSITS.
   Notice to any bank or trust company doing business in this state of an
adverse claim to a deposit standing on its books to the credit of any person
shall not be effectual to cause the bank or trust company to recognize- the
adverse claimant unless: (1) The claimant first procures a restraining order,
injunction or other appropriate process against the bank or trust company from
a court of competent jurisdiction wherein the person to whose credit the
deposit sands is made a party; or (2) the claimant first executes and delivers
to the bank or trust company, in form and with sureties acceptable to it, a
bond, indemnifying the bank or trust company from all liability, loss, damage,
costs and expenses, resulting from the payment of the adverse claim or the
dishonor of any check or other order of the person to whose credit the deposit
stands on the books of the bank or trust company. Provided, that this section
shall not apply in any instance where the person to whose credit the deposit
stands is a fiduciary for such adverse claimant, and the facts constituting
such relationship as also the facts showing reasonable cause of belief on the
part of the claimant that the fiduciary is about to misappropriate the deposit,
are made to appear by the affidavit of the claimant.
(Ord. 2017-04, passed 7-17-17)
Statutory reference:
   Adverse claimant of deposit must obtain court processor give bond, see S.C.
Code § 34-11-110
§ 34.95 DUTY OF PERSON DRAWING POSTDATED CHECK TO GIVE NOTICE.
   It shall be the duty of the person drawing a postdated check to notify in
writing, the bank or trust company upon which such check is drawn, giving a
complete description thereof, including the name of the payee, the date, the
number, and amount thereof; otherwise, the bank or trust company shill not be
liable for erroneously paying such check.
(Ord. 2017-04, passed 7-17-17)
Statutory reference:
   Duty of person drawing postdated check to give notice, see S.C. Code § 34-
11-120
§ 34.96 PAYMENT OF WITHDRAWAL VALUE OF ACCOUNT TO BENEFICIARY UPON DEATH OF
TRUSTEE.
   Subject to the provisions of S.C. Code §§ 62-6-101, et seq, of the South
Carolina Probate Code, when an account, including a certificate of deposit, is
opened by a person describing himself in the account title as trustee or
custodian for another and no other or further notice of the existence and terms
of a legal and valid trust than the description is given in writing to a bank,
banking institution, or other depository transacting business in this state, in
the event of the death of the person so described as trustee or custodian the
withdrawal value of the account or any part thereof together with any earnings
thereon may be paid to the person for whom the account title indicates the
account was opened. The payment or delivery to any beneficiary, beneficiaries,
or designated person, or a receipt or acquittance signed by any beneficiary,
beneficiaries, or designated person, is for any payment or delivery a valid and
sufficient release and discharge of any institution for the payment or delivery
made.
(Ord. 2017-04, passed 7-17-17)
Statutory reference:
   Payment of withdrawal value of account to beneficiary upon death of trustee,
see S.C. Code § 34-11-130
CHAPTER 35: MUNICIPAL COURT
Section
General Provisions
   
35.01   Establishment; jurisdiction
   
35.02   Municipal Judge; Acting Judge
   
35.03   Clerk of Court
   
35.04   Sessions of the court
   
35.05   Penalties and fines
Juries
   
35.15   Jury Commissioners
   
35.16   Drawing jury list
   
35.17   Selection of jury from list
   
35.18   Return of ballots to box; subsequent drawings
   
35.19   Neglect or refusal to appear
   
35.20   Right to trial by jury
   
35.21   Clerk of Court
Cross-reference:
   Jurisdiction of Municipal Court over traffic offenses, see §
70.04
   Swearing falsely when taking oaths, see §
134.06
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 35.01 ESTABLISHMENT; JURISDICTION.
   (A)   There is hereby established a municipal court which shall be a part of
the unified judicial system of the State of South Carolina.
('86 Code, § 7.101)
   (B)   The court shall have jurisdiction to try and determine all cases
arising under the ordinances of the town and shall have all such judicial
powers and duties as are conferred by the laws of the State of South Carolina.
The court shall have all such powers, duties, and jurisdiction in criminal
cases as are now conferred by law upon magistrates appointed and commissioned
in this county. The court shall not have the authority of a magistrate to
appoint a constable. It shall have no jurisdiction in civil matters.
('86 Code, § 7.102)
§ 35.02 MUNICIPAL JUDGE; ACTING JUDGE.
   (A)   The court shall be presided over by a Municipal Judge who shall be
appointed by the Council for a term not to exceed four years and shall receive
such compensation as determined by Council. Before entering upon the discharge
of the duties of his office, he shall take and subscribe the oath of office
prescribed by Article VI, Section 5, of the South Carolina Constitution. The
Judge shall not be required to be a resident of the town.
('86 Code, § 7.103)
   (B)   The Council may appoint a competent person as Acting Judge during the
absence, sickness, incapacity or other disqualification of the Municipal Judge.
('86 Code, § 7.104)
Statutory reference:
   Appointment of municipal judge, see S.C. Code § 14-25-15
§ 35.03 CLERK OF COURT.
   The Council shall designate a Clerk of Court who shall keep such records and
make such reports as may be required by the Judge or the State Court
Administrator.
('86 Code, § 7.105)
§ 35.04 SESSIONS OF THE COURT.
   The Council shall establish a regular place for the court to hold its
sessions.
('86 Code, § 7.106)
§ 35.05 PENALTIES AND FINES.
   (A)   If the Municipal Judge shall find a party guilty of violating an
ordinance or a state law within the jurisdiction of his court, he may impose a
fine or imprisonment, or both, not to exceed $500 or 30 days, unless otherwise
provided in this code.
('86 Code, § 7.301) (Am. Ord. 97-7, passed 8-18-97)
   (B)   All revenues arising from fines shall be turned over by the Clerk of
Court to the Treasurer of the municipality.
('86 Code, § 7.302)
Statutory reference:
   Disposition of fines and penalties, see S.C. Code, § 14-25-85
   Maximum penalties authorized, see S.C. Code § 14-25-65
JURIES
§ 35.15 JURY COMMISSIONERS.
   The Town Council shall act as jury commissioners of the municipality, or
shall appoint not less than three nor more than five persons to serve in lieu
thereof. Before the first 30 days of each year, the jury commissioners shall
prepare a "Jury Box" with two compartments, labeled A and B, respectively. The
jury commission shall place in Compartment A the names of all qualified
electors of the municipality. The box shall then be locked and stored in a safe
place.
('86 Code, § 7.201)
Statutory reference:
   Jury Commissioners and jury boxes, see S.C. Code §§ 14-25-135, 14-25-145
§ 35.16 DRAWING JURY LIST.
   In all cases arising where a jury is demanded, the Judge shall then appoint
a person who is not connected with the trial who shall draw 30 names from the
jury box, Compartment A, and deliver a list of the names to both the attorney
for the municipality and the attorney for the defendant.
('86 Code, § 7.202)
Statutory reference:
   Selecting juries, see S.C. Code § 14-25-165
§ 35.17 SELECTION OF JURY FROM LIST.
   The 30 names drawn from Compartment A of the jury box shall be placed in a
box, and the names drawn from the box by the appointed person. The names so
drawn shall be one of the jury, unless challenged by either party, until six
jurors and four alternates, which have not been challenged, are drawn. Neither
party shall have more than six challenges to jurors nor more than four to
alternates and such other challenges for cause as the court may permit. When
any of the six jurors, unchallenged, cannot be found or are disqualified by law
and the parties do not supply the vacancy by agreement, names shall be randomly
drawn from Compartment A until sufficient jurors and alternates are selected.
('86 Code, § 7.203)
§ 35.18 RETURN OF BALLOTS TO BOX; SUBSEQUENT DRAWINGS.
   After a jury has been drawn, all the names drawn from Compartment A of the
jury box shall be placed in Compartment B of the jury box. When all of the
names in Compartment A are exhausted, all of the names from Compartment B shall
be transferred to Compartment A and, thereafter, juries shall be drawn as
provided in this subchapter.
('86 Code, § 7.204)
Statutory reference:
   Disposition of names drawn, see S.C. Code § 14-25-175
§ 35.19 NEGLECT OR REFUSAL TO APPEAR.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, refuse or neglect to
appear before the municipal court after having been duly summoned to serve as a
juror therein, when lawfully required to do so.
('86 Code, § 7.205)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, refuse or neglect to
appear before the Municipal Court after having been duly summoned to give
evidence in any cause there pending for trial, or to refuse to testify as a
witness, when lawfully required to do so.
('86 Code, § 7.206)
   (C)   When any person charged with an offense against municipal ordinances
or laws of this state shall be summoned to appear, and he has not already been
arrested and answered to said charges, and such person neglects, refuses or
fails to appear at the time specified, the Municipal Court shall proceed with
the trial of said case as though the defendant were present.
('86 Code, § 7.207)
§ 35.20 RIGHT TO TRIAL BY JURY.
   Any person to be tried in the municipal court may, prior to trial, demand a
jury trial, and such jury, when demanded, shall be composed of six persons
drawn from the qualified electors of the town in the manner prescribed by law.
The right to jury shall be deemed to have been waived unless demand is made
prior to trial.
(S.C. Code § 14-25-125) ('86 Code, § 7.208)
§ 35.21 CLERK OF COURT.
   There is hereby established the office of Clerk of Court. The Clerk of Court
shall be elected from time to time by Council and shall serve at its pleasure
or until the office is vacated when employment with the town is terminated. The
Clerk of Court shall perform the powers provided by law and shall be subject to
the supervision of the Municipal Judge. The Clerk of Court shall not be a law
enforcement officers.
('86 Code, § 7.209) (Am. Ord. 97-13, passed 8-18-97)
Statutory reference:
   Clerk of Court, see S.C. Code § 14-25-35
CHAPTER 36: MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS
Section
   
36.01   Election law of state to govern
   
36.02   Nonpartisan election procedure
   
36.03   Authority for conducting municipal elections transferred to the County
Election Commission
   
36.04   Manner of filing; fees
   
36.05   Election dates
   
36.06   When qualified; when to assume office
   
36.07   Contested elections
   
36.08   Single member districts
§ 36.01 ELECTION LAW OF STATE TO GOVERN.
   All municipal elections shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions
of the election laws of the state, as provided in S.C. Code Chapter 15 of Title
5, as appropriate.
('86 Code, § 2.301)
§ 36.02 NONPARTISAN ELECTION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   All regular and special elections for Mayor and Members of Council
shall be conducted and results shall be determined in accordance with the
nonpartisan election and runoff election method authorized by S.C. Code § 5-15-
62.
   (B)   The Mayor shall be elected at large, and Council Members shall be
elected one member from single member districts by the qualified electors of
the single member districts every two years to effect four year staggered
terms. Candidates seeking office from a particular single member district must
be residents of the single member district during their entire term of office.
(Ord. 97-31, passed 8-8-97)
§ 36.03 AUTHORITY FOR CONDUCTING MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS TRANSFERRED TO THE COUNTY
ELECTION COMMISSION.
   The Municipal Election Commission is hereby abolished, and all authority and
responsibility held by the Town of Kingstree Municipal Election Commission for
the conducting of municipal elections and the handling of absentee voting is
hereby transferred to the Election Commission for Williamsburg County in the
following particulars:
   (A)   The County Election Commission shall advertise municipal elections,
prepare and distribute ballots and election materials, appoint managers of
election to manage each polling place and/or to handle absentee ballot voting,
and otherwise supervise and conduct all municipal elections within the town.
The County Voter Registration will provide voter registration books to the
County Election Commission for distribution to Town Election Clerks.
   (B)   Immediately upon the closing of the polls at any municipal election in
the town, the County Election Commission shall begin to count and continuously
count the votes cast and make a statement of the whole number of votes cast in
such election, together with the number of votes cast for each candidate for
Mayor and Council person, canvass the vote and publicly display the unofficial
results.
   (C)   The County Election Commission shall thereafter certify the results of
the elections and transmit the certified results to the State Election
Commission and to the Town Council, or an appointed authority representing the
town government as soon as practical following the certification.
   (D)   The County Election Commission shall accept candidate filings and
filing fees, including but not limited to, notices of candidacy, candidacy
pledges, shall hear and decide protests, and shall certify the results of
municipal elections.
   (E)   The County Election Commission shall utilize an election printing
system that will tabulate results directly uploaded onto the personalized
electronic ballot (PEB), with the count publicly conducted.
   (F)   The County Election Commission shall take such other action as may be
necessary or appropriate to conduct municipal elections and certify the
results.
   (G)   The town, by and through its council, will set regular election dates
and coordinate special elections with the County Election Commission.
(Ord. 2013-03, passed 6-17-13)
§ 36.04 MANNER OF FILING; FEES.
   (A)   A "Statement of Candidacy" for the office of Mayor and for Council
shall be filed with the Municipal Election Commission at the office of the Town
Clerk no later than 12:00 noon, at least 60 days before the date of the
election.
   (B)   Petitions may be filed which shall contain not less than 3% and not
more than 5% of the names of registered voters.
('86 Code, § 2.308)
   (C)   For the office of Mayor, a filing fee of $40 shall be paid. All
candidates for Town Council shall pay a filing fee of $20. Fees shall be paid
at time of filing.
('86 Code, § 2.303)
(Am. Ord. 2003-13, passed 8-18-03)
§ 36.05 ELECTION DATES.
   (A)   Regular nonpartisan elections pursuant to S.C. Code § 5-15-62 shall be
held on the first Tuesday following the first Monday in November in each odd
numbered year.
   (B)   A runoff election, if necessary pursuant to S.C. Code § 5-15-62, shall
be held two weeks following the election.
   (C)   In the event of a tie vote for any office, a runoff election shall be
held pursuant to S.C. Code § 5-15-125 two weeks following the election in which
the tie vote occurred.
   (D)   Special elections to fill vacancies shall be held pursuant to S.C.
Code § 7-13-190.
   (E)   Public notice of a regular or special election shall be given at least
60 days prior to the election, which shall include the location of the polling
places set by resolution of Council.
   (F)   That for the year 1997 only, the election shall be held on the first
Tuesday in January (January 6, 1998).
(Ord. 97-31, passed 8-8-97; Am. Ord. 97-35, passed 9-29-97; Am. Ord. 97-40,
passed 11-17-97)
§ 36.06 WHEN QUALIFIED; WHEN TO ASSUME OFFICE.
   (A)   Newly elected officers shall not be qualified until at least 48 hours
after the closing of the polls.
('86 Code, § 2.309)
   (B)   Newly elected officers shall assume office on the first day of January
immediately following the election, unless said election is contested.
('86 Code, § 2.310)
§ 36.07 CONTESTED ELECTIONS.
   Should the results of an election be contested, the incumbent who fills that
contested office shall hold over until the contest is finally determined.
('86 Code, § 2.311)
§ 36.08 SINGLE MEMBER DISTRICTS.
   The boundaries of single member district lines shall include that part of
the town shown on an official map duly adopted and on file in the office of the
Clerk and incorporated herein by reference.
('86 Code, § 2.313) (Am. Ord. 97-31, passed 8-8-97)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
      Chapter
         
50.   GARBAGE
         
51.   WATER AND SEWERAGE SYSTEM
         
52.   DROUGHT RESPONSE
         
53.   UNDERGROUND UTILITIES
         
54.    PRETREATMENT
CHAPTER 50: GARBAGE
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Services to be provided
   
50.02   Definitions
Collection Regulations
   
50.15   Containers
   
50.16   Collectors to exercise reasonable care
   
50.17   Damaging, destroying or removing containers prohibited
   
50.18   Interfering with collection practices
   
50.19   Frequency of service
   
50.20   Tree limbs, building materials, dead animals
   
50.21   Littering of solid waste
Billing Procedures
   
50.35   Fees established
   
50.36   Fee to be paid with water bill
   
50.37   [Reserved]
   
50.38   Persons not utilizing water and sewer service
   
50.39   Council may negotiate fees
 
   
50.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 SERVICES TO BE PROVIDED.
   The town shall provide garbage and trash collection services and will pick
up garbage and trash at each residence or business in the town on a schedule to
be determined by the Town Manager and at such locations at or near each
residence and business as is designated by the Manager.
('86 Code, § 10.301) (Ord. passed 9-16-80)
§ 50.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LARGE COMMERCIAL BUSINESS. Any business requiring a larger container than
that used for residential customers.
   SMALL COMMERCIAL BUSINESS. Any business requiring a garbage container no
larger than that used for regular residential customers.
('86 Code, § 10.304) (Ord. passed 9-16-80)
COLLECTION REGULATIONS
§ 50.15 CONTAINERS.
   Garbage or trash to be picked up by the town shall be deposited in such
place and in such type container as may be designated by regulation or by the
Town Manager. Notice of any special type container required shall be given to
the occupants of the residence or business who shall be given a reasonable
length of time in which to obtain such containers.
('86 Code, § 10.302) (Ord. passed 9-16-80)
§ 50.16 COLLECTORS TO EXERCISE REASONABLE CARE.
   Collectors shall exercise reasonable care in the handling of containers and
shall not willfully break, deface or injure same.
('86 Code, § 10.308) (Ord. passed 9-16-80)
§ 50.17 DAMAGING, DESTROYING OR REMOVING CONTAINERS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, destroy or move from its
proper location any garbage container used in the collection of garbage and/or
refuse.
('86 Code, § 10.315) (Ord. passed 9-16-80) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.18 INTERFERING WITH COLLECTION PRACTICES.
   No person or persons shall interfere or otherwise deter the normal refuse
collection process by tampering with refuse containers or their contents.
('86 Code, § 10.312) (Ord. passed 9-16-80) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.19 FREQUENCY OF SERVICE.
   Containers shall be serviced a minimum of once per week.
('86 Code, § 10.313) (Ord. passed 9-16-80) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.20 TREE LIMBS, BUILDING MATERIALS, DEAD ANIMALS.
   (A)   All trash, such as limbs, branches, underbrush and all other yard
waste shall be placed at, not in the street for collection so as not to block
the street or sidewalk. This excludes stump service and tree removal service.
Limbs and branches shall be trimmed to the stem and shall not exceed five
inches in diameter or five feet in length. All grass clippings and leaves shall
be bagged or properly contained not to exceed 50 pounds per container or bag.
Residents shall not mix yard trash with garbage in the same container.
('86 Code, § 10.309) (Am. Ord. 97-17, passed 8-18-97)
   (B)   Every person, firm or corporation including a property owner, after
completing or during the construction or alteration of a building, shall remove
all trash incident to such construction or alteration.
('86 Code, § 10.310)
   (C)   Owners of dead animals shall be responsible for their removal and
disposal.
('86 Code, § 10.314) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.21 LITTERING OF SOLID WASTE.
   No person or persons shall deposit or cause to be deposited any form of
solid waste on any public or private property.
('86 Code, § 10.311) (Ord. passed 9-16-80) Penalty, see §
50.99
BILLING PROCEDURES
§ 50.35 FEES ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   There is hereby established the following garbage and trash collection
fees which shall apply to each residence and place of business in the town.
 
                             In-town          Out of town
   Residential Roll Cart  $21.00 per month $24.00 per month
   Small Commercial Busine$21.00 per month  
 
   Large Commercial Businesses
      (1)   4 cubic yard con iners:
         one pickup per week$40.00 per month
         two pickups per wee$73.00 per month
      (2)   6 cubic yard con iners:
         one pickup per week$53.75 per month
         two pickups per wee$79.75 per month
      (3)   8 cubic yard con iners:
         one pickup per week$67.50 per month
         two pickups per wee$100.50 per month
 
All other applicable statutes, ordinances and DHEC regulations will apply.
   (B)   The following monthly landfill fees shall be established as follows:
 Landfill Rates Collection Fee Total
                                  Landfill Rates Collection Fee Total
Roll Cart                         $16.50         $21.00         $37.50
4 cubic yard - 1 pickup per week  $83.75         $40.00         $123.75
4 cubic yard - 2 pickups per week $111.25        $73.00         $184.25
6 cubic yard - 1 pickup per week  $100.25        $53.75         $154.00
6 cubic yard - 2 pickups per week $138.75        $79.75         $218.50
8 cubic yard - 1 pickup per week  $111.25        $67.50         $178.75
8 cubic yard - 2 pickups per week $166.25        $100.50        $266.75
 
('86 Code, § 10.303) (Ord. passed 9-16-80; Am. Ord. 93-6, passed 6-28-93; Am.
Ord. 94-9, passed 6-29-94; Am. Ord. 95-5, passed 7-17-95; Am. Ord. 98-10,
passed 9-28-98; Am. Ord. 2006-03, passed 5-15-06; Am. Ord. 2007-02, passed 6-
25-07; Am. Ord. 2011-08, passed 8-15-11; Am Ord. 2013-016, passed 12-16-13; Am.
Ord. 2018-13, passed 9-17-18; Am. Ord. 2022-08, passed 12-19-22)
§ 50.36 FEE TO BE PAID WITH WATER BILL.
   (A)   The charges provided for in §
50.35 shall be billed to each user of water monthly as an additional charge on
the water bill of that customer, regardless of whether or not the customer
chooses to utilize the garbage collection services, and shall be due and
payable in the same manner and on the same dates as water bills are due and
payable. ('86 Code, § 10.305)
   (B)   The garbage fee established in §
50.35 hereof shall be assessed as a garbage collection fee to be added to the
monthly water bill of each user of water within the corporate limits and
collected therewith. ('86 Code, § 10.316)
(Ord. passed 9-16-80; Am. Ord. 2024-05, passed 8-19-24)
Cross-reference:
   Meter Reading; Billing Dates; Delinquent Bills; Cutoff of Service; see §
51.42
§ 50.37 [RESERVED]
§ 50.38 PERSONS NOT UTILIZING WATER AND SEWER SERVICE.
   Any person not utilizing water and sewer services furnished by the town, but
who utilizes its garbage pickup services, shall be responsible for payment of
the garbage fee in like manner as if they were receiving water and sewer
services.
('86 Code, § 10.318) (Ord. passed 9-16-80)
§ 50.39 COUNCIL MAY NEGOTIATE FEES.
   The Town Council may negotiate a garbage fee to be charged to any industry
or other business located within the corporate limits.
('86 Code, § 10.319)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   Any resident or business of the town which does not properly dispose of his,
her or its trash or garbage and allows the same to accumulate in such a way as
to constitute a nuisance or to adversely affect the health or welfare of
residents of the town shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more
than $500 or imprisonment for not more than 30 days for each such offense.
('86 Code, § 10.307) (Ord. passed 9-16-80; Am. Ord. 97-7, passed 8-18-97)
CHAPTER 51: WATER AND SEWERAGE SYSTEM
Section
General Provisions
   
51.01   Rules and regulations
   
51.02   Wastewater collection and treatment ordinance adopted by reference
   
51.03   Privies prohibited; waste disposal required
   
51.04   Sewer connections required; where facilities not available
   
51.05   Application for sewerage connection
   
51.06   Responsibility for installation and maintenance
   
51.07   Excavations
   
51.08   Right of entry for purpose of making inspections
   
51.09   Water service outside corporate limits
   
51.10   Water supply emergencies
   
51.11   Private wastewater disposal
Prohibited Acts
   
51.20   Violations
   
51.21   Cross-connections; pollution of water supply
   
51.22   Illegal connections to or use of water and sewerage systems
   
51.23   Tampering with water meters
   
51.24   Destruction or defacement of water or sewerage system
   
51.25   Obstruction of sewer lines
   
51.26   Illegal reconnection when service is discontinued for nonpayment
   
51.27   Storm drainage and public sewers
   
51.28   Infiltration/inflow
Rates and Charges
   
51.40   Establishment of rates
   
51.41   No free service
   
51.42   Meter readings; billing dates; delinquent bills; cutoff of service
   
51.43   Failure to pay fees or charges
   
51.44   Water to be metered; service and tap fees
   
51.45   Water rates
   
51.46   Sewer charge calculations
   
51.47   Tap fees
   
51.48   Delinquent charges where sewer only is connected
   
51.49   Water bill adjustment policy
 
   
51.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.01 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   For the protection of the health and the prevention of disease, all water
and wastewater facilities serving the public by private ownership shall conform
to that certain document known as Rules and Regulations Governing the
Development of Subdivision Water Supply and Waste Disposal Systems prescribed
by the South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control, with
amendments thereto.
('86 Code, § 17.201.2)
§ 51.02 WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT ORDINANCE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The wastewater collection and treatment ordinance, No. 97-4, passed 4- -97,
is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this code the same as if set
forth in full herein. The provisions of Ordinance No. 97-4 are not rescinded by
this code. The provisions thereof shall continue in full force and effect,
until such time as amended by Council.
(Ord. 97-4, passed 4- -97; Am. Ord. 2001-016, passed - -01; Am. Ord. 2012-02,
passed 3-19-02; Am. Ord. 2012-07, passed 12-3-12; Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 4-
20-15)
§ 51.03 PRIVIES PROHIBITED; WASTE DISPOSAL REQUIRED.
   (A)   The term "pit privy" as used in this section shall mean a building
which is not connected to a sewer and used for affording privacy while in the
act of urination or defecation.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any property owner to construct, erect,
install, maintain or permit to remain any pit privy on any property within the
corporate limits.
('86 Code, § 10.501)
   (C)   All building contracts for the erection of structures anticipated for
human occupancy shall provide for adequate and sanitary waste disposal. The
contract shall provide for such facilities, and plans shall state the proposed
method of disposal.
('86 Code, § 10.502)
   (D)   The violation of any provision of this section shall be deemed a
misdemeanor.
('86 Code, § 10.503) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.04 SEWER CONNECTIONS REQUIRED; WHERE FACILITIES NOT AVAILABLE.
   (A)   Before any place of human habitation, commercial use, public assembly
or any similar place intended to be used for such is occupied the owner or
occupant thereof shall have installed therein adequate facilities for the
disposal of liquid waste and human excreta. No person shall occupy any such
place until the provisions hereof have be complied with.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the occupants or tenants of all places of
human habitation, commercial use or public assembly to maintain all facilities
for the disposal of liquid waste and human excreta in a clean and sanitary
condition at all times.
   (C)   No owner or occupant of any such premises shall use any private septic
tank or cesspool or allow any liquid waste or human excreta to accumulate
thereupon after such connection to the sanitary sewerage system shall have been
made.
   (D)   Not less than 60 days after the installation of a municipal water or
sanitary sewer line within 250 feet of any residence or building, all said
residences and buildings requiring same shall be connected thereto for water
and disposal of sewerage and similar waste originating on said premises;
provided however, that septic tanks constructed prior to the installation of
the sewerage system and meeting the requirements of the South Carolina
Department of Health and Environmental Control are exempt from the requirements
of this section until such time as septic tank problems develop and connection
to the sanitary sewer collector line is deemed necessary, the public health
requiring it, by proper authority.
   (E)   Upon completion of construction of water mains and sewage collector
lines, as prescribed above, and after official notification to connect thereto,
each day such buildings shall not be so connected shall be deemed a separate
offense and punishable as a misdemeanor.
('86 Code, § 17.202.1)
   (F)   With the written approval of the Council, where sewerage facilities
are not available, septic tanks may be permitted provided the same are
constructed and maintained as required by the laws, rules and regulations of
the State Board of Health.
('86 Code, § 17.202.2) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.05 APPLICATION FOR SEWERAGE CONNECTION.
   (A)   Before any portion of the plumbing and drainage system of any building
shall be constructed, there shall be filed by the owner or agent of the
property at the office of the Town Clerk, a written application for connections
with the sewerage and waterworks systems stating the location of the building
with a plan of the same, showing in detail the entire proposed connections from
the public sewer line through the building to the terminus, showing the
location of all fixtures, traps, vent pipes etc. The application shall contain
a specific agreement to obey and abide by any and all resolutions, ordinances,
rules, and regulations that are now or may hereafter by adopted by the Council
for the protection of the sewerage and waterworks system and to restrict,
regulate and control the use of the same and the connections therewith.
   (B)   The application shall also give permission to an authorized
representative of the town to enter the premises of the applicant at any
reasonable hour, to investigate the plumbing or sewer connections. The plan
shall be inspected and approved corrected or modified by the inspector
whereupon a permit for the proposed connections shall be given by the Clerk.
The work shall be performed by a regularly licensed plumber, if available, and
provided the municipal sewer collector lines are of sufficient depth to serve
each residence or other building.
('86 Code, § 17.202.3)
§ 51.06 RESPONSIBILITY FOR INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   Property owners shall be responsible for the installation and maintenance of
sewer lines from the point where they are connected with public sewer mains,
and installation and maintenance of water lines from the limits of the
particular lot for which an application has been approved.
('86 Code, § 17.202.4)
§ 51.07 EXCAVATIONS.
   All ditches or trenches opened for the purpose of laying pipes for
connection with water or sewer mains, whether on private premises or across
streets, sidewalks or ditches, shall be compactly closed and filled after the
pipes are laid. All paving disturbed in connection therewith shall be restored
to its original condition.
('86 Code, § 17.202.5) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.08 RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR PURPOSE OF MAKING INSPECTIONS.
   Official authorities are hereby authorized to enter the premises of any user
of water or any sanitary sewer line, at all reasonable hours, to inspect or
examine water and sewer pipes, their connections and the use of water or sewer
lines on the premises.
('86 Code, § 17.202.6)
§ 51.09 WATER SERVICE OUTSIDE CORPORATE LIMITS.
   Applicants for water service outside the corporate limits, when required to
do so, shall extend water lines under streets or public ways to connect to the
water meter at their own expense. In such cases, the town reserves the right to
locate water meters in such position or location as deemed in its own best
interest.
('86 Code, § 17.202.7)
§ 51.10 WATER SUPPLY EMERGENCIES.
   Upon a determination by the Council that the water supply may prove
inadequate for the comfort and convenience of the citizens, the Mayor is hereby
authorized and empowered to limit the use of said water to such hours and for
such purposes as he may deem necessary. The limited use period shall become
effective 48 hours after conspicuous posting at the Town Hall of a proclamation
stating the lawful purposes and hours of use of such water and shall remain in
effect for the duration of said emergency period.
('86 Code, § 17.202.8)
§ 51.11 PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge solid or liquid waste
into the sanitary sewer system unless the standards of acceptable waste
established by ordinance are met and the discharge is made through an approved
connection. No material shall be discharged into the public sewer system
through a manhole without a permit from the town. Such a permit shall be issued
only in an emergency involving the public health and safety.
   (B)   Hauled waste shall be deposited at an approved location at the
wastewater plant. Before discharging at the treatment plant, the hauler will
have purchased the proper discharge permit and provided the treatment plant
with a chain of custody sheet for the load to be discharged. Discharge can only
be done during normal working hours, Monday through Friday.
   (C)   Hauled waste from outside Williamsburg County will be accepted on a
case by case basis. An approved letter is required from the town.
   (D)   No grease trap waste will be accepted; no private utility waste will
be accepted. No waste with a high concentration of plastic, rags, paper, candy
wrappers, or other objects which can cause flow problems, equipment problems,
handling problems, or treating problems will be accepted.
   (E)   The town has the right to test for any substance that is felt could
harm the treatment facility. Such loads will not be discharged until test
results are in.
   (F)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate to protect and ensure
compliance with all town codes and NPDES Permit limits.
   (G)   The following fees shall be paid for the discharge of each load:
Gallons Rates
        Portable Toilet / Septic Tank Waste
Gallons                                  Rates
                                         Portable Toilet / Septic Tank Waste
1500                                     $ 15
5011000                                  $ 25
10012500                                 $ 45
25013500                                 $ 105
Domestic waste from outside Williamsburg
County
01500                                    $ 50
5011000                                  $ 100
10012500                                 $ 250
25013500                                 $ 350
 
   (H)   Any cost incurred for testing under division (E) or cost to repair any
damage to structures or equipment at the discharged site caused during the
discharge of a load will be the responsibility of the hauling company.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 3-21-05; Am. Ord. 2021-02, passed 5-17-21)
PROHIBITED ACTS
§ 51.20 VIOLATIONS.
   The following enumerated acts in this subchapter shall be unlawful, but they
shall not be considered all-inclusive. A violation hereof by any person or
persons, who engage in such acts without appropriate permission, authority or
appropriate supervision as herein specified, shall be considered a misdemeanor.
('86 Code, § 17.203.1)
Statutory reference:
   S.C. Code §§ 5-31-20, 6-11-280
§ 51.21 CROSS-CONNECTIONS; POLLUTION OF WATER SUPPLY.
   (A)   (1)   To control cross-connections to the water system of the town,
there is hereby adopted the Cross-Connection Control Policy and Regulations of
the town consisting of 20 typed pages and 13 pages of Exhibits, a copy of which
shall be maintained in the office of The Town Clerk.
('86 Code, § 17.203.8)
      (2)   The town maintains a current cross connection control program. All
testable backflow devices are tested annually. All low hazard residential lawn
irrigation systems connections are protected by approved residential dual check
valves and will be changed at five-year intervals or when meters are changed
out, which ever comes first. All employees continually attempt to locate
unprotected cross connections by visual inspections of the system. An employee
or another licensed tester tests all testable devices annually. Device owners
are notified of testing by mail. Records are maintained and kept on file.
Device selection is based on degree of hazard.
      (3)   The Town of Kingstree maintains Low Hazard residential lawn
irrigation system connections, any lawn irrigation system without chemical
additions, or an unapproved auxiliary water supply.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to defile or pollute in any manner the public
water system or to make connection therewith or maintain any connection whereby
water from any other source may be pumped into or allowed to flow into the
public distribution system which may result in a cross-connection.
('86 Code, § 17.203.2) (Ord. 85-7, passed 5-29-85; Am. Ord. 2006-08, passed 10-
16-06) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.22 ILLEGAL CONNECTIONS TO OR USE OF WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to connect with, use or tap any public water or
sewer main without specific authorization of the Council, in writing first
obtained, other than normal connections for which connection fees shall have
been paid, but not including private wells.
   (B)   No person shall place any pipe or similar material in such a manner as
to furnish public water or sewer service to others, except as otherwise
provided in this chapter.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person without proper authority, to put
any solid or liquid substance, into any public sewer main or line, at manholes
or in any other way, than through a connection provided for the purpose.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge into the public
sewerage system any substance which may be harmful or liable to damage the
public sewerage system or to obstruct the flow of sewage in said system.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful to connect or permit to remain connected, any
open gutter or rain water conductor or cesspool with any sanitary sewer line.
('86 Code, § 17.203.3) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.23 TAMPERING WITH WATER METERS.
   It shall be unlawful to tamper with or change any water meter.
('86 Code, § 17.203.4) (Ord. 83-2, passed - -83)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see S.C. Code § 16-13-385
§ 51.24 DESTRUCTION OR DEFACEMENT OF WATER OR SEWERAGE SYSTEM.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to willfully destroy, break,
injure, climb upon or deface or in any other manner, interfere with any public
water mains, water tanks, sewers, fire hydrants, meter boxes, stop cocks, pumps
or other fixtures of the public waterworks system or throw into such system any
bricks, earth, stone, filth or other substances. It shall also be unlawful for
any person or persons to willfully destroy break, injure deface or in any other
manner interfere with any house, fence, wells, street mains, sluice pipes, gate
valves, or to place advertisements or placards on any property belonging to the
waterworks or sewerage system.
('86 Code, § 17.203.5) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.25 OBSTRUCTION OF SEWER LINES.
   It shall be unlawful to place in any water closet, or allow to enter any
soil pipe any paper other than what is commonly known as toilet paper or
material or substance likely to block, obstruct the flow or damage the pipeline
or sewerage system or to dispose of any flammable, noxious or chemically active
material harmful to life or property into the sewerage system.
('86 Code, § 17.203.6) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.26 ILLEGAL RECONNECTION WHEN SERVICE IS DISCONTINUED FOR NONPAYMENT.
   It shall be unlawful to reconnect water or sewer service or to continue to
use such service when it has been discontinued for nonpayment of a bill for
service, until such bill has been paid in full, including a reconnection fee as
provided in §
51.42 hereof.
('86 Code, § 17.203.7) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.27 STORM DRAINAGE AND PUBLIC SEWERS.
   (A)   No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any polluted
waters, such as stormwater, groundwater roof runoff, sub-surface drainage or
cooling water to any sewer, except stormwater runoff from limited areas, which
stormwater may be polluted at times, may be discharged to the sanitary sewer,
by permission of the town.
   (B)   Stormwater, other than that exempted above, and all other polluted
drainage, shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as
combined sewers or storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the town or
other regulatory agencies. Unpolluted industrial cooling water or process
waters may be discharged, or approved of the town, to a storm sewer, combined
sewer or natural outlet.
('86 Code, § 17.203.9) (Ord. 82-7, passed 7-28-82)
§ 51.28 INFILTRATION/INFLOW.
   (A)   Infiltration shall mean water entering the sewerage system from the
ground through such sources as, but not limited to, defective pipe joints,
connections or manhole walls. Infiltration does not include, and is
distinguished from inflow.
   (B)   Inflow shall mean the water discharged into the sewerage system from
such sources as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellar, yard and area
drains, foundation drains, cooling water discharges, sewers, catch basins,
storm waters, surface run-off or street wash waters or drainage. Inflow does
not include, and is distinguished from, infiltration.
   (C)   Infiltration/inflow shall mean the total quantity of water from both
infiltration and inflow without distinguishing the source.
   (D)   Excessive infiltration/inflow shall mean the quantities of
infiltration/inflow which can be economically eliminated from a sewerage system
by rehabilitation, as determined by a cost-effective analysis that compares the
costs for correcting the infiltration/inflow conditions with the total costs
for transportation and treatment of the infiltration/inflow, subject to EPA
provisions.
   (E)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer shall maintain
said sewer in such a manner as to prevent excessive amounts or infiltration/
inflow from entering the public sewerage system. The owner of any building
whose sewer is not properly maintained shall be notified, and he shall have the
necessary repairs made at his own expense. Before any underground portions are
covered, the owner shall notify the town when the building sewer is ready for
inspection.
('86 Code, § 17.206.6)
RATES AND CHARGES
§ 51.40 ESTABLISHMENT OF RATES.
   (A)   The town shall furnish water to persons for reasonable compensation
and charge a reasonable charge for maintenance of a sewerage system. Such
charges shall be fixed from time to time by the Town Council.
('86 Code, § 17.201.1)
   (B)   The Council shall establish a schedule of charges and rates for
services rendered by the water and sewerage systems. Said schedule shall be
reviewed periodically to insure that it is equitable and fair.
('86 Code, § 17.204.5) (Am. Ord. 2015-01, passed 5-18-15)
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see S.C. Code §§ 5-31-250, 5-31-900
§ 51.41 NO FREE SERVICE.
   No free water or sewer service shall be furnished to any person, firm or
corporation.
('86 Code, § 17.204.3) (Am. Ord. 2015-01, passed 5-18-15)
§ 51.42 METER READINGS; BILLING DATES; DELINQUENT BILLS; CUTOFF OF SERVICE.
   (A)   All meters shall be read once a month, and each monthly bill shall
become due and payable in its entirety on the twenty-fifth day of the month. If
the Town Hall is not open for business on said day, the bill shall be due and
payable on the next business day. Any customer failing to pay their water bill
by this date shall be charged a penalty of 15% which shall be collected along
with the water bill. Penalties shall be added at 8:00 a.m. on the second
business day after the bill is due and payable.
   (B)   If any customer has a balance of $10 or more on the last day of the
month, a non-payment fee of $40 will be added. If the unpaid past due amount is
$15 or more on the third day of the next month, all services to such customer
shall be discontinued and shall remain discontinued until such customer has
paid the customer’s past due balance, including the non-payment fee of $40.
   (C)   For each customer who also receives sewer service, a monthly sewer
service charge as hereinafter provided shall be added to the water bill and
collected as a part thereof.
   (D)   It is the policy of the town to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of nonpayment of bills. The town's form for application for
utility service and all bills shall contain title, address, room number, and
telephone number of the official in charge of billing, and that all bills are
due and payable on or before the date set forth on the bill.
   (E)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained; only
questions of proper and correct billing will be considered. In the absence of
payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided
herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified.
   (F)   In the event any customer fails to pay the imposed garbage fee, the
Water Superintendent is hereby authorized and directed to cut off the water
supply for such customer in the same manner as if the said customer failed to
pay its water bill.
   (G)   (1)   Non-refundable administrative fees. All first-time Kingstree
water customers are required to pay a non-refundable administrative fee as
follows:
 
Account     Inside/Outside Sanitation
Temporary   $25             
Residential $75            $10 (optional outside town limit)
Commercial  $75            $20 (optional outside town limit)
 
      (2)   Temporary accounts lasting longer than 90 days will be converted to
regular service accounts.
(Ord. passed 9-16-80; Ord. 97-14, passed 8-18-97; Ord. 99-16, passed 10-18- 99;
Am. Ord. 2006-1, passed 3-20-06; Am. Ord. 2006-03, passed 5-15-06; Am. Ord.
2007-02, passed 6-25-07; Am. Ord. 2008-12, passed 6-16-08; Am. Ord. 2015-01,
passed 5-18-15; Am. Ord. 2022-02, passed 7-18-22; Am. Ord. 2024-06, passed 9-
16-24; Am. Ord. 2024-11, passed 10-21-24)
§ 51.43 FAILURE TO PAY FEES OR CHARGES.
   The right is reserved hereby to discontinue service to any premises for
failure to pay water and/or sewer charges when due and payable as set out in
this chapter. Service shall be reinstated as hereinafter provided.
('86 Code, § 17.204.1) (Am. Ord. 2015-01, passed 5-18-15)
§ 51.44 WATER TO BE METERED; SERVICE AND TAP FEES.
   (A)   All water service shall be metered and computed for billing purposes
on the amount of water used, both inside and outside the corporate limits.
(‘86 Code, § 17.205.1)
   (B)   Each new customer is subject to the non-refundable administrative fees
as in § 51.42(G).
   (C)   (1)   For each new water connection, the person or firm applying for
water service shall pay as a tap-in or cut-in fee, as follows:
 
Tap Size Inside Outside
¾"      $1,552 $1,552
1"       $1,750 $2,017
2"       $1,920 $2,437
 
      (2)   Tap-in or cut-in fee shall include additional costs related to
boring (up to $1,000) and/or other SCDOT or third-party utility specifications.
      (3)   A request for service will be evaluated and the tap fee will be
calculated based on all costs of materials, labor, equipment, and services used
to make water connection.
      (4)   If the calculated costs of the tap exceed the above rated fee, then
a breakdown of the cost will be provided to the customer before connection is
made.
   (D)   (1)   No wells shall be allowed within the corporate limits of the
town for drinking water.
      (2)   No wells shall be constructed deeper than 250 feet within the
corporate limits of the town for irrigation.
(‘86 Code, § 17.205.4)
   (E)   Customers obtaining an irrigation water connection shall be charged a
tap fee as set forth in § 51.44(C) and charged monthly on the amount of water
used, both inside and outside the corporate limits, as set forth in § 51.45.
Irrigation wells are allowed in the town limits.
(Ord. 83-2, passed 2-10-83; Am. Ord. 89-12, passed 6-26-89; Am. Ord. 2000-7,
passed 8-21-00; Am. Ord. 2000-13, passed 12-18-00; Am. Ord. 2001-13 passed, 8-
20-01; Am. Ord. 2006-03, passed 5-15-06; Am. Ord. 2009-04, passed 8-21-09; Am.
Ord. 2010-2, passed 5-17-10; Am. Ord. 2015-01, passed 5-18-15; Am. Ord. 2024-
09, passed 10-21-24)
§ 51.45 WATER RATES.
   (A)   Monthly water rates are established hereby as follows. The following
monthly charges shall be billed each such customer:
WATER RATE SCHEDULE
 Inside Outside
WATER RATE SCHEDULE
                                   Inside Outside
Residential Water Rates
Base fee/First 3,000 gallons (min.) $23.75 $27.75
All over 3,000 gallons (per 1,000)  $4.13  $4.13
Commercial and Industrial Water Rates
Base fee/First 3,000 gallons (min.) $31.40 $31.40
All over 3,000 gallons (per 1,000)  $4.45  $4.45
 
   (B)   Non-profit organizations shall be charged the same rates as
residential customers upon application with the Water Department. All non-
profit organizations must show proof of non-profit status (as certified by the
Federal Government) and have current documents on file with the town to be
eligible for the residential rate.
('86 Code, § 17.205.2) (Ord. 83-2, passed 2-10-83; Am. Ord. 89-9, passed 6-26-
89; Am. Ord. 91-7, passed 6-24-91; Am. Ord. 93-7, passed 6-28-93; Am. Ord. 97-
36, passed 11-17-97; Am. Ord. 98-3, passed 5-18- 98; Am. Ord. 2007-02, passed
6-25-07; Am. Ord. 2009-03, passed 6-15-09; Am. Ord. 2015-01, passed 5-18-15;
Am. Ord. 2017-06, passed 7-17-17; Am. Ord. 2020-06, passed 6-15-20)
§ 51.46 SEWER CHARGE CALCULATIONS.
   (A)   Sewer rate schedule:
SEWER RATE SCHEDULE
 Inside Outside
SEWER RATE SCHEDULE
                 Inside Outside
Residential Sewer Rates
Base fee          $19.00 $24.00
Per 1,000 gallons $3.76  $3.98
Commercial and Industrial Sewer Rates
Base fee          $22.00 $32.00
Per 1,000 gallons $3.66  $3.98
 
   (B)   Waste may not exceed the maximum pollutant concentrations specified in
permits issued to customers.
   (C)   Non-profit organizations shall be charged the same rates as
residential customers upon application with the Water Department. All non-
profit organizations shall show proof of non-profit status (as certified by the
Federal Government) and have current documents on file with the town to be
eligible for the residential rate.
('86 Code, § 17.206.2) (Ord. 92-5, passed 6-22-92; Am. Ord. 97-8, passed 8-18-
97; Am. Ord. 97-36, passed 11-17-97; Am. Ord. 98-3, passed 5-18-98; Am. Ord.
2007-02, passed 6-25-07; Am. Ord. 2013-08, passed 9-16-13; Am. Ord. 2015-01,
passed 5-18-15; Am. Ord. 2017-05, passed 7- 17-17; Am. Ord. 2020-07, passed 6-
15-20)
§ 51.47 TAP FEES.
   (A)   For each new sewer connection, the applicant therefor shall pay a
tapping fee as provided in
this section.
(‘86 Code, § 17.204.4)
   (B)   (1)   The following shall be the tap-in or cut-in fees, both inside
and outside the corporate limits, for each new sewer connection to the sewerage
system.
 
                       Inside Outside
For a 4" tap or larger $1,750 $1,750
 
      (2)   Tap-in or cut-in fee shall include additional costs related to
boring (up to $1,000) and/or other SCDOT or third-party utility specifications.
      (3)   A request for service will be evaluated and the tap fee will be
calculated based on all costs of materials, labor, equipment, and services used
to make water connection; plus 20% of the total for larger tap size.
      (4)   If the calculated costs of the tap exceed the above rated fee, then
a breakdown of the cost will be provided to the customer before connection is
made.
(‘86 Code, § 17.205.4) (Ord. 82-7, passed 7-28-82; Am. Ord. 2000-7, passed 8-
21-00; Am. Ord. 2007-02, passed 6-25-07; Am. Ord. 2009-03, passed 6-15-09; Am.
Ord. 2015-01, passed 5-18-15; Am. Ord. 2024-10, passed 10-21-24)
§ 51.48 DELINQUENT CHARGES WHERE SEWER ONLY IS CONNECTED.
   When no water is supplied by the town, and a sewer connection is made to the
town system and the service charge becomes delinquent, necessitating a
discontinuance of service therefor, the fee to reconnect the service shall be
the same as that charged for water customers.
('86 Code, § 17.206.3) (Am. Ord. 2015-01, passed 5-18-15)
§ 51.49 WATER BILL ADJUSTMENT POLICY.
   (A)   Customers experiencing a severe increase in their utility bill may be
eligible for an adjustment to that bill if, and only if, the bill being
considered is twice the normal six-month average for water and sewer charges
for that account.
   (B)   The garbage fee, meter rent and service fee will not be included in
determining the normal six-month average.
   (C)   A water user may have no more than one adjustment, to no more than one
bill, on an account during any 12-month period.
   (D)   Adjustments made to any account by the town due to a billing error by
the town, are not considered as an individual adjustment. More than one
adjustment may be considered if it is found to be an unusual occurrence and is
found to warrant an adjustment and is approved by the Town Manager.
   (E)   A "leak" is defined as the loss of water due to broken or burst water
lines/pipes, an improperly functioning toilet fixture or a damaged valve on a
hot water heater. Outside spigots left on will not be considered a leak and,
therefore, no adjustment will be made on that account. The responsibility of
the town for leak repairs ends at the discharge point of the water meter. Any
leaks and repairs thereof beyond the discharge point of the water meter are the
responsibility of the customer. All water passing through the meter is the
responsibility of the customer.
   (F)   Customers requesting such adjustments must have had a valid leak and
show proof of repair.
   (G)   The customer's bill will be adjusted down to the average of the water
and sewer charges on the high bill and the previous two bills. Trash and any
other fees will not be included in the adjustment and will be due as presented
on each bill.
(Ord. 94-15, passed 12-19-94; Am. Ord. 2014-11, passed 12-15-14; Am. Ord. 2015-
01, passed 5-18-15)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is otherwise provided shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $505 or
by imprisonment for a period not exceeding 30 days, or both; provided, however,
that no penalty shall exceed the penalty provided by state law for similar
offenses. Each day any violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
('86 Code, § 1.207)
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate the proclamation in
§
51.10 shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $250, or imprisonment for a
period not exceeding ten days, or both; provided, however, that no person, firm
or corporation shall be subject to said penalty until such offender shall have
been notified of said proclamation and afforded the opportunity to refrain from
any further violation. Failure on the part of any such offender to comply after
notice, shall subject each offender to the penalty herein provided.
('86 Code, § 17.202.8)
   (C)   The violation of any provision of §§
51.20 et seq. unless otherwise provided, shall be deemed a misdemeanor. Each
day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
('86 Code, § 17.203.10)
(Am. Ord. 2015-01, passed 5-18-15)
CHAPTER 52: DROUGHT RESPONSE
Section
   
52.01   Plan adopted by reference
§ 52.01 PLAN ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The Drought Response Plan is hereby adopted by reference as if set forth in
full in this code of ordinances. A copy of the plan is available for public
inspection at town offices during regular town business hours.
(Ord. 86-7, passed 8-18-86; Am. Ord. 2003-06, passed 5-19-03)
CHAPTER 53: UNDERGROUND UTILITIES
Section
   
53.01   Definition
   
53.02   Location of lines to be approved
   
53.03   Hearing on petition for exceptions to standard locations
 
   
53.99   Penalty
§ 53.01 DEFINITION.
   The word PERSON when used in this chapter, shall include individuals,
corporations, firms, partnerships, associations, organizations or any other
group acting as a unit.
('86 Code, § 17.103)
§ 53.02 LOCATION OF LINES TO BE APPROVED.
   It shall be unlawful to locate any underground gas, electric, telephone,
cablevision or any other type lines, within less than two feet from any utility
pole or line without a permit granted as hereinafter provided.
('86 Code, § 17.101) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.03 HEARING ON PETITION FOR EXCEPTIONS TO STANDARD LOCATIONS.
   If any person shall desire or deem it necessary to locate an underground
line within less than two feet of any utility pole or line, such person shall
file a petition with the Town Council requesting a permit to do so. The
Council, after written notice of not less than ten days to the person filing
such petition and to the owner or the person in control or charge of such
utility pole or line, shall grant a hearing on said petition at which the
parties in interest shall be heard. The decision of the Council shall be final
and binding upon all parties in interest.
('86 Code, § 17.102)
§ 53.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor. Each day during which a violation of this chapter exists
shall be considered as a separate offense.
('86 Code, § 17.104)
Statutory reference:
   S.C. Code, § 5-7-30
CHAPTER 54: PRETREATMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
54.001   Purpose and policy
   
54.002   Administration
   
54.003   Abbreviations
   
54.004   Definitions
General Sewer Use Requirements
   
54.010   Prohibited discharge standards
   
54.011   National categorical pretreatment standards
   
54.012   State pretreatment standards
   
54.013   Local limits
   
54.014   Town’s right of revision
   
54.015   Dilution
Pretreatment of Wastewater
   
54.020   Pretreatment facilities
   
54.021   Additional pretreatment measures
   
54.022   Accidental discharge/slug discharge control plans
   
54.023   Hauled wastewater
Individual Wastewater Discharge Permits
   
54.030   Wastewater analysis
   
54.031   Individual wastewater discharge permit requirement
   
54.032   Individual wastewater discharge permitting: existing connections
   
54.033   Individual wastewater discharge permitting: new connections
   
54.034   Individual wastewater discharge permit application contents
   
54.035   Application signatories and certifications
   
54.036   Individual wastewater discharge permit decisions
Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Issuance
   
54.050   Individual wastewater discharge permit duration
   
54.051   Individual wastewater discharge permit contents
   
54.052   Permit modification
   
54.053   Individual wastewater discharge permit transfer
   
54.054   Individual wastewater discharge permit revocation
   
54.055   Individual wastewater discharge permit reissuance
   
54.056   Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions
Reporting Requirements
   
54.065   Baseline monitoring reports
   
54.066   Compliance schedule progress reports
   
54.067   Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline
   
54.068   Periodic compliance reports
   
54.069   Reports of changed conditions
   
54.070   Reports of potential problems
   
54.071   Reports from unpermitted users
   
54.072   Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting
   
54.073   Analytical requirements
   
54.074   Sample collection
   
54.075   Date of receipt of reports
   
54.076   Recordkeeping
   
54.077   Certification statements
   54.078   Notification of hazardous waste discharge
Compliance Monitoring
   
54.085   Right of entry: inspection and sampling
   
54.086   Search warrants
   
54.087   Confidential information
   
54.088   Publication of users in significant noncompliance
Administrative Enforcement Remedies
   
54.095   Notification of violation
   
54.096   Consent orders
   
54.097   Show cause hearing
   
54.098   Compliance orders
   
54.099   Cease and desist orders
   
54.100   Administrative fines
   
54.101   Emergency suspensions
   
54.102   Termination of discharge
Judicial Enforcement Remedies
   
54.110   Injunctive relief
   
54.111   Civil penalties
   
54.112   Criminal prosecution
   
54.113   Remedies nonexclusive
Supplemental Enforcement Action
   
54.120   Penalties for late reports
   
54.121   Performance bonds
   
54.122   Liability insurance
   
54.123   Payment of outstanding fees and penalties
   
54.124   Water supply severance
Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations
   
54.130   Upset
   
54.131   Prohibited discharge standards
   
54.132   Bypass
Miscellaneous Provisions
   
54.140   Pretreatment charges and fees
   
54.141   Severability
   
54.142   Effective date
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 54.001 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
   (A)   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly
owned treatment works for the town and enables the town to comply with all
applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United
States Code [U.S.C.] § 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations
(Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations [CFR] Part 403). The objectives of
this chapter are:
      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned
treatment works that will interfere with its operation;
      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned
treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned treatment works,
inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with
the publicly owned treatment works;
      (3)   To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be
affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the
general public;
      (4)   To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge
from the publicly owned treatment works;
      (5)   To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance, and improvement of the publicly owned treatment works;
and
      (6)   To enable the town to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and
any other federal or state laws to which the publicly owned treatment works is
subject.
   (B)    This chapter shall apply to all users of the publicly owned treatment
works. The chapter authorizes the issuance of individual wastewater discharge
permits; the issuance of general permits for wastewater discharge; provides for
monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative
review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of
fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program
established herein.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12; Am. Ord. 2021-01, passed 3-15-21)
§ 54.002 ADMINISTRATION.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, the Manager shall administer,
implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted to or
duties imposed upon the Manager may be delegated by the Manager to a duly
authorized town employee.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.003 ABBREVIATIONS.
   The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter, shall have the
designated meanings:
   (A)   BOD - Biochemical Oxygen Demand;
   (B)   BMP - Best Management Practice;
   (C)   BMR - Baseline Monitoring Report;
   (D)   CFR - Code of Federal Regulations;
   (E)   CIU - Categorical Industrial User;
   (F)   COD - Chemical Oxygen Demand;
   (G)   EPA - U.S. Environmental Protection Agency;
   (H)   gpd - gallons per day;
   (I)   IU - Industrial User;
   (J)   mg/l - milligrams per liter;
   (K)   NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System;
   (L)   NSCIU - Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User;
   (M)   POTW - Publicly Owned Treatment Works;
   (N)   RCRA - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act;
   (O)   SIU - Significant Industrial User;
   (P)   SNC - Significant Noncompliance;
   (Q)   TSS - Total Suspended Solids; and
   (R)   U.S.C. - United States Code.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.004 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated.
   ACT or “THE ACT.” The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the
Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
   APPROVAL AUTHORITY. South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental
Control.
   AUTHORIZED or DULY AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER.
      (1)   If the user is a corporation:
         (a)   The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or
         (b)   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or
operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management
decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility including having
the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment
recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure
long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can
ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather
complete and accurate information for individual wastewater discharge permit
requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or
delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.
      (2)   If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general
partner or proprietor, respectively.
      (3)   If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a
director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation
and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their
designee.
      (4)   The individuals described in divisions (1) through (3), above, may
designate a DULY AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE if the authorization is in writing,
the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the
overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having
overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the
written authorization is submitted to the town.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures
for five days at 20 degrees centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration
(e.g., mg/l).
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMPs. Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement
the prohibitions listed in §
54.010 (A) and (B) [40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b)]. BMPs include treatment
requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff,
spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials
storage.
   CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL STANDARD. Any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with
§§ 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) that apply to a specific
category of users and that appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-
471.
   CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER. An industrial user subject to a categorical
pretreatment standard or categorical standard.
   CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or COD. A measure of the oxygen required to oxidize
all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in water.
   CONTROL AUTHORITY. The town.
   DAILY MAXIMUM. The arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a
pollutant collected during a calendar day.
   DAILY MAXIMUM LIMIT. The maximum allowable discharge limit of a pollutant
during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in units of
mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of the
day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in terms of a concentration, the
daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant
concentration derived from all measurements taken that day.
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Management Division Director,
the Regional Administrator, or other duly authorized official of said agency.
   EXISTING SOURCE. Any source of discharge that is not a NEW SOURCE.
   GRAB SAMPLE. A sample that is taken from a wastestream without regard to the
flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes.
   INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE. The introduction of pollutants into the
POTW from any nondomestic source.
   INSTANTANEOUS LIMIT. The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be
discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or
composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the
duration of the sampling event.
   INTERFERENCE. A discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment
processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
therefore, is a cause of a violation of the town's NPDES permit or of the
prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the
following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any
more stringent state or local regulations: § 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste
Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any
state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste
Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the
Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act.
   LOCAL LIMIT. Specific discharge limits developed and enforced by the town
upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement the general and specific
discharge prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b).
   MANAGER. The person designated by the town to supervise the operation of the
POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this
chapter. The term also means a duly authorized representative of the Manager.
   MEDICAL WASTE. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood
products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding,
surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis
wastes.
   MONTHLY AVERAGE. The sum of all daily discharges measured during a calendar
month divided by the number of daily discharges measured during that month.
   MONTHLY AVERAGE LIMIT. The highest allowable average of daily discharges
over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all daily discharges measured
during a calendar month divided by the number of daily discharges measured
during that month.
   NEW SOURCE.
      (1)   Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there
is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under § 307(c) of the
Act that will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter
promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:
         (a)   The building, structure, facility, or installation is
constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or
         (b)   The building, structure, facility, or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
         (c)   The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of
an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should
be considered.
      (2)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the
criteria of divisions (1)(b) or (c) above but otherwise alters, replaces, or
adds to existing process or production equipment.
      (3)   Construction of a new source as defined under this division has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
         (a)   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite
construction program:
            1.   Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
            2.   Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which
is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source
facilities or equipment; or
         (b)   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation
within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be
terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility,
engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation
under this division.
   NONCONTACT COOLING WATER. Water used for cooling that does not come into
direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or
finished product.
   PASS THROUGH. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United
States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any
requirement of the town's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude
or duration of a violation.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental
entities.
   pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in
standard units.
   POLLUTANT. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial
wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS,
turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).
   PRETREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of
pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW.
This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or
biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting
the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable
pretreatment standard.
   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural requirement related
to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard.
   PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS. Pretreatment standards shall mean
prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local
limits.
   PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES. Absolute
prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions
appear in §
54.010.
   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW. A treatment works, as defined by §
212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. section 1292), which is owned by the town. This
definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage,
treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a
liquid nature and any conveyances, which convey wastewater to a treatment
plant.
   SEPTIC TANK WASTE. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical
toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
   SEWAGE. Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing
operations, etc.).
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SIU).
      Except as provided in divisions (3) and (4) of this definition, a
significant industrial user is:
      (1)   An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards;
or
      (2)   An industrial user that:
         (a)   Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process
wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler
blowdown wastewater);
         (b)   Contributes a process wastestream which makes up 5% or more of
the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment
plant; or
         (c)   Is designated as such by the town on the basis that it has a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
      (3)   The town may determine that an industrial user subject to
categorical pretreatment standards is a non-significant categorical industrial
user rather than a significant industrial user on a finding that the industrial
user never discharges more than 100 gallons per day (gpd) of total categorical
wastewater (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown
wastewater, unless specifically included in the pretreatment standard) and the
following conditions are met:
         (a)   The industrial user, prior to town's finding, has consistently
complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards and
requirements;
         (b)   The industrial user annually submits the certification statement
required in §
54.077(B) [see 40 CFR 403.12(q)], together with any additional information
necessary to support the certification statement; and
         (c)   The industrial user never discharges any untreated concentrated
wastewater.
      (4)   Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in division (2) of
this part has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the town
may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received
from an industrial user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403-8(f)
(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial
user.
   SLUG LOAD or SLUG DISCHARGE. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration,
which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in §
54.010. A slug discharge is any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature,
including but not limited to an accidental spill or a non-customary batch
discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass
through, or in any other way violate the POTW's regulations, local limits or
permit conditions.
   STORMWATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt.
   TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS or SUSPENDED SOLIDS. The total suspended matter that
floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other
liquid, and that is removable by laboratory filtering.
   TOWN. Town of Kingstree or the Town Council of Kingstree.
   USER or INDUSTRIAL USER. A source of indirect discharge.
   WASTEWATER. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from
residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing
facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are
contributed to the POTW.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT. That portion of the POTW
which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial
waste.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS
§ 54.010 PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.
   (A)   General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through
or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW
whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any
other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
   (B)   Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:
      (1)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of
less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit using the test methods specified in 40 CFR
261.21;
      (2)    Wastewater which will cause corrosive structural damage to the
POTW, but in no case discharges with a pH less than 5.0, unless the POTW is
specifically designed to accommodate such discharges;
      (3)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction
of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference such as but not limited to,
ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails, paper dishes, cups, milk containers, lime residues,
chemical residues, paint residues, and cannery waste bulk solids;
      (4)   Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference
with the POTW;
      (5)   Wastewater having a temperature greater than 140 degrees Fahrenheit
(60 degrees Celsius), or which will inhibit biological activity in the
treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which
causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed
104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius);
      (6)   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through but in no
case in amounts greater than 25 mg/l;
      (7)   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems;
      (8)   Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated
by the Manager in accordance with §
54.023;
      (9)   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater
which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to
create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the
sewers for maintenance or repair;
      (10)   Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's
effluent, thereby violating the town's NPDES permit;
      (11)   Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;
      (12)   Stormwater, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized
water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically
authorized by the Manager;
      (13)   Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes;
      (14)   Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the Manager
in an individual wastewater discharge permit;
      (15)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources,
the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test;
      (16)   Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which might
cause excessive foaming in the POTW; or
      (17)   Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in
concentrations greater than 100mg/l.
   (C)   Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall
not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to
the POTW.
   (D)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any sanitary
wastewater into storm sewers without exception.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12; Ord. 2021-01, passed 3-15-21)
§ 54.011 NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Users must comply with the categorical pretreatment standards found at
40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.
   (B)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms
of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the
Manager may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with
divisions (F) and (G).
   (C)   When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed
only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the Manager may
convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of
pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration for purposes of
calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual industrial users.
   (D)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the Manager shall
impose an alternate limit in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e).
   (E)   A CIU may obtain a net/gross adjustment to a categorical pretreatment
standard in accordance with the following divisions of this division (E).
      (1)   Categorical pretreatment standards may be adjusted to reflect the
presence of pollutants in the industrial user's intake water in accordance with
this section. Any industrial user wishing to obtain credit for intake
pollutants must make application to the town. Upon request of the industrial
user, the applicable standard will be calculated on a "net" basis (i.e.,
adjusted to reflect credit for pollutants in the intake water) if the
requirements of division (2) of this division are met.
      (2)   Criteria.
         (a)   Either:
            1.   The applicable categorical pretreatment standards contained in
40 CFR Subchapter N specifically provide that they shall be applied on a net
basis; or
            2.   The industrial user demonstrates that the control system it
proposes or uses to meet applicable categorical pretreatment standards would,
if properly installed and operated, meet the standards in the absence of
pollutants in the intake waters.
         (b)   Credit for generic pollutants such as biochemical oxygen demand
(BOD), total suspended solids (TSS), and oil and grease should not be granted
unless the industrial user demonstrates that the constituents of the generic
measure in the user's effluent are substantially similar to the constituents of
the generic measure in the intake water or unless appropriate additional limits
are placed on process water pollutants either at the outfall or elsewhere.
         (c)   Credit shall be granted only to the extent necessary to meet the
applicable categorical pretreatment standard(s), up to a maximum value equal to
the influent value. Additional monitoring may be necessary to determine
eligibility for credits and compliance with standard(s) adjusted under this
section.
         (d)   Credit shall be granted only if the user demonstrates that the
intake water is drawn from the same body of water as that into which the POTW
discharges. The town may waive this requirement if it finds that no
environmental degradation will result.
   (F)   When a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of
pollutant concentrations, an industrial user may request that the town convert
the limits to equivalent mass limits. The determination to convert
concentration limits to mass limits is within the discretion of the Manager.
The town may establish equivalent mass limits only if the industrial user meets
all the conditions set forth in divisions (l)(a) through (l)(e) below.
      (1)   To be eligible for equivalent mass limits, the industrial user
must:
         (a)   Employ, or demonstrate that it will employ, water conservation
methods and technologies that substantially reduce water use during the term of
its individual wastewater discharge permit;
         (b)   Currently use control and treatment technologies adequate to
achieve compliance with the applicable categorical pretreatment standard, and
not have used dilution as a substitute for treatment;
         (c)   Provide sufficient information to establish the facility's
actual average daily flow rate for all wastestreams, based on data from a
continuous effluent flow monitoring device, as well as the facility's long-term
average production rate. Both the actual average daily flow rate and the long-
term average production rate must be representative of current operating
conditions;
         (d)   Not have daily flow rates, production levels, or pollutant
levels that vary so significantly that equivalent mass limits are not
appropriate to control the discharge; and
         (e)   Have consistently complied with all applicable categorical
pretreatment standards during the period prior to the industrial user's request
for equivalent mass limits.
      (2)   An industrial user subject to equivalent mass limits must:
         (a)   Maintain and effectively operate control and treatment
technologies adequate to achieve compliance with the equivalent mass limits;
         (b)   Continue to record the facility's flow rates through the use of
a continuous effluent flow monitoring device;
         (c)   Continue to record the facility's production rates and notify
the Manager whenever production rates are expected to vary by more than 20%
from its baseline production rates determined in division (G)(l)(c) of this
section. Upon notification of a revised production rate, the Manager will
reassess the equivalent mass limit and revise the limit as necessary to reflect
changed conditions at the facility; and
         (d)   Continue to employ the same or comparable water conservation
methods and technologies as those implemented pursuant to division (F)(l)(a) of
this section so long as it discharges under an equivalent mass limit.
      (3)   When developing equivalent mass limits, the Manager:
         (a)   Will calculate the equivalent mass limit by multiplying the
actual average daily flow rate of the regulated process(es) of the industrial
user by the concentration-based daily maximum and monthly average standard for
the applicable categorical pretreatment standard and the appropriate unit
conversion factor;
         (b)   Upon notification of a revised production rate, will reassess
the equivalent mass limit and recalculate the limit as necessary to reflect
changed conditions at the facility; and
         (c)   May retain the same equivalent mass limit in subsequent
individual wastewater discharge permit terms if the industrial user's actual
average daily flow rate was reduced solely as a result of the implementation of
water conservation methods and technologies, and the actual average daily flow
rates used in the original calculation of the equivalent mass limit were not
based on the use of dilution as a substitute for treatment pursuant to §
54.015. The industrial user must also be in compliance with §
54.132 regarding the prohibition of bypass.
   (G)   The Manager may convert the mass limits of the categorical
pretreatment standards of 40 CFR Parts 414, 419, and 455 to concentration
limits for purposes of calculating limitations applicable to individual
industrial users. The conversion is at the discretion of the Manager.
   (H)   Once included in its permit, the industrial user must comply with the
equivalent limitations developed in this section in lieu of the promulgated
categorical standards from which the equivalent limitations were derived.
   (I)   Many categorical pretreatment standards specify one limit for
calculating maximum daily discharge limitations and a second limit for
calculating maximum monthly average, or four-day average, limitations. Where
such standards are being applied, the same production or flow figure shall be
used in calculating both the average and the maximum equivalent limitation.
   (J)   Any industrial user operating under a permit incorporating equivalent
mass or concentration limits calculated from a production-based standard shall
notify the Manager within two business days after the user has a reasonable
basis to know that the production level will significantly change within the
next calendar month. Any user not notifying the Manager of such anticipated
change will be required to meet the mass or concentration limits in its permit
that were based on the original estimate of the long term average production
rate.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.012 STATE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   Users must comply with the State of South Carolina Pretreatment Regulations
(R61 -9 Section 403).
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.013 LOCAL LIMITS.
   (A)   The Manager is authorized to establish local limits pursuant to 40 CFR
403.5(c).
   (B)   (1)   The following pollutant limits are established to protect
against pass through and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater
containing in excess of the following daily maximum limit.
      300   mg/l BODs
      800   mg/l COD
      2.0   mg/l cyanide
      100   mg/l oil and/or grease
      250   mg/l total suspended solids
      (2)   The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is
discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for
total metal unless indicated otherwise. The Manager may impose mass limitations
in addition to the concentration-based limitations above.
   (C)   The Manager may develop best management practices (BMPs), by ordinance
or in individual wastewater discharge permits, to implement local limits and
the requirements of §
54.010.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.014 TOWN’S RIGHT OF REVISION.
   The town reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in individual
wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on
discharges to the POTW consistent with the purpose of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.015 DILUTION.
   No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt
to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly
authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The Manager
may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable
pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition
of mass limitations is appropriate.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER
§ 54.020 PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.
   Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this
chapter and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment
standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in §
54.010 within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state, or the Manager,
whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be
provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans
describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the
Manager for review, and shall be acceptable to the Manager before such
facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures
shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such
facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the town under the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.021 ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES.
   (A)   Whenever deemed necessary, the Manager may require users to restrict
their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be
discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of
discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and such
other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the
user's compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   The Manager may require any person discharging into the POTW to
install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable
storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. An individual
wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.
   (C)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Manager, they are necessary for the proper handling of
wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that
such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception
units shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Manager, shall be so
located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors
shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired by the user at their expense.
   (D)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.022 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE/SLUG DISCHARGE CONTROL PLANS.
   The Manager shall evaluate whether each SIU needs an accidental discharge/
slug discharge control plan or other action to control slug discharges. The
Manager may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement
such a plan or take such other action that may be necessary to control slug
discharges. Alternatively, the Manager may develop such a plan for any user. An
accidental discharge/slug discharge control plan shall address, at a minimum,
the following:
   (A)   Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;
   (B)   Description of stored chemicals;
   (C)   Procedures for immediately notifying the Manager of any accidental or
slug discharge, as required by §
54.070; and
   (D)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.023 HAULED WASTEWATER.
   (A)   Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations
designated by the Manager, and at such times as are established by the Manager.
Such waste shall not violate the general sewer use requirements laid out in
this chapter or any other requirements established by the town. The Manager may
require septic tank waste haulers to obtain individual wastewater discharge
permits.
   (B)   The Manager may require haulers of industrial waste to obtain
individual wastewater discharge permits. The Manager may require generators of
hauled industrial waste to obtain individual wastewater discharge permits. The
Manager also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The
discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of
this chapter.
   (C)   Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations
designated by the Manager. No load may be discharged without prior consent of
the Manager. The Manager may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure
compliance with applicable standards. The Manager may require the industrial
waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge.
   (D)    Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form or
approved waste manifest for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum,
the name and address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck
identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and
characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known
or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous
wastes.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12; Am. Ord. 2021-01, passed 3-15-21)
INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS
§ 54.030 WASTEWATER ANALYSIS.
   When requested by the Manager, a user must submit information on the nature
and characteristics of its wastewater within 30 days of the request. The
Manager is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically
require users to update this information.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.031 INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the
POTW without first obtaining an individual wastewater discharge permit from the
Manager, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely
application pursuant to §
54.032 may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein.
   (B)   The Manager may require other users to obtain individual wastewater
discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
   (C)   Any violation of the terms and conditions of an individual wastewater
discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and subjects the
wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in §§
54.095 through
54.124. Obtaining an individual wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a
permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment
standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and
local law.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.032 INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITTING: EXISTING CONNECTIONS.
   Any user required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit who
was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this
chapter and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within
30 days after said date, apply to the Manager for an individual wastewater
discharge permit in accordance with §
54.034, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after
30 days of the effective date of this chapter except in accordance with an
individual wastewater discharge permit issued by the Manager.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.033 INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITTING: NEW CONNECTIONS.
   Any user required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit who
proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such
permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application
for this individual wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with §
54.034, must be filed at least 90 days prior to the date upon which any
discharge will begin or recommence.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.034 INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION CONTENTS.
   (A)   All users required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit
must submit a permit application. Users that are eligible may request a general
permit under §
54.035. The Manager may require users to submit all or some of the following
information as part of a permit application:
      (1)   Identifying information.
         (a)   The name and address of the facility, including the name of the
operator and owner;
         (b)   Contact information, description of activities, facilities, and
plant production processes on the premises;
      (2)   Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits
held by or for the facility;
      (3)   Description of operations.
         (a)   A brief description of the nature, average rate of production
(including each product produced by type, amount, processes, and rate of
production), and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s)
carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process
diagram, which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated
processes;
         (b)   Types of wastes generated, and a list of all raw materials and
chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or
intentionally be, discharged to the POTW;
         (c)   Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed
or actual hours of operation;
         (d)   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum
per day);
         (e)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and
details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location,
and elevation, and all points of discharge;
      (4)   Time and duration of discharges;
      (5)   The location for monitoring all wastes covered by the permit;
      (6)   Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily
and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process
streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined
wastestream formula set out in §
54.011(D) (40 CFR 403.6(e));
      (7)   Measurement of pollutants.
         (a)   The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process and any new categorically regulated processes for existing
sources;
         (b)   The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the Manager,
of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process;
         (c)   Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average
concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported;
         (d)   The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall
be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in §
54.074. Where the standard requires compliance with a BMP or pollution
prevention alternative, the user shall submit documentation as required by the
Manager or the applicable standards to determine compliance with the standard;
         (e)   Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out
in §
54.075;
      (8)   Any requests for a monitoring waiver (or a renewal of an approved
monitoring waiver) for a pollutant neither present nor expected to be present
in the discharge based on §
54.068(B) [40 CFR 403.12(e)(2)]; and
      (9)   Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the Manager to
evaluate the permit application.
   (B)   Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will
be returned to the user for revision.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.035 APPLICATION SIGNATORIES AND CERTIFICATIONS.
   (A)   All wastewater discharge permit applications, user reports and
certification statements must be signed by an authorized representative of the
user and contain the certification statement in §
54.077(A).
   (B)   If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer
accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the
overall operation of the facility or overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, a new written authorization satisfying the
requirements of this section must be submitted to the Manager prior to or
together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative.
   (C)   A facility determined to be a non-significant categorical industrial
user by the Manager pursuant to 1.4 HH(3) must annually submit the signed
certification statement in §
54.077(B).
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.036 INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DECISIONS.
   The Manager will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require
additional information. Within 60 days of receipt of a complete permit
application, the Manager will determine whether to issue an individual
wastewater discharge permit. The Manager may deny any application for an
individual wastewater discharge permit.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE
§ 54.050 INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DURATION.
   An individual wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified
time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. An
individual wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than
five years, at the discretion of the Manager. Each individual wastewater
discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.051 INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT CONTENTS.
   (A)   An individual wastewater discharge permit shall include such
conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the Manager to prevent pass
through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the
treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge
management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW.
   (B)   Individual wastewater discharge permits must contain:
      (1)   A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge permit issuance
date, expiration date and effective date;
      (2)   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable
without prior notification to the town in accordance with §
54.054, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of
the existing wastewater discharge permit;
      (3)   Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on
applicable pretreatment standards;
      (4)   Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-
keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of
pollutants (or best management practice) to be monitored, sampling location,
sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law;
      (5)   The process for seeking a waiver from monitoring for a pollutant
neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge in accordance with
§
54.068(B);
      (6)   A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for
violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable
compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance
beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law;
      (7)   Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the
Manager to be necessary; and
      (8)   Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the Manager, in accordance
with §
54.068(B), must be included as a condition in the user's permit.
   (C)   Individual wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be
limited to, the following conditions:
      (1)   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
      (2)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed
to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
treatment works;
      (3)   Requirements for the development and implementation of spill
control plans or other special conditions including management practices
necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine
discharges;
      (4)   Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
      (5)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;
      (6)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment, including flow measurement devices;
      (7)   A statement that compliance with the individual wastewater
discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for
compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards,
including those which become effective during the term of the individual
wastewater discharge permit; and
      (8)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Manager to ensure
compliance with this chapter, and state and federal laws, rules, and
regulations.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.052 PERMIT MODIFICATION.
   (A)   The Manager may modify an individual wastewater discharge permit for
good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
      (1)   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local
pretreatment standards or requirements;
      (2)   To address significant alterations or additions to the user's
operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of the
individual wastewater discharge permit issuance;
      (3)   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
      (4)   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat
to the town's POTW, town personnel, or the receiving waters;
      (5)   Violation of any terms or conditions of the individual wastewater
discharge permit;
      (6)   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
      (7)   Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
      (8)   To correct typographical or other errors in the individual
wastewater discharge permit; or
      (9)   To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a
new owner or operator where requested in accordance with §
54.054.
   (B)   The Manager may modify a general permit for good cause, including, but
not limited to, the following reasons:
      (1)   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local
pretreatment standards or requirements;
      (2)   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
      (3)   To correct typographical or other errors in the individual
wastewater discharge permit; or
      (4)   To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a
new owner or operator where requested in accordance with §
54.054.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.053 INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT TRANSFER.
   (A)   Individual wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new
owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least 60 days advance notice
to the Manager and the Manager approves the individual wastewater discharge
permit transfer. The notice to the Manager must include a written certification
by the new owner or operator which:
      (1)   States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent
to change the facility's operations and processes;
      (2)   Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
      (3)   Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing
individual wastewater discharge permit.
   (B)   Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the individual
wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.054 INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REVOCATION.
   (A)   The Manager may revoke an individual wastewater discharge permit for
good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
      (1)   Failure to notify the Manager of significant changes to the
wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
      (2)   Failure to provide prior notification to the Manager of changed
conditions pursuant to §
54.069;
      (3)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the wastewater discharge permit application;
      (4)   Falsifying self-monitoring reports and certification statements;
      (5)   Tampering with monitoring equipment;
      (6)   Refusing to allow the Manager timely access to the facility
premises and records;
      (7)   Failure to meet effluent limitations;
      (8)   Failure to pay fines;
      (9)   Failure to pay sewer charges;
      (10)   Failure to meet compliance schedules;
      (11)   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater
discharge permit application;
      (12)   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business
ownership of a permitted facility; or
      (13)   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any
terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter.
   (B)   Individual wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon
cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All individual
wastewater discharge permits issued to a user are void upon the issuance of a
new individual wastewater discharge permit to that user.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.055 INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REISSUANCE.
   A user with an expiring individual wastewater discharge permit shall apply
for individual wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete
permit application, in accordance with §
54.034, a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing
individual wastewater discharge permit.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.056 REGULATION OF WASTE RECEIVED FROM OTHER JURISDICTIONS.
   (A)   If another municipality, or user located within another municipality,
contributes wastewater to the POTW, the Manager shall enter into an
intermunicipal agreement with the contributing municipality.
   (B)   Prior to entering into an agreement required by division (A) of this
section, the Manager shall request the following information from the
contributing municipality:
      (1)   A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to
the POTW by the contributing municipality;
      (2)   An inventory of all users located within the contributing
municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and
      (3)   Such other information as the Manager may deem necessary.
   (C)   An intermunicipal agreement, as required by division (A) of this
section, shall contain the following conditions:
      (1)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer
use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this chapter and local limits,
including required baseline monitoring reports (BMRs) which are at least as
stringent as those set out in §
54.013. The requirement shall specify that such ordinance and limits must be
revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the town's ordinance or local
limits;
      (2)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised
user inventory on at least an annual basis;
      (3)   A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation
activities, including individual wastewater discharge permit issuance,
inspection and sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by the contributing
municipality; which of these activities will be conducted by the Manager; and
which of these activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing
municipality and the Manager;
      (4)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the
Manager with access to all information that the contributing municipality
obtains as part of its pretreatment activities;
      (5)   Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing
municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW;
      (6)   Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's
discharge;
      (7)   A provision ensuring the Manager access to the facilities of users
located within the contributing municipality's jurisdictional boundaries for
the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by
the Manager; and
      (8)   A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms
of the intermunicipal agreement.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
§ 54.065 BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS.
   (A)   Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical
pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category
determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing
categorical industrial users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge
to the POTW shall submit to the Manager a report which contains the information
listed in division (B) of this section. At least 90 days prior to commencement
of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical industrial
users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard,
shall submit to the Manager a report which contains the information listed in
division (B) of this section. A new source shall report the method of
pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new
source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of
pollutants to be discharged.
   (B)   Users described above shall submit the information set forth below:
      (1)   All information required in §
54.034(A)(1)(a), §
54.034(A)(2), §
54.034(A)(3)(a), and §
54.034(A)(6);
      (2)   Measurement of pollutants:
         (a)   The user shall provide the information required in §
54.034(A)(7)(a) through (d);
         (b)   The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to
compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this division;
         (c)   Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment
facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process
if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated
wastewater prior to pretreatment the user should measure the flows and
concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula in 40
CFR 403.6(e) to evaluate compliance with the pretreatment standards. Where an
alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 40
CFR 403.6(e) this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted
to the control authority;
         (d)   Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with §
54.074;
         (e)   The Manager may allow the submission of a baseline report which
utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides information
sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures; and
         (f)   The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place of
sampling and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and
analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant
discharges to the POTW;
      (3)   Compliance certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's
authorized representative as defined in §
54.004 and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements;
      (4)   Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be
required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the
user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M must be provided. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date
established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule
pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in §
54.066; and
      (5)   Signature and report certification. All baseline monitoring reports
must be certified in accordance with §
54.077(A) of this chapter and signed by an authorized representative as defined
in §
54.004.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.066 COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE PROGRESS REPORTS.
   The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by
§
54.065(B)(4):
   (A)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates
for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction
and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to,
hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts
for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and
conducting routine operation);
   (B)   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months;
   (C)   The user shall submit a progress report to the Manager no later than
14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance
including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of
progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken
by the user to return to the established schedule; and
   (D)   In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress
reports to the Manager.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.067 REPORTS ON COMPLIANCE WITH CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD DEADLINE.
   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject
to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the Manager a
report containing the information described in §
54.034(A)(6) and (7) and §
54.065(B)(2). For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits
established in accordance with the procedures in §
54.011, this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term
production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of
production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the
user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance
reports must be signed and certified in accordance with §
54.077(A). All sampling will be done in conformance with §
54.075.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.068 PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS.
[Note: All SIUs are required to submit periodic compliance reports even if they
have been designated a non-significant categorical industrial user under
division (C) of this section.]
   (A)   Except as specified in division (C) of this section, all significant
industrial users must, at a frequency determined by the Manager submit no less
than twice per year (June and December) reports indicating the nature,
concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment
standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the
reporting period. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance
with a best management practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the
user must submit documentation required by the Manager or the pretreatment
standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user.
   (B)   The town may authorize an industrial user subject to a categorical
pretreatment standard to forego sampling of a pollutant regulated by a
categorical pretreatment standard if the industrial user has demonstrated
through sampling and other technical factors that the pollutant is neither
present nor expected to be present in the discharge, or is present only at
background levels from intake water and without any increase in the pollutant
due to activities of the industrial user, [see 40 CFR 403.12(e)(2)]. This
authorization is subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   The waiver may be authorized where a pollutant is determined to be
present solely due to sanitary wastewater discharged from the facility provided
that the sanitary wastewater is not regulated by an applicable categorical
standard and otherwise includes no process wastewater;
      (2)   The monitoring waiver is valid only for the duration of the
effective period of the individual wastewater discharge permit, but in no case
longer than five years. The user must submit a new request for the waiver
before the waiver can be granted for each subsequent individual wastewater
discharge permit. See §
54.034(A)(8);
      (3)   In making a demonstration that a pollutant is not present, the
industrial user must provide data from at least one sampling of the facility's
process wastewater prior to any treatment present at the facility that is
representative of all wastewater from all processes;
      (4)   The request for a monitoring waiver must be signed in accordance
with §
54.004, and include the certification statement in §
54.077(A) (40 CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii));
      (5)   Non-detectable sample results may be used only as a demonstration
that a pollutant is not present if the EPA approved method from 40 CFR Part 13
6 with the lowest minimum detection level for that pollutant was used in the
analysis;
      (6)   Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the Manager must be included
as a condition in the user's permit. The reasons supporting the waiver and any
information submitted by the user in its request for the waiver must be
maintained by the Manager for three years after expiration of the waiver;
      (7)   Upon approval of the monitoring waiver and revision of the user's
permit by the Manager, the industrial user must certify on each report with the
statement in §
54.077(C), that there has been no increase in the pollutant in its wastestream
due to activities of the industrial user;
      (8)   In the event that a waived pollutant is found to be present or is
expected to be present because of changes that occur in the user's operations,
the user must immediately: comply with the monitoring requirements of division
(A) of this section, or other more frequent monitoring requirements imposed by
the Manager, and notify the Manager; and
      (9)   This provision does not supersede certification processes and
requirements established in categorical pretreatment standards, except as
otherwise specified in the categorical pretreatment standard.
   (C)   All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with §
54.077(A).
   (D)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge.
Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly
operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The
failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall
not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative
of its discharge.
   (E)   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling location more
frequently than required by the Manager, using the procedures prescribed in §
54.075, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.069 REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Each user must notify the Manager of any significant changes to the
user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of
its wastewater at least 90 days before the change.
   (B)   The Manager may require the user to submit such information as may be
deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of
a wastewater discharge permit application under §
54.034.
   (C)   The Manager may issue an individual wastewater discharge permit under
§
54.056 or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under §
54.053 in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.070 REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS.
   (A)   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a
noncustomary batch discharge, a slug discharge or slug load, that might cause
potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and
notify the Manager of the incident. This notification shall include the
location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known,
and corrective actions taken by the user.
   (B)   Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless
waived by the Manager, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s)
of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar
future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any
expense, loss, damage, or other liability which might be incurred as a result
of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or
property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties,
or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this chapter.
   (C)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of a
discharge described in division (A) of this section. Employers shall ensure
that all employees, who could cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of
the emergency notification procedure.
   (D)   Significant industrial users are required to notify the Manager
immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for a slug
discharge.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.071 REPORTS FROM UNPERMITTED USERS.
   All users not required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit
shall provide appropriate reports to the Manager as the Manager may require.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.072 NOTICE OF VIOLATION/REPEAT SAMPLING AND REPORTING.
   If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify
the Manager within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall
also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat
analysis to the Manager within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation.
Resampling by the industrial user is not required if the town performs sampling
at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the town performs sampling
at the user between the time when the initial sampling was conducted and the
time when the user or the town receives the results of this sampling, or if the
town has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.073 ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS.
   All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as
part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed
in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments
thereto, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment
standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques
for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that the Part 136
sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in
question, sampling and analyses shall be performed by using validated
analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures,
including procedures suggested by the Manager or other parties approved by EPA.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.074 SAMPLE COLLECTION.
   (A)   Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be based on
data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the
period covered by the report, based on data that is representative of
conditions occurring during the reporting period.
   (B)   Except as indicated in divisions (C) and (D) below, the user must
collect wastewater samples using 24-hour flow-proportional composite sampling
techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is
authorized by the Manager. Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab
sampling is authorized by the town, the samples must be representative of the
discharge. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40
CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected
during a 24-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for
cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited in the
laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease, the
samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other
parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved
EPA methodologies may be authorized by the town, as appropriate. In addition,
grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous limits.
   (C)   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols,
sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection
techniques.
   (D)   For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and 90-day
compliance reports required in §§
54.065 and
54.067 (40 CFR 403.12(b) and (d)), a minimum of four grab samples must be used
for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic
compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for
facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the Manager may
authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by §
54.068 (40 CFR 403.12(e) and 403.12(h)), the industrial user is required to
collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance
with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.075 DATE OF RECEIPT OF REPORTS.
   Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked. For reports, which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of
the report shall govern.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.076 RECORDKEEPING.
   Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain,
and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information
obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this chapter, any
additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities
undertaken by the user independent of such requirements, and documentation
associated with best management practices established under §
54.013(C). Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of
sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses
were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or
methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain
available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be
automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user
or the town, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer
retention period by the Manager.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.077 CERTIFICATION STATEMENTS.
   (A)   Certification of permit applications, user reports and initial
monitoring waiver. The following certification statement is required to be
signed and submitted by users submitting permit applications in accordance with
§
54.036; users submitting baseline monitoring reports under §
54.065(B)(5); users submitting reports on compliance with the categorical
pretreatment standard deadlines under §
54.067; users submitting periodic compliance reports required by §
54.068(A) through (D), and users submitting an initial request to forego
sampling of a pollutant on the basis of §
54.068(B)(4). The following certification statement must be signed by an
authorized representative as defined in §
54.004:
         I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage
the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant
penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine
and imprisonment for knowing violations.
   (B)   Annual certification for non-significant categorical industrial users.
A facility determined to be a non-significant categorical industrial user by
the Manager pursuant to 1.4 HH(3) and 4.7 C must annually submit the following
certification statement signed in accordance with the signatory requirements in
§
54.004. This certification must accompany an alternative report required by the
Manager:
         Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for
managing compliance with the categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR
_____, I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief that during the
period from ____, _____ to _____,____ [months, days, year]:
         (a)   The facility described as__________________ [facility name] met
the definition of a Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User as described in
1.4 GG (3);
         (b)   The facility complied with all applicable Pretreatment Standards
and requirements during this reporting period; and
         (c)   The facility never discharged more than 100 gallons of total
categorical wastewater on any given day during this reporting period.
         This compliance certification is based on the following information.
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
   (C)   Certification of pollutants not present. Users that have an approved
monitoring waiver based on §
54.068(B) must certify on each report with the following statement that there
has been no increase in the pollutant in its wastestream due to activities of
the user:
         Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for
managing compliance with the Pretreatment Standard for 40 CFR ______ [specify
applicable National Pretreatment Standard part(s)], I certify that, to the best
of my knowledge and belief, there has been no increase in the level of
____________ [list pollutant(s)] in the wastewaters due to the activities at
the facility since filing of the last periodic report under Section 6.4.A.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.078 NOTIFICATION OF HAZARDOUS WASTE DISCHARGE.
   (A)   Each industrial user shall notify the Manager of the POTW, the EPA
Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state hazardous waste
authorities in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance, which, if
otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such
notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40
CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge
(continuous, batch, or other). If the industrial user discharges more than 100
kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall
also contain the following information to the extent such information is known
and readily available to the industrial user. An identification of the
hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and
concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that
calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the
wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All
notifications must take place within 180 days of the effective date of this
division (A). Industrial users who commence discharging after the effective
date of this division (A) shall provide the notification no later than 180 days
after the discharge of the listed or characteristic hazardous waste. Any
notification under this division (A) needs to be submitted only once for each
hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed discharges must
be submitted under 40 CFR 403.12(j). The notification requirement in this
section does not apply to pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring
requirements of 40 CFR 403.12(b), (d), and (e).
   (B)   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of the division (A) above
during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of
hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in
40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of non-
acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute
hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a
one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the industrial user
discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require
additional notification.
   (C)   In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the industrial user must notify the
POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and state
hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days
of the effective date of such regulations.
   (D)   In the case of any notification made under division (A) above, the
industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the
volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has
determined to be economically practical.
(Ord. 2021-01, passed 3-15-21
COMPLIANCE MONITORING
§ 54.085 RIGHT OF ENTRY: INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.
   (A)   The Manager shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to
determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this chapter
and any individual wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users
shall allow the Manager ready access to all parts of the premises for the
purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the
performance of any additional duties.
   (B)   Where a user has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall
make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation
of suitable identification, the Manager shall be permitted to enter without
delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
   (C)   The Manager shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or
require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/
or metering of the user's operations.
   (D)   The Manager may require the user to install monitoring equipment as
necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained
at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own
expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be
calibrated annually to ensure their accuracy.
   (E)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user
at the written or verbal request of the Manager and shall not be replaced. The
costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user.
   (F)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the Manager access to the user's
premises shall be a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.086 SEARCH WARRANTS.
   If the Manager has been refused access to a building, structure, or
property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to
believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need
to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program
of the town designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any permit or
order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and
welfare of the community, the Manager may seek issuance of a search warrant
from the South Carolina Circuit Court - 3rd Circuit.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.087 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater
discharge permit applications, individual wastewater discharge permits, and
monitoring programs, and from the Manager's inspection and sampling activities,
shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user
specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Manager, that the release of such information would divulge information,
processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets
under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of
submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the
user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the
portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes
shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made
available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to
the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings
involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and
characteristics and other effluent data, as defined at 40 CFR 2.3 02 shall not
be recognized as confidential information and shall be available to the public
without restriction.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.088 PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.
   The Manager shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general circulation
that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions served by the
POTW, a list of the users which, at any time during the previous 12 months,
were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall be applicable to all
significant industrial users (or any other industrial user that violates
divisions (C), (D) or (H) of this section) and shall mean:
   (A)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant
parameter taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric
pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits as defined
in §§
54.010 through
54.015;
   (B)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter
during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the numeric
pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined
by §§
54.010 through
54.015 multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and
grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
   (C)   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as
defined by §§
54.010 through
54.015 (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative
standard) that the Manager determines has caused, alone or in combination with
other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the
health of POTW personnel or the general public;
   (D)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to
the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the Manager's exercise of
its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
   (E)   Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in an individual wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or
attaining final compliance;
   (F)   Failure to provide within 45 days after the due date, any required
reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with
categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports,
and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
   (G)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
   (H)   Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best
management practices which the Manager determines will adversely affect the
operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
§ 54.095 NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION.
   When the Manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate,
any provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the
Manager may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within seven
days of the receipt of such notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan
for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific
required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the Manager. Submission of
such a plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations
occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this
section shall limit the authority of the Manager to take any action, including
emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a
notice of violation.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.096 CONSENT ORDERS.
   The Manager may enter into consent orders, assurances of compliance, or
other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for
noncompliance. Such documents shall include specific action to be taken by the
user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the
document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the
administrative orders issued pursuant to §§
54.098 and
54.099 and shall be judicially enforceable.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.097 SHOW CAUSE HEARING.
   The Manager may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate,
any provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to
appear before the Manager and show cause why the proposed enforcement action
should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and
place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such
action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement
action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served
personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at
least five days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any
authorized representative of the user as defined in §
54.004 and required by §
54.036. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for,
taking any other action against the user.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.098 COMPLIANCE ORDERS.
   When the Manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate,
any provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the
Manager may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing
that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does
not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be
discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related
appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may
contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional
self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of
pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the
deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement,
nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation,
including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be
a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.099 CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS.
   When the Manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate,
any provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or
that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the Manager may issue an
order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and
directing the user to:
   (A)   Immediately comply with all requirements; and
   (B)   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed
to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting
operations and/or terminating the discharge. Issuance of a cease and desist
order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the user.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.100 ADMINISTRATIVE FINES.
   (A)   When the Manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge
permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, the Manager may fine such user in an amount not to exceed $2,000.
Such fines shall be assessed on a per-violation, per-day basis. In the case of
monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed
for each day during the period of violation.
   (B)   Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after 30 calendar days, be
assessed an additional penalty of 1.5% of the unpaid balance, and interest
shall accrue thereafter at a rate of 1.5% per month. A lien against the user's
property shall be sought for unpaid charges, fines, and penalties.
   (C)   Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for
the Manager to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount
within 30 days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit, the
Manager may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the user's appeal is
successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be
returned to the user. The Manager may add the costs of preparing administrative
enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine.
   (D)   Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12; Ord. 2025-01, passed 3-17-25)
§ 54.101 EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS.
   (A)   The Manager may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal
notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or
threatened discharge, which reasonably appears to present, or cause an imminent
or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The Manager
may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity
to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or
which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment.
   (B)   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately
stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to
immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Manager may take
such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or
endangerment to any individuals. The Manager may allow the user to recommence
its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Manager
that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings
in §
54.102 are initiated against the user.
   (C)   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement,
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence, to the Manager prior to the date of any show
cause or termination hearing under §§
54.097 or §
54.102.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing
prior to any emergency suspension under this section.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.102 TERMINATION OF DISCHARGE.
   (A)   (A)   In addition to the provisions in §
54.055, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge
termination:
      (1)   Violation of individual wastewater discharge permit conditions;
      (2)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
      (3)   Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;
      (4)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose
of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or
      (5)   Violation of the pretreatment standards in §§
54.010 through
54.015.
   (B)   Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its
discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under §
54.097 why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by
the Manager shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the user.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
§ 54.110 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   When the Manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate,
any provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the
Manager may petition the South Carolina Circuit Court -3rd Circuit through the
Town's Attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as
appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the
individual wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by
this chapter on activities of the user. The Manager may also seek such other
action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a
requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for
injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any
other action against a user.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.111 CIVIL PENALTIES.
   (A)   A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of
this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to
the town for a maximum civil penalty of $ 1,000 per violation, per day. In the
case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall
accrue for each day during the period of the violation.
   (B)   The Manager may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and
other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and
monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the town.
   (C)   In determining the amount of civil liability, the Court shall take
into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the
violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective
actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor
as justice requires.
   (D)   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.112 CRIMINAL PROSECUTION.
   (A)   A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this
chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder,
or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be
guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than the maximum fine
allowed under state law per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more
than the maximum term allowed under state law, or both.
   (B)   A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the
POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be
guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of at least the maximum
fine allowable under state law, or be subject to imprisonment for not more than
the maximum term allowed under state law, or both. This penalty shall be in
addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage
available under state law.
   (C)   A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or
certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation
filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this chapter, individual
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies,
tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method
required under this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of
not more than the maximum fine allowable under state law per violation, per
day, or imprisonment for not more than the maximum term allowed under state
law, or both.
   (D)   In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be punished by a
fine of not more than the maximum fine allowable under state law per violation,
per day, or imprisonment for not more than the maximum term allowed under state
law, or both.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.113 REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE.
   The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The Manager may
take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user.
Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the
town's enforcement response plan. However, the Manager may take other action
against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the Manager is
empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant
user.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION
§ 54.120 PENALTIES FOR LATE REPORTS.
   A penalty of $100 shall be assessed to any user for each day that a report
required by this chapter, a permit or order issued hereunder is late, beginning
five days after the date the report is due. Actions taken by the Manager to
collect late reporting penalties shall not limit the Manager's authority to
initiate other enforcement actions that may include penalties for late
reporting violations.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.121 PERFORMANCE BONDS.
   The Manager may decline to issue or reissue an individual wastewater
discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of
this chapter, a previous individual wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless
such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the town in a sum not to
exceed a value determined by the Manager to be necessary to achieve consistent
compliance.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.122 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   The Manager may decline to issue or reissue an individual wastewater
discharge to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this
chapter, a previous individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user
first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to
restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.123 PAYMENT OF OUTSTANDING FEES AND PENALTIES.
   The Manager may decline to issue or reissue an individual wastewater
discharge permit to any user who has failed to pay any outstanding fees, fines
or penalties incurred as a result of any provision of this chapter, a previous
individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.124 WATER SUPPLY SEVERANCE.
   Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this
chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder,
or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user
may be severed. Service will recommence, at the user's expense, only after the
user has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS
§ 54.130 UPSET.
   (A)   For the purposes of this section, upset means an exceptional incident
in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical
pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the
user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by
operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate
treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper
operation.
   (B)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought
for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements
of division (C) of this section, are met.
   (C)   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other
relevant evidence that:
      (1)   An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
      (2)   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures; and
      (3)   The user has submitted the following information to the Manager
within 24-hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided
orally, a written submission must be provided within five days):
         (a)   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
         (b)   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or,
if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue; and
         (c)   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
   (D)   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
   (E)   Users shall have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards.
   (F)   Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power
of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.131 PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.
   A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought
against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in §
54.010(A) of this chapter or the specific prohibitions in §
54.010(B)(3) through (17) of this chapter if it can prove that it did not know,
or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with
discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and
that either:
   (A)   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in
compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or
interference; or
   (B)   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially
in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the town was
regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference,
was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.132 BYPASS.
   (A)   For the purposes of this section the following terms and phrases shall
have the meanings hereinafter designated:
      BYPASS. The intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a
user's treatment facility.
      SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE. Substantial physical damage to property, damage
to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or
substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be
expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not
mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
   (B)   A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment
standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential
maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to
the provision of divisions (C) and (D) of this section.
   (C)   Bypass notifications.
      (1)   If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall
submit prior notice to the Manager, at least ten days before the date of the
bypass, if possible.
      (2)   A user shall submit oral notice to the Manager of an unanticipated
bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24-hours from the
time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be
provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The
written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the
duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has
not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps
taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass.
The Manager may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral
report has been received within 24-hours.
   (D)   Bypass.
      (1)   Bypass is prohibited, and the Manager may take an enforcement
action against a user for a bypass, unless:
         (a)   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury,
or severe property damage;
         (b)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
         (c)   The user submitted notices as required under division (C) of
this section.
      (2)   The Manager may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering
its adverse effects, if the Manager determines that it will meet the three
conditions listed in division (D)(1) of this section.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
§ 54.140 PRETREATMENT CHARGES AND FEES.
   The town may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up
and operating the town's pretreatment program, which may include:
   (A)   Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost
of processing such applications;
   (B)   Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including
the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing
monitoring reports and certification statements submitted by users;
   (D)   Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures
and construction;
   (E)   Fees for filing appeals;
   (F)   Fees to recover administrative and legal costs (not included in
division (B) of this section) associated with the enforcement activity taken by
the Manager to address IU noncompliance; and
   (G)   Other fees as the town may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered
by this chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties
chargeable by the town.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.141 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this chapter is invalidated by any court of competent
jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be affected and shall continue
in full force and effect.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
§ 54.142 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall be in full force and effect immediately following its
passage, approval, and publication, as provided by law.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 4--12)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
      Chapter
         
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
         
71.   TRAFFIC RULES
         
72.   PARKING REGULATIONS
         
73.   PEDESTRIANS
         
74.   BICYCLES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
70.01   Short title
   
70.02   Definitions
   
70.03   Adoption of state law
   
70.04   Jurisdiction of municipal court
   
70.05   Powers of Council
   
70.06   Licenses required
   
70.07   Responsibility of vehicle owner
   
70.08   Fixing traffic tickets unlawful
   
70.09   Signs in median on Main Street
   
70.10   Interference with traffic-control signals
   
70.11   Using vehicle for advertising
   
70.12   Riding in or on municipal vehicles unlawful
 
   
70.99   Penalty
§ 70.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This title may be cited as the "Traffic Ordinance."
('86 Code, § 18.101)
§ 70.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this title the definitions of S.C. Code § 56-5-110 et
seq. are hereby adopted and made a part of this code.
('86 Code, § 18.102)
§ 70.03 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW.
   (A)   All vehicles shall be operated in accordance with and conformity with
all current state laws and this code or amendments thereto enacted, as relating
to the operation of vehicles. Such provisions are adopted by reference and made
a part of this chapter as if set out herein, except those provisions relating
solely to the South Carolina Department of Highways and Public Transportation
and those provisions the penalty for which exceeds a fine of $500 or
imprisonment for more than 30 days. Any person violating these provisions shall
be, upon conviction, guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (B)   All requirements of S.C. Code §§ 56-5-4410 to 56-5-5050 (relating to
equipment) and § 56-5-5140 (transporting explosives) are hereby adopted by
reference and made a part of this chapter, as if set out in full herein. All
owners of vehicles shall conform with such requirements, and any person failing
to conform therewith, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
('86 Code, § 18.201) (Am. Ord. 97-7, passed 8-18-97)
§ 70.04 JURISDICTION OF MUNICIPAL COURT.
   The municipal court may try and determine criminal cases involving violation
of the provisions of this title or provisions of the 1976 South Carolina Code
of Laws, relating to motor vehicles and traffic occurring within the corporate
limits, when the penalty prescribed by state law for such violations does not
exceed 30 days imprisonment or $500 fine. The court may have trial jurisdiction
over such criminal cases the same as magistrates.
('86 Code, § 18.103) (Am. Ord. 97-7, passed 8-18-97)
§ 70.05 POWERS OF COUNCIL.
   Pursuant to the 1976 Code of Laws of South Carolina, as amended, the Town
Council shall have the power and is hereby authorized to:
   (A)   Regulate the operation and parking of vehicles within the corporate
limits by the erection or placing of proper signs or markers indicating
prohibited or limited parking, restricted speed areas, one-way streets, play
streets, through or arterial streets, U turns, school zones, and other official
traffic-control devices indicating the place or manner of operating or parking
vehicles, including loading zones.
   (B)   Regulate the movement of pedestrians upon the streets and sidewalks by
the erection or placement of proper signs or markers indicating the flow of
pedestrian traffic.
   (C)   Mark off traffic lanes on streets and parts of streets indicating and
directing the flow of traffic.
   (D)   Secure all necessary signs, markers or official traffic-control
devices to be erected or placed on any street or part of a street. The
existence of such signs, markers or official traffic-control devices at any
place shall be prima facie evidence that such signs, markers or official
traffic-control devices were erected or placed by and at the direction of the
Council and in accordance with the provisions of this section.
('86 Code, § 18.104)
§ 70.06 LICENSES REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any street without a valid
driver's license issued by this or another state to operate the vehicle, and
said vehicle shall have current license tags.
('86 Code, § 18.105)
Statutory reference:
   Driver's license required, see S.C. Code § 56-1-20
§ 70.07 RESPONSIBILITY OF VEHICLE OWNER.
   No person shall allow or permit any vehicle registered in his name to
violate any ordinance. All violations of parking ordinances shall be presumed
to be with the knowledge of the owner of such vehicle.
('86 Code, § 18.106)
Statutory reference:
   Offenses by owner of vehicle, see S.C. Code § 56-5-6120
§ 70.08 FIXING TRAFFIC TICKETS UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful for any official or employee of the town to "fix" or
cancel any ticket or summons issued by the Police Department for a violation of
this chapter or any other traffic ordinance.
('86 Code, § 18.107)
§ 70.09 SIGNS IN MEDIAN ON MAIN STREET.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place any permanent or temporary sign
within the boundaries of the medians on Main Street.
('86 Code, § 18.108) (Ord. 82-11, passed 8-17-82)
§ 70.10 INTERFERENCE WITH TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS.
   No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in any way alter,
deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic-control device or any
railroad sign or signal of any description, shield or insignia thereon or any
other part thereof.
('86 Code, § 18.511) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.11 USING VEHICLE FOR ADVERTISING.
   No person shall operate or park any vehicle on any street for the primary
purpose of advertising without the prior approval of the Council.
('86 Code, § 18.202) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.12 RIDING IN OR ON MUNICIPAL VEHICLES UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person, or persons, to ride in or
on any municipal vehicle, without official authority to do so.
('86 Code, § 18.222) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this title for which no specific
penalty is otherwise provided, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500
or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding 30 days, or both; provided,
however, that no penalty shall exceed the penalty provided by state law for
similar offenses. Each day any violation of this title shall continue shall
constitute a separate offense.
('86 Code, § 1.207) (Am. Ord. 97-7, passed 8-18-97)
   (B)   Traffic moving violations.
Violation Minimum Maximum
Violation                     Minimum Maximum
Speeding, less than 10 m.p.h. $32     $50
Speeding, 11-15 m.p.h.        $52     $100
Speeding, 16-25 m.p.h.        $105    $150
Speeding, 26 m.p.h. and above $155    $415
Racing                        $210
Acquiescing in racing         $210
Driving left of center        $210
Improper passing on left      $210
Improper passing on right     $210
Changing lanes unlawfully     $210
Following too closely         $210
 
Violation Minimum Maximum
Violation                                 Minimum Maximum
Following fire apparatus less 500 feet    $210
Disregarding traffic control device       $210
Improper starting                         $210
Improper turning (left or ride)           $210
Unlawful U-turn (curve)                   $210
No turn signal (turning or changing lane) $210
Fail to yield right-of-way left turn      $210
Fail to yield at intersection             $210
Fail to yield at private road way         $210
Fail to yield to emergency vehicle        $210
Stopping/parking on roadway               $210
Disregarding stop sign                    $210
Disregarding R/R barrier signal           $210
Reckless driving                          $210
DUI (with/without datamaster)             $766
Child endangerment                        $210
Improper backing                          $210
Driving on sidewalk                       $210
Towing vehicle no safety chain            $210
Right turn on red                         $210
Fail to stop for bluelights               G/S
Hit and run property damage               G/S
Reckless homicide                         G/S
Felony DUI                                G/S
 
 
Violation                  Minimum Maximum
Passing stopped school bus G/S
Careless operation         $210
 
(Am. Ord. 2000-3, passed 5-15-00; Am. Ord. 2001-05, passed 4-16-01; Am. Ord.
2001-19, passed 1-28-02; Am. Ord. 2002-09, passed 6-27-02)
   (C)   Other violations.
Violation Minimum Maximum
Violation                           Minimum Maximum
N.O.S.C. license                    $210
Violation of beginner's permit      $210
Violation of license restriction    $210
No drivers license in possession    $210
Fail to surrender suspended D/L     $210
DUS first offense                   $445
Permit child or ward to drive       $210
Permit unauthorized person to drive $210
Lend, borrow, steal, alter D/L      $210
No moped driver license             $210
Fail to register/expired tag        $210
Improper vehicle license            $415
Improper use of dealer tag          $415
Helmet required under 21            $210
Hitchhiking                         $210
Motorcycle lights on at all times   $210
Driving unsafe vehicle              $210
Driving without lights              $210
 
Violation Minimum Maximum
Violation                              Minimum Maximum
Window tint 27% only                   $210
Failure to dim lights                  $210
Operating (allowing) uninsured vehicle $445
Child restraint violation              $155
Seatbelt violation                     $27
Littering                              $390
Disorderly conduct                     $235
Brown bagging                          $390
Open container                         $390
Under age 21 possession of beer/wine   $390
Under age 21 possession of liquor      $390
Simple possession marijuana            $445
CDV                                    $905
 
(Am. Ord. 2000-3, passed 5-15-00; Am. Ord. 2001-05, passed 4-16-01; Am. Ord.
2001-19, passed 1-28-02; Am. Ord. 2002-09, passed 6-27-02)
   (D)   Each of the following town ordinances carries a fine for violation of
$450:
      (1)   Parties to a crime;
      (2)   Petty larceny;
      (3)   Shoplifting;
      (4)   Receiving stolen goods;
      (5)   Obtaining goods under false pretense;
      (6)   Impersonation of police officer;
      (7)   Failing to return property;
      (8)   Gaining admission to event without paying;
      (9)   Defrauding innkeeper;
      (10)   Damaging property;
      (11)   Trespassing;
      (12)   Loitering;
      (13)   Assault and battery;
      (14)   Disorderly conduct;
      (15)   Noise; loud music;
      (16)   False alarm (Fire/EMS);
      (17)   False call for police;
      (18)   Resisting or interfering with police;
      (19)   Fail to stop on command of police;
      (20)   Aiders and abettors to a crime;
      (21)   Swearing falsely taking oaths;
      (22)   Indecent exposures;
      (23)   Obscene material;
      (24)   Gambling;
      (25)   Public drunkeness;
      (26)   Discharging firearm in city limits;
      (27)   Concealed weapons; and
      (28)   Carrying weapons.
(Am. Ord. 2001-05, passed 4-16-01; Am. Ord. 2002-09, passed 6-27-02)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see S.C. Code § 14-25-65
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC RULES
Section
General Traffic Regulations
   
71.01   Driving across private property to make turns
   
71.02   Stop signs
   
71.03   Entering intersection or marked crosswalk
   
71.04   Moving on one-way streets
   
71.05   Boarding or alighting from vehicle
   
71.06   Unlawful riding on vehicle
   
71.07   Clinging to moving vehicle while riding motorcycle
   
71.08   Operation of vehicles on play streets
   
71.09   Use of coasters, roller skates and similar devices
   
71.10   U turns unlawful
   
71.11   Operation on closed streets
   
71.12   Driving on sidewalks
   
71.13   No-passing zones
   
71.14   Reckless driving
   
71.15   Following too closely
   
71.16   Spilling loads
   
71.17   Use of horn in quiet zones
   
71.18   Opening doors into traffic
   
71.19   Display of vehicle for sale, washing, repairing
   
71.20   Passing unlawfully; shifting lanes without safety precaution
   
71.21   Failure to dim lights
   
71.22   Unattended motor vehicle
   
71.23   Driving while intoxicated or under influence of drugs
   
71.24   Accidents
   
71.25   Careless operation of a vehicle
   
71.26   Drivers to exercise due care with regard to pedestrians
   
71.27   Trucks prohibited on certain streets
Speed Regulations
   
71.35   Controlled speed; prima facie speed limits
   
71.36   When lower speeds required
   
71.37   Authority to establish speed limits
   
71.38   Special limits for trucks, solid or cushion tires
   
71.39   Racing prohibited
   
71.40   Authorized emergency vehicles
Processions
   
71.50   Permits required
   
71.51   Driving into funeral, parade or procession prohibited
   
71.52   Drivers in processions to follow closely; identification
Cross-reference:
   Vehicles leaking or scattering load, see §
94.19
GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
§ 71.01 DRIVING ACROSS PRIVATE PROPERTY TO MAKE TURNS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person driving a vehicle to use a sidewalk area
or any driveway, parking lot or business entrance at any intersection to "cut a
corner" purposely. It is the intention of this section to prohibit corner-
cutting by driving a vehicle from one street into another across any sidewalk
and/or driveway.
('86 Code, § 18.203) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.02 STOP SIGNS.
   When stop signs are erected at the entrance to any intersection, every
driver of a vehicle shall stop, before entering the intersection, except when
directed to proceed by a police officer, or traffic-control signal.
('86 Code, § 18.205) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.03 ENTERING INTERSECTION OR MARKED CROSSWALK.
   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate said vehicle without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or
pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed.
('86 Code, § 18.206) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.04 MOVING ON ONE-WAY STREETS.
   Upon those streets and parts of streets whereon signs are erected
designating them as "one-way streets," vehicular traffic shall move only in the
indicated direction.
('86 Code, § 18.207) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.05 BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM VEHICLE.
   No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while it is in motion.
('86 Code, § 18.208) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.06 UNLAWFUL RIDING ON VEHICLE.
   No person shall ride on any vehicle, nor upon any portion thereof not
designated or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not
apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty or to persons
riding within truck bodies in a space intended for merchandise.
('86 Code, § 18.209) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.07 CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLE WHILE RIDING MOTORCYCLE.
   No person riding a motorcycle shall attach the same or himself to any moving
vehicle upon any street, nor shall any motorcycle be operated in a reckless or
dangerous manner.
('86 Code, § 18.210) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.08 OPERATION OF VEHICLES ON PLAY STREETS.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or any part
thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any portion
thereof, except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are
within such closed area.
('86 Code, § 18.211) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.09 USE OF COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES AND SIMILAR DEVICES.
   No person upon roller skates, toy vehicle or similar device shall go upon
any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk and except upon
streets set aside as play streets when and as authorized by Council.
('86 Code, § 18.212) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.10 U TURNS UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person driving a vehicle to make a turn or
other prohibited turn at any point where such turn is prohibited by posted
signs or to accomplish a U turn by deviously going into or through private
property adjoining a street where such turn is prohibited.
('86 Code, § 18.213) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.11 OPERATION ON CLOSED STREETS.
   No person shall drive or cause to be driven any vehicle over any street
which is being repaired or paved or over any part of a street wholly closed to
travel.
('86 Code, § 18.214) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.12 DRIVING ON SIDEWALKS.
   It shall be unlawful for anyone to ride or drive a motor vehicle on the
sidewalks of any public streets, except for the purpose of crossing the same.
('86 Code, § 18.215) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.13 NO-PASSING ZONES.
   The Council may determine those portions of any street where overtaking and
passing a vehicle proceeding in the same direction or driving to the left of
the roadway would be especially hazardous and may by appropriate signs or
markings on the roadway, indicate the beginning and end of such zones. When
such signs or markings are in place and clearly visible to an ordinarily
observant person, every driver of a vehicle shall obey the directions thereof.
('86 Code, § 18.216) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.14 RECKLESS DRIVING.
   Any person who drives a vehicle in such manner as to indicate a willful or
wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property shall be guilty of
reckless driving and of a violation of this section.
('86 Code, § 18.217)
Statutory reference:
   Reckless driving, see S.C. Code § 56-5-2920
§ 71.15 FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY.
   The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely
than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such
vehicle, the traffic and the conditions of the street.
('86 Code, § 18.218) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.16 SPILLING LOADS.
   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any street unless such vehicle is so
constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load from dropping, sifting,
leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom.
('86 Code, § 18.219) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.17 USE OF HORN IN QUIET ZONES.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a zone of quiet, no person
operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other
warning device of the vehicle, except in an emergency.
('86 Code, § 18.220) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.18 OPENING DOORS INTO TRAFFIC.
   No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, nor shall any
person leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to traffic
for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
('86 Code, § 18.221) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.19 DISPLAY OF VEHICLE FOR SALE, WASHING, REPAIRING.
   No person shall stand or park vehicles within any public right-of-way for
the principal purpose of displaying it for sale or washing, greasing or
repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency, without
prior approval of the Chief of Police.
('86 Code, § 18.223) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.20 PASSING UNLAWFULLY; SHIFTING LANES WITHOUT SAFETY PRECAUTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to pass another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction when the passing vehicle is within 100 feet of
an intersection, approaching a curve, when a solid yellow line is located in
the lane of the passing vehicle or upon a hill or grade.
('86 Code, § 18.501)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to shift lanes of
traffic without first ascertaining that a shift in lanes of traffic by his
vehicle will not impede or interfere with the movement of any other vehicle
upon the public right-of-way.
('86 Code, § 18.503) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.21 FAILURE TO DIM LIGHTS.
   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, from dusk to dawn, when
approaching another vehicle from an opposite direction, to fail to dim the
lights of his vehicle when it is within 300 feet of the approaching vehicle.
('86 Code, § 18.502) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.22 UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLE.
   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand
unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing
the key and effectively setting the brake thereon and, when standing upon any
grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the highway or street.
('86 Code, § 18.504) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.23 DRIVING WHILE INTOXICATED OR UNDER INFLUENCE OF DRUGS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the influence of
intoxicating liquors, narcotic drugs, barbiturates, paraldehydes or drugs,
herbs or any substance of like character, whether synthetic or natural, to
drive any vehicle within the corporate limits.
   (B)   The penalty for violating this section shall be as prescribed by state
law.
('86 Code, § 18.508)
Statutory reference:
   Driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol, see S.C. Code §§ 56-5-2930
to 56-5-3000
§ 71.24 ACCIDENTS.
   (A)   Every person driving a vehicle of any kind which strikes or hits any
person or another vehicle shall stop such vehicle at once and render such
assistance as he can, give his name, post office address, license number and
serial number of his vehicle to the other person or driver, shall assist in
calling a police officer and remain at the scene until a police officer
arrives.
('86 Code, § 18.509)
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in an injury
to or the death of any person or total property damage to an apparent extent of
$50 or more shall, within 24 hours after such accident, forward a written
report of such accident to the Police Department, which report may be a copy of
the accident report required to be filed with the state under S.C. Code § 56-5-
1270. The Police Chief may require any such driver to file supplemental reports
whenever, in his opinion, the original report is insufficient and also may
require witnesses of accidents to render reports to him.
('86 Code, § 18.510) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   As to state laws relating to accidents, see S.C. Code § 56-5-1210 et seq.
§ 71.25 CARELESS OPERATION OF A VEHICLE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle without
care and caution and full regard for safety of persons or property. Any person
failing so to do shall be guilty of careless driving or riding. The operation
of any vehicle when the same or any of its appliances is not in proper or safe
condition shall be prima facie evidence of careless driving or riding. Careless
operation is unlawful and may be a lesser included offense of reckless driving.
   (B)   It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to
perform any act required in this section.
(Ord. 93-10, passed 9-20-93) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.26 DRIVERS TO EXERCISE DUE CARE WITH REGARD TO PEDESTRIANS.
   Every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with
any pedestrian upon any street and shall give warning by sounding the horn,
when necessary, and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child
or any confused or incapacitated person upon a street.
('86 Code, § 18.605) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.27 TRUCKS PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate on Main Street any
heavy trucks and other commercial vehicles with over six wheels or two axles,
except as necessary to make deliveries or pick up freight for businesses with
no other access. The restricted portion of Main Street shall be measured from
the four-way intersection of SC 261 and SC 527 to the three-way intersection of
SC 261 and SC 377.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any heavy trucks and
other commercial vehicles with over six wheels or two axles on any street
posted “no through trucks” by the Town Engineer upon approval of the Town
Council, or upon state highways within the city limits upon approval by the
State Department of Transportation, except to make deliveries or pick up
freights for businesses with no other access.
   (C)   The intent of this section is to restrict heavy trucks and commercial
vehicles from traveling through certain town streets and:
      (1)   To eliminate the visual blight created by large trucks and
commercial vehicles traveling through certain areas in town;
      (2)   To minimize physical damage to publicly maintained roadways;
      (3)   To protect property values and the character of property within
certain areas in town;
      (4)   To reduce traffic congestion;
      (5)   To protect children and the public from traffic injuries.
   (D)   For the purpose of this section, HEAVY TRUCKS and COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
are hereby defined to mean those vehicles having more than two axles or six
wheels.
(Ord. 2018-03, passed 4-16-18) Penalty, see §
70.99
SPEED REGULATIONS
§ 71.35 CONTROLLED SPEED; PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle on any street at a speed greater than
is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual
and potential hazards then existing. In every event speed shall be so
controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or
other conveyance on or entering the street in compliance with legal
requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care.
(S.C. Code § 56-5-1520(a)) ('86 Code, § 18.224)
   (B)   Where no special hazard exists that requires a lower speed for
compliance with this chapter, the speed of any vehicle not in excess of the
limits specified in this chapter shall be lawful, such limits established in
this section being:
      (1)   Twenty-five miles per hour in any business district; and
      (2)   Thirty-five miles per hour in any residence district.
   (C)   Any speed in excess of such limits shall be prima facie evidence that
the speed is not reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful.
('86 Code, § 18.225)
Statutory reference:
   Speed limits generally, see S.C. Code § 56-5-1520 et seq.
§ 71.36 WHEN LOWER SPEEDS REQUIRED.
   The driver of every vehicle shall, consistent with the requirements of this
chapter, drive at an appropriate speed when approaching and crossing an
intersection, when approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon any narrow or
winding roadway and when any special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians
or other traffic or by reason of weather or street conditions.
('86 Code, § 18.226) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   S.C. Code § 56-5-1540
§ 71.37 AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH SPEED LIMITS.
   The Council may, from time to time, establish speed limits different from
those set out in this chapter on particular streets or parts of streets or in
particular areas. When signs or markings are installed giving notice of such
speed limits, it shall be unlawful to exceed the indicated speed.
('86 Code, § 18.227) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.38 SPECIAL LIMITS FOR TRUCKS, SOLID OR CUSHION TIRES.
   (A)   Where no special hazards exist, motor trucks and motor truck tractors
of a size greater than 1 tons shall obey signs posted giving notice of special
conditions.
('86 Code, § 18.228)
   (B)   No person shall drive any vehicle equipped with solid rubber or
cushion tires at a speed greater than a maximum of ten miles per hour.
('86 Code, § 18.231) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.39 RACING PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in a motor vehicle race or
contest for speed or acceleration on any public road, street or highway or to
aid, abet or assist in any manner whatsoever in any such race contest. It shall
be unlawful also for any owner of a motor vehicle to acquiesce in or permit his
car to be used by another in any motor vehicle race or contest for speed.
('86 Code, § 18.229) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.40 AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   The speed limitations set forth herein shall not apply to authorized
emergency vehicles when responding to emergency calls and the drivers thereof
sound an audible signal by siren, bell or exhaust whistle capable of emitting
sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than 500
feet.
   (B)   This provision shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency
vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons
using the streets nor shall it protect the driver of any vehicle from the
consequence of a reckless disregard of the safety of others.
('86 Code, § 18.230) Penalty, see §
70.99
PROCESSIONS
§ 71.50 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   No procession or parade containing 100 or more persons or 25 or more
vehicles excepting the armed forces of the United States, or of this state and
forces of the Police and Fire Departments shall occupy, march or proceed along
any street except in accordance with a permit issued by the Council and such
other regulations as are set forth herein which may apply. Funerals shall be
exempt from this requirement.
('86 Code, § 18.301) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.51 DRIVING INTO FUNERAL, PARADE OR PROCESSION PROHIBITED.
   No driver of a vehicle shall drive between vehicles comprising a funeral,
parade or other authorized procession while same are in motion and when such
vehicles are conspicuously designated as required herein. This provision shall
not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic signals or
police officers.
('86 Code, § 18.302) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.52 DRIVERS IN PROCESSIONS TO FOLLOW CLOSELY; IDENTIFICATION.
   (A)   Each driver in a funeral, parade or other similar procession shall
drive as near to the righthand edge of the roadway as practical and follow the
vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe.
('86 Code, § 18.303)
   (B)   A parade or procession, including funerals, composed of a procession
of vehicles, shall be identified as such by the display upon the outside of
each vehicle as may be designated by the Chief of Police.
('86 Code, § 18.304) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 72: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
72.01   Manner of parking
   
72.02   Loading and unloading merchandise
   
72.03   Blocking streets and alleys
   
72.04   Special parking places
   
72.05   Parking prohibited in specified locations
   
72.06   Special provisions for handicapped persons
   
72.07   Prohibited parking by proprietors, managers, employees
   
72.08   Abandoned vehicles
   
72.09   Junked, unoperational vehicles
   
72.10   Limitation of commercial vehicles parked within residentially zoned
districts
 
   
72.99   Penalty
§ 72.01 MANNER OF PARKING.
   (A)   No person shall park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel
thereto, headed in the direction of traffic and with the curbside wheels of the
vehicle within 12 inches of the edge of the roadway, unless otherwise provided
by ordinance.
('86 Code, § 18.403)
   (B)   All vehicles parked in areas in which parking spaces have been marked
off or designated shall be parked entirely within a single space.
('86 Code, § 18.405(b.)) Penalty, see §
72.99
Statutory reference:
   Laws relating to parking, see S.C. Code § 56-5-2510 et seq.
§ 72.02 LOADING AND UNLOADING MERCHANDISE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to load or unload merchandise from
trucks or other vehicles in front of any business, except where unable to load
or unload at the rear thereof and front-door loading does not constitute a
traffic hazard.
('86 Code, § 18.401) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.03 BLOCKING STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street or alley
in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten
feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic, except
that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading or unloading of
passengers or when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations, traffic signs
or a police officer.
   (B)   When signs prohibiting parking are erected on narrow streets, no
person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place.
('86 Code, § 18.402) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.04 SPECIAL PARKING PLACES.
   The Council, in its discretion, may designate special parking areas or
places for which sufficient cause is shown.
('86 Code, § 18.404) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.05 PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED LOCATIONS.
   (A)   When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a
vehicle at any time upon any of the streets whereon such signs are erected.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to park adjacent to fire hydrants in such a
manner as to interfere with emergency situations or vehicles.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to park a bus on a public street, except in
places designated and marked as bus stops.
('86 Code, § 18.405)
   (D)   When signs are erected at an approach to hazardous or congested places
no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such designated place.
('86 Code, § 18.407)
   (E)   When signs are erected indicating no parking upon that side of the
street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any
such designated place.
('86 Code, § 18.408)
   (F)   Kingstree parking lot located downtown behind the Department of Social
Services Building, Museum, Wallace Chiropractic Building and all of the
buildings between Main, Hampton and Academy Streets shall be closed from 11:00
p.m. to 5:00 a.m. each day.
(Am. Ord. 2015-07, passed 7-20-15) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.06 SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR HANDICAPPED PERSONS.
   To provide a system for its handicapped citizens and to facilitate their
freedom of movement throughout the community, it is hereby ordained that:
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, "handicapped" shall mean any person
who is legally blind, has a disability of incoordination resulting from brain,
spinal or peripheral nerve damage, has an amputation of one or more of the
lower extremities, has an obvious physical disability that requires the use of
a wheelchair, braces, walker, crutches, prosthetic devices or any person who,
in the opinion of a licensed physicians has a physical impairment which renders
them restricted in their ability to move about freely, to include but not
limited to, persons of advanced age, or persons with respiratory, heart or
circulatory difficulties.
   (B)   Any person who is handicapped as defined in this section, or any
person who regularly transports a handicapped person and is in fact
transporting the handicapped person, shall be allowed to park in designated
spaces reserved for handicapped persons specifically marked by distinguishing
letters or signs. As a condition of this privilege, a vehicle transporting
handicapped persons shall display a distinguishing parking decal which shall
display such information for enforcement purposes. Any person who is
handicapped as defined in this section shall obtain such a decal from the S.C.
Department of Highways and Public Transportation, and the decal shall be
displayed as required by the Department.
   (C)   Any person or persons, without the decal described herein, who shall
park in parking places designated as being reserved for handicapped persons
shall be deemed to be in violation of this section and, upon conviction of such
offense, shall be fined as set forth in §
72.99; provided, however, that no person or persons who have a license tag,
decal or other emblem displayed on their vehicle, which indicates a handicapped
condition, whether a South Carolina motorist or a motorist from another state,
shall be subject to such fine.
('86 Code, § 18.406) (Am. Ord. 97-16, passed 8-18-97)
Statutory reference:
   Handicapped parking, see S.C. Code § 56-3-1950 through 56-3-1975
§ 72.07 PROHIBITED PARKING BY PROPRIETORS, MANAGERS, EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   No proprietor, manager, or employee of any business in the downtown
area shall park and leave standing any motor vehicle for a period of more than
two consecutive hours between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except on
Sundays and legal holidays, on the following streets:
      (1)   On Main Street from Jackson Street to the right-of-way of the
Seaboard Coast Line Railroad.
      (2)   On Jackson Street from Mill Street to Main Street.
      (3)   On Hampton Avenue from Mill Street to Main Street.
      (4)   On Mill Street from Jackson Street to Hampton Avenue.
      (5)   On Academy Street from Mill Street to Short Street.
   (B)   The downtown area shall include all that area from Longstreet Street
and Nelson Boulevard to the right-of-way of the Seaboard Coast Line Railroad
and from Mill Street to Short Street.
('86 Code, § 18.411) (Ord. 85-1, passed 4-15-85) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.08 ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon a junk or unoperational
vehicle upon the public streets.
   (B)   If any vehicle is found by any police officer abandoned on the public
streets, it shall be his duty to cause such vehicle to be removed and conveyed
to a garage designated by the Chief of Police. The owner or person in whose
name such vehicle is registered shall be given immediate personal notice or
notice by certified mail, if his address can be ascertained.
   (C)   If the address of such owner cannot be ascertained, then the Chief of
Police shall advertise that such car has been abandoned and impounded, giving
an accurate description thereof, the name of the person licensed to operate it
and the circumstances under which the same was found and removed and calling
upon the owner to reclaim the same within 30 days. Such notice shall be
published once a week for four consecutive weeks in a locally distributed
newspaper. If such vehicle is not reclaimed after such advertisement, then the
same shall be sold for cash to the highest bidder at such place as may be
designated therefor.
   (D)   The expenses of removing, keeping, advertising, and selling the
vehicle shall be paid from the proceeds of such sale; the balance, if any,
shall be deposited with the Clerk and Treasurer, subject to the claim of the
owner to be filed and proven within 12 months thereafter. If no such claim is
filed and proven within that time, such proceeds shall be forfeited. The Chief
of Police shall keep a record of such vehicle, the name of the registered
owner, the license tag and the circumstances under which it was found,
impounded, stored and sold.
('86 Code, § 18.409) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.09 JUNKED, UNOPERATIONAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   A junk automobile, for the purpose of this section, shall be any
vehicle with such present value that it would not be economical to repair or
restore it. An unoperational automobile, for the purpose of this section, shall
be an automobile incapable of moving under its own power without repair or in
an abandoned status.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any owner of any property in the corporate
limits to permit a vehicle not having a current motor vehicle license,
unoperational as defined in division (A) or upon which property taxes have not
been paid, to be brought upon or remain upon his property other than a licensed
new or used car dealer.
   (C)   A garage, salvage shop or wrecking yard may store unoperational
vehicles on its premises for a period not to exceed 90 days provided that the
area used to store such vehicles has fencing or other such barriers to conceal
the vehicles from the publics view.
   (D)   Any garage, salvage shop or wrecking yard has 90 days from the
operative date of Ord. 2001-18 (eff. 1-28-02) to comply with division (C).
('86 Code, § 18.410) (Am. Ord. 2001-18, passed 1-28-02; Am. Ord. 2004-02,
passed 3-15-04) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.10 LIMITATION OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES PARKED WITHIN RESIDENTIALLY ZONED
DISTRICTS.
   (A)   The parking of any commercial vehicle, semi-trailer or trailer upon
any lot, land, street, right-of-way, or shoulder thereof, for a period of time
exceeding one hour is prohibited, except in emergency situations or for such
length of time as may be necessary for the pickup, loading, unloading or
delivery of materials and/or passengers in any residentially zoned area. A copy
of the town zoning map is available for public inspection in the Office of the
Town Clerk. This prohibition shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer
or his designated representative, by written complaint from a civic or
homeowners’ association representing a subdivision in which such violation is
alleged to have occurred, or by written complaint by at least one resident
living within 1,000 feet of the alleged prohibited conduct. It is further
provided that this prohibition shall not apply to lots larger than two acres,
provided adequate screening of such alleged prohibited conduct is undertaken.
   (B)   The intent of this section is to limit the size and weight of
commercial vehicles, semi-trailers or trailers in residential areas and:
      (1)   To eliminate the visual blight created by large commercial
vehicles, semi-trailers or trailers being indiscriminately parked in
residential areas for long periods of time;
      (2)   To minimize physical damage to publicly maintained rights-of-way;
      (3)   To protect property values and character of property within
residential developments;
      (4)   To reduce traffic congestion;
      (5)   To protect children from traffic injuries.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, a COMMERCIAL VEHICLE is defined as a
vehicle used or maintained for the transportation of persons for hire,
compensation or profit, or designed, used or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property; or a vehicle having a tare weight exceeding five
tons (10,000 pounds), or a vehicle having more than two axles, or a vehicle
greater than ten feet in height. Construction equipment and farming equipment
of any type are included in the definition of COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. SEMI-TRAILER
means a vehicle designed for carrying persons or property used in conjunction
with a motor vehicle, and so constructed that some part of its weight and that
of its load rests upon, or is carried by another vehicle. TRAILER means a
vehicle designed for carrying persons or property on its own structure and
being drawn by a motor vehicle, and so constructed that no part of its weight
rests upon any other vehicle.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 2-19-18) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is otherwise provided shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
70.99.
   (B)   Any person violating the provision of §
72.07 shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of $25. Each two-hour
period shall constitute a separate offense.
('86 Code, § 18.411) (Ord. 85-1, passed 4-15-85; Am. Ord. 97-18, passed 8-18-
97; Am. Ord. 2001-05, passed 4-16-01)
CHAPTER 73: PEDESTRIANS
Section
   
73.01   Obedience to traffic-control signals required
   
73.02   Use of right half of crosswalks
   
73.03   Walking on streets and roadways
   
73.04   Hitchhiking prohibited
Cross-reference:
   Drivers to exercise due care with regard to pedestrians, see §
71.26
§ 73.01 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS REQUIRED.
   Pedestrians shall strictly comply with the directions of any official
traffic-control signal, device, marking, etc., or police officer.
('86 Code, § 18.601) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.02 USE OF RIGHT HALF OF CROSSWALKS.
   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of a
crosswalk.
('86 Code, § 18.602) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.03 WALKING ON STREETS AND ROADWAYS.
   Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to
walk along and upon an adjacent roadway. Where sidewalks are not provided, any
pedestrian walking along and upon a street shall, when practicable, walk only
on the left side of the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may
approach from the opposite direction.
('86 Code, § 18.603) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.04 HITCHHIKING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride from
the driver of any vehicle.
('86 Code, § 18.604) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 74: BICYCLES
Section
   
74.01   Applicability of regulations
   
74.02   Manner of riding
   
74.03   Duty to keep to right
   
74.04   Riding abreast
   
74.05   Bicycle paths to be used
   
74.06   Riding bicycles on sidewalks
   
74.07   Clinging to vehicles
   
74.08   Bicycle equipment
   
74.09   Larceny of bicycles
§ 74.01 APPLICABILITY OF REGULATIONS.
   (A)   This chapter shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any
highway or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject
to those exceptions stated herein.
('86 Code, § 18.801)
   (B)   Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of
the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver
of a vehicle by this code of ordinances, except as to special regulations
herein and except as to those provisions of this code which by their nature can
have no application.
('86 Code, § 18.702) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.02 MANNER OF RIDING.
   It shall be unlawful to operate a bicycle without having at least one hand
on the handlebars at all times, or to fail to have control of the bicycle at
all times.
('86 Code, § 18.708) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.03 DUTY TO KEEP TO RIGHT.
   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the
right side of the roadway as practicable.
('86 Code, § 18.703) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.04 RIDING ABREAST.
   It shall be unlawful for persons on bicycles to ride more than two abreast,
except in parades and similar circumstances.
('86 Code, § 18.704) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.05 BICYCLE PATHS TO BE USED.
   Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway,
bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway.
('86 Code, § 18.705) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.06 RIDING BICYCLES ON SIDEWALKS.
   It shall be unlawful for anyone to ride a bicycle on a sidewalk, except for
the purpose of crossing the same when necessary; provided, however, that this
section shall not apply to tricycles operated in residential districts by
children under 12 years of age.
('86 Code, § 18.706) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.07 CLINGING TO VEHICLES.
   No person riding upon a bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle
shall attach it or them or himself to any vehicle on a roadway.
('86 Code, § 18.707) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.08 BICYCLE EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Every bicycle, when in use after dark, shall be equipped with a lamp
on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least
500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear which shall be
visible from all distances from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when directly
in front of the lawful upper beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle. A red lamp
emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be
used in addition to the red reflector. After dark shall mean the time during
which the street lights of the town are or should be lighted.
('86 Code, § 18.709)
   (B)   No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or
other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least 100
feet, except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any person use
upon a bicycle any siren or whistle.
('86 Code, § 18.710)
   (C)   No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a brake
which will enable the operator to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level and
clean pavement.
('86 Code, § 18.712) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.09 LARCENY OF BICYCLES.
   The larceny of any bicycle shall be punishable at the discretion of the
court, when the value thereof is less than $100.
('86 Code, § 18.711) Penalty, see §
70.99
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
      Chapter
         
90.   ANIMALS
         
91.   FIRE PREVENTION
         
92.   HEALTH AND SANITATION
         
93.   PARKS AND RECREATION
         
94.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
         
95.   TREES
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Animal Warden; rules and regulations
   
90.02   Animals running at large; impoundment
   
90.03   Cruelty to animals
   
90.04   Cats
   
90.05   Game birds
   
90.06   Hogs prohibited
   
90.07   Raising poultry or fowl
Bird Sanctuary
   
90.20   Establishment
   
90.21   Unlawful interference with birds
   
90.22   Birds constituting nuisance
   
90.23   Exclusion
Dogs
   
90.35   Purpose and intent
   
90.36   Definitions
   
90.37   Dogs running at large
   
90.38   Confinement of dogs
   
90.39   Dog biting
   
90.40   Notice to owner of impoundment
   
90.41   Impoundment fees
   
90.42   Redemption and disposition other than rabies cases
   
90.43   Limit on number of dogs per household
   
90.44   Rabies vaccination
   
90.45   Humane care
   
90.46   Dog causing nuisance
   
90.47   Guide dogs
   
90.48   Unlawful interference with enforcement
   
90.49   Authority of officials as to violations
 
   
90.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 ANIMAL WARDEN; RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by a
special officer known as the Animal Warden. The town is empowered to adopt such
rules and regulations as are necessary to administer the provisions of this
chapter.
('86 Code, § 3.102)
§ 90.02 ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE; IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any hog, goat, sheep, cow, mule,
ox, horse or other animal to allow the same to wander, roam or run at-large on
the streets of the town.
('86 Code, § 3.201)
   (B)   The Animal Warden of the town shall immediately seize and impound any
such hog, goat, sheep, cow, mule, ox, horse or other animal found wandering,
roaming or running at-large on any street of the town and shall retain and hold
any such animal so seized and impounded until the owner shall have been
discharged for the violation of this section.
('86 Code, § 3.202) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.03 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to overload, overwork, overdrive,
torture, torment, wantonly or cruelly beat or bruise, cut or ill treat any
animal or in any other manner to inflict any unnecessary pain or suffering upon
any such animal.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall apply to all person violating the
same, whether such person or persons be the owners of such animals or have the
temporary charge or custody of same.
('86 Code, § 3.206) Penalty, see §
90.99
Statutory reference:
   Cruelty to animals, see S.C. Code §§ 47-1-10 et seq.
§ 90.04 CATS.
   The Animal Warden or his duly authorized representative is hereby authorized
to receive any cat which is deemed to be without ownership and/or any cat
surrendered to the Animal Warden by its owner to be destroyed in some humane
manner or to be placed for adoption.
('86 Code, § 3.203) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.05 GAME BIRDS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to kill, catch, or have in his
possession any wild bird, other than a game bird.
('86 Code, § 3.204) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.06 HOGS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any hog or hogs
within the corporate limits.
('86 Code, § 3.205) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.07 RAISING POULTRY OR FOWL.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful for any person
within residential districts of the city limits to keep, or allow or permit the
keeping of, or have possession of any chicken, poultry, birds, peacocks,
peafowl, guineas, ducks, geese, gander, or other fowl, except as provided and
specified in division (B) below.
   (B)   The following shall be accepted and exempt from the provisions of
division (A).
      (1)   Zoos, fares, shows, and light exhibits issued permits by or
approved for the temporary showing by the Town of Kingstree.
      (2)   Parrots, parakeets, cockatoos, cockatiels, lovebirds, and similar
indoor pet birds actually kept in residence in confinement, if in compliance
with local, state, and federal laws and regulations.
      (3)   Waterfowl on any lake or pond or a subdivision lake or pond.
      (4)   Less than 15 domesticated female chickens (hens) shall be kept,
maintained, or raised on lots with single family dwellings only. No male
chickens (roosters) whatsoever shall be allowed. The following are additional
requirements regarding the maintenance of domesticated female chickens.
         (a)   Domesticated female chickens must be confined in a coop. The
coop must be a safe environment that keeps animals from escaping at all times.
It must be constructed in a uniform manner of sturdy material that provides
protection from potential predators and the elements, and properly ventilated.
Runs must be constructed of a fencing material that prevents potential
predators from getting in and hens from escaping.
         (b)   Runs and coops must be well drained so that there is no
accumulation of chicken excrement, and shall be cleaned on a regular basis with
all droppings and excretions disposed of in a manner so as not to attract flies
or varmints unless otherwise disposed of in accordance with any federal, state,
or health regulation.
         (c)   Chickens, coops, runs, or other structures for housing chickens
shall only be located or permitted between the rear of the principal structure
and the rear lot line of the premises; must be screened from the side and rear
lot lines by shrubbery or a privacy fence at least five feet tall; and shall
not be located within ten feet of any property line and 30 feet from the
nearest residence excluding your own residence (or on the approval of the Code
Enforcement Officer if there are any unusual circumstances).
         (d)   No person shall slaughter any chickens on the premises. It shall
be unlawful to raise chickens for commercial purposes within the city limits in
the residential area, or to sell eggs laid by chickens kept in the city limits.
All eggs laid by the chickens must be utilized on the premises.
         (e)   Chicken coops, runs, or other structures for housing chickens
shall not constitute an accessory structure.
         (f)   No person shall keep chickens on his or her premises within the
city without first obtaining a complete and approved initial compliance
inspection and application, and paying a $5 registration fee as set by the Town
Council.
         (g)   No person shall keep chickens on his or her premises within the
city limits without first obtaining written permission from abutting property
owners in the initial application process.
         (h)   A permit to keep hens may be suspended, revoked, or not issued
by the city where there is a risk to public health or safety, for any violation
of, or failure to comply with, any provisions of other applicable ordinances or
laws, including local subdivision covenants.
   (C)   Every person keeping, maintaining, or raising chickens and/or fowls
within the corporate city limits of Kingstree on a lot, area, plot, parcel,
pond, or tract of land prior to or on the effective date of this section shall
conform to and be in full compliance with the regulations of this section
within 90 days after its passage.
   (D)   Refer to §
90.99 for the penalty for violating any of the above provisions of this
section.
(Am. Ord. 2024-04, passed 9-16-24)
BIRD SANCTUARY
§ 90.20 ESTABLISHMENT.
   The entire area situated within the corporate limits is hereby designated a
bird sanctuary.
('86 Code, § 3.401)
§ 90.21 UNLAWFUL INTERFERENCE WITH BIRDS.
   Subject to §
90.22 herein, it shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot or
molest in any way any bird or wild fowl or to rob bird or wild fowl nests.
('86 Code, § 4.402) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.22 BIRDS CONSTITUTING NUISANCE.
   If starlings or similar birds are found to be congregating in such numbers
in a particular locality that they constitute a menace to health or property,
in the opinion of the County Board of Health, the Council shall meet with said
health authorities to resolve the problem. If no satisfactory course of action
is found to abate such nuisance at such meeting, said birds may be destroyed in
such manner and in such numbers as is deemed advisable by said health
authorities under the supervision of such persons as may be approved by the
Council.
('86 Code, § 3.403) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.23 EXCLUSION.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to farm or swamp lands
within the corporate limits.
('86 Code, § 3.404)
DOGS
§ 90.35 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   It is the purpose and intent of this section to provide for the following:
   (A)   Regulating the keeping of dogs;
   (B)   Prohibiting the running at-large of unlicensed and unvaccinated dogs;
   (C)   The impounding and destruction of unlicensed and unvaccinated dogs
found running at-large;
   (D)   The quarantining of dogs in heat and/or suspected of rabies;
   (E)   Rabies vaccination; and
   (F)   Such other rules and regulation necessary for the control of
unlicensed and unvaccinated dogs running at-large and to promote public health
and public welfare in the community.
('86 Code, § 3.101)
Statutory reference:
   Dogs, see S.C. Code §§ 47-3-10 et seq.
§ 90.36 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. The facilities of the officially designated animal shelter.
   ANIMAL WARDEN. The person or persons employed by the town as its enforcement
officer.
   AT-LARGE. Off the premises of the owner, or the person keeping or harboring
the dog, and not under the control of the owner or his representative either by
leash, cord, chain or other similar device.
   BITE. Any abrasion, scratch, puncture, tear or piercing of the skin actually
or suspected of being caused by a dog.
   COLLAR. A band, chain, harness or other suitable device worn around the neck
of a dog to which a current rabies vaccination registration tag and a license
tag can be affixed.
   EXPOSED TO RABIES. A dog which has been exposed to rabies if it has been
bitten by another animal or if it has been in contact with any animal known to
be or suspected of being infected by rabies.
   KENNEL. Any establishment wherein dogs are kept for the purpose of breeding,
boarding, sale or show purposes from which the dog cannot stray.
   OFFICER. Any person whose duty is to preserve peace, make arrests or enforce
the provisions of this chapter.
   OWNER. Any person who has a right of property in such dog, who owns,
harbors, keeps or causes to permit to be harbored, kept or has in his care a
dog on or about any premises occupied by said person.
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, partnership, association or local
officers or employees.
   VACCINATION. Inoculation of a dog with a vaccine that is licensed by the
United States Department of Agriculture and which is administered by a
veterinarian for the purpose of immunizing a dog against rabies.
   VETERINARIAN. A doctor of veterinary medicine who holds a valid license to
practice his profession.
('86 Code, § 3.103)
§ 90.37 DOGS RUNNING AT LARGE.
   Any person who owns, keeps, harbors or cares for a dog is subject to a
notice of violation and penalty or the impoundment of the dog, or both, if the
dog is permitted to be at-large. A dog will be considered at-large in the
following instances:
   (A)   Any dog that is off the property of the owner, or the person keeping
or harboring such dog(s), unless such dog(s) shall be under control by leash,
cord, chain or other similar device.
   (B)   Any dog that is upon any school premises or grounds or upon any public
recreation area when an organized activity is being conducted unless the dog is
controlled by a leash or similar device.
   (C)   Any dog, whether on leash or not, which shall be or which shall enter
upon any church premises, any public meeting, or gathering place, restaurants,
food markets, eating establishments, department and dry goods stores and rest
rooms open to the public during the time that said place is open for business;
provided, however, these provisions shall not apply to dogs leading visually
handicapped persons.
   (D)   Any dog of fierce, dangerous, or vicious propensity off the property
of the owner or the person keeping or harboring said dog unless the dog is
wearing a muzzle of sufficient strength to prevent its biting any person or
another animal. Said muzzle shall be worn even though the dog is controlled by
a leash, at "heel" beside a competent person and obedient to that person's
command, under the immediate control of a competent person or otherwise
humanely restrained.
('86 Code, § 3.104)
§ 90.38 CONFINEMENT OF DOGS.
   (A)   Dogs of fierce, dangerous, or vicious propensity, whether licensed or
not shall not be allowed to run at-large upon the premises of other than the
owner's. If any such dog is found running at-large in violation of this
provision, it shall be taken up and impounded and shall not be released except
upon the approval of the Animal Warden after payment of the penalties;
provided, however, that if any dangerous, fierce, or vicious dog so found at-
large cannot be safely taken and impounded, such dog may be destroyed by a duly
authorized representative of the town.
   (B)   Dogs of fierce, dangerous, or vicious propensity when on the property
of the owner or a person keeping or harboring said dog shall be secured in such
a way that the dog cannot reach mailmen, delivery personnel, newspaper boys, or
any others who may have occasion to enter the owner's premises in the course of
their work.
   (C)   Female dogs "in heat" shall be confined by the owner in a closed
building so that the dog cannot come into contact with another except for
planned breeding.
   (D)   Dogs suspected of rabies shall be confined by the owner in and at a
place designated by the Animal Warden or his duly authorized representative in
such a way so as to prohibit such rabies-suspected dog to come into contact
with any other animal or person and/or from escaping, at the owner's expense.
Such rabies-suspected dog shall be confined until such time as a veterinarian
has authorized in writing its release or nonconfinement.
('86 Code, § 3.105) (Ord. 1972-3, passed - -72)
§ 90.39 DOG BITING.
   (A)   Reporting animal bites. It shall be the duty of every physician or
other medical practitioner, owner of dog involved, and/or victim to report to
the Animal Warden or his authorized representative the names and addresses of
persons treated for bites inflicted by dogs, together with such other
information as is pertinent to rabies control. It shall be the duty of any
person having any knowledge of a dog bite incident to notify the Animal Warden
of said incident and to provide such information upon request of the Animal
Warden or any officer as is pertinent to rabies control.
   (B)   Confinement. Any dog that bites a person shall be confined by the
owner in and at a place designated by the Animal Warden or his duly authorized
representative in such a way as to prohibit such dog to come into contact with
another animal or person and/or from escaping, at the owner's expense. Said dog
shall be confined ten days from the date of the dog bite incident and/or until
such time as a veterinarian has authorized in writing its release or non-
confinement.
('86 Code, § 3.106) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.40 NOTICE TO OWNER OF IMPOUNDMENT.
   The Animal Warden or his duly authorized representative shall, immediately
upon impounding any dog, make a complete registry entering the breed, color,
and sex of such dog, and whether licensed, if known. If licensed, he shall
enter the name and address of the owner and the number of the license tag, if
known, and, if bearing an inoculation tag, the number of such tag shall be
recorded. When any licensed animal shall be impounded, the Animal Warden or his
duly authorized representative shall give immediate notice, either personal or
by certified mail, to the owner of said licensed dog, informing such owner of
the impounding of his dog and the reason therefor.
('86 Code, § 3.109)
§ 90.41 IMPOUNDMENT FEES.
   The Animal Warden or his duly authorized representative is hereby empowered
to establish the following penalties and fees:
   (A)   Impoundment penalty for a licensed or unlicensed dog shall be $10.
   (B)   A daily board fee of $5 shall be charged for every day or fraction
thereof that an animal shall be confined to the shelter.
   (C)   A fee in the amount charged by the veterinarian may be charged to the
owner for distemper, hepatitis, and leptospirosis shots administered to dogs
impounded if in the opinion of the veterinarian such medication is required.
   (D)   A fee of $10 will be charged for animal pick-up service requested by
the owner of the animal.
   (E)   A fee of $10 will be charged for euthanasia service requested by the
owner of the animal. If the owner of the animal requests the veterinarian to
dispose of the body the veterinarian may charge an additional fee.
   (F)   Any dog to be redeemed by or released to an owner shall be required to
meet the vaccination and/or licensing requirements of this section prior to
resuming full possession, and all applicable fees shall be paid in full.
('86 Code, § 3.108) (Am. Ord. 97-19, passed 8-18-97)
§ 90.42 REDEMPTION AND DISPOSITION OTHER THAN RABIES CASES.
   (A)   Unlicensed dogs. The owner shall be entitled to resume possession of
any impounded unlicensed dog upon payment of the at-large penalties or the
impoundment penalties, or both, the daily board fees and compliance with the
rabies vaccination and licensing requirements, provided that application for
such possession, with payments of all required penalties and fees, is made
within 72 hours after impoundment.
   (B)   Licensed dogs. The owner shall be entitled to resume possession of any
impounded dog upon payment of at-large penalties or impoundment penalties, or
both, daily board fees and compliance with rabies vaccination requirements
provided that application for such possession, with payment of all required
penalties and fees, is made within ten days after impoundment and notice
thereof.
   (C)   Disposition of dogs. Any unlicensed dog impounded and not reclaimed by
the owner after being held at least 72 hours, after impoundment, and any
licensed dog impounded and not reclaimed by the owner after being held ten
hours after impoundment and notice as required by paragraph b, above, may be
destroyed in a humane manner.
   (D)   Adoption authorized. If the Animal Warden or his duly authorized
representative determines that any unclaimed dog is reasonably healthy,
currently vaccinated against rabies and should not constitute a threat to the
public health and welfare of the town, he may retain said dog for a reasonable
period of time to attempt to place the animal for adoption.
   (E)   Injured or ill animals. Any animal detained and or impounded and
suffering from serious injuries, in great pain, with probability of recovery
remote, or having a communicable or infectious disease which would endanger the
health of people or other animals, may be destroyed in a humane manner after
reasonable efforts to determine ownership have failed.
   (F)   Written release. Any licensed dog may be destroyed in a humane manner
or placed for adoption any time within ten days from the date of impoundment
if, upon notification or impoundment of said dog, the owner states that he does
not wish to redeem the impounded dog and subsequently, in writing, releases the
dog to the sole jurisdiction of the Animal Warden.
('86 Code, § 3.110)
§ 90.43 LIMIT ON NUMBER OF DOGS PER HOUSEHOLD.
   No residence shall be allowed to house more than four dogs at any one time
within the town limits excluding puppies under the age of 12 weeks.
(Ord. 2000-2, passed 3-21-00)
§ 90.44 RABIES VACCINATION.
   (A)   Current vaccination. No person shall own, keep, harbor, or care for,
or have on or about the premises occupied by said person within the town any
dog four months of age or older unless such dog has a current rabies
vaccination. Prior to July 1 of each year, every owner of a pet shall have his
pet inoculated against rabies.
   (B)   Vaccination tag. With the issuance of the certificate, the licensed
graduate veterinarian shall also furnish a serially numbered metal license tag
bearing the same number and year of the certificate. The metal license tag,
when issued by the licensed graduate veterinarian, shall bear the name of such
veterinarian. The metal license tag shall at all times be attached to a collar
or harness worn by the dog for which the certificate and tag have been issued.
   (C)   Fee. Application for initial issuance or renewal of each registration
must be made by the owner in writing or in person, and must be accompanied by a
fee as prescribed by the veterinarian.
   (D)   Renewal. A registration shall be renewed no later than the date of
expiration of the current vaccination period for which it was issued, as
defined in division (A) above.
   (E)   Use of registration. No person shall use a certificate for any animal
other than the one for which it was issued.
   (F)   Loss of tag. If such tag is lost or destroyed, the owner shall apply
at the licensed graduate veterinarian issuing the tag and, upon presentation of
the applicable vaccination registration certificate, a replacement tag will be
issued upon payment of a fee of $.50.
('86 Code, § 3.113) (Ord. 1972-3, passed - -72) Penalty, see §
90.99
Statutory reference:
   Rabies control, see S.C. Code §§ 47-5-10 et seq.
§ 90.45 HUMANE CARE.
   All owners shall provide their dog with sufficient food and water, proper
shelter, veterinary care when needed, and with humane care and treatment. Any
person found not providing humane care for their dog will be considered in
violation of this section. No person shall poison or ill treat a dog, nor may a
dog be abandoned in the town; such acts shall be considered a violation of this
section.
('86 Code, § 3.107) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.46 DOG CAUSING NUISANCE.
   (A)   Every owner of a dog shall exercise proper care and control of his dog
to prevent the dog from becoming a nuisance. Excessive or untimely barking,
molesting passerby, chasing vehicles, attacking other domestic animals,
depositing excretory matter on property other than that of the owner and
damaging property, shall be deemed a nuisance and such acts shall be considered
a violation of this section. Any dog that shall bite, attack or attempt to bite
one or more persons three or more times within any four-year period, and/or any
dog or dogs who have subjected their owner to a conviction of a third offense
for excessive or untimely barking within any two year period can be declared a
nuisance by the Animal Warden who can order that such dog or dogs will not be
kept in the town, be destroyed, or such other procedure that will eliminate the
dog or dogs as a nuisance.
   (B)   Sanitation.
      (1)   No owner or custodian of any animal shall cause or allow such
animal to soil, defile, or defecate on any public property or upon any street,
sidewalk, public way, play area or common grounds owned jointly by the members
of a homeowners or condominium association, or upon private property other than
that of the owner, unless such owner or custodian immediately removes and
disposes of all feces deposited by such animal by the following methods;
         (a)   Collection of the feces by appropriate implement and placement
in a paper or plastic bag or other container; and
         (b)   Removal of such bag or container to the property of the animal
owner or custodian and disposition thereafter in a manner as otherwise may be
permitted by law.
      (2)   No person owning, harboring or keeping an animal within the town
shall permit any waste matter from the animal to collect and remain on the
property of the owner or custodian or on the property of others so as to cause
or create an unhealthy, unsanitary, dangerous or offensive living condition on
the owner's or custodian's property, or to abutting property of others.
      (3)   No person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any animal
shall cause unsanitary dangerous or offensive conditions by virtue of the size
or number of animals maintained at a single location or due to the inadequacy
of the facilities.
('86 Code, § 3.112) (Am. Ord. 2002-03, passed 4-15-02; Am. Ord. 2008-02, passed
2-25-08) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.47 GUIDE DOGS.
   It shall be lawful for any dog trained to guide any blind person to be
admitted, when actually accompanying such blind person, to any public place or
vehicle which such blind person may have the lawful right to enter, if the dog
is currently vaccinated, registered and licensed.
('86 Code, § 3.114)
§ 90.48 UNLAWFUL INTERFERENCE WITH ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with any
officer or employee of the town lawfully engaged in the capture of stray dogs,
pursuant to this chapter.
('86 Code, § 3.115)
      (2)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the
interference alleged consisted of constitutionally protected speech only.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person other than an authorized officer
or employee of the town to tamper with any dog box trap which has been set by
an officer or employee of the town, or to release any animal therefrom except
with the consent and under the supervision of an authorized officer or employee
of the town.
('86 Code, § 3.116) (Am. Ord. 97-21, passed 8-18-97) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.49 AUTHORITY OF OFFICIALS AS TO VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of discharging the duties imposed by this chapter and
the State Rabies Control Act of 1969, being S.C. Code §§ 47-5-10 et seq., as
amended, and enforcing the provisions of same, any officer duly authorized by
the town is hereby empowered to enter upon any private property for the purpose
of enforcing this section and to ascertain whether any dog is present, kept,
harbored or cared for thereon; whether the owner has secured a current calendar
year town dog license and tag, and/or secured a current rabies vaccination
certificate and tag; to issue notices or violation to owners of dogs found
running at-large and/or to impound dogs found to be in violation of this
chapter. The said officers are hereby vested with all powers, duties and
responsibilities contained herein, nor shall any person interfere, hinder or
molest any officer in the performance of his duties.
('86 Code, § 3.117)
   (B)   The Animal Warden or any other employee duly authorized by the town or
any municipal policeman shall have the authority to issue to any owner of a
licensed dog found at-large, without seizing and/or detaining said dog, a
notice of violation in lieu of impoundment. A notice of violation shall be a
printed form similar in design to a traffic ticket in use by the Police
Department and in sufficient duplicates so as to afford a copy for the
violator, the Animal Warden, and for any other authorized records.
('86 Code, § 3.118)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof before the Municipal Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not less than $25 for a first offense, a fine of not less than $50 for a second
offense, a fine of not less than $75 for a third offense and a maximum fine of
not more than $150 to be collected as fines and penalties are now collected.
Default of payment of such fine and costs, shall constitute cause for
imprisonment of not less than five days nor more than 30 days, at the
discretion of the Municipal Judge.
('86 Code, § 3.119) (Am. Ord. 97-22, passed 8-18-97)
CHAPTER 91: FIRE PREVENTION
Section
International Fire Code
   
91.01   Adoption by reference
Fire Protection Regulations
   
91.15   Enforcement by police; failure to obey lawful orders
   
91.16   Right-of-way of vehicles responding to alarms
   
91.17   Obstructing fire equipment; following fire apparatus
   
91.18   Riding fire trucks
   
91.19   Use of fire equipment
   
91.20   Driving over fire hose
   
91.21   Tampering with fire hydrant
   
91.22   Burning trash; bonfires
   
91.23   Fire hazard on lots
   
91.24   Recovery of costs by fees from users of fire protection and emergency
medical services
Fireworks
   
91.35   Fireworks prohibited
   
91.36   Exceptions
   
91.37   Public displays
   
91.38   Sales regulations
   
91.39   Permissible fireworks
   
91.40   License required for sale; sales prohibited on public property
   
91.41   Prohibited acts
   
91.42   Violation of this subchapter
   
91.43   Revocation of licenses for a violation of this subchapter
   
91.44   Seizure and destruction of prohibited fireworks
   
91.45   Public exhibitions
   
91.46   Allowable hours
   
91.47   Fireworks prohibited zone
 
   
91.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Fireworks and explosives, see S.C. Code Title 23, Chapter 35
INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE
§ 91.01 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   Chapter 1 and the Appendix of the 2015 International Fire Code is hereby
adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein.
(Ord. 2011-05, passed 7-18-11; Am. Ord. 2014-02, passed 4-21-14; Am. Ord. 2016-
06, passed 7-28-16)
Cross-reference:
   Adoption of Fire Prevention Code; modification and enforcement, see also §
150.02
FIRE PROTECTION REGULATIONS
§ 91.15 ENFORCEMENT BY POLICE; FAILURE TO OBEY LAWFUL ORDERS.
   (A)   Police officers shall enforce the provisions of this chapter.
Immediately upon their arrival at the scene of a fire, and subject to
availability of personnel, they shall station one police officer at each end of
the block wherein the fire occurs. They may require motor vehicles or other
vehicles parked within said block to be moved immediately.
('86 Code, § 5.202)
   (B)   Failure to obey any lawful order of any official of the Fire or Police
Department at the scene of any emergency shall constitute a violation of this
chapter.
('86 Code, § 5.207)
§ 91.16 RIGHT-OF-WAY OF VEHICLES RESPONDING TO ALARMS.
   All motor equipment of the Fire Department, Police Department and the
vehicles of firemen shall have the right-of-way over all other vehicles when
responding to an alarm.
('86 Code, § 5.203)
§ 91.17 OBSTRUCTING FIRE EQUIPMENT; FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS.
   (A)   No person shall park any vehicle or otherwise cause any obstruction to
fire equipment at a fire or at an entrance to the fire station nor park within
15 feet of any fire hydrant. It shall be unlawful to interfere with or obstruct
the activities of any member of the Fire Department who is acting in the line
of duty at or proceeding to a fire.
('86 Code, § 5.204)
   (B)   No driver of any vehicle, other than one on official business, shall
follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 500
feet or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus
has stopped in answer to an alarm. Bystanders shall stay a safe distance away.
('86 Code, § 5.205)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state laws, see S.C. Code §§ 56-5-1960, 56-5-2530
§ 91.18 RIDING FIRE TRUCKS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, who is not a member of the Fire
Department, to ride upon any fire truck without permission from the Fire Chief.
('86 Code, § 5.206) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.19 USE OF FIRE EQUIPMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to use, borrow or tamper
with any equipment of the Fire Department without the express consent of the
Fire Chief. "Equipment" shall mean all vehicles, firefighting apparatus,
supplies, facilities or other material belonging to the Fire Department.
('86 Code, § 5.208) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.20 DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, without permission of the Fire Chief,
to drive a vehicle of any description over or across a fire hose stretched or
laid upon the ground for use at a fire or for any other lawful purpose of the
Fire Department.
('86 Code, § 5.209) Penalty, see §
91.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see S.C. Code § 56-5-3850
§ 91.21 TAMPERING WITH FIRE HYDRANT.
   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to open or otherwise tamper
with a fire hydrant.
('86 Code, § 5.210) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.22 BURNING TRASH; BONFIRES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to burn any trash or to have a bonfire within the
corporate limits, without first obtaining a permit from the Fire Chief and
permission from the property owner.
   (B)   Burning shall only be permitted between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:
00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. during Daylight Savings Time, Monday
through Saturday.
      (1)   Burning permits will not be issued on Sunday.
      (2)   Large commercial burning shall be prohibited.
      (3)   Burning will be immediately stopped upon the receipt of complaints.
('86 Code, § 5.211) (Am. Ord. 2001-06, passed 5-21-01) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.23 FIRE HAZARD ON LOTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, tenant, occupant, person
possessing, or any other person, to permit, allow, or cause any condition,
accumulation, growth or structure, or other matter, to exist upon any lot,
building or premises so as to constitute or create a fire hazard, or to
increase the menace of fire.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief, or his authorized agents, to
notify any person of a violation of this section and to suggest proper action
or precautions. See Ordinance 92.14
   (C)   Any person who shall fail, within five days of such notice to
eliminate said fire hazard shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor.
('86 Code, § 5.212) (Am. Ord. 2001-06, passed 5-21-01) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.24 RECOVERY OF COSTS BY FEES FROM USERS OF FIRE PROTECTION AND EMERGENCY
MEDICAL SERVICES.
   (A)   Recovery of costs by fees. The owner or occupant of a structure,
vehicle, or property to which the fire department or other department of the
town provides fire suppression, emergency management services, vehicle
extrication, hazardous material mitigation, emergency medical care, or other
fire department services, (collectively referred to in this section as
“Emergency Response Services”) or any person or entity causing the need for the
fire or emergency services department to respond and/or provide any emergency
response service (the “Responsible Party”) shall pay the cost of such service.
Cost recovery fees are set forth in “Exhibit A” attached to Ordinance 2016-03,
and are hereby found to not exceed the town’s actual expense in providing such
emergency response services. The fees enacted herein apply to any services
rendered by any town department to whatever property or person, whether within
the town or if requested by any other entity, or if supplied by the town
pursuant to any interlocal cooperation agreement.
   (B)   Fees and charges. The cost recovery fees will be collected in the
amounts found in “Exhibit A” of Ordinance 2016-03, which may be revised
periodically by the adoption of a resolution by the town.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed 5-16-16)
FIREWORKS
§ 91.35 FIREWORKS PROHIBITED.
   Except as provided in this subchapter, it shall be unlawful for any person
to, within the town limits, fire, shoot, discharge, offer for sale, store,
exchange, give away, or possess any fireworks of any description.
('86 Code, § 5.501) (Am. Ord. 2014-10, passed 9-15-14) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.36 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The term "fireworks" shall not include toy paper pistol caps which
contain less than .20 grains of explosive compounds, toy pistols, toy canes,
toy guns or other devices using paper caps and the sale, and use of these items
shall be permitted at all times.
('86 Code, § 5.502)
   (B)   Nothing in this subchapter shall apply to:
      (1)   Manufacture, storage, sale or use of signals necessary for the safe
operation of railroads or other public or private transportation;
      (2)   Illumination devices for photographic use;
      (3)   Military or naval forces of the state or United States;
      (4)   Peace officers;
      (5)   Sale or use of blank cartridges for ceremonial, theatrical or
athletic events; or
      (6)   Transportation or use of fireworks solely for agricultural
purposes.
('86 Code, § 5.503) (Am. Ord. 2014-10, passed 9-15-14)
Statutory reference:
   Exceptions to fireworks regulations, see S.C. Code §§ 23-35-30, 23-35-40
§ 91.37 PUBLIC DISPLAYS.
   (A)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to prohibit the
shipping, sale, possession and use of fireworks for public displays. Such items
of fireworks which are to be used for public display only and which are
otherwise prohibited for sale and use shall include display shells designed to
be fired from mortars and display set pieces of fireworks classified by the
regulations of the Interstate Commerce Commission as "Class B Fireworks" and
shall not include such items of commercial fireworks as cherry bombs, tubular
salutes, repeating bombs, aerial bombs and torpedoes.
('86 Code, § 5.505)
   (B)   Any person desiring to hold a public display of fireworks shall first
secure from Town Council a written permit to hold such display at least ten
days prior to the date of the proposed display. No permit shall be issued to
allow any public display of fireworks at any location whereby, in the judgment
of the Council, life or property may be endangered.
('86 Code, § 5.504) (Am. Ord. 2014-10, passed 9-15-14)
Statutory reference:
   Permits for public displays, see S.C. Code § 23-35-60
§ 91.38 SALES REGULATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for persons to fire, shoot, discharge, sell,
offer for sale, exchange, give away, store or transport or have in his
possession any fireworks of any kind within the town limits, other than the
permissible fireworks enumerated in §
91.39.
   (B)   No common fireworks permitted in this subchapter shall be sold,
offered for sale, possessed, stored or used, unless they shall be properly
marked to conform to the nomenclature thereof and unless it is certified as
"Common Fireworks" on all shipping cases and by imprinting on the article to be
of sufficient size and so positioned as to be readily recognized by law
enforcement authorities and the general public.
   (C)   The retail handling, storage, use, and sale of all permissible
fireworks shall be in compliance with all federal, state, and town regulations.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the use of
signals necessary for the safe operation of railroads, buses, trucks or boats,
nor shall the provisions of this section apply to any common carrier, while
acting as such, lawfully transporting or having custody of fireworks in
interstate commerce or for delivery within the town for use as provided in this
section.
(Am. Ord. 2014-10, passed 9-15-14) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.39 PERMISSIBLE FIREWORKS.
   Permissible fireworks are those not prohibited under S.C. Code § 23-35-130
(A) and are designated as Interstate Commerce Commission "Class C Common
Fireworks." In the event that other permitted items subsequently be outlawed by
state law, they shall also be eliminated from the permitted category contained
in this subchapter.
(Ord. 2014-10, passed 9-15-14)
§ 91.40 LICENSE REQUIRED FOR SALE; SALES PROHIBITED ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall sell, order for sale, barter, or store any of the
fireworks permitted by §
91.39 without first obtaining a license from the town in an amount and on the
terms and conditions as prescribed by state law and the town business license
ordinance. The sale of permitted fireworks is absolutely prohibited on the
streets, sidewalks or other public property.
   (B)   Once a business license authorizing the sale of fireworks is obtained,
all such establishments offering fireworks for sale must prominently display
the following notice at or near where fireworks are arranged for sale: "Notice:
It is unlawful for any person to use, fire, shoot or discharge fireworks within
the corporation limits of the Town of Kingstree on any public property, public
rights-of-way, and public or private streets."
(Ord. 2014-10, passed 9-15-14)
§ 91.41 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   Within the town, it shall be unlawful to do any of the following acts:
   (A)   Offer for sale or sell a permissible firework to children under the
age of 16 years unless accompanied by a parent or guardian;
   (B)   Explode, ignite, or discharge a firework within 600 feet of any
church, hospital, asylum, or public school;
   (C)   Explode, ignite, or discharge a firework within 75 feet of where any
other firework is stored, sold, or offered for sale;
   (D)   Explode, ignite, or discharge a permissible firework within or throw a
firework from any vehicle;
   (E)   Place or throw any ignited fireworks into or at any vehicle;
   (F)   Explode, ignite, or discharge a firework in any public gathering or at
any public assemblage. Public locations or public assemblage as used in this
section, shall, in addition to the usual and accepted meaning and without in
any way limiting the comprehensive terms, include parades, parking lots used by
the general public, whether of public or private ownership, drive-ins, stores,
shopping centers, theaters, public entertainments, or public displays;
   (G)   Explode, ignite, or discharge a firework in a garage, filling station,
warehouse, storage area or any other location at which gasoline, oil, gas,
cotton, hay, or any other inflammatory material is displayed, sold, utilized,
or stored;
   (H)   Explode, ignite, or discharge a firework during a red flag alert, as
declared by the town as a drought condition or burning ban;
   (I)   Explode, ignite, or discharge a firework on property not owned or
under the control of the person exploding, igniting, or discharging the
firework, except that the owner of record may grant express permission for the
use of said property on which to explode, ignite, or discharge a firework;
   (J)   Fail to collect and safely dispose of any spent component or debris of
any exploded, ignited, or discharged firework, regardless of whether such
component or debris is on public or private property;
   (K)   Explode, ignite, or discharge a firework in violation of the town
noise regulations §
133.05; or
   (L)   Knowingly and willfully discharge a firework from, in, or into a Fire
Prohibited Zone, as defined within this subchapter.
(Ord. 2014-10, passed 9-15-14)
§ 91.42 VIOLATION OF THIS SUBCHAPTER.
   Each separate act, which is prohibited by any provision of this subchapter,
shall be punishable as a separate offense.
(Ord. 2014-10, passed 9-15-14)
§ 91.43 REVOCATION OF LICENSES FOR A VIOLATION OF THIS SUBCHAPTER.
   If a licensee violates any provision of this subchapter, all licenses of
such licensee shall be deemed forfeited and revoked, without refund of any
license fee. If the licensee has more than one outlet or establishment at which
lawful fireworks may have been authorized, a violation of any provision of this
subchapter at any one outlet or establishment shall automatically terminate the
license as to all outlets or establishments which may have been licensed to
that licensee.
(Ord. 2014-10, passed 9-15-14)
§ 91.44 SEIZURE AND DESTRUCTION OF PROHIBITED FIREWORKS.
   Any duly authorized law officer, while within the town limits, shall have
the power to seize and take in possession any fireworks which are prohibited by
any provision of this subchapter. Any such seizure must be promptly released to
the police department within the town.
(Ord. 2014-10, passed 9-15-14)
§ 91.45 PUBLIC EXHIBITIONS.
   All town-sponsored events are exempted from this subchapter. Any pyrotechnic
companies utilized for such town-sponsored events shall comply with all
federal, state, and municipal regulations for licensing, insurance, and
permits.
(Ord. 2014-10, passed 9-15-14)
§ 91.46 ALLOWABLE HOURS.
   (A)   The discharge of fireworks shall be allowed year round in the town's
limit, except as prohibited in this subchapter and regulated by the state.
   (B)   The discharge of fireworks shall have a curfew of no later than hours
of 1:00 a.m. during New Year’s Eve and New Year’s Day, and during all other
days the curfew shall be no later than 11:00 p.m.
   (C)   All town-sponsored events shall have the limited hours set and
approved by an appropriate law enforcement agency.
(Ord. 2014-10, passed 9-15-14)
§ 91.47 FIREWORKS PROHIBITED ZONE.
   (A)   The town does authorize areas to be designated as Fireworks Prohibited
Zones pursuant to S.C. Code § 23-35-175, including an extension of those Zones
onto various public properties as permitted by statutory law.
   (B)   The Town Council is vested with the responsibilities detailed in the
state statute regarding issues of public hearings, testimony, written
decisions, and any and all other ancillary matters as are mandated.
(Ord. 2014-10, passed 9-15-14)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no penalty is
otherwise specifically provided, shall be subject to the provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person violating any provisions of this subchapter or S.C. Code
Title 23, Chapter 23, or regulations promulgated by the State Fire Marshal or
the State Board of Pyrotechnic Safety is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, must be punished:
      (1)   For a first offense, by a fine of not more than $200 or
imprisonment for not more than 30 days;
      (2)   For a second offense, by a fine of not less than $500 nor more than
$2,500 or imprisonment for not less than 60 days, or both;
      (3)   For a third offense, by a fine of not less than $1,000 or
imprisonment of not less than 90 days nor more than one year, or both.
('86 Code, § 5.120)
   (C)   In addition to the above penalties in division (B), the license of any
wholesaler, jobber, or retailer must be permanently revoked upon conviction for
a third offense.
   (D)   The penalty for each violation of any provisions within §§
91.35 et seq. shall be a fine of not more than $500 or imprisonment for not
more than 30 days.
('86 Code, § 5.501) (Am. Ord. 97-30, passed 8-18-97; Am. Ord. 2014- 10, passed
9-15-14)
CHAPTER 92: HEALTH AND SANITATION
Section
General Provisions
   
92.01   Board of Health
   
92.02   Definitions
Nuisances
   
92.10   Definition of public nuisances
   
92.11   Abatement authority; refusal to abate
   
92.12   (Reserved)
   
92.13   (Reserved)
   
92.14   Notice to owner to remedy or remove condition
   
92.15   Correction or removal of conditions by town
   
92.16   Zoning Board of Appeals
   
92.17   Appeals
   
92.18   Supplemental provisions
 
   
92.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Obstructing drains, see §
94.21
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.01 BOARD OF HEALTH.
   Unless and until a formal Board of Health is appointed by Council, health
matters, generally, shall be referred to the County Board of Health.
('86 Code, § 10.101)
§ 92.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. An individual appointed by the Town Administrator
who shall have powers described in this chapter, in addition to any other
powers granted to the officer by this chapter and any other ordinance or act of
the town.
   DATE OF NOTIFICATION. Date of delivery of notice to an owner as indicated on
the return receipt or by way of affidavit of personal service.
   OFFICIAL ADDRESS FOR TAX NOTICES. The official address designated for tax
notices of an individual tax map number, as may then be held by the
Williamsburg County Treasurer.
   PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATION. The initial inquiry to determine whether an
alleged defect from compliance has a semblance of proof.
   STRUCTURE. Permanent and/or temporary property that is built by putting
parts together and that usually stands on its own.
(Ord. 2014-04, passed 5-12-14)
NUISANCES
§ 92.10 DEFINITION OF PUBLIC NUISANCES.
   (A)   Any act of any person, firm, or occupation whereby the health or life
of any individual may be endangered, injured or impaired, or which causes any
disease is hereby declared a nuisance.
   (B)   Nuisances affecting public heath. The following are hereby declared to
be nuisances affecting public health:
      (1)   All decayed or unwholesome food products or food waste not properly
contained either inside or outside for more than 24 hours before pickup.
      (2)   It shall not be lawful to accumulate on any premises or in the rear
of any store, factory, or residence, old fixtures, junk, trash, or any other
material which tends to keep such premises wet, exclude the sun and catch and
favor the accumulation of filth to render the property unsightly and unhealthy.
      (3)   All pools of stagnant water or vessels holding stagnant water in
which mosquitoes can breed excluding required retention pools.
      (4)   Swimming pools which either:
         (a)   Are empty, excluding such pools that are completely and
effectively covered; or
         (b)   Contain liquids and/or debris which are not bacteriological,
chemically or physically safe for swimming or other intended uses.
      (5)   Animal carcasses not buried or disposed of in a lawful and sanitary
manner within 24 hours after death.
      (6)   Leaking septic tanks or sewer lines or other sewage existing in an
unsanitary manner.
      (7)   Weeds or other rank growths of vegetation upon private or public
property, and all other vegetation of any wage of maturity which exceeds 18
inches in height, except for healthy trees, shrubs or plants grown in a tended
and cultivated garden or plot regardless of height, harbors, conceals or
invites rodents, pests, and vermin or deposits of refuse; gives off noxious
odors; constitutes a fire or traffic safety hazard.
      (8)   Vacant lots when such properties abut residence or public rights-
of-way, a minimum 40-foot strip shall be cleared and maintained. Where such
clearing of the 40-foot strip results in more than 50% of the lot being cut,
then the entire lot shall be required to be cut.
      (9)   Damaged or diseased limbs of trees or trees to the extent of
potential injury to the public at large due to imminent structural failure.
      (10)   Deliberate placement or discharge into any part of a storm water
drainage system of: untreated sewage, sewage solids, process wastewater,
refuse, explosive or combustible liquid, solid or gas, oil greases, industrial
water or other polluted water except where a federal, state or local permit for
connections, discharge or disposal has been obtained prior to the event; or
waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous wastes to constitute a hazard to
humans, plants or animals or to cause corrosion, discoloration or deposition on
real or personal property; or any solid or viscous substances in such
quantities or such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in the storm
water drainage system or other interference with the proper operation of the
drainage system of the city.
   (C)   Nuisances offending public decency, peace and order. The following are
hereby declared to be public nuisances affecting public decency, peace and
order when such violations are of a continual, reoccurring or constant nature;
provided, however, that no person shall be held liable or no structure shall be
declared a nuisance in the event that person does not generate, enable or
contribute to the occurrence of unlawful behavior by management policy or
practice, personal conduct, lack of control or supervision, absence or
ineffectiveness, security or other factors:
      (1)   A person who erects, establishes, continues, maintains, uses, owns,
occupies, leases, or releases any building or other place used for the purposes
of lewdness, assignation, prostitution, repeated acts of unlawful possession or
sale of controlled substances or continuous breach of the peace in this state
is guilty of a nuisance; and the building, place, or ground itself in or upon
which the lewdness, assignation, prostitution, repeated acts of unlawful
possession or sale of controlled substances, or continuous breach of the peace
is conducted, permitted, carried on, continued or exists and the furniture,
fixtures, musical instruments and moveable property used in conducting or
maintaining the nuisance also are declared a nuisance and shall be enjoined and
abated as provided in this chapter.
      (2)   Any structure, whether commercial or residential, where gambling
devices, slot machines, punch boards, or other such contrivances of similar
character involving any elements of chance as consideration or any type of
gambling, bookmaking, wagering or betting is carried on and all gambling
equipment, except where such specific form of gambling is permitted by
applicable law.
      (3)   Any structure, whether commercial or residential, where
intoxicating liquors are manufactured, sold, bartered, or given away in
violation of federal, state or local law or where intoxicating liquors kept for
sale, barter or distribution in violation of federal, state or local law and
all liquors, bottles, kegs, pumps, bars and other property kept at and used for
maintaining such a place.
      (4)   Any structure, whether a commercial operation or a residential use,
where breaches of the peace, disorderly conduct or offenses against the person
found in S.C. Code Chapter 3, Title 16, offenses against the person found in
Chapter 133 of this code, in the town occur with such disproportionate
frequency when compared to frequency of law enforcement action required at
other similarly situated structures or where the intensity of law enforcement
response, when required, is disproportionate to the intensity of response
required at other similarly situated structures. After notice of the continuing
nature of the nuisance and specific identification of the facts and
circumstances that either generate, enable, or contribute to the nuisance, the
owner, lessee, renter, management or the person in control, may be held
responsible for the maintenance of a public nuisance and the structure declared
a public nuisance.
         (a)   For purposes of division (C)(4) of this section only, a
COMMERCIAL OPERATION is defined as an activity in which goods or services are
exchanged for money or barter, or the rental or lease of accommodations for any
length of time less than 30 days; a RESIDENTIAL USE is defined as single family
residences or multifamily residences; it is the intent of this section that
commercial operations shall be held responsible for factors which generate,
enable or contribute to the requirement of frequent or intensive law
enforcement action due to a management policy or practice, personal conduct,
lack of control or supervision, absence or ineffectiveness of security or other
factors. When such a management policy or practice, personal conduct, lack of
control or supervision, absence or ineffectiveness of security or other factors
are identified by law enforcement as generating, enabling or contributing to
the disproportionate need for frequent or intensive law enforcement action,
notice shall be provided to the commercial operation. Such notice shall
identify with particularity the management policy or practice, personal
conduct, lack of control or supervision, absence or ineffectiveness of security
or other factors that are generating, enabling or contributing to the frequency
and intensity of unlawful behavior and that further occurrence may result in
declaration of a public nuisance. If, after notice, the management policy or
practice, personal conduct, lack of control or supervision, absence or
ineffectiveness of security or other factors that are generating, enabling or
contributing to the frequency and intensity of unlawful behavior are not
changed or modified, the owner, lessees, renter, management or the person in
control, may be held responsible for the maintenance of a public nuisance and
the structure declared a public nuisance.
         (b)   For purposes of division (C)(4) of this section only, a
RESIDENTIAL USE is defined as any residence in which a family or individual or
individuals reside for a period exceeding 30 days. It is the intent of this
section that owners, lessees or renters of the property shall be held
responsible for the conduct of the residents, invitees or guests that generate,
enable or contribute to the requirement of frequent or intensive law
enforcement action. When conduct is identified by law enforcement as
generating, enabling or contributing to the disproportionate need for frequent
or intensive law enforcement action, notice shall be provided to the owner,
lessee or renter. Such notice shall identify with particularity the conduct
that is generating, enabling or contributing to the frequency and intensity of
unlawful behavior and that further occurrences may result in the declaration of
a public nuisance. If, after notice, the conduct that is generating, enabling
or contributing to the frequency and intensity of unlawful behavior is not
changed or modified, the owner, lessee, renter, management or the person in
control may be held responsible for the maintenance of a public nuisance and
the structure declared a public nuisance.
   (D)   Nuisances affecting public welfare and safety. The following are
declared to be public nuisance affecting public welfare and safety:
      (1)   All trees, hedges, signs or other obstructions or any portion of
the same, so located on private property which prevent persons driving vehicles
approaching an intersection of streets from having a clear, safe view of
traffic approaching such intersection pursuant to the town zoning ordinance and
subdivision regulations;
      (2)   All trees, hedges, signs or other obstructions or any portion of
the same so located on private property which prevent the clear and
unobstructed view of a fire hydrant, fire department or other fire protection
device or directional or identification signage pertaining to the above from a
public way;
      (3)   Any obstruction, erosion or depression which poses a potential
hazard to vehicles or pedestrians using a right-of-way on private property
where the public is invited or permitted to traverse for commercial purposes;
      (4)   Any wires, strings, ropes, lighting contrivances over streets,
alley or public grounds, which are not authorized or permitted by the city or
which are strung so that the lowest portion is less than 13-1/2 feet above the
surface of the ground;
      (5)   All explosives, flammable liquids and other dangerous substances
stored in any manner, in any amount other than that manner or amount permitted
by law;
      (6)   Any hanging signs, awnings, canopies and other similar structures
over the streets or sidewalks so situated or constructed as to endanger public
safety or to be contrary to this code;
      (7)   Any motor vehicle that is unregistered, inoperable, derelict or
abandoned on any highway or right-of-way or other public or private property,
unless such vehicle is stored inside of a building; or
      (8)   Any abandoned or discarded icebox, refrigerator, ice chest or other
type of air-tight container whose door, lid or other closing device has not
been removed.
   (E)   Nuisances affecting public economy. The following are declared public
nuisances affecting the public economy:
      (1)   All structures including signs that bear graffiti;
      (2)   All structures including signs with the majority of the surface in
need of painting, re-lettering due to flaky, fading, cracking or other
conditions that make it unsightly; and
      (3)   All signs that do not apply to a currently licensed and operating
business.
('86 Code, § 10.201) (Ord. 2004-02, passed 3-15-04; Am. Ord. 2008-05, passed 3-
17-08)
§ 92.11 ABATEMENT AUTHORITY; REFUSAL TO ABATE.
   (A)   The Town Council or Code Enforcement Officer may declare as nuisances
such things, the existence of which may be deemed unhealthy or harmful to the
citizens, and such nuisances shall be abated pursuant to directions to the
following sections. ('86 Code, § 10.202)
   (B)   Any person refusing or neglecting to abate a nuisance, after having
been directed to do so, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. ('86 Code, § 10.203)
(Ord. 2004-02, passed 3-15-04; Am. Ord. 2014-04, passed 5-12-14) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.12 (RESERVED)
§ 92.13 (RESERVED)
§ 92.14 NOTICE TO OWNER TO REMEDY OR REMOVE CONDITION.
   (A)   Whenever it appears that any property owner is in violation of a
provision in this subchapter, as evaluated upon preliminary investigation by
the Code Enforcement Officer, the owner of such premises shall be notified
personally by the Code Enforcement Officer or by certified mail return receipt
requested at the official address for tax notices to correct the condition. In
the event personal service cannot be made or the owner's official address for
tax notices is unknown, such notice shall be given by publication at least two
times within 15 consecutive days in a local newspaper of general circulation.
   (B)   If the corrective action demanded in the notice has not been fully
completed within 15 days of the date of notification, the owner of the premises
shall be fined in accordance with §
92.99.
(Ord. 2001-07, passed 6-18-01; Am. Ord. 2004-02, passed 3-15-04; Am. Ord. 2008-
05, passed 3-17-08; Am. Ord. 2014-04, passed 5-12-14) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.15 CORRECTION OR REMOVAL OF CONDITIONS BY TOWN.
   In the event any owner of any lot or premises, upon which a condition
described in this subchapter exists, fails to remedy the condition within 15
days after notification, the town may, in its own discretion, do such work or
make improvements as are necessary to correct, remedy, remove such condition or
cause the same to be done, paid therefor and charge the expenses incurred
thereby to any and all owners of such lot, in joint and severable liability for
any and all expenses incurred. The doing of such work shall not relieve such
person from prosecution or failure to comply with such notice. Such expenses
shall be assessed against the lot or real estate upon which the work was done
or the improvements made. The expenses shall be added to the annual tax levied
on the property and shall be collected in the same manner as the annual
property tax.
('86 Code, § 10.208) (Am. Ord. 2001-07, passed 6-18-01; Am. Ord. 2004-02,
passed 3-15-04; Am. Ord. 2008-05, passed 3-17-08; Am. Ord. 2014-04, passed 5-
12-14) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Ordinances related to upkeep of property, see S.C. Code § 5-7-80
§ 92.16 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.
   (A)   Appeals from the decision of the Code Enforcement Officer shall be to
the Zoning Board of Appeals.
   (B)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have all of the powers granted to
the Code Enforcement Officer herein and may carry out its orders through its
own actions or those of the Code Enforcement Officer or other officers and
agents as it may designate.
(Ord. 2014-04, passed 5-12-14)
§ 92.17 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person receiving an order from the Code Enforcement Officer,
within 15 days following the date of the notice, enter an appeal in writing to
the Zoning Board of Appeals. The appeal shall state the location of the
property, the date of the notice of violations and the number of the notice.
The appellant shall state the variance or modification requested, the reasons
therefor and the hardship and/or conditions upon which the appeal is made. No
appeal filed later than 15 days after the date of the notice shall be acted
upon by the Board, unless the Code Enforcement Officer shall consent thereto.
   (B)   (1)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall notify the appellant at least
seven days in advance of the date set for the hearing set on the appeal stating
the time and place of the hearing. The Board may consider any matter contained
in the record of the Code Enforcement Officer and may take any additional
testimony that may be offered by the appellant or the Code Enforcement Officer.
After the hearing on appeal, the Board shall report its findings of fact in
support of its determination on the issues, which may affirm, modify or reject
the findings of fact, determinations and orders of the Code Enforcement
Officer, and shall cause such to be served upon the appellant owner.
      (2)   The Board may establish its own rules of procedure, provided the
rules are not in conflict with this chapter or the laws of the state. The rules
of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in
appeals or hearings before the Board.
   (C)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall not take any action on an order
issued by him until after the 15-day period for the owner to appeal to the
Zoning Board of Appeals. An appeal to the Board shall operate a stay of the
order of the Code Enforcement Officer until the appeal is heard and the Board
has issued its order.
   (D)   Any person affected by this chapter shall have the right to appeal
from the Zoning Board of Appeals to a state court of competent jurisdiction
within 30 days after the Board's decision. Any order of the Board shall state
that the owner has the right to appeal to a state court of competent
jurisdiction as provided in this section. The Code Enforcement Officer shall,
from the time an appeal is made and one issue is resolved, stay any further
action on his part with regard to the structure and/or property in question.
   (E)   All requests for appeal shall be accompanied by payment of $100 to
cover the costs associated with such hearing.
(Ord. 2014-04, passed 5-12-14)
§ 92.18 SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not abrogate the powers of any other
department of the town or repeal any criminal ordinance but shall be in
addition to and is supplemental to any other provision of this code and any
other ordinances of the town and/or state. The procedures enumerated in this
chapter shall be the procedures followed in dealing with the structures and/or
property, the provisions of any previously adopted standard structure code
notwithstanding.
(Ord. 2014-04, passed 5-12-14)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be found guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or by
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 30 days, or both; provided, however
that no penalty shall exceed the penalty provided by state law for similar
offenses. Each day any violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate
violation per offense, per day.
(Ord. 2014-04, passed 5-12-14)
CHAPTER 93: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
General Provisions
   
93.01   Definition
   
93.02   Times when parks to be open and closed
Conduct in Parks
   
93.15   Injuring park property
   
93.16   Leaving trash in park
   
93.17   Handbills or advertising
   
93.18   Sales in parks
   
93.19   Intoxicating liquors; disorderly conduct
   
93.20   Glass containers prohibited
   
93.21   Motor vehicle traffic regulated
   
93.22   Regulations for watercraft use in Black River
Statutory reference:
   Municipal park regulations, see S.C. Code §§ 51-15-20, 51-15-30
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 93.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PUBLIC PARK shall be construed to refer to municipally owned or municipally
maintained parks, whether located wholly within, wholly without, or partly
within and partly without, the corporate limits.
('86 Code, § 12.101)
§ 93.02 TIMES WHEN PARKS TO BE OPEN AND CLOSED.
   The hours of operation for all town parks, with the exception of the J.
Russell Kellahan Recreation Center, including the recreation path leading from
Brooks Street into the recreation center, shall operate from sunup to sundown
and no person shall be present or utilize any of the parks from the time the
sun goes down until the time the sun comes up the next morning except for
scheduled activities at the J. Russell Kellahan Recreation Center or by written
permission from the town.
(Ord. 2010-04, passed 5-17-10; Am. Ord. 2015-06, passed 7-20-15)
CONDUCT IN PARKS
§ 93.15 INJURING PARK PROPERTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to break, pluck, walk, step on or
in any way injure or destroy any shrub, flower or bush, or to dig, uproot, tear
up or injure any sod or grass in any public park, or to walk, drive, sit or
stand upon any space or area in such public park where a "keep off" sign has
been posted.
('86 Code, § 12.102)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to write on, carve, cut, deface,
injure or break any part of any building, grandstand or other structure, or any
chair, seats, etc., in any public park.
('86 Code, § 12.103) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.16 LEAVING TRASH IN PARK.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, leave or permit to be
deposited or left in any public park any trash, paper, box, can, bottle, food
fragments or other unsightly substance, except in receptacles provided
especially for that purpose, or to dump or throw any trash, stones, bottles,
food fragments or refuse of any kind in any lake, stream, swimming pool or
fountain in any such park.
('86 Code, § 12.104) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.17 HANDBILLS OR ADVERTISING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect any bill posters or to post,
tack up or otherwise display any bills or advertising signs, or to distribute
handbills in any public park.
('86 Code, § 12.105) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.18 SALES IN PARKS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, except such as may have a permit or
concession from the Council, to sell or offer for sale within any public park
any cold drinks, fruits, eatables, cigars, tobacco or other merchandise.
('86 Code, § 12.106) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.19 INTOXICATING LIQUORS; DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry into any public park any
intoxicating liquors, to drink the same therein, or to be therein under the
influence of intoxicants, or to use any profane, vulgar or indecent language,
or to commit any nuisance, or to engage in any unseemly, obnoxious or
disorderly conduct, or to engage in any game of chance, or in betting or
wagering in any such park.
('86 Code, § 12.107) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.20 GLASS CONTAINERS PROHIBITED.
   No glass containers of any kind or description shall be permitted in any of
the parks, playgrounds or recreational facilities owned or operated by the
town.
(Ord. 89-3, passed 3-7-89) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.21 MOTOR VEHICLE TRAFFIC REGULATED.
   It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle to be driven in any public park
at a greater rate of speed than fixed by traffic signs erected therein, nor
shall any such vehicle be parked in any of the driveways without being drawn
well to the right, so as not to impeded obstruct or interfere with the free
passage on such driveway of other vehicles and traffic. At night, both moving
and parked motor vehicles shall be provided with adequate lights, front and
rear.
('86 Code, § 12.108) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.22 REGULATIONS FOR WATERCRAFT USE IN BLACK RIVER.
   The town does hereby adopt the most current resolutions of the S.C. Wildlife
and Marine Resources Department providing regulations for use of watercraft in
Black River, a copy of which is incorporated herein by reference.
(Res. 89-4, passed 5-15-89)
CHAPTER 94: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
   
94.01   Control over maintenance and construction
   
94.02   Maintenance of new streets
   
94.03   Street names; changes, new streets
   
94.04   Regulations concerning picketing, demonstrations and parades
Prohibited Acts
   
94.15   Damaging, breaking public property
   
94.16   Doors and gates opening onto sidewalks
   
94.17   Draining rain water, oil or other liquids on sidewalks or streets
   
94.18   Throwing glass, nails or dangerous substances on streets or sidewalks
   
94.19   Vehicles leaking or scattering load
   
94.20   Vehicles prohibited on sidewalks
   
94.21   Obstructing drains and watercourses
   
94.22   Obstructing vision at street intersections
   
94.23   Hauling certain materials over streets
   
94.24   Blocking streets and sidewalks
   
94.25   Interference with streets and sidewalks
   
94.26   Building materials laid on public places; protection by barricades
   
94.27   Use of streets or sidewalks for sales of merchandise
Excavations
   
94.40   Excavation permit required
   
94.41   Danger signals required; restoration of excavation
   
94.42   Failure of excavation
   
94.43   Removal of danger signals
Cross-reference:
   Spitting on sidewalks, see §
133.11
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 94.01 CONTROL OVER MAINTENANCE AND CONSTRUCTION.
   The Council shall approve the construction and maintenance of streets and
shall employ such number of persons to work on the streets as may be needed.
('86 Code, § 15.101)
§ 94.02 MAINTENANCE OF NEW STREETS.
   When any application is made to the Council to assume the maintenance of any
proposed new street, the following requirements shall be met:
   (A)   The required right-of-way shall be furnished.
   (B)   Plans and profiles for the proposed street shall be submitted to the
Council for review and approval.
   (C)   When plans and profiles are approved by the Council, the applicant
shall cause the street to be constructed to line and grade, the necessary
drainage structures installed and adequate inlet and outlet ditches constructed
in a manner approved by Council. The approved construction plans shall be
submitted to the Council at the time the request is made to accept the street
for maintenance.
('86 Code, § 15.102)
§ 94.03 STREET NAMES; CHANGES, NEW STREETS.
   (A)   Requests for street name changes shall be made in writing to the Town
Manager. For requests that the naming or renaming be in honor of an individual,
the individual should be one of preeminence within the Kingstree community.
Special consideration may be given to honoring those individuals who are
deceased. At the next regular Council meeting after a 30-day review period the
Manager shall provide the Council with a list of approved names for their
consideration. This change will require two readings which shall be held at
regular Council meetings, unless in the opinion of Council, time constraints
warrant special meetings for this purpose. Nothing herein is to be construed to
limit the authority of the Council to request any information it deems
pertinent, act upon any request without regard to this procedure, initiate any
naming of any existing unnamed street or renaming of any existing named street,
or forgoing the list of recommended names and choosing any other name it deems
appropriate.
   (B)   Requests for the naming of newly constructed streets shall be in
accordance with the procedure as outlined in division (A) above.
   (C)   No street within the town limits shall be named or renamed if there
exists within a five-mile radius of city center another street so likewise
named. For purposes of this section, city center shall be defined as the
intersection of Main and Academy.
(Ord. 94-6, passed 6-29-94)
§ 94.04 REGULATIONS CONCERNING PICKETING, DEMONSTRATIONS AND PARADES.
   It shall be unlawful to picket, parade or march unless a permit to perform
such actions has been secured. To secure a permit, those desiring same shall
make application duly signed by the individual organizer or by an officer of
the organization and submit it to the Municipal Clerk, for subsequent approval
by the Town Manager, between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. of each work
day. A permit may be issued three days thereafter, excluding the date the
application is submitted. Any permit denied by the Town Manager shall
automatically be referred to the Town Council for its approval or disapproval
as expeditiously as possible. The application shall state the time, duration,
purpose, the area in which said picketing parading or marching will occur and
the individual, group of individuals or organization directing and responsible
for said picketing parading or marching. When picketing or engaging in
"demonstrations," no person shall:
   (A)   Use on the streets or public places any verbal abuse, including
curses, insults or threats which are likely to cause an imminent breach of the
peace, or acts of violence, directed against any person.
   (B)   March, parade, protest or picket in any manner other than as permitted
by this section, except with the express written consent and approval of the
Council.
   (C)   Engage in riotous and loud conduct which invades the privacy of homes
or businesses.
   (D)   Damage, destroy or injure the person or property of others.
   (E)   Block, in any manner, the streets and means of ingress and egress to
places of business.
   (F)   Interfere with, in any manner, or obstruct any official in the
performance of his duties.
   (G)   Interfere in any manner with the attendance, during school hours, of
children in the public schools, by inciting or urging them to participate in
demonstrations or for any other unlawful purpose or reason.
   (H)   Picket other than in accordance with the following principles:
      (1)   In a manner so as not to interfere with pedestrians or vehicular
traffic.
      (2)   In a manner so as not to block entrances or exits to or from
picketed establishments.
      (3)   No more than four pickets posted at any one time at any one
business establishment.
      (4)   No picket trespassing upon the property of the business
establishment being picketed.
   (I)   "Demonstrate," other than in accordance with the following principles:
      (1)   Observe all traffic-control devices.
      (2)   Walking close to the building line or curb so as not to interfere
with or obstruct other pedestrian traffic on the sidewalk.
('86 Code, § 14.411) (Am. Ord. 89-5, passed 6-19-89; Am. Ord. 97-25, passed 8-
18-97) Penalty, see §
10.99
PROHIBITED ACTS
§ 94.15 DAMAGING, BREAKING PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, mutilate or deface any
public property within the corporate limits, including burning of leaves or
other matter injurious to asphalt pavements.
('86 Code, § 15.201)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to break any lamp or electric
light or to remove any electric light bulb or otherwise tamper with street
lights.
('86 Code, § 15.208)
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to break or destroy the curbing of
any street, to otherwise deface the same or to construct any entrance into
property on any of the paved streets, unless such person shall have first
obtained a permit in writing so to do from the Council.
('86 Code, § 15.209)
Statutory reference:
   Repair of streets, bridges and the like, see S.C. Code § 5-27-120
§ 94.16 DOORS AND GATES OPENING ONTO SIDEWALKS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation to maintain any door or
gate upon his premises so as to swing across or into any sidewalk or street,
except as provided in §
112.01 of this code.
('86 Code, § 15.202) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.17 DRAINING RAIN WATER, OIL OR OTHER LIQUIDS ON SIDEWALKS OR STREETS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to build, construct, erect or
maintain a house or building of any description in such manner that rain water
may flow from the roof, eaves, cornices, gutters or other part thereof, down
any sidewalk or street so as to cause holes, depressions unevenness gullies or
other defect or damage to such sidewalk or street.
('86 Code, § 15.203)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit water, oil or other
liquid of any kind, from any store, residence or other building, to fall or
flow upon any part of any street or sidewalk; provided that sprinkling of a
street to lay dust is not hereby forbidden.
('86 Code, § 15.204) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.18 THROWING GLASS, NAILS OR DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES ON STREETS OR SIDEWALKS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or place on any of the streets
or sidewalks any glass in any shape or form, tin cans, nails, brick, pieces of
iron, sticks or any other substance likely to injure any person, animal or
vehicle thereon.
('86 Code, § 15.205) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Putting foreign substances oh highways, see S.C. Code § 57-7-20
§ 94.19 VEHICLES LEAKING OR SCATTERING LOAD.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of every vehicle employed in
removing or carrying any dirt, sawdust, sand, coal or any other material liable
to be blown by the wind or fall by gravity or any manure or filth or offensive
matter of any kind or description along or over any public street, to fail to
keep the same in such tight and secure condition that such matter shall not be
scattered or suffered to fall on any such streets.
('86 Code, § 15.206) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.20 VEHICLES PROHIBITED ON SIDEWALKS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, propel or park any automobile,
motorcycle, wheelbarrow, handcart or other vehicle upon any sidewalk, except as
may be necessary in entering or leaving the premises or buildings. This section
shall not apply to children under the age of 12 years who may ride bicycles and
tricycles on residential sidewalks, other than in the Main Business District,
at a speed less than 15 miles per hour.
('86 Code, § 15.207) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.21 OBSTRUCTING DRAINS AND WATERCOURSES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to obstruct, or cause to be
obstructed, any drains, ditches or water courses within the corporate limits.
Every person owning, controlling or in possession of land, through which or
through part of which a stream, ditch, gully or any natural drain runs, shall
keep the bed of same free from obstructions. They shall not allow any growth of
weeds or shrubbery on or along the banks thereof which will prevent sunlight
from entering therein. When overflows or floods form pools or "back waters"
therein, they shall be promptly drained.
('86 Code, § 15.210) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.22 OBSTRUCTING VISION AT STREET INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   On corner lots there shall be no obstruction to vision between a
height of two feet and a height of ten feet measured above the average
elevation of the existing surfaces of the intersecting streets at their center
lines, within the area formed by joining points on the property lines, measured
as follows:
      (1)   On property lines abutting streets 50 feet or less in right-of-way
width, the points on the property lines shall be not less than 25 feet from the
lot corner.
      (2)   On property lines abutting streets more than 50 feet in right-of-
way width, the points on the property lines shall be 50 feet from the lot
corner.
   This restriction shall not apply to buildings in business districts.
('86 Code, § 15.211)
   (B)   Whenever it shall be determined by Council that there exists on any
privately owned property, located at any street intersection, any tree, bush,
shrubbery, plant, fence or other obstruction which obstructs the view of
pedestrians or vehicular traffic, interferes with the safe and orderly movement
of traffic or creates a dangerous condition, the owner and occupant of such
property shall, within ten days after official written notice, remove such
obstruction. Any such owner or occupant who shall fail or refuse to remove any
such obstruction shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
('86 Code, § 15.212)
   (C)   If any such property owner shall fail or refuse to remove any such
obstruction, after written notice to do so, as provided above, the costs of
such removal shall be charged to the property owner. It shall be a lien on such
property and shall be added to and be payable with the taxes on such property.
('86 Code, § 15.213)
§ 94.23 HAULING CERTAIN MATERIALS OVER STREETS.
   No person shall haul round logs, pulpwood logs, lumber, crossties or barrels
over or upon any street unless they shall be safely and securely fastened, with
chains, on such vehicle. The links of such chain shall be made of material of
not less dimension than one-half inch in diameter.
('86 Code, § 15.214) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.24 BLOCKING STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place any obstruction upon or cause
to be obstructed in any manner any street, sidewalk, public way or part
thereof, so as to render the passage of persons, vehicles or other travel
thereon difficult, inconvenient, dangerous or impossible except as otherwise
provided in this chapter; provided, that this section shall not apply to any
employee of the municipality, county or state while such employee is
immediately and actively engaged in the maintenance, improvement or
construction of utilities, street, sidewalk or public way.
('86 Code, § 15.215) (Am. Ord. 97-8, passed 8-18-97) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.25 INTERFERENCE WITH STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to close or in any manner interfere with
the free use of any public street or thoroughfare, sidewalk or alley without
the previous written consent of the Council.
('86 Code, § 14.315) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.26 BUILDING MATERIALS LAID ON PUBLIC PLACES; PROTECTION BY BARRICADES.
   (A)   Building materials shall not be laid on any sidewalk, street or public
place unless official permission is first obtained. It shall be the duty of the
person desiring so to use the streets thusly to obtain permission to lay such
material thereon, and otherwise to obstruct such places for the purpose of
erecting a building adjoining said street, where some obstruction thereof is
necessary, to estimate what space will be needed and for what length of time
the obstruction will be necessary. Official permission may be given
accordingly, imposing then and from time to time such reasonable conditions as
may be considered necessary or proper for the protection of the public and
public property.
('86 Code, § 15.216)
   (B)   While the obstructions provided for in this chapter remain on the
streets, sidewalks or other public places suitable safeguard by day and by
night shall be maintained by the contractor, owner or person in charge of the
work, for the protection of the public by roping off using lanterns and other
proper means.
('86 Code, § 15.217) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.27 USE OF STREETS OR SIDEWALKS FOR SALES OF MERCHANDISE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to sell,
solicit sales or offer for distribution any merchandise, publications,
handbill, or pamphlet while such person is standing in the street, areas
reserved for parking spaces, the areas reserved for loading and unloading or to
enter any of the said areas for the purpose of sale and/or delivery of any said
items.
('86 Code, § 18.505)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any merchant to display merchandise on the
sidewalks in such manner as to block more than one-half of the sidewalk, it
being the intent of Council that at least one-half of the sidewalk in front of
the premises of any business shall be free for the flow of traffic unhindered
by any display of merchandise.
('86 Code, § 15.218) Penalty, see §
10.99
EXCAVATIONS
§ 94.40 EXCAVATION PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to cut or excavate
a street or sidewalk in the corporate limits without having first obtained a
permit therefor from the town or the South Carolina Department of Highways and
Public Transportation, except in a bona fide urgency situation.
('86 Code, § 15.301)
Statutory reference:
   S.C. Code § 5-7-30
§ 94.41 DANGEROUS SIGNALS REQUIRED; RESTORATION OF EXCAVATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any trench, ditch or
excavation in any street, sidewalk or public place to remain open without a
sufficient number of lights or other safety devices properly displayed around
same as danger signals to prevent accidents to persons or property. Adequate
lights shall be displayed at night.
('86 Code, § 15.304)
   (B)   Any such cut or excavation shall be restored according to the
standards of the Department of Highways and Public Transportation within a
period of 24 hours. Special consideration may be granted by the town or said
department due to extreme weather conditions, upon request.
('86 Code, § 15.302) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.42 FAILURE OF EXCAVATION.
   In the event that said repair should sink or give away within one year, it
promptly shall be repaired by the person, firm, or corporation making the
original cut or excavation within 72 hours of being notified by the town and/or
said department.
('86 Code, § 15.303)
§ 94.43 REMOVAL OF DANGER SIGNALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or extinguish any warning
device or light which may be placed as a signal during daylight hours, or at
night, to warn persons of danger from ditches, trenches, building materials,
scaffolds, excavations impediments or obstacles of any description whatsoever.
('86 Code, § 15.305) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 95: TREES
Section
Public Trees
   
95.01   Title
   
95.02   Purpose
   
95.03   Objectives
   
95.04   Benefits of trees
   
95.05   Applicability
   
95.06   Administration
   
95.07   Definitions
   
95.08   Tree committee
   
95.09   Tree City USA
   
95.10   Tree inventory
   
95.11   Annual work plan
   
95.12   Public tree maintenance standards
   
95.13   Establishment
   
95.14   Maintenance
   
95.15   Protection
   
95.16   Removal
   
95.17   Damage to public trees
   
95.18   Enforcement
   
95.19   Emergencies
 
   
95.99   Violations; penalty
PUBLIC TREES
§ 95.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Town of Kingstree Tree
Ordinance.”
(Ord. 2014-01, passed 3-17-14) 
§ 95.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies, regulations, and
standards for the management of public trees within the town limits. Public
tree management shall include, but not be limited to, tree establishment,
maintenance, protection, and removal.
(Ord. 2014-01, passed 3-17-14)
§ 95.03 OBJECTIVES.
   The objectives of public tree management shall be to maximize the functional
benefits of trees while minimizing the costs of management. The objectives of
this chapter shall be as listed below:
   (A)   Maintain the town's tree canopy cover at or above its current level;
   (B)   Maintain and improve community character;
   (C)   Enhance the aesthetic appearance of the landscape; and
   (D)   Provide direction and support to tree management.
(Ord. 2014-01, passed 3-17-14)
§ 95.04 BENEFITS OF TREES.
   Trees provide many environmental, social, and economic benefits that
include, but are not limited to, the following:
   (A)   Trees produce oxygen and absorb carbon dioxide, thereby reducing air
pollution and improving air quality;
   (B)   Trees filter out dust, particulate matter, and airborne pollutants,
thereby improving air quality;
   (C)   Trees intercept precipitation, thereby reducing storm water runoff and
improving water quality;
   (D)   Tree roots hold the soil, thereby reducing soil erosion and
sedimentation and improving water quality;
   (E)   Trees provide shade and cooling and provide windbreaks, thereby
reducing energy usage and air conditioning and heating costs;
   (F)   Trees provide wildlife food and habitat;
   (G)   Trees buffer different land uses to eliminate or minimize nuisances
such as dust, litter, noise, glare, signs, and unsightly buildings or parking
areas;
   (H)   Trees improve public health by reducing stress, encouraging exercise,
calming traffic, decreasing illness recovery times, reducing crime and domestic
violence, and improving concentration;
   (I)   Trees attract residents, visitors, commerce and industry to the town
and increase the value and marketability of property; and
   (J)   Trees beautify the town and protect and enhance the quality of life.
(Ord. 2014-01, passed 3-17-14)
§ 95.05 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all public trees, as
described herein. Some provisions of this chapter shall apply to trees located
on private property under specific and limited circumstances.
   (B)   Public trees shall include all trees growing on town-owned or
controlled property within the South Carolina Department of Transportation
street rights-of-way, in parks, in cemeteries, around public facilities, and on
all other town-maintained properties within the town limits.
(Ord. 2014-01, passed 3-17-14)
§ 95.06 ADMINISTRATION.
   The Town Manager or his/her designee shall be responsible for the
administration of all provisions of this chapter and for public tree
management. The street and other departments within the Town of Kingstree shall
support the Zoning Department in all tree management activities.
(Ord. 2014-01, passed 3-17-14)
§ 95.07 DEFINITIONS.
   As used within this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set
forth in this section. The word "shall" as used in this chapter is mandatory
and not merely directory.
   CERTIFIED ARBORIST. An individual who has passed the International Society
of Arboriculture's Certified Arborist examination, is designated as a Certified
Arborist by said organization, and maintains such designation through attending
at least 30 hours of qualifying continuing education within each three-year
certification period.
   CRITICAL ROOT ZONE. A more or less circular area on the ground equivalent to
a circle around the trunk with a radius equivalent to one foot for every one
inch in the dbh.
   CROWN. The upper portion of a tree that contains the large scaffold limbs,
branches, twigs, and leaves.
   DBH. Diameter of the tree trunk at breast height, four and a half feet above
the ground.
   DRIPLINE. A vertical line that extends down at the point of the greatest
extent of the tree's branches.
   ESTABLISHMENT. The selection, placement, planting, and maintenance of new
trees in the landscape. The minimum period of time required for establishing
trees is generally considered to be three years.
   HAZARD TREE. A tree that is at risk for failure, either whole or in part,
with the part large enough to cause damage, and there exists within the falling
distance of the tree or tree part a target, such as people, buildings,
vehicles, or hardscape.
   MAINTENANCE. Routine, periodic, or occasional activities directed at
maintaining or improving a tree's health and condition. Maintenance activities
include but are not limited to mulching, pruning, irrigation, fertilization,
pest control, cabling and bracing, and lightning protection system
installation.
   PROTECTION. The active or passive protection of a tree's roots, trunk, and
crown for the purpose of avoiding damage to these living structures and
maintaining tree health and structural integrity.
   PRUNING. The deliberate removal of tree branches for a specific purpose,
i.e. young tree training, deadwood removal, utility line, traffic, or
pedestrian clearance, or correcting structural defects.
   REMOVAL. The cutting of a tree at ground line to remove the tree's trunk and
crown. The tree stump and roots may or may not be removed along with the trunk
and crown.
   ROOTS. The below ground portion of a tree that includes large, woody support
roots and small, non-woody, fibrous "feeder" roots. Roots are generally located
within the top 18 inches of soil and extend out from the trunk two to three
times the width of the crown.
   TOPPING. The improper removal of tree limbs with cuts made between nodes;
also known as "tipping," "heading," and "shearing."
   TREE. A woody perennial plant, generally with a single trunk but sometimes
with multiple trunks, with the potential to attain a mature size of at least
three inches in trunk diameter at four and a half feet above the ground and a
height of at least 15 feet.
   TRUNK. The main woody stem of a tree that supports the crown and functions
in the transport of water, nutrients, and carbohydrates from the crown to the
roots and the roots to the crown.
(Ord. 2014-01, passed 3-17-14)
§ 95.08 TREE COMMITTEE.
   (A)   Name. A tree board shall be created and shall be known as the
"Kingstree Beautification Committee."
   (B)   Members.  The Beautification Committee shall have nine members,
citizens and residents of the town, approved by the Mayor and Town Council. One
advisory, nonvoting staff member shall be appointed in addition to the nine
members.
   (C)   Quorum. A quorum shall consist of five voting members. The
Beautification Committee shall take no action in the absence of a quorum.
   (D)   Compensation. The Beautification Committee members shall serve without
compensation. The town, upon receipt of appropriate receipts and documentation,
shall reimburse reasonable expenses incurred by members and approved by the
Committee.
   (E)   Term of office. The term of office for the Beautification Committee
members shall be at the pleasure of the Town Council. Members may serve no more
than two terms.
   (F)   Officers, regulations, and proceedings. The Beautification Committee
shall elect a Chairman, Vice-Chairman, and Secretary. The Beautification
Committee shall make its own rules and regulations above and beyond those
listed herein, shall keep minutes of its meetings, shall keep records of its
activities through correspondence, photographs, articles, and written
summaries.
      (1)   Chairman.  The Chairman shall be elected by members of the
Beautification Committee and shall serve a term of one year. The Chairman shall
be responsible for setting each meeting's agenda and for conducting the
meetings.
      (2)   Vice-Chairman.  The Vice-Chairman shall be elected by the members
of the Beautification Committee and shall serve a term of one year. In the
absence of the Chairman, the Vice-Chairman shall carry out the responsibilities
of the Chairman.
      (3)   Secretary. The Secretary shall be elected by the members of the
Beautification Committee and shall serve a term of one year.
   (G)   Responsibilities generally. The responsibilities of the Beautification
Committee shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   Advise the town in all tree-related matters;
      (2)   Serve as a source of information about proper tree maintenance
techniques and community tree management policies;
      (3)   Make recommendations for public tree establishment, maintenance,
protection, and removal;
      (4)   Investigate and apply for donations and grant funding from public
and private sources for community forestry related projects;
      (5)   Provide regular community tree care educational programs and
information about the value of trees and proper tree maintenance to town staff
and citizens;
      (6)   Review this chapter and provide recommendations for changes to the
Planning and Zoning Department and in turn to Town Council at least every two
years;
      (7)   Promote and support the Tree City USA program; and
      (8)   Prepare an annual report to the City Council that includes the past
year's accomplishments and planned activities.
   (H)    Meetings. The Beautification Committee shall meet monthly. Special
meetings may be held in addition to the regular meetings. At least seven days
public notice shall be given in the local newspaper prior to each regularly
scheduled or special meeting. Members absent for more than three consecutive
meetings or more than one-third of the regularly scheduled meetings per year
may be replaced by recommendation of the Beautification Committee to the Town
Council. The Secretary shall advise Town Council of any members recommended to
be replaced or any member that has resigned and ask Town Council to appoint a
new member to fill the un-expired term of the vacating member.
   (I)   Sub-committees. The Beautification Committee may, at its discretion,
create sub-committees to assist in conducting its business. The members of
these committees may or may not be members of the Beautification Committee.
(Ord. 2014-01, passed 3-17-14)
§ 95.09 TREE CITY USA.
   The Town of Kingstree shall maintain Tree City USA status and submit an
application for this designation each year by December 15th to the South
Carolina Forestry Commission and the National Arbor Day Foundation. To maintain
eligibility for this program, the town shall meet the following criteria:
   (A)   Hold an annual Arbor Day Celebration on or around Arbor Day in South
Carolina, the first Friday in December. An Arbor Day Proclamation shall be
created and included as part of the celebration;
   (B)   Have a tree ordinance. The tree ordinance shall be reviewed, and
revised if necessary, at least once every two years;
   (C)   Have an active Tree Committee, appointed by Town Council, responsible
for advising the town on tree-related matters; and
   (D)   Spend at least $2 per capita on public tree management, including
planning, education, tree establishment, maintenance, protection, and removal,
and any and all other maintenance or management activities.
(Ord. 2014-01, passed 3-17-14)
§ 95.10 TREE INVENTORY.
   The Zoning Administrator, or someone designated, shall maintain a current
inventory of all public trees. The inventory data gathered and recorded for
each tree shall include, at a minimum, the following information:
   (A)   Location (address or latitude/longitude coordinates);
   (B)   Tree species;
   (C)   DBH;
   (D)   Condition; and
   (E)   Maintenance needs.
(Ord. 2014-01, passed 3-17-14)
§ 95.11 ANNUAL WORK PLAN.
   The Beautification Committee shall develop an annual work plan for the
management of public trees utilizing the tree inventory information and input
from the Beautification Committee. The work plan shall contain the following
plans and schedules:
   (A)   Tree planting;
   (B)   New tree maintenance including mulching, irrigation, and young tree
training pruning;
   (C)   Tree pruning;
   (D)   Tree mulching; and
   (E)   Tree removal.
(Ord. 2014-01, passed 3-17-14)
§ 95.12 PUBLIC TREE MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   The town shall have the right and responsibility to establish,
maintain, protect, and remove trees located on public property. Public tree
maintenance standards shall be developed and made a part of this chapter and
shall include, at a minimum, standards for tree establishment, maintenance (to
include pruning, mulching, fertilization, irrigation, and pest control),
protection, and removal.
   (B)   These standards shall incorporate the current version of the following
professional standards from the American National Standards Institute:
      (1)   ANSI Z60.1 - American National Standard for Nursery Stock;
      (2)   ANSI Z133.1 - American National Standard for Arboricultural
Operations: pruning, repairing, maintaining, and removing trees, and cutting
brush—Safety Requirements; and
      (3)   ANSI A300 - American National Standard for Tree Care Operations:
trees, brush, and other woody plant maintenance—Standard Practices.
(Ord. 2014-01, passed 3-17-14)   
§ 95.13 ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   Establishment shall include the following:
      (1)   Species common name;
      (2)   Latin name;
      (3)   Mature height category; and
      (4)   Recommended or not recommended.
   (B)   Mature height categories shall be as listed below:
      (1)   Small- less than 25 feet in height at maturity;
      (2)   Medium- less than 40 feet in height at maturity; and
      (3)   Large- at least 40 feet and up to 100 feet or more in height at
maturity.
   (C)   Tree quality. Trees planted on town property shall be good quality and
have the following characteristics:
      (1)   Have healthy roots, trunk, and crown;
      (2)   Be free from stem encircling and stem girdling roots;
      (3)   Have a form characteristic of the species, but otherwise with a
straight trunk and without co-dominant stems and included bark;
      (4)   Have well-spaced branches; and
      (5)   Be free from insect pests, diseases, and mechanical injuries.
   (D)   Tree placement. Trees shall be planted in locations that meet the
following criteria:
      (1)   At least 30 feet from street intersections;
      (2)   At least 25 feet from stop signs and light poles;
      (3)   At least 15 feet from driveways, utility poles, fire hydrants, and
mail boxes;
      (4)   At least two-and-a-half feet from the curb and sidewalks;
      (5)   Only small maturing trees shall be planted beneath or within 20
feet of overhead utility lines;
      (6)   Small maturing trees shall be planted no closer than ten feet to a
building;
      (7)   No medium maturing tree shall be planted closer than 20 feet to
overhead electrical power lines or 20 feet to a building; and
      (8)   No large maturing tree shall be planted closer than 30 feet to
overhead electrical power lines or 30 feet to a building.
      (9)   The Tree Board may recommend other tree placement designs in public
spaces that do not meet the above criteria, such as a planned streetscape
design.
   (E)   Spacing between trees. For all street tree plantings, except for
special planting plans recommended by the Tree Board, the following minimum
planting distances shall be required:
      (1)   Small maturing trees shall be planted at least 25 feet apart;
      (2)   Medium maturing trees shall be planted at least 35 feet apart; and
      (3)   Large maturing trees shall be planted at least 50 feet apart.
   (F)   Open soil surface area.  Trees shall have a minimum of 25 square feet
of open soil surface area when planted in tree wells or concrete cutouts.
Otherwise, trees shall have the minimum open soil surface areas listed below:
      (1)   Small trees- Suitable for spaces no less than 16 square feet and up
to 100 square feet of total planting area; in a planting strip at least four
feet wide; or planted at least two-and- a-half feet from pavement or wall.
      (2)   Medium trees- Suitable for spaces no less than 64 square feet and
up to 200 square feet of total planting area; in a planting strip at least six
feet wide, or planted at least four feet from pavement or wall.
      (3)   Large trees- Suitable for spaces with no less than 200 square feet
of total planting area; in a planting strip at least seven feet wide; or
planted at least six feet from pavement or wall.
   (G)   Utility locates. No street tree other than those species as listed as
small maturing trees may be planted under or within 20 lateral feet of any
overhead utility wire, or over or within ten lateral feet of any underground
water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility. The party
excavating the planting hole shall be responsible for insuring that all
underground utilities have been located and marked prior to any excavation.
   (H)   City tree planting permit. A town tree planting permit shall be
required for anyone to plant trees on public property. On state highway rights-
of-way, a State of South Carolina Encroachment Permit shall also be required
(see division (I)). The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for issuing
town tree planting permits. Applications for town tree planting permits shall
include, at a minimum, the following information:
      (1)   Application date;
      (2)   Name and contact information of applicant;
      (3)   Address where the tree is to be planted;
      (4)   Tree species and variety to be planted;
      (5)   Caliper size of tree (diameter of trunk measured at six inches
above the ground line);
      (6)   Exact location of planting site and description, including the
presence of overhead or underground utility lines; and
      (7)   Three-year maintenance plan and schedule.
   (I)   State of South Carolina encroachment permit. A State of South Carolina
Encroachment Permit is required for any landscaping work performed on state
highway rights-of-way and can be requested from the South Carolina Department
of Transportation. A sketch plan of the proposed project must be attached to
the Encroachment Permit Application. This plan should show the planting
arrangement and the type of plants to be used. Photographs may also be helpful.
All proposed Encroachment Permit applications should clearly state the
following information:
      (1)   Speed limit (mph);
      (2)   Cut or fill slope (check with local Resident Maintenance Engineer);
      (3)   Traffic volume less or greater than 1,500 ADT (check with local
Resident Maintenance Engineer);
      (4)   Label guardrail; barrier curb; sidewalks; edge of pavement and
right-of-way line on sketch; indicate traffic lights at road intersections (a
label stating "TL" in a box is acceptable); and
      (5)   State distance plant material is from curb or edge of pavement
(offset).
(Ord. 2014-01, passed 3-17-14)
§ 95.14 MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Pruning.
      (1)   Public trees. Tree pruning shall be done on a routine basis to
provide pedestrian, traffic, sign, light, and signal clearance, to reduce
conflicts with buildings and infrastructure, to improve tree structure, form,
and health, and to remove dead, diseased, dying and otherwise objectionable
branches over two inches in diameter. Tree pruning shall be done in accordance
with current professional standards (ANSI A300). The following clearances shall
be maintained through routine pruning:
         (a)   Seven feet above sidewalks and walkways;
         (b)   Twelve feet above residential streets; and
         (c)   Sixteen feet above major thoroughfares
      (2)   Newly planted trees. Newly planted trees shall be inspected during
the summer months at one, two, and three years after planting and pruned if
necessary to improve their structure and health.
      (3)   Private trees. The town shall have the right to prune trees on
private property to provide clearance over public sidewalks and roadways, to
improve visibility of signs, signals, and lights, and to reduce hazards.
Pruning shall comply to current national standards (ANSI A300).
      (4)   Utility line clearance pruning. All pruning completed for the
purpose of utility line clearance shall be done in accordance with current
professional standards (ANSI A300).
      (5)   Topping. The topping of any publicly owned tree shall not be
permitted under any circumstances. The town may, at its discretion, require
that any party topping public trees pay a penalty in an amount up to but not
greater than the appraised value of the tree prior to topping.
   (B)   Mulching. All newly planted trees shall be mulched with leaves, aged
wood chips, pine straw, or other good quality organic mulch during the
establishment period-the first three years after planting. Mulch shall be
applied in an even layer, three to four inches deep, out to the dripline of the
tree. All trees shall be mulched where practical, as far out towards the
dripline as possible. Mulch shall be kept at least six inches away from the
tree trunk to avoid creating favorable conditions for insect, disease, or
rodent infestation.
   (C)   Fertilization. Fertilization may be done where and when a soil or
foliar test indicates a nutrient deficiency. Fertilization shall be done
according to current professional standards (ANSI A300).
   (D)   Watering. Watering shall be done for all newly planted trees during
the months of May through October at least once per week during periods of
drought or low rainfall, up to an amount of one inch of water per week.
   (E)   Pest control. When public trees are found to have insect or disease
infestations that pose a major threat to surrounding trees, they shall be
effectively treated or removed by the town. Spraying of insecticides,
fungicides, or herbicides shall be done only for the control of specific
insects, diseases, or weeds with the proper materials in the necessary strength
and applied at the proper time to obtain the desired control. General spraying
for insect, disease, and weed control shall be discouraged. Any pesticide
application shall be performed or supervised by personnel with a current SC
Pesticide Applicator's License.
(Ord. 2014-01, passed 3-17-14)
§ 95.15 PROTECTION.
   (A)   During the installation, repair, alteration, or removal of any
building, house, structure, utility line, or hardscape, or the conduct of a
public event or gathering, any person, firm, or corporation in charge of such
work or event shall protect the roots, trunk, and crown of adjacent public
trees from harmful activities to prevent injury to such trees. The minimum
radius of the root protection zone should be equal to one foot per inch (DBH)
of the affected tree(s).
   (B)   Activities harmful to trees. Activities harmful to trees shall
include, but are not limited to, trenching, grading, grubbing, soil backfill or
sedimentation, soil cuts, soil compaction from equipment, vehicle, or
pedestrian traffic, soil compaction from materials storage, soil contamination
from equipment maintenance and washouts, changes in water drainage, fire, trunk
wounds, limb wounds, improper pruning (including topping), and broken branches.
These activities are common during infrastructure installation or repair,
building or facility construction, and public events or gatherings.
   (C)   Tree protection fencing and other protection measures. Except in the
case of public events and gatherings, tree protection fencing, consisting of
sturdy material at least four feet high, shall be erected at the critical root
zone prior to the commencement of any harmful activity by the individual in
charge of that activity, and shall remain in place until the activity is
completed. Other protection measures may include tunneling, trunk wraps,
mulching, or irrigation.
(Ord. 2014-01, passed 3-17-14)
§ 95.16 REMOVAL.
   (A)   Citizen requests. A tree removal permit shall be required for anyone
wishing to remove a tree on public property. The removal of trees on public
property shall be the responsibility of the Zoning Department. The town may
charge the cost of the removal of trees in response to citizen requests, upon
recommendation, to the citizen requesting the removal.
   (B)   Tree removal permit. A permit shall be required for any party, except
for town personnel and those acting at the expressed request or direction of
the town, to remove any tree located on public property. The Zoning
Administrator shall issue the tree removal permit. The application for a tree
removal permit shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator. The application
for a tree removal permit must include, at a minimum, the following
information:
      (1)   Application date;
      (2)   Name and contact information of applicant;
      (3)   Tree location;
      (4)   Tree species;
      (5)   Tree DBH; and
      (6)   Reason for removal.
   (C)   Permitted reasons. Removal shall be permitted for the following
reasons:
      (1)   Tree is dead;
      (2)   The tree is affected by an insect or disease problem that is
untreatable and results in rapidly declining tree health or a hazardous
condition;
      (3)   Tree is dying due to past damage and its condition cannot be
improved with standard maintenance techniques;
      (4)   Tree has an uncorrectable structural defect that results in an
increased risk of whole or partial tree failure;
      (5)   Tree is reducing sight visibility and the correction of the problem
will result in severe disfigurement of the tree or crown reduction below 50%;
      (6)   The tree is in a restricted growing space, is in conflict with the
surrounding hardscape or infrastructure, and the conflict cannot be resolved;
and
      (7)   Tree is in conflict with overhead utility lines and proper pruning
cannot adequately reduce the conflict without severely disfiguring the tree.
   (D)   Replacement of trees removed. All trees removed on public property
shall be replaced within one year after removal. If the site where the tree was
removed is not suitable for replanting, a tree shall be planted in a suitable
location as close as possible to the removal location. If there is no suitable
location close to the removal location, then a tree shall be planted in a
planned planting location in the vicinity.
   (E)   Stump removal. All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed to
a depth of eight inches below the surface of the ground so that the top of the
stump shall not project above the surface of the ground. Sod, grass seed, or
other satisfactory ground cover shall be placed and maintained on the site of
the removed or ground stump. Stumps shall not be ground in cemeteries. The Tree
Board may preserve stumps with historic significance.
   (F)   Private commercial trees.  The town shall have the right to remove or
cause to be removed trees on private commercial property that are at a high
risk for failure, have insect or disease infestations that are a threat to
surrounding trees, or are otherwise nuisances that threaten the health and
safety of the public.
   (G)   Written notice. Owners of premises (commercial property) where a
nuisance tree is located shall be served a written notice from the Zoning
Administrator either in person or by registered mail that action must be taken
to abate the nuisance within 30 days. If after 30 days the nuisance has not
been abated, the town shall have the right to remove the tree or cause the tree
to be removed, and charge the property owner with the cost of removal and all
other associated costs.
(Ord. 2014-01, passed 3-17-14)
§ 95.17 DAMAGE TO PUBLIC TREES.
   (A)   No person shall damage, destroy, remove, or otherwise harm a tree
located on public property without a tree removal permit or the written consent
of the Zoning Administrator. The town shall require compensation for the damage
or destruction of a public tree equal to the appraised value of the tree prior
to the damage or the cost of repair to the tree by an approved arborist.
   (B)   Appraised tree value.  The appraised value of a tree shall be
calculated by a certified arborist based on the current edition of the Guide
for Plant Appraisal developed by the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers
and published by the International Society of Arboriculture.
(Ord. 2014-01, passed 3-17-14)
§ 95.18 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Town of Kingstree shall be responsible for enforcing all the provisions
of this chapter.
(Ord. 2014-01, passed 3-17-14)
§ 95.19 EMERGENCIES.
   In case of emergencies involving, but not limited to, tornadoes, windstorms,
floods, hurricanes, freezes, or other natural disasters, the requirements of
this chapter may be waived by the Town Manager.
(Ord. 2014-01, passed 3-17-14)
§ 95.99 VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.
   Except when stated otherwise in this chapter, any person, firm, or
corporation who violates any provision of this chapter or who fails to comply
with any notice issued pursuant to provisions of this chapter, upon being found
guilty of violation, shall be subject to a fine not to exceeds $1,000 for each
separate offense.
(Ord. 2014-01, passed 3-17-14)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
      Chapter
         
110.   BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL LICENSES
         
111.   ADVERTISING
         
112.   AMUSEMENTS
         
113.   GARAGE AND RUMMAGE SALES
         
114.   JUNK YARDS
         
115.   TAXICABS
         
116.   WRECKER SERVICES
         
117.   LOCAL ACCOMMODATIONS FEE
         
118.   PEDDLERS
         
119.   `LOCAL HOSPITALITY FEE
CHAPTER 110: BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL LICENSES
Section
Business Licenses
   
110.01   License required
   
110.02   Definitions
   
110.03   Business license tax; refund
   
110.04   Purpose and duration
   
110.05   Registration required
   
110.06   Deductions; exemptions; charitable organizations
   
110.07   False application unlawful
   
110.08   Display and transfer
   
110.09   Administration of chapter
   
110.10   Inspection and audits
   
110.11   Assessments; payment under protest; appeal
   
110.12   Delinquent license fees; partial payment
   
110.13   Notices
   
110.14   Denial of license
   
110.15   Suspension or revocation of license
   
110.16   Appeals to Council or its designee
   
110.17   Consent, franchise, or license required for use of streets
   
110.18   Confidentiality
   
110.19   Classification and rates
 
   
110.99   Penalty
   
Appendix A: Business License Rate Schedule
   Appendix B: Business License Class Schedule by NAICS Code
BUSINESS LICENSES
§ 110.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Every person engaged or intending to engage in any business, calling,
occupation, profession, or activity engaged in with the object of gain,
benefit, or advantage, in whole or in part within the limits of the town is
required to pay an annual license tax for the privilege of doing business and
obtain a business license as herein provided.
(Ord. 2004-05, passed 7-19-04; Am. Ord. 2021-07, passed 1-14-22)
§ 110.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. Any business, calling, occupation, profession, or activity engaged
in with the object of gain, benefit, or advantage, either directly or
indirectly.
   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION. An organization that is determined by the Internal
Revenue Service to be exempt from federal income taxes under 26 U.S.C. Section
501(c)(3), (4), (6), (7), (8), (10) or (19).
   CHARITABLE PURPOSE. A benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, or eleemosynary
purpose that does not result in personal gain to a sponsor, organizer, officer,
director, trustee, or person with ultimate control of the organization.
   CLASSIFICATION. That division of businesses by NAICS codes subject to the
same license rate as determined by a calculated index of ability to pay based
on national averages, benefits, equalization of tax burden, relationships of
services, or other basis deemed appropriate by the Council.
   COUNCIL. The Town Council of the Town of Kingstree.
   DOMICILE. A principal place from which the trade or business of a licensee
is conducted, directed, or managed. For purposes of this subchapter, a licensee
may be deemed to have more than one DOMICILE.
   GROSS INCOME. The gross receipts or gross revenue of a business, received or
accrued, for one calendar or fiscal year collected or to be collected from
business done within the municipality. If the licensee has a domicile within
the municipality, business done within the municipality shall include all gross
receipts or revenue received or accrued by such licensee. If the licensee does
not have a domicile within the municipality, business done within the
municipality shall include only gross receipts or revenue received or accrued
within the municipality. In all cases, if the licensee pays a business license
tax to another county or municipality, then the licensee’s GROSS INCOME for the
purpose of computing the tax within the municipality must be reduced by the
amount of revenues or receipts taxed in the other county or municipality and
fully reported to the municipality. GROSS INCOME for business license tax
purposes shall not include taxes collected for a governmental entity, escrow
funds, or funds that are the property of a third party. The value of bartered
goods or trade-in merchandise shall be included in GROSS INCOME. The gross
receipts or gross revenues for business license purposes may be verified by
inspection of returns and reports filed with the Internal Revenue Service, the
South Carolina Department of Revenue, the South Carolina Department of
Insurance, or other government agencies. In calculating GROSS INCOME for
certain businesses, the following rules shall apply:
         (1)   GROSS INCOME for agents shall be calculated on gross commissions
received or retained, unless otherwise specified. If commissions are divided
with other brokers or agents, then only the amount retained by the broker or
agent is considered GROSS INCOME.
         (2)   Except as specifically required by S.C. Code § 38-7-20, GROSS
INCOME for insurance companies shall be calculated on gross premiums written.
         (3)   GROSS INCOME for manufacturers of goods or materials with a
location in the municipality shall be calculated on the lesser of (i) gross
revenues or receipts received or accrued from business done at the location,
(ii) the amount of income allocated and apportioned to that location by the
business for purposes of the business’s state income tax return, or (iii) the
amount of expenses attributable to the location as a cost center of the
business. Licensees reporting GROSS INCOME under this provision shall have the
burden to establish the amount and method of calculation by satisfactory
records and proof. Manufacturers include those taxpayers reporting a
manufacturing principal business activity code on their federal income tax
returns.
   LICENSE OFFICIAL. A person designated to administer this chapter.
Notwithstanding the designation of a primary license official, the municipality
may designate one or more alternate license officials to administer particular
types of business licenses, including without limitation for business licenses
issued to businesses subject to business license taxes under Article 20,
Chapter 9, Title 58, and Chapters 7 and 45, Title 38, of the South Carolina
Code.
   LICENSEE. The business, the person applying for the license on behalf of the
business, an agent or legal representative of the business, a person who
receives any part of the net profit of the business, or a person who owns or
exercises control of the business.
   MUNICIPALITY. The Town of Kingstree, South Carolina.
   NAICS. The North American Industry Classification System for the United
States published under the auspices of the Federal Office of Management and
Budget.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, limited liability partnership,
limited liability company, cooperative non-profit membership, corporation,
joint venture, association, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate,
holding company, or other group or combination acting as a unit, in the
singular or plural, and the agent or employee having charge or control of a
business in the absence of the principal.
(Ord. 2004-05, passed 7-19-04; Am. Ord. 2021-07, passed 1-14-22)
§ 110.03 PURPOSE AND DURATION.
   The business license required by this chapter is for the purpose of
providing such regulation as may be required for the business subject thereto
and for the purpose of raising revenue for the general fund through a privilege
tax. Except as set forth below for business licenses issued to contractors with
respect to specific construction projects, each yearly license shall be issued
for the 12-month period of May 1 to April 30. A business license issued for a
construction contract may, at the request of the licensee, be stated to expire
at the completion of the construction project; provided, any such business
license may require that the licensee file, by each April 30 during the
continuation of the construction project, a statement of compliance, including
but not limited to a revised estimate of the value of the contract. If any
revised estimate of the final value of such project exceeds the amount for
which the business license was issued, the licensee shall be required to pay a
license fee at the then-prevailing rate on the excess amount. The provisions of
this chapter and the rates herein shall remain in effect from year to year as
amended by the Council.
(Ord. 2004-05, passed 7-19-04; Am. Ord. 2018-008, passed 5-21-18; Am. Ord.
2021-07, passed 1-14-22)
§ 110.04 BUSINESS LICENSE TAX; REFUND.
   (A)   The required business license tax shall be paid for each business
subject hereto according to the applicable rate classification on or before the
due date of the April 30 in each year, except for those businesses in Rate
Class 8 for which a different due date is specified. Late payments shall be
subject to penalties as set forth in §
110.12, except that admitted insurance companies may pay before June 1 without
penalty.
   (B)   A separate license shall be required for each place of business and
for each classification or business conducted at one place. If gross income
cannot be separated for classifications at one location, the business license
tax shall be computed on the combined gross income for the classification
requiring the highest rate. The business license tax must be computed based on
the licensee’s gross income for the calendar year preceding the due date, for
the licensee’s 12-month fiscal year preceding the due date, or on a 12-month
projected income based on the monthly average for a business in operation for
less than one year. The business license tax for a new business must be
computed on the estimated probable gross income for the balance of the license
year. A business license related to construction contract projects may be
issued on a per project basis, at the option of the taxpayer. No refund shall
be made for a business that is discontinued.
   (C)   A licensee that submits a payment greater than the amount owed may
request a refund. To be considered, a refund request must be submitted in
writing to the municipality before the June 1 immediately following the April
30 on which the payment was due and must be supported by adequate documentation
supporting the refund request. The municipality shall approve or deny the
refund request, and if approved shall issue the refund to the business, within
30 days after receipt of the request.
(Ord. 2004-05, passed 7-19-04; Am. Ord. 2009-06, passed 10-19-09; Am. Ord.
2018-008, passed 5-21-18; Am. Ord. 2021-07, passed 1-14-22)
§ 110.05 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   The owner, agent, or legal representative of every business subject to
this chapter, whether listed in the classification index or not, shall register
the business and make application for a business license on or before the due
date of each year; provided, a new business shall be required to have a
business license prior to operation within the municipality, and an annexed
business shall be required to have a business license within 30 days of the
annexation. A license for a bar (NAICS 722410) must be issued in the name of
the individual who has been issued the corresponding state alcohol, beer, or
wine permit or license and will have actual control and management of the
business.
   (B)   Application shall be on the then-current standard business license
application as established and provided by the Director of the South Carolina
Revenue and Fiscal Affairs Office and shall be accompanied by all information
about the applicant, the licensee, and the business deemed appropriate to carry
out the purpose of this chapter by the license official. Applicants may be
required to submit copies of portions of state and federal income tax returns
reflecting gross receipts and gross revenue figures.
   (C)   The applicant shall certify under oath that the information given in
the application is true, that the gross income is accurately reported (or
estimated for a new business) without any unauthorized deductions, and that all
assessments, personal property taxes on business property, and other monies due
and payable to the municipality have been paid.
   (D)   The Municipality shall allow application, reporting, calculation, and
payment of business license taxes through the business license tax portal
hosted and managed by the South Carolina Revenue and Fiscal Affairs Office,
subject to the availability and capability thereof. Any limitations in portal
availability or capability do not relieve the applicant or licensee from
existing business license or business license tax obligations.
(Ord. 2004-05, passed 7-19-04; Am. Ord. 2021-07, passed 1-14-22)
§ 110.06 DEDUCTIONS; EXEMPTIONS; CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS.
   (A)   No deductions from gross income shall be made except income earned
outside of the municipality on which a license tax is paid by the business to
some other municipality or county and fully reported to the municipality, taxes
collected for a governmental entity, or income which cannot be included for
computation of the tax pursuant to state or federal law. Properly apportioned
income from business in interstate commerce shall be included in the
calculation of gross income and is not exempted. The applicant shall have the
burden to establish the right to exempt income by satisfactory records and
proof.
   (B)   No person shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter by
reason of the lack of an established place of business within the municipality,
unless exempted by state or federal law. The license official shall determine
the appropriate classification for each business in accordance with the latest
issue of NAICS. No person shall be exempt from this chapter by reason of the
payment of any other tax, unless exempted by state law, and no person shall be
relieved of liability for payment of any other tax or fee by reason of
application of this chapter.
   (C)   Wholesalers are exempt from business license taxes unless they
maintain warehouses or distribution establishments within the municipality. A
wholesale transaction involves a sale to an individual who will resell the
goods and includes delivery of the goods to the reseller. It does not include a
sale of goods to a user or consumer.
   (D)   A charitable organization shall be exempt from the business license
tax on its gross income unless it is deemed a business subject to a business
license tax on all or part of its gross income as provided in this section. A
charitable organization, or any affiliate of a charitable organization, that
reports income from for-profit activities or unrelated business income for
federal income tax purposes to the Internal Revenue Service shall be deemed a
business subject to a business license tax on the part of its gross income from
such for-profit activities or unrelated business income.
   (E)   A charitable organization shall be deemed a business subject to a
business license tax on its total gross income if (1) any net proceeds of
operation, after necessary expenses of operation, inure to the benefit of any
individual or any entity that is not itself a charitable organization as
defined in this chapter, or (2) any net proceeds of operation, after necessary
expenses of operation, are used for a purpose other than a charitable purpose
as defined in this chapter. Excess benefits or compensation in any form beyond
fair market value to a sponsor, organizer, officer, director, trustee, or
person with ultimate control of the organization shall not be deemed a
necessary expense of operation.
(Ord. 2004-05, passed 7-19-04; Am. Ord. 2021-07, passed 1-14-22)
§ 110.07 FALSE APPLICATION UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person subject to the provisions of this
chapter to make a false application for a business license or to give or file,
or direct the giving or filing of, any false information with respect to the
license or tax required by this chapter.
(Ord. 2004-05, passed 7-19-04; Am. Ord. 2021-07, passed 1-14-22) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.08 DISPLAY AND TRANSFER.
   (A)   All persons shall display the license issued to them on the original
form provided by the license official in a conspicuous place in the business
establishment at the address shown on the license. A transient or non-resident
shall carry the license upon his or her person or in a vehicle used in the
business readily available for inspection by any authorized agent of the
municipality.
   (B)   A change of address must be reported to the license official within
ten days after removal of the business to a new location and the license will
be valid at the new address upon written notification by the license official
and compliance with zoning and building codes. Failure to obtain the approval
of the license official for a change of address shall invalidate the license
and subject the licensee to prosecution for doing business without a license. A
business license shall not be transferable, and a transfer of controlling
interest shall be considered a termination of the old business and the
establishment of a new business requiring a new business license, based on old
business income.
(Ord. 2004-05, passed 7-19-04; Am. Ord. 2021-07, passed 1-14-22)
§ 110.09 ADMINISTRATION OF CHAPTER.
   The license official shall administer the provisions of this chapter,
collect business license taxes, issue licenses, make or initiate investigations
and audits to ensure compliance, initiate denial or suspension and revocation
procedures, report violations to the municipal attorney, assist in prosecution
of violators, produce forms, undertake reasonable procedures relating to the
administration of this chapter, and perform such other duties as may be duly
assigned.
(Ord. 2004-05, passed 7-19-04; Am. Ord. 2021-07, passed 1-14-22)
§ 110.10 INSPECTION AND AUDITS.
   (A)   For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, the
license official or other authorized agent of the municipality is empowered to
enter upon the premises of any person subject to this chapter to make
inspections and to examine and audit books and records. It shall be unlawful
for any such person to fail or refuse to make available the necessary books and
records. In the event an audit or inspection reveals that the licensee has
filed false information, the costs of the audit shall be added to the correct
business license tax and late penalties in addition to other penalties provided
herein. Each day of failure to pay the proper amount of business license tax
shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   The license official shall have the authority to make inspections and
conduct audits of businesses to ensure compliance with this chapter. Financial
information obtained by inspections and audits shall not be deemed public
records, and the license official shall not release the amount of business
license taxes paid or the reported gross income of any person by name without
written permission of the licensee, except as authorized by this chapter, state
or federal law, or proper judicial order. Statistics compiled by
classifications are public records.
(Ord. 2004-05, passed 7-19-04; Am. Ord. 2021-07, passed 1-14-22) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.11 ASSESSMENTS; PAYMENT UNDER PROTEST; APPEAL.
   (A)   Assessments, payments under protest, and appeals of assessment shall
be allowed and conducted by the municipality pursuant to the provisions of S.C.
Code § 6-1-410, as amended. In preparing an assessment, the license official
may examine such records of the business or any other available records as may
be appropriate and conduct such investigations and statistical surveys as the
license official may deem appropriate to assess a business license tax and
penalties as provided herein.
   (B)   The license official shall establish a uniform local procedure
consistent with S.C. Code § 6-1-410 for hearing an application for adjustment
of assessment and issuing a notice of final assessment; provided that for
particular types of business licenses, including without limitation for
business licenses issued to businesses subject to business license taxes under
Article 20, Chapter 9, Title 58, and Chapters 7 and 45, Title 38, of the South
Carolina Code, the municipality, by separate ordinance, may establish a
different procedure and may delegate one or more rights, duties, and functions
hereunder to the Municipal Association of South Carolina.
(Ord. 2004-05, passed 7-19-04; Am. Ord. 2021-07, passed 1-14-22)
§ 110.12 DELINQUENT LICENSE FEES; PARTIAL PAYMENT.
   (A)   For non-payment of all or any part of the correct business license
tax, the license official shall impose and collect a late penalty of 5% of the
unpaid tax for each month or portion thereof after the due date until paid.
Penalties shall not be waived. If any business license tax remains unpaid for
60 days after its due date, the license official shall report it to the
municipal attorney for appropriate legal action.
   (B)   Partial payment may be accepted by the license official to toll
imposition of penalties on the portion paid; provided, however, no business
license shall be issued or renewed until the full amount of the tax due, with
penalties, has been paid.
(Ord. 2004-05, passed 7-19-04; Am. Ord. 2009-06, passed 10-19-09; Am. Ord.
2018-008, passed 5-21-18; Am. Ord. 2021-07, passed 1-14-22)
§ 110.13 NOTICES.
   The license official may, but shall not be required to, mail written notices
that business license taxes are due. If notices are not mailed, there shall be
published a notice of the due date in a newspaper of general circulation within
the municipality three times prior to the due date in each year. Failure to
receive notice shall not constitute a defense to prosecution for failure to pay
the tax due or grounds for waiver of penalties.
(Ord. 2004-05, passed 7-19-04; Am. Ord. 2021-07, passed 1-14-22)
§ 110.14 DENIAL OF LICENSE.
   The license official may deny a license to an applicant when the license
official determines:
      (1)   The application is incomplete or contains a misrepresentation,
false or misleading statement, or evasion or suppression of a material fact;
      (2)   The activity for which a license is sought is unlawful or
constitutes a public nuisance per se or per accidens;
      (3)   The applicant, licensee, prior licensee, or the person in control
of the business has been convicted within the previous ten years of an offense
under a law or ordinance regulating business, a crime involving dishonest
conduct or moral turpitude related to a business or a subject of a business, or
an unlawful sale of merchandise or prohibited goods;
      (4)   The applicant, licensee, prior licensee, or the person in control
of the business has engaged in an unlawful activity or nuisance related to the
business or to a similar business in the municipality or in another
jurisdiction;
      (5)   The applicant, licensee, prior licensee, or the person in control
of the business is delinquent in the payment to the municipality of any tax or
fee;
      (6)   A licensee has actual knowledge or notice, or based on the
circumstances reasonably should have knowledge or notice, that any person or
employee of the licensee has committed a crime of moral turpitude on the
business premises, or has permitted any person or employee of the licensee to
engage in the unlawful sale of merchandise or prohibited goods on the business
premises and has not taken remedial measures necessary to correct such
activity; or
      (7)   The license for the business or for a similar business of the
licensee in the municipality or another jurisdiction has been denied,
suspended, or revoked in the previous license year.
   (B)   A decision of the license official shall be subject to appeal as
herein provided. Denial shall be written with reasons stated.
(Ord. 2004-05, passed 7-19-04; Am. Ord. 2021-07, passed 1-14-22)
§ 110.15 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   When the license official determines:
      (1)   A license has been mistakenly or improperly issued or issued
contrary to law;
      (2)   A licensee has breached any condition upon which the license was
issued or has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter;
      (3)   A licensee has obtained a license through a fraud,
misrepresentation, a false or misleading statement, or evasion or suppression
of a material fact in the license application;
      (4)   A licensee has been convicted within the previous ten years of an
offense under a law or ordinance regulating business, a crime involving
dishonest conduct or moral turpitude related to a business or a subject of a
business, or an unlawful sale of merchandise or prohibited goods;
      (5)   A licensee has engaged in an unlawful activity or nuisance related
to the business; or
      (6)   A licensee is delinquent in the payment to the municipality of any
tax or fee,
the license official may give written notice to the licensee or the person in
control of the business within the municipality by personal service or mail
that the license is suspended pending a single hearing before Council or its
designee for the purpose of determining whether the suspension should be upheld
and the license should be revoked.
   (B)   The written notice of suspension and proposed revocation shall state
the time and place at which the hearing is to be held, and shall contain a
brief statement of the reasons for the suspension and proposed revocation and a
copy of the applicable provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2004-05, passed 7-19-04; Am. Ord. 2021-07, passed 1-14-22)
§ 110.16 APPEALS TO COUNCIL OR ITS DESIGNEE.
   (A)   Except with respect to appeals of assessments under §
110.11, which are governed by S.C. Code § 6-1-410, any person aggrieved by a
determination, denial, or suspension and proposed revocation of a business
license by the license official may appeal the decision to the Council or its
designee by written request stating the reasons for appeal, filed with the
license official within ten days after service by mail or personal service of
the notice of determination, denial, or suspension and proposed revocation.
   (B)   A hearing on an appeal from a license denial or other determination of
the license official and a hearing on a suspension and proposed revocation
shall be held by the Council or its designee within ten business days after
receipt of a request for appeal or service of a notice of suspension and
proposed revocation. The hearing shall be held upon written notice at a regular
or special meeting of the Council, or, if by designee of the Council, at a
hearing to be scheduled by the designee. The hearing may be continued to
another date by agreement of all parties. At the hearing, all parties shall
have the right to be represented by counsel, to present testimony and evidence,
and to cross-examine witnesses. The proceedings shall be recorded and
transcribed at the expense of the party so requesting. The rules of evidence
and procedure prescribed by Council or its designee shall govern the hearing.
Following the hearing, the Council by majority vote of its members present, or
the designee of Council if the hearing is held by the designee, shall render a
written decision based on findings of fact and conclusions on application of
the standards herein. The written decision shall be served, by personal service
or by mail, upon all parties or their representatives and shall constitute the
final decision of the municipality.
   (C)   Timely appeal of a decision of Council or its designee does not
effectuate a stay of that decision. The decision of the Council or its designee
shall be binding and enforceable unless overturned by an applicable appellate
court after a due and timely appeal.
   (D)   For business licenses issued to businesses subject to business license
taxes under Article 20, Chapter 9, Title 58, and Chapters 7 and 45, Title 38,
of the South Carolina Code, the municipality may establish a different
procedure by ordinance.
(Ord. 2004-05, passed 7-19-04; Am. Ord. 2021-07, passed 1-14-22)
§ 110.17 CONSENT, FRANCHISE OR BUSINESS LICENSE FEE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install, maintain,
or operate in, on, above, or under any street or public place under control of
the municipality any line, pipe, cable, pole, structure, or facility for
utilities, communications, cablevision, or other purposes without a consent
agreement or franchise agreement issued by the Council by ordinance that
prescribes the term, fees, and conditions for use.
   (B)   The annual fee for use of streets or public places authorized by a
consent agreement or franchise agreement shall be set by the ordinance
approving the agreement and shall be consistent with limits set by state law.
Existing franchise agreements shall continue in effect until expiration dates
in the agreements. Franchise and consent fees shall not be in lieu of or be
credited against business license taxes unless specifically provided by the
franchise or consent agreement.
(Ord. 2004-05, passed 7-19-04; Am. Ord. 2021-07, passed 1-14-22)
§ 110.18 CONFIDENTIALITY.
   Except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by
law, no official or employee of the municipality may divulge or make known in
any manner the amount of income or any financial particulars set forth or
disclosed in any report or return required under this chapter. Nothing in this
section shall be construed to prohibit the publication of statistics so
classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns.
Any license data may be shared with other public officials or employees in the
performance of their duties, whether or not those duties relate to enforcement
of this chapter.
(Ord. 2004-05, passed 7-19-04; Am. Ord. 2021-07, passed 1-14-22) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.19 CLASSIFICATION AND RATES.
   (A)   The business license tax for each class of businesses subject to this
chapter shall be computed in accordance with the current business license rate
schedule, designated as
Appendix A to this chapter, which may be amended from time to time by the
Council.
   (B)   The current business license class schedule is set forth as
Appendix B to this chapter. Hereafter, no later than December 31 of each odd
year, the municipality shall adopt, by ordinance, the latest standardized
business license class schedule as recommended by the Municipal Association of
South Carolina and adopted by the Director of the South Carolina Revenue and
Fiscal Affairs Office. Upon adoption by the municipality, the revised business
license class schedule shall then be appended to this chapter as a replacement
Appendix B.
   (C)   The classifications included in each rate class are listed with NAICS
codes, by sector, subsector, group, or industry. The business license class
schedule (
Appendix B) is a tool for classification and not a limitation on businesses
subject to a business license tax. The classification in the most recent
version of the business license class schedule adopted by the Council that most
specifically identifies the subject business shall be applied to the business.
The license official shall have the authority to make the determination of the
classification most specifically applicable to a subject business.
   (D)   A copy of the class schedule and rate schedule shall be filed in the
office of the Town Clerk.
(Ord. 2004-05, passed 7-19-04; Am. Ord. 2004-08, passed 9-20-04; Am. Ord. 2004-
10, passed 11-15-04; Am. Ord. 2006-11, passed 12-18-06; Am. Ord. 2012-09,
passed 12-3-12; Am. Ord. 2021-07, passed 1-14-22) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of
an offense and shall be subject to a fine of up to $500 or imprisonment for not
more than 30 days or both, upon conviction. Each day of violation shall be
considered a separate offense. Punishment for violation shall not relieve the
offender of liability for delinquent taxes, penalties and costs provided for
herein.
(Ord. 2004-05, passed 7-19-04; Am. Ord. 2021-07, passed 1-14-22)
APPENDIX A: BUSINESS LICENSE RATE SCHEDULE
RATES
Rate Class Income 0 to $2,000 All Over $2,000
           Minimum Fee        Rate Per 1,000 or Fraction Thereof
RATES
Rate Class Income 0 to $2,000 All Over $2,000
           Minimum Fee        Rate Per 1,000 or Fraction Thereof
1          $35.00             $0.60 (In)/$1.20 (Out)
2          $40.00             $0.70 (In)/$1.40 (Out)
3          $45.00             $0.80 (In)/$1.60 (Out)
4          $50.00             $0.90 (In)/$1.80 (Out)
5          $55.00             $1.00 (In)/$2.00 (Out)
6          $60.00             $1.10 (In)/$2.20 (Out)
7          $65.00             $1.20 (In)/$2.40 (Out)
8.2        Set by state statute
8.3        MASC Telecommunications
8.4        MASC Insurance
8.51       $12.50 + $12.50 per machine
8.52       $12.50 + $180.00 per machine
8.6        $5.00 - OR - $12.50 per table
9.3        See below
9.4        See below
 
Non-Resident Rates
   Unless otherwise specifically provided, all taxes and rates shall be doubled
for nonresidents and itinerants having no fixed principal place of business
within the municipality.
Declining Rates
Declining Rates Apply in all Classes for Gross Income in Excess of $1,000,000,
unless Otherwise Specifically Provided for in this Chapter
Gross Income in $ Millions Percent of Class Rate for Each Additional $1,000
Declining Rates
Declining Rates Apply in all Classes for Gross Income in Excess of $1,000,000,
unless Otherwise Specifically Provided for in this Chapter
Gross Income in $ Millions Percent of Class Rate for Each Additional $1,000
0 - 1                      100%
1 - 2                      90%
2 - 3                      80%
3 - 4                      70%
Over 4                     60%
 
Class 8 Rates
   Each NAICS Number designates a separate subclassification. The businesses in
this section are treated as separate and individual subclasses due to
provisions of state law, regulatory requirements, service burdens, tax
equalization considerations and other factors that are deemed to be sufficient
to require individually determined rates. In accordance with state law, the
municipality also may provide for reasonable subclassifications for rates,
described by an NAICS sector, subsector, or industry, that are based on
particularized considerations as needed for economic stimulus or for the
enhanced or disproportionate demands on municipal services of infrastructure.
   Nonresident rates do not apply except where indicated.
8.1   NAICS 230000 - Contractors, Construction, All Types (Nonresident rates
apply.)
Resident rates, for contractors having a permanent place of business within the
municipality:
   Minimum on first $2,000   $   55.00 plus
   Each additional 1,000   $   1.25
Nonresident rates apply to contractors that do not have a permanent place of
business within the municipality. A trailer at the construction site or
structure in which the contractor temporarily resides is not a permanent place
of business under this chapter.
No contractor shall be issued a business license until all state and municipal
qualification examination and trade license requirements have been met. Each
contractor shall post a sign in plain view on each job identifying the
contractor with the job.
Sub-contractors shall be licensed on the same basis as general or prime
contractors for the same job. No deductions shall be made by a general or prime
contractor for value of work performed by a sub-contractor.
No contractor shall be issued a business license until all performance and
indemnity bonds required by the Building Code have been filed and approved.
Zoning permits must be obtained when required by the Zoning Ordinance.
Each prime contractor shall file with the license official a list of sub-
contractors furnishing labor or materials for each project.
For licenses issued on a per-job basis, the total tax for the full amount of
the contract shall be paid prior to commencement of work and shall entitle the
contractor to complete the job without regard to the normal license expiration
date. An amended report shall be filed for each new job and the appropriate
additional license fee per $1,000 of the contract amount shall be paid prior to
commencement of new work. Only one base tax shall be paid in a license year.
Licensees holding a per-job license shall file, by each April 30 during the
continuation of the construction project, a statement of compliance, including
but not limited to a revised estimate of the value of the contract. If any
revised estimate of the final value of such project exceeds the amount for
which the business license was issued, the licensee shall be required to pay a
license fee at the then-prevailing rate on the excess amount.
8.2   NAICS 482 - Railroad Companies (See S.C. Code § 12-23-210.)
8.3   NAICS 517111, 517112, 517122 - Telephone Companies
With respect to “retail telecommunications services” as defined in S. C. Code §
58-9-2200, the municipality participates in a collections program administered
by the Municipal Association of South Carolina. The municipality has approved
participation in the collections program by separate ordinance (the
“Telecommunications Collections Ordinance”). The rates, terms, conditions,
dates, penalties, appeals process, and other details of the business license
applicable to retail telecommunications services are set forth in the
Telecommunications Collections Ordinance.
(Ord. 2024-01, passed 5-1-24)
8.4   NAICS 5241 and 5242 - Insurance Companies and Brokers
Independent agents, brokers, and their employees are subject to a business
license tax based on their natural class. With respect to insurers subject to
license fees and taxes under Chapter 7 of Title 38 and to brokers under Chapter
45 of Title 38, the municipality participates in a collections program
administered by the Municipal Association of South Carolina. The municipality
has approved participation in the collections program by separate ordinance
(the “Insurers and Brokers Collections Ordinance”). The rates, terms,
conditions, dates, penalties, appeals process, and other details of the
business license applicable to insurers and brokers are set forth in the
Insurers and Brokers Collections Ordinance.
8.51   NAICS 713120 - Amusement Machines, coin operated (except gambling)
Music machines, juke boxes, kiddy rides, video games, pin tables with levers,
and other amusement machines with or without free play feature licensed by S.C.
Department of Revenue pursuant to S.C. Code §§12-21-2720(A)(l) and (A)(2) [Type
I and Type II].
For operation of all machines (not on gross income), pursuant to S.C. Code §12-
21-2746:
   Per Machine       $12.50 plus
   Business license    $12.50
Distributors that sell or lease machines and are not licensed by the state as
an operator pursuant to §12-21-2728 are not subject to Subclass 8.51.
8.52   NAICS 713290 - Amusement Machines, coin operated, non-payout
Amusement machines of the non-payout type or in-line pin game licensed by S.C.
Department of Revenue pursuant to S.C. Code §12-21-2720(A)(3) [Type III].
For operation of all machines (not on gross income), pursuant to S.C. Code §12-
21-2720(B):
   Per Machine    $180.00 plus
   Business license    $12.50
Distributors that sell or lease machines and are not licensed by the state as
an operator pursuant to S.C. §12-21-2728 are not subject to Subclass 8.52.
8.6   NAICS Code Varies - Billiard or Pool Tables
A business that offers the use of billiard of pool tables shall be subject to
business license taxation under its natural class for all gross income of the
business excluding the gross income attributable to the billiard or pool
tables. In addition, the billiard or pool tables shall require their own
separate business licenses pursuant to S.C. Code § 12-21-2746 and shall be
subject to a license tax of $5.00 per table measuring less than 3-1/2 feet wide
and 7 feet long, and $12.50 per table longer than that.
(Ord. 2024-01, passed 2-19-24)
9.2   NAICS 522298 - Pawn Broker [All Types]
Minimum on first $2,000       $55.00 plus
Per $1,000, or fraction, over $2,000     $0.80
9.3   NAICS 4411, 4412 - Automotive, Motor Vehicles, Boats, Farm Machinery or
Retail 
(except auto supply stores - see 4413)
Minimum on first $2,000       $55.00 plus
Per $1,000, or fraction, over $2,000    $1.00
One sales lot not more than 400 feet from the main showroom may be operated
under this license provided that proceeds from sales at the lot are included in
gross receipts at the main office when both are operated under the same name
and ownership.
Gross receipts for this classification shall include value of trade-ins. Dealer
transfers or internal repairs on resale items shall not be included in gross
income.
9.7   NAICS 722410 - Drinking Places, bars, lounges, cabarets (Alcoholic
beverages consumed on premises).
Minimum on first $2,000          $100.00 plus
Per $1,000, or fraction, over $2,000     $0.70
License must be issued in the name of the individual who has been issued a
state alcohol, beer or wine permit or license and will have actual control and
management of the business.
(Ord. 2004-05, passed 7-19-04; Am. Ord. 2004-08, passed 9-20-04; Am. Ord. 2004-
10, passed 11-15-04; Am. Ord. 2006-11, passed 12-18-06; Am. Ord. 2012-09,
passed 12-3-12; Am. Ord. 2021-07, passed 1-14-22; Am. Ord. 2024-01, passed 2-
19-24) Penalty, see §
110.99
APPENDIX B: BUSINESS LICENSE CLASS SCHEDULE BY NAICS CODE
2021 BUSINESS LICENSE CLASS SCHEDULE BY NAICS CODE
NAICS Sector/Subsector Industry Sector Class
2021 BUSINESS LICENSE CLASS SCHEDULE BY NAICS CODE
NAICS Sector/Subsector Industry Sector                                  Class
11                     Agriculture, forestry, hunting and fishing       1.00
21                     Mining                                           2.00
22                     Utilities                                        1.00
23                     Construction                                     8.10
31-33                  Manufacturing                                    3.00
42                     Wholesale trade                                  1.00
44-45                  Retail trade                                     1.00
4411                   Automobile Dealers                               9.30
4412                   Other Motor Vehicle Dealers                      9.30
48-49                  Transportation and warehousing                   1.00
482                    Rail Transportation                              8.20
51                     Information                                      4.00
517111                 Wired Telecommunications Carriers                8.30
517112                 Wireless Telecommunications Carriers (except     8.30
                       Satellite)
517122                 Agents for Wireless Telecommunications Services  8.30
52                     Finance and insurance                            7.00
522298                 Pawnshops                                        9.20
5241                   Insurance Carriers                               8.40
5242                   Insurance Brokers for non-admitted Insurance     8.40
                       Carriers
53                     Real estate and rental and leasing               7.00
54                     Professional, scientific, and technical services 5.00
55                     Management of companies                          7.00
 
2021 BUSINESS LICENSE CLASS SCHEDULE BY NAICS CODE
NAICS Sector/Subsector Industry Sector Class
2021 BUSINESS LICENSE CLASS SCHEDULE BY NAICS CODE
NAICS Sector/Subsector Industry Sector                                  Class
56                     Administrative and support and waste management  3.00
                       and remediation services
61                     Educational services                             3.00
62                     Health care and social assistance                4.00
71                     Arts, entertainment, and recreation              3.00
713120                 Amusement Parks and Arcades (per machine)        8.51
713290                 Nonpayout Amusement Machines (per machine)       8.52
713990                 All Other Amusement and Recreational Industries  8.60
                       (pool tables)
721                    Accommodation                                    1.00
722                    Food services and drinking places                2.00
722410                 Drinking Places (Alcoholic Beverages)            9.70
81                     Other services                                   4.00
 
(Ord. 2004-05, passed 7-19-04; Am. Ord. 2021-07, passed 1-14-22; Am. Ord. 2024-
01, passed 2-19-24)
CHAPTER 111: ADVERTISING
Section
   
111.01   Posting on public property
   
111.02   Posting on private property
   
111.03   Signs and signboards
   
111.04   Handbills and placards
   
111.05   Municipal or state signs
Cross-reference:
   Using vehicle for advertising, see §
70.11
§ 111.01 POSTING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to place any advertisement, business, political
or otherwise, or any notice or sign of any nature on public property within the
corporate limits, by the use of a placard, pictured paper, circular, printings
or by any means or device whatsoever without prior approval of the Council.
('86 Code, § 16.101)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to place any such advertisement, notice or sign
of any nature in any park, street or any other property such as telephone
poles, telegraph poles, electric poles or towers, and the like thereof.
('86 Code, § 16.102) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.02 POSTING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful to place any such item in §
111.01(A) hereof on private property without written consent of the owner or
lessee of the property.
('86 Code, § 16.103) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.03 SIGNS AND SIGNBOARDS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any sign or
signboard which is less than ten feet from the pavement or which extends more
than five feet across any sidewalk. None shall extend into the street. The
construction and placement of any such sign or signboard shall be subject to
approval by Council.
   (B)   Total sign area allowed shall not exceed 16 square feet in area except
for buildings that have a primary face (front facade) that is greater than 40
feet in length; then a wall sign that covers up to 10% of the entire building
face, not to exceed 60 square feet may be allowed (less any signage area used
for a suspended sign which shall not exceed 16 square feet).
('86 Code, § 16.104) (Am. Ord. 2001-09, passed 8-20-01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.04 HANDBILLS AND PLACARDS.
   When authorized by Council, no handbill or placard shall be distributed
within the corporate limits unless it is deposited in a secure place where the
wind will not blow it away. The placing of a handbill or placard under a
windshield wiper of a motor vehicle shall not be construed as a deposit of same
in a secure place. The attachment in any way of a handbill or placard to public
property or a pole or other equipment of a public utility is prohibited.
('86 Code, § 16.105) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.05 MUNICIPAL OR STATE SIGNS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person firm or corporation to remove, tear
down, deface or destroy any sign erected by municipal or state authorities.
('86 Code, § 16.106)
CHAPTER 112: AMUSEMENTS
Section
General Provisions
   
112.01   Amusement places to have entrances opening onto street for safety
purposes
   
112.02   Permit required for carnivals and street shows
   
112.03   Fortune-telling
Cross-reference:
   Disturbances at public gatherings, see §
133.02
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 112.01 AMUSEMENT PLACES TO HAVE ENTRANCES OPENING ONTO STREET FOR SAFETY
PURPOSES.
   All places of public amusements, for safety purposes, shall have entrances
which open onto a public street.
('86 Code, § 14.210) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.02 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR CARNIVALS AND STREET FAIRS.
   All carnival or street shows or any business of the like are hereby
forbidden to show, parade or otherwise engage in business without the written
permission of the Council and the said permit shall specify the date, time,
place, length of show, duration of appearance and all other details required by
Council.
('86 Code, § 14.205)
§ 112.03 FORTUNE-TELLING.
   It shall be unlawful to engage in the business, trade or profession of
fortune-telling, palmistry, phrenology, clairvoyance, or the prediction of
future events by cards or other means or to offer to tell fortunes or predict
future events by palmistry, astrology, clairvoyance, cards or other means as an
inducement to promote some other business, trade or profession.
('86 Code, § 14.309) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 113: GARAGE AND RUMMAGE SALES
Section
   
113.01   Garage sales
   
113.02   Rummage sales
§ 113.01 GARAGE SALES.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
   GARAGE SALE. Household or personal effects on public display in a garage
carport or yard for purchase by others.
   (B)   License required; fee. It shall be unlawful to conduct a garage sale
without first obtaining a license therefor from the Department of Licenses and
paying therefor a fee of $25.
   (C)   Frequency. A license for a garage sale shall not be issued to any
person for use at any one house or residence more than four times in any 12-
month period and at intervals of not less than 60 days each.
   (D)   Merchandise. A person securing a license under this section shall be
prohibited from purchasing or bartering merchandise for the express purpose of
selling it in a garage sale.
('86 Code, § 14.316) (Ord. passed 6-17-80; Am. Ord. 91-3, passed 4-15-91; Am.
Ord. 97-8, passed 8-18-97; Am. Ord. 97-26, passed 8-18-97) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.02 RUMMAGE SALES.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
   RUMMAGE SALE.  A sale of household or personal effects or homemade
foodstuffs for charitable purposes.
   (B)   License Fee. No fee is required for rummage sales.
('86 Code, § 14.316) (Am. Ord. 97-8, passed 8-18-97; Am. Ord. 97-26, passed 8-
18-97)
CHAPTER 114: JUNK YARDS
Section
   
114.01   Junk yards prohibited
§ 114.01 JUNK YARDS PROHIBITED.
   No junk yard, whether for automobiles, machinery or other junk equipment
shall be operated and no license shall be issued for such a business; provided,
this section shall not apply to junk dealers who maintain their business in a
completely enclosed building or which is fenced from the view of the general
public.
('86 Code, § 14.512) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 115: TAXICABS
Section
   
115.01   License required
   
115.02   Application; insurance requirements
   
115.03   Number of taxicabs allowed
   
115.04   Revocation of license
 
   115.99   Penalty
§ 115.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate for hire within the limits of
the town any taxicab or other vehicle for the transportation of passengers
without first securing a license from the town to operate such vehicle.
('86 Code, § 18.901) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.02 APPLICATION; INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   Any person desiring to secure a license for the operation of a taxicab or
other vehicle for the transportation of passengers within the limits of the
town shall make written application to the Town Clerk. This application shall
contain the name of the owner of the vehicle to be so operated, the driver
thereof, the make, serial number and motor vehicle of the vehicle to be so
used. Before any licenses may be issued the applicant shall be required to file
with the Town Clerk a public liability and property damage insurance policy
issued by a reputable casualty company authorized to do business in the State
of South Carolina, together with a receipt from the issuing company showing
payment of the premium on the policy through the following December 31,
covering the vehicle to used in the transportation of passengers. This policy
shall be kept in full force and effect until the required date; and this policy
shall be for not less than the minimum standards required by the state for
bodily injury liability and $5,000 dollars for property damage liability for
each accident.
('86 Code, § 18.902) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.03 NUMBER OF TAXICABS ALLOWED.
   Council shall, by resolution, determine the number of taxicabs or other
vehicles for the transportation of passengers that may be licensed for
operation in the town, the number to be determined based on the need therefor,
and as Council shall deem necessary to serve the public and no licenses shall
be issued in excess of the number so fixed.
('86 Code, § 18.903) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.04 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   Any license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by
Council at any time should it appear that the taxicab or other vehicle for the
transportation of passengers for which this license was issued is operating in
violation of this section or of any other ordinance of the town.
('86 Code, § 18.905)
CHAPTER 116: WRECKER SERVICES
Section
   
116.01   Definitions
   
116.02   Business license required
   
116.03   Police regulations; emergency lights
   
116.04   Revocation of license for violation
   
116.05   Exceptions
   
116.06   Wrecker service rotation program
   
116.07   Right of entry reinspection
   
116.08   Application selection; fees
   
116.09   Rotation list dispatching
   
116.10   Police regulations
 
   
116.99   Penalty
§ 116.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self propelled, upon or by which a
person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon any road, highway,
right-of-way or public or private property.
   OPERATOR. The person driving the wrecker (tow truck) or any person assisting
with the operation of the wrecker.
   OWNER. Any person owning or having any financial interest in a wrecker
business licensed by the town.
(Ord. 94-16, passed 1-16-95)
§ 116.02 BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every wrecker service conducting business in the town shall pay a
license fee as outlined in the Business License Ordinance of the town.
   (B)   If the conditions of this chapter are met, license fees paid, and if
the towing vehicle(s) approved by the Chief of Police or his designed
representative, a business license shall be issued to operate the towing
vehicle on the streets of the town during the fiscal year, subject to
compliance with the terms of this chapter. The town business license or a copy
of the town business license shall be kept within the vehicle at all times.
(Ord. 94-16, passed 1-16-95)
Cross-reference:
   Business Licenses, see
Chapter 110
§ 116.03 POLICE REGULATIONS; EMERGENCY LIGHTS.
   (A)   No wrecker shall be driven or operated in a manner as to interfere
with the duties of the police investigating accidents. Directions of police
officers shall be obeyed at all times; and any licensed wrecker will promptly
furnish service when requested to do so by the police in order to clear traffic
and promote public safety; all motor vehicle regulations shall be observed. No
soliciting of the business of towing or supplying wrecker service shall be made
at or near the scene of an accident.
   (B)   Wrecker companies shall not operate any emergency lights except at the
scene of an accident while hooking up to the vehicle to be towed or while
actually towing a vehicle. Emergency lights shall not be operated while en
route to any accident scene or other service call.
(Ord. 94-16, passed 1-16-95)
§ 116.04 REVOCATION OF LICENSE FOR VIOLATION.
   If any licensed wrecker operates in violation of the terms of this chapter
the owner or manager, or their agents, shall be subject to the revocation
procedures.
(Ord. 94-16, passed 1-16-95)
§ 116.05 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   A towing vehicle owned or operated by a licensed garage in this town
solely for the purpose of towing vehicles to its premises for purpose of having
them repaired or serviced on the premises by the employees of the garage.
   (B)   Transient wreckers moving disabled vehicles through the town streets
to or from another location from outside the corporate limits.
   (C)   Automobiles, jeeps, pick-ups or like vehicles, not equipped with any
special wrecker equipment but used solely for light towing of stranded or
repossessed vehicles in transit.
   (D)   Temporary storage of a disabled vehicle on the premises of the
licensed owner of the vehicle if in compliance with zoning laws, but his
exemption shall not apply to any premises owned by, leased to or under the
direct or indirect control of any licensed wrecker, or as to which the licensee
has right of possession.
   (E)   Any wrecker vehicle of the federal or state government or any
subdivision or agency thereof.
(Ord. 94-16, passed 1-16-95)
§ 116.06 WRECKER SERVICE ROTATION PROGRAM.
   (A)   To afford reasonable and prompt response time it is the policy of the
Police Department to utilize only the services of wrecker companies located
within the corporate town limits or within 20 minutes of the town that express
a desire to participate in the Department's wrecker rotation program. Wrecker
companies desiring to participate must meet all the standard conditions and
agree to comply with those conditions.
   (B)   The Police Department's rotation program is controlled and regulated
by the Chief of Police through the establishment of requirements, rules,
regulations and schedule of maximum fees for services. Participation in the
program is on a strictly voluntary basis.
   (C)   Wrecker companies applying for the right to participate in the
rotation program, freely and willingly subject themselves to compliance with
the requirements, rules, regulations and schedule of maximum fees for services
as established.
   (D)   The Chief of Police or his designee will administer the wrecker
rotation program. The designee, upon approval of the Chief, shall have the
authority to suspend a wrecker company from participating in the rotation
program, if it is found not to be in compliance with the requirements, rules,
regulations and schedule of fees for authorized services.
   (E)   The wrecker shall be equipped with the following:
      (1)   Each wrecker shall be equipped with oscillating, rotating or
flashing amber color emergency lights mounted on the cab or boom brace of the
truck.
      (2)   Each wrecker shall be equipped with a five pound or larger fire
extinguisher rated for class A, B and C fires. The extinguisher shall be
permanently mounted on the wrecker to ensure each access. The extinguisher must
be annually certified and be fully charged or recharged as necessary.
      (3)   Each wrecker shall carry as standard equipment: tow sling, tow bar,
towing dollies, safety chains, wrecker bar, heavy duty broom, shovel and
container for debris, and any other equipment necessary to the safe and
efficient operations of the wrecker.
      (4)   Each wrecker and its equipment shall be modern and in excellent
mechanical condition.
      (5)   Any wrecker(s) on the rotation list will be required to be
registered with the town.
   (F)   If a wrecker or any of its equipment fails to meet the above
requirements the designated officer will disapprove the wrecker company. In
that event the company may make repairs as needed, and resubmit its requests.
   (G)   Upon passing requirements, all wrecker companies located within the
corporate limits or 20 minutes of town meeting the requirements of all town
zoning, rules, regulations, laws and upon issuance of a town business license
may apply for inclusion on the Department's rotation list.
   (H)   Each wrecker service shall be required to inspect its wrecker(s) and
equipment monthly to ensure continuing compliance. Wrecker(s) or equipment
which do not pass requirements shall be taken out of operation by the wrecker
service until such time as repairs are made or defective equipment has been
repaired.
   (I)   In addition to the minimum requirements to conduct a wrecker business
within the town rotation list applicants shall:
      (1)   Provide wrecker and motor vehicle storage services to the town 24
hours a day, seven days a week;
      (2)   Arrive at the requested service location within 20 minutes of
notification by the Police Department.
      (3)   Remove any debris, including but not limited to glass, and parts
from the accident scene where service is provided.
      (4)   Maintain a motor vehicle storage facility of sufficient size and
design to ensure the secure storage of all motor vehicles towed. There shall be
an operator on call capable of responding to requests for wrecker service as
well as an attendant available for the release of vehicles to the owner(s) or
responsible driver during normal business hours, usually 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
seven days a week. If any vehicle storage facility is located outside the
corporate limits, it shall be within a reasonable distance to allow minimal
inconvenience for owners of towed and stored vehicles wishing to pick up
vehicle(s). The determination of a "reasonable distance" will be solely at the
discretion of the Police Department; however, generally it would be within the
20 minutes response time area from any point within the town.
      (5)   The wrecker company shall take all necessary precautions to protect
motor vehicles and personal property contained therein from theft or damage
until property released to the rightful owner(s). The wrecker company shall be
responsible for any theft, vandalism or damage caused to vehicle(s) towed/
stored.
      (6)   Minimum standards for equipment:
         (a)   At least one wrecker of not less than one ton in size with dual
rear wheels and booster brakes.
         (b)   A power operated winch line and boom, with a factory rated
lifting capacity, of not less than 8,000 pounds single line capacity.
         (c)   Standard equipment: town sling, wheel lift or cradle devices,
towing dollies, safety chain, wrecker bar, fire extinguisher, flood lights to
the rear, heavy duty broom, shovel, containers for debris and approved warning
devices.
      (7)   Heavy duty wrecker (optional):
         (a)   Wrecker not less than 2 tons in size.
         (b)   Equipped with a power operated winch, winch line and boom, with
a factory rated lighting capacity of not less than 32,000 pounds, single or
double line capacity and tow sling.
         (c)   Safety chains, fire extinguisher, flood lights, heavy duty
broom, shovel, containers for debris and approved warning devices.
   (J)   Any deviation from the terms or requirements of this chapter or a
failure to provide service as stipulated herein may result in suspension from
the rotation list or termination as deemed appropriate by the town.
(Ord. 94-16, passed 1-16-95)
§ 116.07 RIGHT OF ENTRY REINSPECTION.
   The Police Department shall have the right at any time, upon presentation of
proper identification, to enter into or upon any wrecker participating in the
rotation program, for the purpose of inspecting the wrecker and its equipment
to ensure public safety and adherence to the provisions. Any wrecker or
equipment which is found to be unsafe or in poor mechanical or physical
condition shall be immediately taken out of service until repaired or replaced
and reinspected by the designated officer of the Police Department.
(Ord. 94-16, passed 1-16-95)
§ 116.08 APPLICATION SELECTION; FEES.
   Those wrecker firms that do not wish to participate in the program will not
be used in the selection process. The maximum fee for services by a licensed
wrecker in the limits of the town or within 20 minutes of the town shall be
established by the Town Council.
   (A)   Towing and storage charges. Operators fee for towing services rendered
shall be in accordance with the following:
      (1)   Wrecked, disabled vehicles                                 $125
      (2)   Traffic offenses/stolen vehicles/abandoned/junked vehicles $125
      (3)   Righting turned over vehicles (extra)                      $50
      (4)   Dollies (extra)                                            $50
      (5)   All tows after 5:00 p.m. until 7:00 a.m.                   $150
      (6)   Heavy duty wrecker (determined by wrecker company)         $75
      (7)   Winching a car, van or a pick-up truck from an embankment  $45
(determined by wrecker company)
      (8)   Storage per day after the first 24 hours                   $35
      (9)   Burned vehicles (extra)                                    $50
 
NOTE: All wrecker companies participating in the rotation program of the
Department, agree to abide by the above list of charges for all services
rendered in response to police calls for their tow services.
   (B)   Stored or impounded vehicles.
      (1)   Shall not be released until proper evidence of ownership is
presented to the Police Department. Upon presentation, the Police Department
will issue a signed tow release to be given to the wrecker company for release
of the vehicle(s). The wrecker company is solely responsible for collection of
all towing and storage fees.
      (2)   All rates approved by the town shall be posted in a conspicuous
place at the business location of the wrecker company. Each vehicle owner shall
be provided with an invoice or receipt itemizing all towing and storage charges
when paid. The town shall not be responsible for any towing or storage charges
under any circumstances.
   (C)   General consideration.
      (1)   The wrecker company will be responsible for maintaining a complete
record on each vehicle towed and stored. Monthly inventory reports containing
all information may be requested by the town.
      (2)   The wrecker company shall obtain at its own expense any and all
licenses, permits and public liability insurance coverage.
      (3)   Responsibility of wrecker company, any loss, cost, damage or other
expense in performance of work under this agreement or occasioned by negligence
of the wrecker company shall be the sole and entire responsibility of the
wrecker company and not the town. All and total liability shall be upon the
towing company from initial hook-up to a vehicle until release of said vehicle.
      (4)   The wrecker company agrees to indemnify and save harmless the town,
its employees, agents and assigns from suit, and claims or action of every
nature and description brought for, or on account of or sustained by any person
or person(s) as a result of any act or acts of the wrecker company, its
employees, agents or assigns in the performance of services under the terms of
the contract.
(Ord. 94-16, passed 1-16-95; Am. Ord. 95-8, passed - -95; Am. Ord. 2004-09,
passed 10-18-04; Am. Ord. 2008-17, passed 1-21-09)
§ 116.09 ROTATION LIST DISPATCHING.
   (A)   The police dispatcher shall upon the request of the owner/driver of a
vehicle damaged or disabled on a street/highway or public place, call any
wrecker company having a business license issued by the town.
   (B)   If no particular wrecker company is requested by the vehicle owner/
driver, the police dispatcher shall upon the direction of the investigating
officer(s) call a wrecker from the wrecker rotation list.
   (C)   No wrecker company will be able to tow for another company once
called. If wrecker is unable to respond, the next wrecker on rotation list will
be called.
   (D)   Wrecker companies unable to respond when called will forfeit the tow.
A notation will be entered on the rotation list. The next wrecker on the list
will be contacted to respond.
   (E)   After five consecutive forfeits, wrecker company will be taken off
rotation list.
(Ord. 94-16, passed 1-16-95)
§ 116.10 POLICE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Dummy companies and other interest. It shall be unlawful for any owner
or operator of a wrecker company to subcontract or have any connection,
association, affiliation or financial interest in another wrecker company
participating or operating on the town's rotation program or list.
   (B)   Chasing wrecks prohibited. It shall be unlawful for the owner,
operator or agent of any company to drive or park along any streets or highways
soliciting wrecker or towing services. It shall be unlawful for any town
employee to solicit business for any wrecker company. It shall likewise be
unlawful for any owner, operator or agent of a towing company to entice or
engage a town employee to solicit business for the service and upon conviction
shall forfeit its eligibility to participate in the rotation program.
   (C)   Use of emergency lights. Wrecker companies shall not operate any
emergency lights except at the scene of an accident while hooking up to the
vehicle to be towed or while actually towing a vehicle. Emergency lights shall
not be operated while en route to any accident scene or other service call.
   (D)   Miscellaneous.
      (1)   No wrecker shall be given or operated in a manner as to interfere
with the duties of the police investigating accidents.
      (2)   Direction of police officers shall be obeyed at all times and any
license wrecker will promptly furnish service when requested to do so by the
police in order to clear traffic and promote public safety.
   (E)   Violations. All alleged violations of these authorized tow service
requirements, rules, regulations and schedule or authorized fees for service
shall be investigated by the Police Department. In the event that the alleged
violation is sustained, the owner or manager, shall be subject to the
revocation procedures and/or penalized and/or removed from the rotation list.
(Ord. 94-16, passed 1-16-95)
§ 116.99 PENALTY.
   Violation of the terms of this chapter is punishable as provided in §
10.99.
(Ord. 94-16, passed 1-16-95)
CHAPTER 117: LOCAL ACCOMMODATIONS FEE
Section
   
117.01   Applicability
   
117.02   Definitions
   
117.03   Local accommodations fee
   
117.04   Payment of local accommodations fee
   
117.05   Local accommodations fee account
   
117.06   Permitted uses of fees
   
117.07   Inspections, audits and administration
   
117.08   Violations
 
   
117.99   Penalty
§ 117.01 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall apply to all businesses located in the city that provide
overnight transient lodging.
(Ord. 2000-11, passed 10-16-00)
§ 117.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCOMMODATIONS. Any room (excluding meeting and conference rooms), lodging
or sleeping accommodations furnished to transients by any hotel, motel, inn or
"bed and breakfast" for consideration. The gross proceeds received from the
lease or rental of sleeping accommodations supplied to the same person or
persons for a period of more than 30 continuous days are not considered
proceeds from transients.
   CITY.  The Town of Kingstree.
   GROSS PROCEEDS.  The total income received from the rental or lease of
accommodations.
(Ord. 2000-11, passed 10-16-00)
§ 117.03  LOCAL ACCOMMODATIONS FEE.
   A uniform fee of 3% is hereby imposed on the gross proceeds from the rental
of any accommodations within the city.
(Ord. 2000-11, passed 10-16-00)
§ 117.04 PAYMENT OF LOCAL ACCOMMODATIONS FEE.
   (A)   Payment of the local accommodations fee established herein shall be
the liability of the consumer of the services. The fee shall be paid at the
time of delivery of the services to which it applies and shall be collected by
the provider of the services. The city shall provide a form of return which
shall be utilized by the provider of the services to calculate the amount of
local accommodation fees collected and due. This form shall contain a sworn
declaration as to the correctness thereof by the provider of services.
   (B)   The provider of services shall remit the form and the local
accommodations fee to the City Finance Department monthly, not later than the
twentieth day of the month, and shall cover accommodation rentals of the
previous month.
(Ord. 2000-11, passed 10-16-00)
§ 117.05 LOCAL ACCOMMODATIONS FEE ACCOUNT.
   The revenue account, to be known as the City of Kingstree Local
Accommodations Fee, shall be established and all revenues received thereby
shall be deposited into this account. The principal and any accrued interest
from this account shall be expended only as permitted below.
(Ord. 2000-11, passed 10-16-00)
§ 117.06 PERMITTED USES OF FEES.
   The Town Council is hereby authorized to utilize the funds collected from
the imposition of the local accommodations fee for the following purposes:
   (A)   The nourishment, renourishment, and maintenance of the public parks
and waterfront access areas; the provision of police, fire, emergency medical,
and sanitation services; the planting of grass or other vegetation useful in
preserving parks and recreational areas within the territorial limits of the
city.
   (B)   The acquisition and maintenance of public waterfront access.
   (C)   Capital improvements to the public parks and other open space-related
facilities, which include but are not limited to public parks, public parking,
public access, and public restrooms.
   (D)   Transportation improvements including construction and resurfacing of
streets, storm water drainage, sidewalks, bikeways, landscaping, and all
associated costs including right-of-way acquisition and engineering design.
   (E)   The acquisition of land and the construction of passive and active
parks and facilities associated with parks including playground equipment,
sports facilities, and community recreation buildings.
   (F)   The acquisition of property and the construction of facilities
required for the provision of police and fire service; the acquisition of
capital equipment for the provision of public, fire and other public safety
services.
   (G)   The payment of bonded indebtedness required to provide the uses
referenced above.
(Ord. 2000-11, passed 10-16-00)
§ 117.07 INSPECTIONS, AUDITS AND ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, the
director of finance or other authorized agent of the city is empowered to:
enter upon the premises of any person subject to this chapter, make
inspections, examine and audit books and records.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to make
available the necessary books and records during normal business hours upon 24
hours written notice.
   (C)   In the event an audit reveals that false information has been filed by
the remitter, the cost of the audit shall be added to the correct amount fees
determined to be due. Each day of failure or refusal to make available the
necessary books and records, after proper notice, shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ord. 2000-11, passed 10-16-00) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.08 VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be a violation of this chapter to:
   (A)   Fail to collect the local accommodations fee in connection with the
rental of accommodations to transients.
   (B)   Fail to remit to the city, on a monthly basis, the local
accommodations fee collected pursuant to this chapter.
   (C)   Knowingly provide false information on the form of return submitted to
the city.
   (D)   Fail to provide or make available books and records to the City
Finance Department for the purpose of an audit upon 24 hours written notice.
(Ord. 2000-11, passed 10-16-00)
§ 117.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Fees not remitted by the twentieth day of the month shall be subject
to a 10% late fee. The late fee penalty of 10% of the amount of local
accommodations fees due shall be added for each month, or portion thereof,
after the due date until paid.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to fail to pay the taxes required by this
chapter. If any tax due under this chapter shall remain unpaid 30 days after
its due date, the town may proceed with all available procedures under the law,
including but not limited to, issuance of ordinance summons, enforcement
through the municipal court, or the revocation of the establishment's business
license. For businesses that are delinquent more than two times in a calendar
year, for the remainder of that calendar year, if any tax due under this
chapter shall remain unpaid ten days after its due date, the town may proceed
with all available procedures under the law, including but not limited to,
issuance of ordinance summons, enforcement through the municipal court, or the
revocation of the establishment's business license. Enforcement by a civil
action in the Court of Common Pleas shall entitle the town to the recovery of
attorney fees and costs of action. The failure to collect from patrons the
amount imposed by this chapter shall not relieve any establishment subject to
this chapter from making the required remittance. Furthermore, punishment for
violation shall not relieve the offender of liability for delinquent amounts,
penalties, and costs provided for herein.
(Ord. 2000-11, passed 10-16-00; Am. Ord. 2012-11, passed 12-27-12)
CHAPTER 118: PEDDLERS
Section
   
118.01   Definition
   
118.02   Business license required
   
118.03   Peddlers prohibited
   
118.04   Home grown produce
§ 118.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PEDDLER.  A person who sells his/her wares door to door, from his/her
vehicle, or from a makeshift stand inside the town limits. The nature of the
person's business within the town is temporary in nature.
(Ord. 2002-13, passed 10-21-02)
§ 118.02 BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Every peddler conducting business in the town shall pay a business license
fee as outlined in
Chapter 110.
(Ord. 2002-13, passed 10-21-02)
§ 118.03 PEDDLERS PROHIBITED.
   Peddlers are prohibited from selling their goods in the public streets or
sidewalks without the expressed permission from the town. This does not
restrict their rights to travel on the street for purposes of making
deliveries. Peddlers are restricted to sell their wares at the depot pursuant
to this section or on private property. In order to be allowed to sell on
private property, the peddler is required to show written permission from the
private property owner on a form provided to the peddler by the town when the
business license is obtained.
(Ord. 2002-13, passed 10-21-02)
§ 118.04 HOME GROWN PRODUCE.
   Peddlers shall be allowed to sell their own home grown produce within the
town by purchasing a seasonal business license for six months for $50 or for
one year for $100. In order to be allowed to sell on private property, the
peddler is required to show written permission from the private property owner
on a form provided to the peddler by the town when the business license is
obtained.
(Ord. 2002-13, passed 10-21-02)
CHAPTER 119: LOCAL HOSPITALITY FEE
Section
   
119.01   Applicability
   
119.02   Definitions
   
119.03   Local hospitality fee
   
119.04   Payment of local hospitality fee
   
119.05   Local hospitality fee account
   
119.06   Permitted uses of fees
   
119.07   Inspections, audits and administration
   
119.08   Violations
 
   
119.99   Penalty
§ 119.01 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall apply to the sales of prepared meals and beverages sold
in establishments or sales of prepared meals and beverages sold in
establishments licensed for on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages,
beer or wine.
(Ord. 2004-06, passed 8-16-04)
§ 119.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The Town of Kingstree.
   GROSS FEE. The total of the sales of prepared meals and beverages sold in
establishments or sales of prepared meals and beverages sold in establishments
licensed for on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages, beer or wine in
the town.
   HOSPITALITY FEE.  The tax on the sales of prepared meals and beverages sold
in establishments or sales of prepared meals and beverages sold in
establishments licensed for on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages,
beer or wine.
(Ord. 2004-06, passed 8-16-04)
§ 119.03 LOCAL HOSPITALITY FEE.
   A fee not to exceed 2% of the charges for the sales of prepared meals and
beverages sold in establishments or sales of prepared meals and beverages sold
in establishments licensed for on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages,
beer or wine in the town.
(Ord. 2004-06, passed 8-16-04) Penalty, see §
119.99
§ 119.04 PAYMENT OF LOCAL HOSPITALITY FEE.
   (A)   Payment of the local hospitality fee established herein shall be the
liability of the consumer of the services. The fee shall be paid at the time of
delivery of the services to which the fee applies and shall be collected by the
provider of the services. The city shall provide a form of return which shall
be utilized by the provider of the services to calculate the amount of local
accommodation fees collected and due. This form shall contain a sworn
declaration as to the correctness thereof by the provider of services.
   (B)   The provider of services shall remit the form and the local
hospitality fee to the town Finance Department monthly, not later than the
twentieth day of the month, when the estimated amount of average tax is more
than $50 a month, on a quarterly basis when the estimated amount of average tax
is $25 a month, and on an annul basis when the estimated amount of average tax
is less than $25 a month.
(Ord. 2004-06, passed 8-16-04) Penalty, see §
119.99
§ 119.05 LOCAL HOSPITALITY FEE ACCOUNT.
   The revenue account, to be known as the town local hospitality fee, shall be
established and all revenues received from the local hospitality fee shall be
deposited into this account. All interest generated by the local hospitality
tax fund must be credited to the local hospitality tax fund. The principal and
any accrued interest from this account shall be expended only as permitted in §
119.05.
(Ord. 2004-06, passed 8-16-04) Penalty, see §
119.99
§ 119.06 PERMITTED USES OF FEES.
   The Town Council is hereby authorized to utilize the revenue generated by
the hospitality tax collected from the imposition of the local hospitality fee
for the following purposes:
   (A)   Tourism - related buildings, including but not limited to, civic
centers, coliseums, and aquariums;
   (B)   Tourism - related cultural, recreational, or historic facilities;
   (C)   Beach access and renourishment;
   (D)   Highways, roads, streets, and bridges providing access to tourist
destinations;
   (E)   Advertisements and promotions related to tourism development; or
   (F)   Water and sewer infrastructure to serve tourism-related demand.
(Ord. 2004-06, passed 8-16-04) Penalty, see §
119.99
§ 119.07 INSPECTIONS, AUDITS AND ADMINISTRATION.
   For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, the director of
finance or other authorized agent of the city is empowered to enter upon the
premises of any person subject to this chapter and to make inspections, examine
and audit books and records. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or
refuse to make available the necessary books and records during normal business
hours upon 24 hours written notice. In the event an audit reveals that false
information has been filed by the remitter, the cost of the audit shall be
added to the correct amount fees determined to be due. Each day of failure or
refusal to make available the necessary books and records, after proper notice,
shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 2004-06, passed 8-16-04) Penalty, see §
119.99
§ 119.08 VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be a violation of this chapter to:
   (A)   Fail to collect the local hospitality fee in connection with the sale
of any prepared food or beverages;
   (B)   Fail to remit to the town the local hospitality fee collected pursuant
to this chapter on a monthly basis or as required.
   (C)   Knowingly provide false information on the form of return submitted to
the city.
   (D)   Fail to provide or make available books and records to the Finance
Department for the purpose of an audit upon 24 hours written notice.
(Ord. 2004-06, passed 8-16-04) Penalty, see §
119.99
§ 119.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Fees not remitted by the twentieth day of the month shall be subject
to a 10% late fee. The late fee penalty of 10% of the amount of local
hospitality fees due shall be added for each month, or portion thereof, after
the due date until paid.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to fail to pay the taxes required by this
chapter. If any tax due under this chapter shall remain unpaid 30 days after
its due date, the town may proceed with all available procedures under the law,
including but not limited to, issuance of ordinance summons, enforcement
through the municipal court, or the revocation of the establishment’s business
license. For businesses that are delinquent more than two times in a calendar
year, for the remainder of that calendar year, if any tax due under this
chapter shall remain unpaid ten days after its due date, the town may proceed
with all available procedures under the law, including but not limited to,
issuance of ordinance summons, enforcement through the municipal court, or the
revocation of the establishment’s business license. Enforcement by a civil
action in the Court of Common Pleas shall entitle the town to the recovery of
attorney fees and costs of action. The failure to collect from patrons the
amount imposed by this chapter shall not relieve any establishment subject to
this chapter from making the required remittance. Furthermore, punishment for
violation shall not relieve the offender of liability for delinquent amounts,
penalties, and costs provided for herein.
(Ord. 2004-06, passed 8-16-04; Am. Ord. 2012-10, passed 12-27-12)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
      Chapter
         
130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
         
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
         
132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
         
133.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY
         
134.   OFFENSES AGAINST JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION
         
135.   MORALS OFFENSES
         
136.   WEAPONS OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
130.01   Adoption of state criminal law
   
130.02   Parties to a crime
   
130.03   Plea of guilty or nolo contendere or forfeiture of bail
   
130.04   Crime watch area signs
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 ADOPTION OF STATE CRIMINAL LAW.
   All acts and conduct that constitute violation of the common law and
statutory law, as set forth in the 1976 Code of Laws of South Carolina, and
amendatory thereof, are hereby declared unlawful, when such acts, conduct or
violations occur, insofar as such provisions and violations can have
application and the punishment of which is within the jurisdiction of the
Council.
('86 Code, § 14.804)
§ 130.02 PARTIES TO A CRIME.
   Every person who, whether present or absent, commits, attempts to commit,
conspires to commit or aids or abets in the commission of any act violating any
provision of this code, whether individually or in connection with one or more
other persons or as a principal, agent or accessory, shall, upon conviction, be
guilty of such violation. Every person who falsely, fraudulently, forcibly or
willfully induces, causes, coerces, requires, permits or directs another to
violate any such provisions shall be guilty of such offense.
('86 Code, § 14.801) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.03 PLEA OF GUILTY OR NOLO CONTENDERE OR FORFEITURE OF BAIL.
   The entry of any plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of any
bail posted for the violation of any provision of this code or for the
violation of any other law or municipal ordinance shall have the same effect as
a conviction after trial under such provisions.
('86 Code, § 14.802)
§ 130.04 CRIME WATCH AREA SIGNS.
   Crime Watch Area signs shall not exceed three feet by four feet and shall be
placed on highway or street rights-of-way in accordance with South Carolina
Department of Highways and Public Transportation regulations.
('86 Code, § 14.416)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Unless otherwise provided herein, upon conviction, the violation of
any section of this code shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $700 or
imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both.
('86 Code, § 14.803) (Am. Ord. 97-7, passed 8-18-97)
   (B)    Other violations.
S.C. Section Description Fine
S.C. Section Description                          Fine
56-5-740     Disobedience to police officer       $425.00
16-11-700    Littering (First Offense)            $500
16-11-700    Littering (Second Offense)           $1000
16-17-530    Disorderly conduct                   200.00 + 25.00
44-53-370    Simple possession of marijuana       425.00
61-6-2600    Brown bagging open liquor            348.00 + 25.00
61-4-110     Open container law beer/wine         348.00 + 25.00
20-7-8920    Under age 21 possession of beer/wine 348.00 + 25.00
20-7-8925    Under age 21 possession liquor       348.00 + 25.00
********     Criminal domestic violence           870.00
 
(Am. Ord. 2000-3, passed 5-15-00; Am. Ord. 2001-05, passed 4-16-01; Am. Ord.
2001-19, passed 1-28-02; Am. Ord. 2005-04, passed 8-15-05)
   (C)   Town ordinance codes.
Code Section Description Fine
                         (Minimum/Maximum)
Code Section Description                                      Fine
                                                              (Minimum/Maximum)
130.02       Parties to a crime                               $500/$700
131.01       Petty larceny                                    500/700
131.02       Shoplifting                                      500/700
131.03       Receiving stolen goods                           500/700
131.04       Obtaining goods by false pretense                500/700
131.05       Impersonation of officer                         500/700
131.06       Failing to return property                       500/700
131.07       Gaining admission to public event without paying 500/700
131.08       Defrauding innkeeper                             500/700
131.20       Damaging property                                500/700
131.24       Trespassing                                      500/700
131.26       Loitering                                        500/700
132.01       Assault and battery                              500/700
132.03       Damaging property                                500/700
133.01       Disorderly conduct                               500/700
133.02       Disturbing or interfering with gatherings        500/700
133.05       Noise loud music                                 500/700
133.06       False alarm (fire, ems)                          500/700
133.07       False call for police                            500/700
134.01       Resisting or interfering with police             500/700
134.02       Failure to stop on command of police             500/700
134.03       Aiders and abettors to crime                     500/700
134.06       Swearing falsely when taking oaths               500/700
135.01       Indecent exposure                                500/700
 
   (C)   Town ordinance codes (continued).
Code Section Description Fine
                         (Minimum/Maximum)
Code Section Description                 Fine
                                         (Minimum/Maximum)
135.07       Obscene material            $500/$700
135.08       Gambling                    500/700
135.09       Public drunkeness           500/700
135.10       Drug paraphernalia          500/700
136.01       Discharging firearm in city 500/700
136.02       Concealed weapons           500/700
136.03       Carrying weapons            500/700
 
(Am. Ord. 2001-05, passed 4-16-01)
Statutory reference:
   S.C. Code § 14-25-65
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
Theft Offenses
   
131.01   Petty larceny
   
131.02   Shoplifting
   
131.03   Receiving stolen goods
   
131.04   Obtaining signature or property by false pretenses
   
131.05   Securing property by fraudulent impersonation of officer
   
131.06   Failing to return property borrowed from certain public institutions
   
131.07   Gaining admission to public event without paying therefor
   
131.08   Defrauding hostelry
Damage to or Interference with Property
   
131.20   Damaging property
   
131.21   Removing or destroying fences
   
131.22   Altering or removing landmarks, trees and the like
   
131.23   Fires and fireworks near buildings
   
131.24   Trespass
   
131.25   Failure to leave premises when ordered
   
131.26   Loitering
THEFT OFFENSES
§ 131.01 PETTY LARCENY.
   Petty larceny is hereby defined as any article of goods, choses in action,
bank bills, bills receivable, chattels or other article of personalty of which,
by law, larceny may be committed or of any such fixture or part or product of
the soil as was severed from the soil by an unlawful act, in value of less than
$1,000, and said act is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor.
('86 Code, § 14.501) (Am. Ord. 97-27, passed 8-18-97) Penalty, see §
130.99
Cross-reference:
   Larceny of bicycles, see §
74.09
Statutory reference:
   Petit larceny, see S.C. Code § 16-13-30
§ 131.02 SHOPLIFTING.
   A person shall be guilty of shoplifting which is hereby declared to be a
misdemeanor pursuant to S.C. Code § 16-13-110, if he:
   (A)   Takes possession of, carries away, transfers from one person to
another or from one area of a wholesale or retail mercantile establishment to
another area, or cause to be carried away or transferred any merchandise
displayed held, stored or offered for sale by any wholesale or retail
mercantile establishment with the intention of depriving the owner of the
possession use or benefit of said merchandise without paying the full value
thereof.
   (B)   Alters, transfers or removes any label, price tag marking indicia of
value or any other markings which aid in determining value affixed to any
merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a wholesale or
retail mercantile establishment and attempts to purchase such merchandise
personally or in consort with another at less than the established value with
the intention of depriving the owner of the full value of said merchandise.
   (B)   Transfers any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale
by any store or other retail mercantile establishment from the container in
which it is displayed to any other container with intent to deprive the
merchant of the full retail value.
('86 Code, § 14.317) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.03 RECEIVING STOLEN GOODS.
   Any person who shall buy, receive, or have in his possession any goods or
chattels or other property knowing the same to have been stolen, shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
('86 Code, § 14.505) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.04 OBTAINING SIGNATURE OR PROPERTY BY FALSE PRETENSES.
   Any person who shall, by any false pretense or representations obtain the
signature of any person to any written instrument or shall obtain for any other
person any chattel, money, valuable security or other property, real or
personal, if the sum of the written instrument or the value of the property so
obtained does not exceed $1,000, with the intent to cheat and defraud any
person of such property, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and the punishment
shall be not more than is permitted by law without presentment or indictment by
the grand jury.
('86 Code, § 14.506) (Am. Ord. 97-27, passed 8-18-97) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see S.C. Code § 16-13-240
§ 131.05 SECURING PROPERTY BY FRAUDULENT IMPERSONATION OF OFFICER.
   Whoever, with intent to defraud any government, firm, or person, shall take
upon himself to act as an officer or shall in such pretension or pretended
character demand, obtain or receive from any government, firm or person any
money, paper, document or other valuable thing of a less value than $200, shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor.
('86 Code, § 14.507) (Am. Ord. 97-27, passed 8-18-97) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see S.C. Code § 16-13-290
§ 131.06 FAILING TO RETURN PROPERTY BORROWED FROM CERTAIN PUBLIC INSTITUTIONS.
   Whoever shall borrow from any library, school, museum, collection or
exhibition any book, newspaper, magazine, manuscript, writings, pamphlet,
publication, recording, film or other article belonging to or in the care of
said organizations, under any agreement to return it, thereafter shall fail to
return said borrowed article, shall be given written notice, mailed to his last
known address by certified mail or delivered in person, to return such borrowed
article within 15 days; and in the event that such person shall thereafter
willfully and knowingly fail to return such borrowed article within 15 days,
such person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
('86 Code, § 14.508) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see S.C. Code § 16-13-340
§ 131.07 GAINING ADMISSION TO PUBLIC EVENT WITHOUT PAYING THEREFOR.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person where an admission charge is made,
to gain admittance to any athletic contest or other public event, without
paying the price of admission.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person unless upon his own premises to
witness an athletic contest or other public event, where an admission is
charged, without paying the price of said admission.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to aid, abet or assist in any way
any other person to witness any athletic contest or other public event without
said person paying the admission charge.
('86 Code, § 14.514) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.08 DEFRAUDING HOSTELRY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to obtain credit at
any place where food is served, or accommodations are provided by false
pretense or any fraudulent device or, after obtaining food, accommodation or
credit therefrom, to surreptitiously remove himself or his baggage therefrom
and defraud the operator thereby.
('86 Code, § 11.101) Penalty, see §
130.99
DAMAGE TO OR INTERFERENCE WITH PROPERTY
§ 131.20 DAMAGING PROPERTY.
   Any person or persons who shall injure any animal, or who shall damage any
goods, wares or merchandise, or other personal property of another person, or
any public property or who shall damage or destroy any fencing, trees,
shrubbery or buildings on the land of another or belonging to any other person
or persons shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
('86 Code, § 14.502) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see S.C. Code §§ 16-11-510, 16-11-520
§ 131.21 REMOVING OR DESTROYING FENCES.
   Any person other than the owner who shall remove, destroy or leave down any
portion of any fence intended to enclose animals of any kind, crops or
uncultivated lands or who shall leave open any gate or leave down any bars or
other structure intended for a like purpose shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
('86 Code, § 14.504) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see S.C. Code § 16-11-650
§ 131.22 ALTERING OR REMOVING LANDMARKS, TREES AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   Any person who shall knowingly, willfully, maliciously or fraudulently
cut, fell, alter or remove any boundary tree or other landmark, lamp post,
lamp, or street signs shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (B)   Any person who knowingly, willfully, maliciously or fraudulently
possesses a town street sign shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and the penalty
shall be set as follows: $500 for first offense; $1,000 for second offense.
('86 Code, § 14.510) (Am. Ord. 2003-14, passed 8-18-03) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see S.C. Code § 16-11-610
§ 131.23 FIRES AND FIREWORKS NEAR BUILDINGS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to build or ignite a fire or to shoot or
discharge fireworks in any place within the corporate limits that would
endanger any property or building.
('86 Code, § 14.511) Penalty, see §
130.99
Cross-reference:
   Fire Prevention, see
Chapter 91
§ 131.24 TRESPASS.
   (A)   Every entry upon the lands of another, after notice from the owner or
tenant prohibiting such entry, shall be a misdemeanor. When any owner or tenant
of any lands shall post a notice in four conspicuous places on the borders of
such land prohibiting entry thereon, a proof of the posting shall be deemed and
taken as notice conclusive against the person making entry, as aforesaid, for
the purpose of trespassing.
   (B)   Any person entering upon the lands of another for the purpose of
hunting, fishing, swimming, skiing, trapping netting, gathering fruit, wild
flowers, cultivated flowers, shrubbery, straw, turf, vegetables or herbs or
cutting timber on the same, without the consent of the owner or manager
thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
('86 Code, § 14.509) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Trespass, see S.C. Code §§ 16-11-600, 16-11-610
§ 131.25 FAILURE TO LEAVE PREMISES WHEN ORDERED.
   Any person or persons who, when requested to leave the premises of another
or the house wherein any one or more persons shall conduct business (except
offices of public officers), shall refuse to do so, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.
('86 Code, § 14.503) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see S.C. Code § 16-11-620
§ 131.26 LOITERING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in or upon any street,
park, public place or in any public building or obstruct the access to any
public building or any part thereof, or obstruct the passage of any person
through any public street, park or public place.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the term "loiter" shall encompass but
shall not necessarily be limited to, one or more of the following acts:
      (1)   Obstruction of the unhampered passage of pedestrians or vehicles.
      (2)   Obstructing, molesting or interfering with any person lawfully upon
any street, park or other public place.
      (3)   Refusing to move when requested to do so by a peace officer,
provided the peace officer has exercised his discretion reasonably under the
circumstances in order to preserve or promote public peace and order.
('86 Code, § 14.318) Penalty, see §
130.99
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
Section
   
132.01   Assault and battery
   
132.02   Pointing pistol or gun at any person
   
132.03   Unlawful to injure persons or damage property
§ 132.01 ASSAULT AND BATTERY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an assault or assault and
battery upon any other person.
('86 Code, § 14.701) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.02 POINTING PISTOL OR GUN AT ANY PERSON.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to point at any other person any loaded
or unloaded firearm. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to abridge the
right of self-defense or to apply to theatrical or like performances or to
peace officers in the discharge of their duties.
('86 Code, § 14.702) Penalty, see §
130.99
Cross-reference:
   Weapons offenses, see
Chapter 136
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see S.C. Code § 16-23-410
§ 132.03 UNLAWFUL TO INJURE PERSONS OR DAMAGE PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw any stone, stick or other
object whereby any person may be, or shall be, hit or hurt, or any window
broken, or other property belonging to another damaged or destroyed.
('86 Code, § 14.705) Penalty, see §
130.99
CHAPTER 133: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY
Section
   
133.01   Disorderly conduct
   
133.02   Disturbing or interfering with gatherings
   
133.03   Curfew for minors
   
133.04   Riots
   
133.05   Noise
   
133.06   False alarms
   
133.07   Imitating signal for police
   
133.08   Failing to remove doors from abandoned refrigerators
   
133.09   Unlawful to leave abandoned wells open
   
133.10   Halloween regulations
   
133.11   Spitting
 
   
133.99   Penalty
§ 133.01 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to conduct oneself in a disorderly manner with
the purpose to cause public inconvenience, annoyance, alarm or recklessly
creating a risk thereof by:
      (1)   Engaging in fighting, threatening, violent or tumultuous behavior,
breach of the peace; or
      (2)   Making unreasonable noise or offensively coarse utterance, gesture
or display, or addresses of abusive language to any person present; or
      (3)   Creating a hazardous or physically offensive condition by any act
which serves no legitimate purpose of the act; or
      (4)   Existence of any disorderly, lewd or indecent conduct by
scurrilous, obscene, indecent or profane writing, picture, mark or figure on
any wall, fence, house or structure.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section "public" means affecting or likely to
affect any person or persons in a place to which the public or a substantial
group has access; among the places included are highways, transport facilities,
schools, prisons, apartment houses, places of business or entertainment,
governmental buildings, any neighborhood, in automobiles, etc.
('86 Code, § 14.404) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.02 DISTURBING OR INTERFERING WITH GATHERINGS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or disturb any
religious worship or public gatherings.
('86 Code, § 14.406)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to behave disorderly in any public
hall or other place of amusement, entertainment or gathering or to enter the
same in a drunken condition or to interrupt any play, performance, lecture,
entertainment or service therein or any player, speaker or other person taking
part therein.
('86 Code, § 14.204)
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to interrupt the proceedings of
any public meeting, or be guilty of disorderly conduct therein, or to commit
any contempt of either.
('86 Code, § 14.601)
   (D)   It shall be unlawful:
      (1)   For any person willfully or unnecessarily to interfere with or to
disturb in any way or in any place the students or teachers of any school
attended by women or girls, to loiter about such school premises or to act in
an obnoxious manner thereon; or
      (2)   For any person to enter upon any school premises or loiter around
the premises, except on business, without the permission of the principal or
person in charge.
('86 Code, § 14.310) Penalty, see §
133.99
Cross-reference:
   Interrupting meetings of public bodies, see §
30.27
Statutory reference:
   Disturbing religious worship, see S.C. Code § 16-17-520
   Disturbing schools, see S.C. Code § 16-17-420
§ 133.03 CURFEW FOR MINORS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of enforcing and interpreting this
section, the following definitions shall control.
      (1)   EMERGENCY. Shall include but not be limited to the following: fire,
natural disaster, vehicular accident, or obtaining immediate medical care for
another person.
      (2)   GUARDIAN. Any person to whom custody of a minor has been given by a
court order.
      (3)   MINOR. Any person under 17 years of age.
      (4)   PARENT. A person who is the natural or adoptive parent of a minor.
As used herein, PARENT shall also include a court appointed guardian or other
person that is 18 years of age or older, authorized by the parent, by a court
order, or by the court appointed guardian to have the care and custody of a
minor.
      (5)   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the public or a substantial group
of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets,
highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office
building, transport facilities, and shops.
   (B)   Offenses.
      (1)   Minors. It shall be unlawful for a minor to purposefully remain,
walk, run, stand, drive or ride about in or upon any public place in the town
between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m.
      (2)   Parents. It shall be unlawful for the parent having legal custody
of a minor to knowingly allow or permit the minor to be in violation of the
curfew imposed in division (B)(1) above.
      (3)   Unlawful conduct of owners or operators of establishments.
         (a)   No operator of an establishment or his agents or employees shall
knowingly permit any minor upon the premises of said establishment between the
hours of 12:00 midnight Friday and 6:00 a.m. Saturday, or between the hours of
12:00 midnight Saturday and 6:00 a.m. Sunday, official city time, or between
the hours of 12:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day, on any other day of
the week.
         (b)   No operator of an establishment or his agents or employees shall
knowingly permit any minor between the ages of 6 and 16 years, inclusive, to
remain upon the premises of said establishment between the hours of 9:00 a.m.
and 1:45 p.m. during any school day unless he has written proof from school
authorities excusing him from attendance at that particular time or unless
accompanied by a parent or guardian or a person 21 years of age or older.
      (4)   Parent neglect.
         (a)   No parent shall knowingly permit any minor under the age of 17,
not exempted under division (C) below to remain in or upon any pubic place or
any establishment between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. Saturday or
between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. Sunday, official town time,
or between the hours of 12:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., of the following day, on any
other day of the week.
         (b)   No parent shall knowingly permit any minor between the ages of 6
and 16 years, inclusive, to remain in or about any public place or any
establishment between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 1:45 p.m. during any school
day unless he/she has written proof from school authorities excusing him from
attendance at that particular time or unless accompanies by a parent or
guardian or a person 21 year of age or older.
         (c)   It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian, or other person
having custody or control of any minor between the ages of 6 and 16, inclusive,
to knowingly permit or, by insufficient control, to allow such minor to be in
or upon any public place or any establishment between the hours of 12:00
midnight Saturday and 6:00 a.m. Sunday or between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m. of the following day, on any other day of the week.
   (C)   Defenses. It is a defense to prosecution under division (B) of this
section that:
      (1)   The minor was accompanied by a parent or guardian;
      (2)   The minor was accompanied by another adult approved by the parent
or guardian of the minor;
      (3)   The minor was on emergency errand;
      (4)   The minor was attending a school, community, government or
religious activity or is going to or coming from a school, community,
government or religious activity;
      (5)   The minor was engaged in a lawful employment activity or is going
directly to or coming directly from a lawful employment;
      (6)   The minor was on the sidewalk of the place where the minor resides,
or on the sidewalk of a place where the minor has permission from his/her
parent or guardian to be or on the sidewalk of a next-door neighbor who has not
communicated an objection to this activity by the minor to any police officer;
      (7)   The minor was upon an errand directed by his/her parent or
guardian;
      (8)   The minor was in a motor vehicle involved in intrastate or
interstate transportation or transportation for which passage through the
curfew area is the most direct route;
      (9)   The minor was legitimately exercising his/her First Amendment
Rights protected by the United States Constitution, including but not limited
to the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly.
   (D)   Enforcement procedure.
      (1)   First offense. Any police officer, upon finding a minor in
violation of division (B)(2) of this section, shall determine the name and
address of the minor, and the name and address of the minor's parent or
guardian. A warning notice shall be forwarded to the Juvenile Division of the
Police Department, which shall send a letter to the parent or guardian of the
minor advising of the fact that the minor was found in violation of this
section, and soliciting cooperation from the parent or guardian to avoid any
subsequent violations of this section by the offending minor.
      (2)   Second offense. Any police officer, upon finding that a minor is in
violation of division (B) of this section, and that the minor has once
previously been found in violation of division (B) of this section, and once
previously warned as required in division (D)(1) above, shall again determine
the minor's name and address and the name and address of the minor's parent and
guardian. The parent or guardian shall be summoned to the Police Department and
issued a $50 courtesy summons for violation of curfew after warning. A copy of
the summons shall be placed in the file of the juvenile, along with the first
warning notice. A conference at this time or at a convenient time shall be held
or scheduled with both parties, with the juvenile officer of the Police
Department; concerning the necessity of the enforcement of this section and the
town's expectations of parental control of minors.
      (3)   Third offense. Any police officer, upon finding that a minor in
violation of division (B) of this section, and that the minor and guardian has
been first warned twice, $50 summons, in accordance of violation of division
(B)(2), shall again determine the minor's name and address and the name and
address of the minor's parent or guardian. A third summons shall be issued
against the parent or guardian. A $100 courtesy summons shall be issued to said
parent or guardian. The Police Department shall be responsible for filing all
necessary papers, pursuant to this section, supply the Municipal Court with all
necessary documentation, and provide such testimony as required to pursue any
prosecution under this section against any minor or any parent or guardian.
(Ord. 94-13, passed 11-24-94) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.04 RIOTS.
   Any person, upon conviction of engaging in a riot, rout or affray when no
weapon was actually used and no wound inflicted, shall be subject and liable
for each offense.
('86 Code, § 14.407) Penalty, see §
133.99
Statutory reference:
   Riots, see S.C. Code §§ 16-5-120, 16-5-130
§ 133.05 NOISE.
   The creation and continuation of any loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise
is hereby prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, make or
contribute to creating any loud or disturbing noise of such character,
intensity, or duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of any
citizen. The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing,
annoying and unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but such
enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
   (A)   Noises to attract attention. The use of any drum, noise makers or
other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention to any
performance or event, show, sale or the display or advertisement of merchandise
by the creation of noise except by permit from the Chief of Police.
   (B)   Loud speakers or amplifiers on vehicles. The use of any mechanical
loud speakers or amplifiers on trucks or other vehicles for advertising or
other purposes except by special permission of the Council.
   (C)   Business noises at night near residences. The operation of any garage
service station, auto repair business, plant store, factory or other place of
business, between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., in such manner as to
create loud and disturbing noises, of such frequency or such volume as to annoy
or disturb the quiet and comfort of any citizen and particularly the creating
of disturbing noises of such frequency and volume as to annoy or disturb the
quiet, comfort, peace or repose of any person in any dwelling, boarding house
or other type of residence.
('86 Code, § 14.413) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.06 FALSE ALARMS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly give a false fire alarm by
telephoning, informing any person that an emergency exists, knowing the same to
be untrue, or in any other manner, communicating falsely to the Fire Department
that an emergency exists.
('86 Code, § 5.201) Penalty, see §
133.99
Statutory reference:
   False alarms, see S.C. Code § 16-17-570
§ 133.07 IMITATING SIGNAL FOR POLICE.
   Anyone imitating the signal or call for a policeman, either through mischief
or otherwise, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor.
('86 Code, § 14.513) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.08 FAILURE TO REMOVE DOORS FROM ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon or discard an ice box,
refrigerator, ice chest or any type of airtight container, of a capacity
sufficient to contain any child, to neglect, prior to such abandonment, to
remove the door, lid or other device for the closing thereof or for any owner,
lessee or other person in charge of property to knowingly permit any such
airtight container to be placed on property under his control.
('86 Code, § 14.703) Penalty, see §
133.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see S.C. Code § 16-3-1010
§ 133.09 UNLAWFUL TO LEAVE ABANDONED WELLS OPEN.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner or tenant to permit or allow any
abandoned well to remain open and unprotected curbed or fenced in, on any place
or premises within the corporate limits.
('86 Code, § 14.704) Penalty, see §
133.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see S.C. Code § 16-3-1020
§ 133.10 HALLOWEEN REGULATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person over 12 years of age to participate in
the act of "Trick or Treat" on Halloween night, and all persons under said age
shall be accompanied by a parent or responsible person. All "Trick or Treat"
activities shall end by 9:00 p.m. This section shall not apply to organized and
supervised Halloween parties.
('86 Code, § 14.414) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.11 SPITTING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to spit upon any sidewalk or other
public place, or upon the floor, walls or any other part of any building or
room which is used by the public.
('86 Code, § 14.313) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is otherwise provided shall be subject to the penalties contained in §
10.99.
   (B)   The violation of §
133.02(B) shall be deemed a misdemeanor and the violator shall be subject to a
fine of not less than $50 nor more than $200.
('86 Code, § 14.211)
   (C)   Any minor violating the provisions of §
133.03 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor as defined in the South Carolina Codes
of Laws. A parent or guardian of a minor violating §
133.03 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, which shall be punishable by a fine of
not less than $50; second offense $50; third offense $100; fourth offense $150
and/or ten days incarceration for any violation above the fourth offense.
(Ord. 94-13, passed 11-24-94)
CHAPTER 134: OFFENSES AGAINST JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION
Section
   
134.01   Resisting or interfering with officers or employees
   
134.02   Failure to stop on command of police
   
134.03   Aiders or abettors; hindering police officers
   
134.04   Communications with prisoners
   
134.05   Public property to be returned upon separation
   
134.06   Swearing falsely when taking oaths
§ 134.01 RESISTING OR INTERFERING WITH OFFICERS OR EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to resist or interfere with any
member of the Police Department, Fire Department or any other officer or
employee in the discharge of his official duties.
('86 Code, § 2.403)
   (B)   Any person or persons who shall resist, obstruct any officer in the
discharge of his duty or who shall aid or abet any person or persons in
resisting or obstructing any officer in the discharge of his duty, shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to the limitations prescribed by S.C.
Code §§ 14-25-65 and 16-5-50.
('86 Code, § 14.405) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 134.02 FAILURE TO STOP ON COMMAND OF POLICE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and knowingly fail or
refuse to stop when signaled, hailed or commanded to stop by a policeman or
other officer.
('86 Code, § 14.606) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 134.03 AIDERS OR ABETTORS; HINDERING POLICE OFFICERS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to counsel, advise, incite, abet,
procure or aid any other person in the violation of any ordinances. Such person
shall be held and deemed a principal.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to escape from custody of a police
officer or to rescue or attempt to do so, hinder a police officer or offer to
help, aid, assist or abet, directly or indirectly, another person or persons to
escape from the custody of an officer making an arrest or an officer assisting
therein.
('86 Code, § 14.412)
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to willfully approach
nearer than 20 feet to any policeman who has made, is making or attempting to
make an arrest.
('86 Code, § 14.603) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Accessories, see S.C. Code § 16-1-40
   Aiding escape, see S.C. Code § 16-9-420
§ 134.04 COMMUNICATIONS WITH PRISONERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, except authorized officials, to take
anything to or in any way communicate with any prisoner confined unless
permission to do so shall have first been obtained from the Chief of Police or
his deputies.
('86 Code, § 14.602) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 134.05 PUBLIC PROPERTY TO BE RETURNED UPON SEPARATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any employee or member of Council to fail to return
any public property entrusted to him, including this code, upon his resignation
or any other reason for separation from municipal employment or service.
('86 Code, § 14.604) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 134.06 SWEARING FALSELY WHEN TAKING OATHS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and knowingly swear falsely
under oath in giving evidence in the Municipal Court, or at any other time or
place within the corporate limits where an oath has been taken before any
person who may be qualified to administer oaths.
('86 Code, § 14.605) Penalty, see §
130.99
CHAPTER 135: MORALS OFFENSES
Section
   
135.01   Indecent exposure
   
135.02   Bawdy houses
   
135.03   Solicitation for immoral purposes
   
135.04   Information or direction for immoral purposes
   
135.05   Transportation of persons for immoral purposes
   
135.06   Use of places for immoral purposes
   
135.07   Obscene material
   
135.08   Gambling
   
135.09   Public drunkenness
   
135.10   Drug paraphernalia
 
   
135.99   Violations and penalties
§ 135.01 INDECENT EXPOSURE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit willful and malicious
indecent exposure of his person in any public place, on property of others or
to the view of any person on any street or highway or to appear in a public
place in a state of nudity.
   (B)   Public indecency prohibited.
      (1)   Definitions. Unless the context shall clearly indicate some other
meaning, the terms defined in this section shall for purposes of this section
have the meanings herein specified. Definitions shall be equally applicable to
both singular and the plural forms of any of the terms herein defined.
         ADULT. A person who has reached full legal age as defined by the laws
of the State of South Carolina.
         CREST OF THE ILIUM. The upper portion of the dorsal, upper and largest
area of the three bones composing either the lateral half of the pelvis that is
broad and expanded above the greater sciatic notch.
         CUSTODIAL PARENT. A person as defined by the laws of the State of
South Carolina.
         GUARDIAN. A person as defined by the laws of the State of South
Carolina.
         INTIMATE CLOTHING. Men and women's underwear, men and women's
underpants, panties, boxers, slips, girdles, athletic supporters, thongs or
other similar garments ordinarily worn beneath pants.
         MINOR. A person who has not reached full legal age as defined by the
laws of the State of South Carolina.
         PANTS. Any garment ordinarily worn to cover a person's lower body and
legs. This shall include, but not be limited to, trousers, long pants, short
pants, cutoffs, shorts or skirts.
         PERSON. An individual or entity possessing legal rights and duties.
         PUBLIC PLACE. An area which the public is invited to or to which the
public is admitted or has access, including, but not limited to, public and
private educational facilities, including, but not limited to, schools,
administration buildings, and other school owned or controlled property,
licensed child care and adult day care facilities, healthcare facilities,
hospitals, doctor offices, hotel and motel lobbies, public transportation
facilities, restaurants, retail food production and marketing establishments,
retail service establishments, retail stores, shopping malls, theaters,
galleries, libraries, museums, convention facilities, conference centers,
exhibition halls, cultural arts centers, stadiums, ball parks, government
controlled parks or recreation areas, other places of meeting or assembly,
inclusive of lobbies and audience seating areas, roadways, pathways, sidewalks,
yards of residential, commercial and governmental buildings or facilities when
visible from roadways, common areas in apartment buildings, condominiums,
trailer parks, mobile home parks, camp grounds, retirement facilities, nursing
homes, and other multiple residential facilities, restrooms, lobbies, reception
areas, hallways, and other common use areas, rooms chambers, and private clubs
when being used for a function to which the general public is invited. A
private residence is not a public place unless it is used as a child care,
adult daycare, or healthcare facility.
      (2)   Prohibition of certain attire; duties of parents and guardians.
         (a)   It shall be prohibited for any person to appear in a public
place wearing his or her pants more than three inches below his or her hips
(crest of the ilium) and thereby exposing his or her skin or intimate clothing
or other clothing such that one's buttocks, genital area, breasts or
undergarments are clearly exposed.
         (b)   It shall be prohibited for any custodial parent or guardian to
willfully allow their minor to appear in a public place wearing his or her
pants more than three inches below his or her hips (crest of the ilium) and
thereby exposing his or her skin or intimate clothing, or other clothing such
that one's buttocks, genital area, breasts or undergarments are clearly
exposed.
      (3)   Enforcement.
         (a)   This section shall be enforced by the Police Department and by
the Town Manager and his/her authorized designees within the incorporated areas
of the town.
         (b)   Any citizen of the town who desires to register a complaint
under this section may initiate enforcement with the Police Department.
         (c)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the town or
any member of the public may bring legal action against any person(s) to
enforce the provisions of this section.
      (4)   Public education. The town, in conjunction with the Public School
District of Williamsburg County and the Independent Schools of Williamsburg
County found within its incorporated areas shall engage in a continuing program
to encourage and clarify the purposes and requirements of this section and to
guide adults and minors in the development of critical life skills for improved
employability. The Town Manager of the town or his/her designee shall be
responsible for the town’s participation in this program.
('86 Code, § 14.301) (Am. Ord. 2016-02, passed 5-16-16) Penalty, see §
130.99 and §
135.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see S.C. Code § 16-15-130
§ 135.02 BAWDY HOUSES.
   The keeping of a bawdy house, disorderly house or house of prostitution
within the corporate limits shall be deemed a misdemeanor for the owner or
lessee of any dwelling house, or other building situated within the corporate
limits, to let or sublet such dwelling house or other building to any person to
be used, or with the knowledge that the same is intended to be used, and kept
as a bawdy house or house of prostitution.
('86 Code, § 14.302) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Prostitution, see S.C. Code §§ 16-15-90, 16-15-110
§ 135.03 SOLICITATION FOR IMMORAL PURPOSES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to invite or entice person upon any
street, public square or enclosure to accompany, go with or follow such person
to any place for immoral purposes, or to invite, entice or address any person
from any door, porch or portico of any house or building or to enter any with
or accompany such person to any place for immoral purposes.
('86 Code, § 14.303) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Prostitution, see S.C. Code § 16-15-90
§ 135.04 INFORMATION OR DIRECTION FOR IMMORAL PURPOSES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to give information about any house or
place for immoral purposes, whether the communication be by mouth, or
direction, telephone or in writing.
('86 Code, § 14.304) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 135.05 TRANSPORTATION OF PERSONS FOR IMMORAL PURPOSES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to transport, carry, convey, or assist
by aiding, abetting, encouraging, requesting or other, in transporting,
carrying, conveying in or accompanying by any ways and means whatsoever any
person for any immoral purpose.
('86 Code, § 14.305) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 135.06 USE OF PLACES FOR IMMORAL PURPOSES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to take, rent, use or occupy any place
for immoral purposes.
('86 Code, § 14.306) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 135.07 OBSCENE MATERIAL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to post or make any indecent, obscene or
profane writing or pictures or to make, sell, exhibit or offer for sale any
indecent or lewd book, picture or anything of like character.
('86 Code, § 14.314) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 135.08 GAMBLING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in gambling or games of
chance within the corporate limits.
('86 Code, § 14.307)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to keep or maintain a
gambling house, room or any other place where people engage in gambling or
games of chance, or to permit gambling or games of chance in any building on
their premises or under their control.
('86 Code, § 14.308) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Unlawful games and betting, see S.C. Code § 16-19-40
§ 135.09 PUBLIC DRUNKENNESS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to create a nuisance upon the
public streets or in any public place in a drunken condition.
('86 Code, § 14.311)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to drink any kind of
intoxicating alcoholic beverages on the streets, alleyways, highways or other
such public places.
('86 Code, § 14.312) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 135.10 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   (A)   The term DRUG PARAPHERNALIA is hereby defined as equipment, products
and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for
use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling,
or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to possess drug paraphernalia within the
corporate limits for use to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack,
repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce
into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this section.
('86 Code, § 14.415) (Am. Ord. 96-3, passed 9-16-96) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 135.99 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any person who violates a provision of division (B)(2) of §
135.01 shall be guilty of a civil infraction and subject to a fine of $25
dollars. Any civil infraction issued to a minor under §
135.01(B) shall be enforced in the Williamsburg County Family Court pursuant to
S.C. Code § 20-7-400, as amended. All civil infractions issued to adults or
entities under §
135.01(B) where the infraction occurred within the incorporated area of the
town shall be enforced in the town Municipal Court.
   (B)   Beginning June 1, 2016, and ending December 31, 2016, any person found
to be in violation of §
135.01(B)(2), shall be issued a civil infraction warning. The fine as set forth
above in division (A) of this section shall be waived during this time.
Beginning January 1, 2017, the fine shall be re-instituted for violations of §
135.01(B)(2).
   (C)   Violation of §
135.01(B) is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated by
the town by restraining order, preliminary and permanent injunction, or other
means provided for by law and the town may take action to recover all attorney
fees and costs of the nuisance abatement.
   (D)   Each day of a continuing violation of §
135.01(B) shall be considered a separate and distinct infraction.
   (E)   All civil infractions issued by an agent of the town within the
incorporated areas of the town shall be issued on a town Municipal Ordinance
Summons Ticket. Further, all civil infraction fines collected as a result of a
civil infraction written by the town within the incorporated areas of the town
shall go to the general fund of the town.
(Ord. 2016-02, passed 5-16-16)
CHAPTER 136: WEAPONS OFFENSES
Section
   
136.01   Discharge of firearms
   
136.02   Concealed weapons
   
136.03   Carrying weapons
Cross-reference:
   Pointing pistol at persons, see §
132.02
§ 136.01 DISCHARGING FIREARMS.
   It shall be unlawful, within the corporate limits, to fire or discharge any
pistol, gun, air rifle, sling shot, or other device which may be potentially
harmful to any person or property. Violations of this section shall be cause
for the Police Department to destroy and render the rifle/handgun useless and
to pursue the case in Municipal Court.
('86 Code, § 14.401) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   S.C. Code § 16-23-410
§ 136.02 CONCEALED WEAPONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry concealed about his person any
pistol, dirk, metal knuckles, razor, ice pick, hawkbill knife or any spring or
clasp knife, which has a blade more than three inches in length, or other
weapon usually used for the infliction of personal injuries.
('86 Code, § 14.402) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see S.C. Code § 16-23-460
§ 136.03 CARRYING WEAPONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry about his person, whether
concealed or not, any dirk, slingshot, metal knuckles, razor or other weapon
usually used for the infliction of personal injury or injuries. This section
shall not apply to peace officers while in the discharge of their duties.
('86 Code, § 14.403) Penalty, see §
130.99
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
      Chapter
         
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
         
151.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
         
152.   MOBILE HOMES
         
153.   ZONING
         
154.   HISTORIC PRESERVATION
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
150.01   State law provisions prevail
   
150.02   Adoption of standard codes; modification and enforcement
   
150.03   Utility connections
   
150.04   Liability not assumed
   
150.05   Homeowners work; ordinary repairs
   
150.06   [Reserved]
   
150.07   Permit fees
Unfit Buildings
   
150.10   Legislative findings
   
150.11   Definitions
   
150.12   Petitions; complaint and hearing
   
150.13   Orders determining fitness
   
150.14   Standards; conditions
   
150.15   Service of complaints and orders
   
150.16   Sale of materials; proceeds
   
150.17   Code Enforcement Officer
   
150.18   Zoning Board of Appeals
   
150.19   Appeals
   
150.20   Supplemental provisions
 
   
150.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01 STATE LAW PROVISIONS PREVAIL.
   To the extent that any conflict arises between a provision of this chapter
and any South Carolina law, rule or regulation, the provision of the state law
shall prevail and be controlling.
('86 Code, § 5.101) (Ord. 2014-05, passed 5-12-14)
§ 150.02 ADOPTION OF STANDARD CODES; MODIFICATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   (1)   On October 6, 2021, the South Carolina Building Codes Council
approved and adopted codes and appendices, modifications and the latest
editions of the mandatory codes referenced in S.C. Code Ann. § 6-9-50 (1976, as
amended) to be enforced by all municipalities and counties in South Carolina.
The Council established the implementation date for local jurisdictions as of
January l, 2023. Fire and Building codes established a minimum standard for
construction to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the general public
that occupy the resulting structures. The current adopted codes, as of January
1, 2020, included the 2018 editions of the Building and Fire Codes.
      (2)   The South Carolina State legislature adopted the 2021 include the
following mandatory codes:
         (a)    2021 South Carolina Building Code or the International Building
Code with SC Modifications;
         (b)   2021 South Carolina Residential Code or the International
Residential Code with SC Modifications;
         (c)   2021 South Carolina Fire Code or the International Fire Code
with SC Modifications;
         (d)   2021 South Carolina Plumbing Code or the International Plumbing
Code with SC Modifications;
         (e)   2021 South Carolina Mechanical Code or the International
Mechanical Code with SC Modifications;
         (f)   2021 South Carolina Gas Code or the International Gas Code with
SC Modifications;
         (g)   2009 South Carolina Energy Conservation Code or the
International Energy Conservation Code with SC Modifications (Energy Standard
Act);
         (h)   2020 National Electrical Code (NFPA) 70) with SC Modifications;
         (i)   The latest edition of ICC/ANSI Al 17.1, Accessible and Useable
Buildings and Facilities.
      (3)   The Town Council accepts and supports the adoption for enforcement
of the mandatory building and fire codes referenced in § 6-9-50 of the South
Carolina Code of Laws, 1976 as amended.
   (B)   Any matters in said codes which are contrary to existing ordinances of
the town shall prevail, and if any existing ordinances are contrary to said
codes, they are hereby repealed in that respect only.
   (C)   Within said codes, when reference is made to the duties of a certain
official named therein, that designated official of the town who has duties
corresponding to those of the named official in said code shall be deemed to be
the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code are
concerned.
('86 Code, § 5.109)
   (D)   The Council reserves the right to make modifications in said codes, as
amendments thereto are promulgated by the issuing authority.
('86 Code, § 5.107) (Am. Ord. 97-1, passed 2-17-97; Am. Ord. 2000- 10, passed
10-16-00; Am. Ord. 2008-14, passed 8-18-08; Am. Ord. 2014- 02, passed 4-21-14;
Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 7-28-16; Am. Ord. 2020- 003, passed 4-20-20; Am. Ord.
2022-06, passed 11-21-22) Penalty, see §
150.99
Cross-reference:
   Adoption of Standard Fire Prevention Code, see also §§
91.01 - 91.03
§ 150.03 UTILITY CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   No supplier of water, gas or electric service shall initiate service
to a building unless the owner thereof has been issued a building permit or
certificate of occupancy for the building.
('86 Code, § 5.112)
   (B)   The power lines serving buildings in the downtown area of the town
shall be attached to the rear of the building to be served. The downtown area
where referred to in this section shall include all of that area of the town
presently zoned Core Commercial.
(Ord. 86-13, passed 1-5-87)
   (C)   There shall be, and is hereby required, upon all of the businesses of
the town, for the conversion of the overhead electrical lines to underground
lines through the rewiring of the electrical service from the above ground
service poles to the rear of the building. Requests for same shall be in
writing to businesses in anticipation of efforts toward the revitalization of
the town.
(Ord. 94-14, passed 1-16-94) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.04 LIABILITY NOT ASSUMED.
   This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility of any party owning, operating, controlling or installing any
building, electrical, gas or plumbing equipment from damages to anyone insured
thereby, nor shall the town be held as assuming any such liability by reason of
inspection authorized herein or certificate issued.
('86 Code, § 5.114)
§ 150.05 HOMEOWNERS' WORK; ORDINARY REPAIRS.
   (A)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent any homeowner from installing or
maintaining buildings, electrical wiring or plumbing within his own property
boundaries, provided such work is done by himself and is used exclusively by
him or his family. Such privilege does not convey the right to violate any of
the provisions of this chapter, neither is it to be construed as exempting any
such property owner from obtaining a permit and having work inspected.
('86 Code, § 5.115)
   (B)   Ordinary minor repairs and general maintenance may be made without a
permit; provided, that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of
this code. Examples of minor repairs and general maintenance shall include, but
not be limited to, painting, reroofing, carpeting, etc.
('86 Code, § 5.116)
§ 150.06 [RESERVED]
§ 150.07 PERMIT FEES.
   The following schedule of fees are established.
   (A)   Building permit fees.
Total Valuation of Construction, Alterations or Repair of Structure Fee
Total Valuation of Construction,   Fee
Alterations or Repair of Structure
$1 to $500                         $24
                                   $24 for the first $500; plus $3 for each
$501 to $2,000                     additional $100 or fraction thereof, up to
                                   and including $2,000
                                   $69 for the first $2,000; plus $11 for each
$2,001 to $40,000                  additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, up to
                                   and
                                   including $40,000
                                   $487 for the first $40,000; plus $9 for each
$40,001 to $100,000                additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, up to
                                   and
                                   including $100,000
                                   $1,027 for the first $100,000; plus $7 for
$100,001 to $500,000               each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof,
                                   up to and
                                   including $500,000
                                   $3,827 for the first $500,000; plus $5 for
$500,001 to $1,000,000             each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof,
                                   up to and
                                   including $1,000,000
                                   $6,327 for the first $1,000,000; plus $3 for
$1,000,001 to $5,000,000           each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof,
                                   up to and including $5,000,000
                                   $18,327 for the first $5,000,000; plus $1
$5,000,001 and over                for each additional $1,000 or fraction
                                   thereof
                                   
 
   (B)   Plan review fee. A plan review fee shall be equal to one-half of the
building permit fee.
   (C)   Moving fee. For the moving of any building or structure, the fee shall
be $100.
   (D)   Demolition fees.
      0 - 100,000 cubic feet      $50
      100,000 cubic feet and over   $0.50 per 1,000 cubic feet
   (E)   Penalties. Where work for which a permit is required by adopted
building codes is started or proceeded prior to obtaining said permit, the fees
herein specified shall be doubled, but the payment of such double fee shall not
relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirements of the adopted
building codes in the execution of the work nor from any other penalties
prescribed herein.
(Ord. 2009-05, passed 8-17-09; Am. Ord. 2024-12, passed 11-18-24)
UNFIT BUILDINGS
§ 150.10 LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS.
   (A)   The town finds that there exist in the town certain structures which
are unfit for human use due to:
      (1)   Dilapidation;
      (2)   Defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other
calamities;
      (3)   Lack of ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or
      (4)   Other conditions rendering the structure unsafe or unsanitary,
dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or morals or otherwise inimical
to the welfare of the residents of the town.
   (B)   The town deems it necessary to exercise its powers to repair, close,
or demolish any structure in the manner herein provided, pursuant to the
provisions of the state code.
(Ord. 2008-06, passed 3-17-08; Am. Ord. 2014-05, passed 5-12-14)
§ 150.11 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANSWER.  The response of the accused to the complaint, denying in whole or
in part.
   BUILDINGS. Any building, structure or part thereof used and occupied for
human habitation or intended to be so used, including any outhouses and
appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. An individual appointed by the Town Administrator
who shall have powers described in this subchapter, in addition to any other
powers granted to the officer by this code and any other ordinance or act of
the town.
   COMPLAINT.  The initial charge that a person has committed an offense
presented in which action to comply will commence.
   DILAPIDATION.  A structure in a state of disrepair or ruin as a result of
age or neglect.
   HEARING. A proceeding which definite issues of fact or law are to be tried.
   HUMAN USE. The ability for a person to use the structure for its intend
purpose, be it commercial, residential, or other purpose.
   ORDER. A mandate to perform an action within a specific period of time.
   OWNER. When applied to a structure or land, the holder of the title in fee
simple, any part-owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant
by the entirety, and/or every mortgagee of record, of the whole or part of such
structure or land.
   PARTIES IN INTEREST. All persons who have an interest of record in a
structure and any other occupant or person in possession thereof.
   PETITION. A formal petition for the exercise of action for some matter
therein.
   PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATION. The initial inquiry by the Code Enforcement
Officer to determine whether an alleged defect from compliance has a semblance
of proof.
   REASONABLE COST. Determined as 50% or less of the tax assessor's value of
the structure at the time of needed repair.
   STRUCTURE.  Permanent and/or temporary property that is built by putting
parts together and that usually stands on its own.
   ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS. A quasi-judicial body with the authority to direct
the proper usage and maintenance of structures within a set jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2008-06, passed 3-17-08; Am. Ord. 2014-05, passed 5-12-14)
§ 150.12 PETITIONS; COMPLAINT AND HEARING.
   (A)   Whenever a petition is filed with the Code Enforcement Officer by any
official of the town or any department head having duties relating to health,
fire or structure regulations or to any other activities concerning structures
in the town, or by at least five residents of the town charging that any
structure is unfit for human use, or whenever it appears to the Code
Enforcement Officer, on his or her own motion, that any structure is unfit for
human use, he or she shall, if his or her preliminary investigation discloses a
basis for the charges, issue and cause to be served a complaint upon every
owner of and all parties of interest in the structure.
   (B)   The complaint shall state the charges in that respect and contain a
notice that a hearing will be held before the Code Enforcement Officer or his
or her designated agent, at a place therein fixed, not less than ten days or
more than 30 days after the serving of the complaint. Every owner and all
parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint
and to appear in person or to otherwise give testimony at the place and time
fixed in the complaint.
   (C)   The rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not
be controlling in hearings before the Code Enforcement Officer.
(Ord. 2008-06, passed 3-17-08; Am. Ord. 2014-05, passed 5-12-14)
§ 150.13 ORDERS DETERMINING FITNESS.
   (A)   If, after notice and hearing as provided above, the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that the structure under consideration is unfit for human
use, he or she shall state in writing his or her findings of fact in support of
the determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon every owner
thereof an order, providing as follows:
      (1)   If the repair, alteration or improvement of the structure can be
made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the structure, requiring
the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter or improve
the structure to render it fit for human use or to vacate and close the
structure as intended for human use; or
      (2)   If the repair, alteration or improvement of the structure cannot be
made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the structure, requiring
the owner, within the time specified in the order, to remove or demolish the
structure.
   (B)   (1)    If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or
improve or to vacate and close a structure, the Code Enforcement Officer may
cause the structure to be repaired, altered or improved or to be vacated and
closed. The Code Enforcement Officer may cause to be posted on the main
entrance of any structure so closed a placard with the following words:
"DANGER. This structure is unfit for human use. The usage or occupation of this
structure for human use is prohibited and unlawful."
      (2)   If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish
the structure, the Code Enforcement Officer may cause the structure to be
removed or demolished.
      (3)   The amount of the cost of repairs, alterations or improvements,
vacating and closing or removal or demolition by the Code Enforcement Officer
shall be a lien against the real property upon which cost was incurred.
(Ord. 2008-06, passed 3-17-08; Am. Ord. 2014-05, passed 5-12-14)
§ 150.14 STANDARDS; CONDITIONS.
   (A)   The Code Enforcement Officer may determine that a building is unfit
for human habitation if he finds that conditions exist in the building which
are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety or morals of the occupants of
the building, the occupants of the neighboring buildings or other residents of
the town.
   (B)   Conditions may include the following:
      (1)   Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other
calamities;
      (2)   Lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities;
      (3)   Dilapidation, disrepair, structural defects or uncleanliness; or
      (4) For any such condition deemed to be a hazard and unsafe for the
residents of the town.
(Ord. 2008-06, passed 3-17-08; Am. Ord. 2014-05, passed 5-12-14)
§ 150.15 SERVICE OF COMPLAINTS AND ORDERS.
   Complaints or orders issued by the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to this
subchapter shall be served upon persons either personally or by certified mail,
return receipt requested at the official address for tax notices to correct the
condition. In the event the persons official address for tax notices is
unknown, he or she shall make an affidavit to that effect, and the serving of
the complaint or order upon the persons may be made by publishing it once a
week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper circulated in town. A copy of the
complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises
affected by the complaint or order. A copy of the complaint or order also shall
be filled with the County Court Clerk as a lis pendens.
(Ord. 2008-06, passed 3-17-08; Am. Ord. 2014-05, passed 5-12-14)
§ 150.16 SALE OF MATERIALS; PROCEEDS.
   If a building is removed or demolished by the Code Enforcement Officer, he
shall sell the materials of the building and shall credit the proceeds of the
sale against the cost of the removal or demolition. Any balance remaining shall
be deposited in the Circuit Court by the Code Enforcement Officer, secured in
the manner as may be directed by the Court and shall be disbursed by the Court
to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of the
Court.
(Ord. 2008-06, passed 3-17-08)
§ 150.17 CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized to exercise the powers as
may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effect the purposes and
provisions of this subchapter, including the following powers in addition to
others herein granted:
   (A)   To investigate the structure conditions in the town in order to
determine which structures therein are unfit for human use;
   (B)   To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence;
   (C)   To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations;
provided, that the entries are made in a manner as to cause the least possible
inconvenience to the persons in possession;
   (D)   To appoint and fix the duties of the officers, agents and employees,
with the approval of the Town Administrator, as he deems necessary to carry out
the purposes of this subchapter; and
   (E)   To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under this
subchapter to the officers and agents he or she may designate.
(Ord. 2008-06, passed 3-17-08; Am. Ord. 2014-05, passed 5-12-14)
§ 150.18 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.
   Appeals from the decision of the Code Enforcement Officer shall be to the
Zoning Board of Appeals.
(Ord. 2008-06, passed 3-17-08; Am. Ord. 2014-05, passed 5-12-14)
§ 150.19 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person receiving an order from the Code Enforcement Officer may,
within 15 days following the date of the notice, enter an appeal in writing to
the Zoning Board of Appeals. The appeal shall state the location of the
property, the date of the notice of violations and the number of the notice.
The appellant shall state the variance or modification requested, the reasons
therefor and the hardship or conditions upon which the appeal is made. No
appeal filed later than 15 days after the date of the notice shall be acted
upon by the Board, unless the Building Official shall consent thereto.
   (B)   (1)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall notify the appellant at least
seven days in advance of the date of a hearing set on his appeal stating the
time and place of the hearing. The Board may consider any matter contained in
the record of the Code Enforcement Officer and may take any additional
testimony that may be offered by the appellant or the Building Enforcement
Officer. After the hearing on appeal, the Board shall report its findings of
fact in support of its determination on the issues, which may affirm, modify or
reject the findings of fact, determinations and orders of the Code Enforcement
Officer, and shall cause such to be served upon the appellant owner.
      (2)   The Board may establish its own rules of procedure, provided the
rules are not in conflict with this subchapter or the laws of the state. The
rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be
controlling in appeals or hearings before the board.
   (C)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall not take any action on an order
issued by him or her until after the 15-day period for the owner to appeal to
the Zoning Board of Appeals. An appeal to the Board shall operate a stay of the
order of the Code Enforcement Officer until the appeal is heard and the Board
has issued its order.
   (D)   Any person affected by this subchapter shall have the right to appeal
from the Zoning Board of Appeals to a state court of competent jurisdiction
within 30 days the Board's decision. Any order of the Board shall state that
the owner has the right to appeal to a state court of competent jurisdiction as
provided in this section. The Code Enforcement Officer shall, from the time an
appeal is made and one issue is resolved, stay any further action on his part
with regard to the structure and/or property in question.
   (E)   All requests for appeal shall be accompanied by payment of $100 to
cover the costs associated with such hearing.
(Ord. 2008-06, passed 3-17-08; Am. Ord. 2014-05, passed 5-12-14)
§ 150.20 SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not abrogate the powers of any other
department of the town or repeal any criminal ordinance but shall be in
addition to and is supplemental to any other provision of this code and any
other ordinance of the town. The procedures enumerated in this subchapter shall
be the procedures followed in dealing with the structures unfit for human use,
the provisions of any previously adopted standard structure code
notwithstanding.
(Ord. 2008-06, passed 3-17-08; Am. Ord. 2014-05, passed 5-12-14)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be found guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or by
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 30 days, or both; provided, however
that no penalty shall exceed the penalty provided by state law for similar
offenses. Each day any violation of this chapter shall continue shall
constitute a separate violation per offense, per day.
('86 Code, § 1.207) (Am. Ord. 97-7, passed 8-18-97; Am. Ord. 2014-05, passed 5-
12-14)
CHAPTER 151: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
General Standards
   
151.01   Statutory authorization
   
151.02   Findings of fact
   
151.03   Statement of purpose and objectives
   
151.04   Lands to which this chapter applies
   
151.05   Establishment of development permit
   
151.06   Compliance
   
151.07   Interpretation
   
151.08   Partial invalidity and severability
   
151.09   Warning and disclaimer of liability
Definitions
   
151.20   Definitions
Administration
   
151.30   Designation of local Floodplain Administrator
   
151.31   Adoption of letter of map revisions (LOMR)
   
151.32   Development permit and certification requirements
   
151.33   Duties and responsibilities of the local Floodplain Administrator
   
151.34   Administrative procedures
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
   
151.40   General standards
   
151.41   Specific standards
   
151.42   Standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or
floodways
   
151.43   Standards for streams with established base flood elevations but
without floodways
   
151.44   Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO Zones)
Variance Procedures
   
151.50   Establishment of Appeal Board
   
151.51   Right to appeal
   
151.52   Historic structures
   
151.53   Functionally dependent uses
   
151.54   Accessory structures and agricultural structures
   
151.55   Considerations
   
151.56   Findings
   
151.57   Floodways
   
151.58   Conditions
Legal Status Provisions
   
151.60   Effect on rights and liabilities under the existing damage prevention
ordinance
   
151.61   Effect upon outstanding building permits
 
   
151.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The Legislature of the State of South Carolina has in S.C. Code Title 5 and
Title 6, and amendments thereto, delegated the responsibility to local
governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health,
safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Town Council of
the Town of Kingstree, South Carolina does ordain as follows.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 10-15-12; Am. Ord. 2022-03, passed 7-18-22)
§ 151.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The special flood hazard areas of the town are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life, property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures of flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
   (B)   Furthermore, these flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities,
and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or
hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or
otherwise unprotected from flood damages.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 10-15-12; Am. Ord. 2022-03, passed 7-18-22)
§ 151.03 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES.
   (A)   It is the purpose of this chapter to protect human life and health,
minimize property damage, and encourage appropriate construction practices to
minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions by requiring that
uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be
protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction. Uses of the
floodplain which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or
erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion are
restricted or prohibited. These provisions attempt to control the alteration of
natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are
involved in the accommodation of flood waters, and control filling, grading,
dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion.
Additionally, this chapter prevents or regulates the construction of flood
barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood
hazards to other lands.
   (B)   The objectives of this chapter are to protect human life and health,
to help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight
areas, and to insure that potential home buyers are notified that property is
in a flood area. The provisions of this chapter are intended to minimize damage
to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric,
telephone, and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in the floodplain, and
prolonged business interruptions. Also, an important floodplain management
objective of this chapter is to minimize expenditure of public money for costly
flood control projects and rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding.
   (C)   Floodplains are an important asset to the community. They perform
vital natural functions such as temporary storage of floodwaters, moderation of
peak flood flows, maintenance of water quality, groundwater recharge,
prevention of erosion, habitat for diverse natural wildlife populations,
recreational opportunities, and aesthetic quality. These functions are best
served if floodplains are kept in their natural state. Wherever possible, the
natural characteristics of floodplains and their associated wetlands and water
bodies should be preserved and enhanced. Decisions to alter floodplains,
especially floodways and stream channels, should be the result of careful
planning processes that evaluate resource conditions and human needs.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 10-15-12; Am. Ord. 2022-03, passed 7-18-22)
§ 151.04 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
   (A)   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within
the jurisdiction of the Town of Kingstree, South Carolina as identified by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its Flood Insurance Study, dated
October 27, 2022, with accompanying maps and other supporting data that are
hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.
   (B)   Upon annexation any special flood hazard areas identified by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its Flood Insurance Study for the
unincorporated areas of Williamsburg County, with accompanying map and other
data are adopted by reference and declared part of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 10-15-12; Am. Ord. 2022-03, passed 7-18-22)
§ 151.05 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of
this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 10-15-12; Am. Ord. 2022-03, passed 7-18-22)
§ 151.06 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted, or
structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and
other applicable regulations.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 10-15-12; Am. Ord. 2022-03, passed 7-18-22)
§ 151.07 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions shall
be considered as minimum requirements, liberally construed in favor of the
governing body, and deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under state law. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair
any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this
chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions, shall prevail.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 10-15-12; Am. Ord. 2022-03, passed 7-18-22)
§ 151.08 PARTIAL INVALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY.
   If any part of this chapter is declared invalid, the remainder of the
chapter shall not be affected and shall remain in force.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 10-15-12; Am. Ord. 2022-03, passed 7-18-22)
§ 151.09 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
consideration. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the town or by any officer or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 10-15-12; Am. Ord. 2022-03, passed 7-18-22)
DEFINITIONS
§ 151.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE). Structures that are located on
the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure. ACCESSORY STRUCTURES should
constitute a minimal investment (no more than 10% of the value of the primary
structure), may not be used for human habitation, and be designed to have
minimal flood damage potential. Examples of accessory structures are detached
garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, and hay sheds.
   ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING BUILDING). An extension or increase in the floor
area or height of a building or structure. Additions to existing buildings
shall comply with the requirements for new construction regardless as to
whether the addition is a substantial improvement or not. Where a firewall or
loadbearing wall is provided between the addition and the existing building,
the addition(s) shall be considered a separate building and must comply with
the standards for new construction,
   AGRICULTURAL STRUCTURE. A structure used solely for agricultural purposes in
which the use is exclusively in connection with the production, harvesting,
storage, drying, or raising of agricultural commodities, including the raising
of livestock. AGRICULTURAL STRUCTURES are not exempt from the provisions of
this chapter.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the local Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or VO Zone on a community's Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths of one to three feet where a
clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a 1% or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   BASEMENT. Any enclosed area of a building that is below grade on all sides.
   BUILDING. See STRUCTURE.
   COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA. An area of special flood hazard extending from
offshore to the inland limit of the primary frontal dune along an open coast
and any other area subject to velocity wave action from storms or seismic
sources.
   CRITICAL DEVELOPMENT. Development that is critical to the community's public
health and safety, is essential to the orderly functioning of a community,
store or produce highly volatile, toxic or water-reactive materials, or house
occupants that may be insufficiently mobile to avoid loss of life or injury.
Examples of CRITICAL DEVELOPMENT include jails, hospitals, schools, fire
stations, nursing homes, wastewater treatment facilities, water plants, and
gas/oil/propane storage facilities.
   DEVELOPMENT.  Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials.
   ELEVATED BUILDING. A non-basement building built to have the lowest floor
elevated above the ground level by means of solid foundation perimeter walls,
pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls parallel to the flow of water.
   EXECUTIVE ORDER 1 1988 (FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT). Issued by President Carter
in 1977, this order requires that no federally assisted activities be conducted
in or have the potential to affect identified special flood hazard areas,
unless there is no practicable alternative.
   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION.  For the purposes of determining rates, structures
for which the start of construction commenced before September 1, 1987.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION. A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities
for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities,  the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before July 20, 1987.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete slabs).
   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters, or the
unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). An official map of a community, issued by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the areas of
special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of
special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency which contains flood profiles, as well as the Flood Boundary
Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
   FLOOD-RESISTANT MATERIAL. Any building material capable of withstanding
direct and prolonged contact (minimum 72 hours) with floodwaters without
sustaining damage that requires more than low-cost cosmetic repair. Any
material that is water-soluble or is not resistant to alkali or acid in water,
including normal adhesives for above-grade use, is not flood-resistant.
Pressure-treated lumber or naturally decay-resistant lumbers are acceptable
flooring materials. Sheet-type flooring coverings that restrict evaporation
from below and materials that are impervious, but dimensionally unstable are
not acceptable. Materials that absorb or retain water excessively after
submergence are not flood resistant. Please refer to Technical Bulletin 2.,
Flood Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements, available from the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, Class 4 and 5 materials, referenced therein; are
acceptable flood-resistant materials.
   FLOODWAY. the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level
for purposes of floodplain management. FREEBOARD tends to compensate for the
many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the
height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway  conditions, such as
wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of
the watershed.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface,
prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of the structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE.  
      (1)   Any structure that is:
         (a)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places
(a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of the Interior (DOI)) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
         (b)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
         (c)   Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places;
         (d)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified:
            1.   By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of
Interior, or
            2.   Directly by the Secretary of Interior in states without
approved programs.
      (2)   Some structures or districts listed on the State or local
inventories MAY NOT be “Historic” as cited above but have been included on the
inventories because it was believed that the structures or districts have the
potential for meeting the “Historic” structure criteria of the DOI. In order
for these structures to meet NFIP historic structure criteria, it must be
demonstrated and evidenced that the South Carolina Department of Archives and
History has individually determined that the structure or district meets DOI
historic structure criteria.
   INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE (ICC). Applies to all new and renewed flood
insurance policies effective on and after June 1, 1997. The NFIP shall enable
the purchase of insurance to cover the cost of compliance with land use and
control measures established under Section 1361. It provides coverage for the
payment of a claim to help pay for the cost to comply with State or community
floodplain management laws or ordinances after a flood event in which a
building has been declared substantially or repetitively damaged.
   LIMITED STORAGE. An area used for storage and intended to be limited to
incidental items that can withstand exposure to the elements and have low flood
damage potential. Such an area must be of flood resistant or breakaway
material, void of utilities except for essential lighting and cannot be
temperature controlled. If the area is located below the base flood elevation
in an A, AE and Al-A30 zone it must meet the requirements of §
151.41(D) of this chapter. If the area is located below the base flood
elevation in a V, VE and VI-V30 zone it must meet the requirements of §
151.55 of this chapter.
   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE (LAG). An elevation of the lowest ground surface that
touches any structurally attached deck support, exterior walls of a building or
proposed building walls.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided, that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a “recreational vehicle”.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. For the purpose of this chapter, the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or
other datum, to which the base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood
Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) are shown.
   NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD) OF 1929.  As corrected in 1929,
elevation reference points set by the National Geodetic Survey based on mean
sea level.
   NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM (NAVD) OF 1988. Vertical control, as corrected
in 1988, used as the reference datum on Flood Insurance Rate Maps.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structure for which the start of construction commenced on
or after July 20, 1987. The term also includes any subsequent improvements to
such structure.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete slabs) is completed on or after July 20,
1987.
   PRIMARY FRONTAL DUNE. A continuous or nearly continuous mound or ridge of
sand with relatively steep seaward and landward slopes immediately landward and
subject to erosion and overtopping from high tides and waves during coastal
storms. The inland limit of the primary frontal dune occurs at the point where
there is a distinct change from a relatively steep slope to a relatively mild
slope.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   REPETITIVE LOSS.  A building covered by a contract for flood insurance that
has incurred flood-related damages on two occasions during a ten-year period
ending on the date of the event for which a second claim is made, in which the
cost of repairing the flood damage, on the average, equaled or exceeded 25% of
the market value of the building at the time of each such flood event.
   SECTION 1316 OF THE NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE ACT OF 1968. The act provides
that no new flood insurance shall be provided for any property found by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency to have been declared by a state or local
authority to be in violation of state or local ordinances.
   STABLE NATURAL VEGETATION. The first place on the oceanfront where plants
such as sea oats hold sand in place.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. For other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L. 97-348), includes
substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or improvement was within 1 80 days of the permit
date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of
slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for footings, piers or
foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any  wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, including a
gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
   SUBDIVISION. A parcel of land divided into two or more lots.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Such repairs may be undertaken successively, and their costs counted
cumulatively. Please refer to the definition of “substantial improvement”.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.  
      (1)   Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred repetitive loss
or substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term
does not, however, include either:
         (a)   Any project of improvement to a structure to correct existing
violations of State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions or,
         (b)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
historic structure.
      (2)   Permits shall be cumulative for a period of five years. If the
improvement project is conducted in phases, the total of all costs associated
with each phase, beginning with the issuance of the first permit, shall be
utilized to determine whether SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT will occur.
   SUBSTANTIALLY IMPROVED EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. Where
the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets,
utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50% of the value of the streets, utilities
and pads before the repair, reconstruction, or improvement commenced.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from a term or terms of this chapter.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with these regulations.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 10-15-12; Am. Ord. 2022-03, passed 7-18-22)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 151.30 DESIGNATION OF LOCAL FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Code Enforcement Officer or his/her designee is hereby appointed to
administer and implement the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 10-15-12; Am. Ord. 2022-03, passed 7-18-22)
§ 151.31 ADOPTION OF LETTER OF MAP REVISIONS (LOMR).
   All LOMRs that are issued in the areas identified in §
151.04 are hereby adopted.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 10-15-12; Am. Ord. 2022-03, passed 7-18-22)
§ 151.32 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT AND CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Development permit. Application for a development permit shall be made
to the local Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him or her prior to
any development activities. The development permit may include, but not be
limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing: the nature, location,
dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed
structures; and the location of fill materials, storage areas, and drainage
facilities. Specifically, the following information is required:
      (1)   A plot plan that shows the 100-year floodplain contour or a
statement that the entire lot is within the floodplain must be provided by the
development permit applicant when the lot is within or appears to be within the
floodplain as mapped by the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the
floodplain identified pursuant to either §
151.33(J), The Use of Best Available Data or the Standards for Streams Without
Estimated Base Flood Elevations and Floodways of §
151.42. The plot plan must be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a
registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by it. The plot
plan must show the floodway, if any, as identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency or the floodway identified pursuant to either §
151.33(J), The Use of Best Available Data or the Standards for Streams Without
Estimated Base Flood Elevations and Floodways of §
151.42.
      (2)   Where base flood elevation data is provided as set forth in §
151.04 or §
151.33(J), the application for a development permit within the flood hazard
area shall show:
         (a)   The elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest
floor of all new and substantially improved structures; and
         (b)   If the structure will be floodproofed in accordance with the
non-residential construction requirements of §
151.41(B) the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure
will be floodproofed.
      (3)   Where base flood elevation data is not provided as set forth in §
151.04 or §
151.33(J), then the provisions in the standards for streams without estimated
base flood elevations and floodways of §
151.42 must be met.
      (4)   Alteration of watercourse. Where any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development, the application for a
development permit shall include a description of the extent of watercourse
alteration or relocation, an engineering study to demonstrate that the flood-
carrying capacity of the altered or relocated watercourse is maintained and a
map showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation.
   (B)   Certifications.
      (1)   Floodproofing certification.  When a structure is floodproofed, the
applicant shall provide certification from a registered, professional engineer
or architect that the non-residential, floodproofed structure meets the
floodproofing criteria in the non-residential construction requirements of §§
151.41(B) and
151.44(B).
      (2)   Certification during construction. A lowest floor elevation or
floodproofing certification is required after the lowest floor is completed. As
soon as possible after completion of the lowest floor and before any further
vertical construction commences, or floodproofing by whatever construction
means, whichever is applicable, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to
submit to the local Floodplain Administrator a certification of the elevation
of the lowest floor, or floodproofed elevation, whichever is applicable, as
built, in relation to mean sea level. Said certification shall be prepared by
or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional
engineer and certified by it. Any work done prior to submission of the
certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The local Floodplain
Administrator shall review the floor elevation survey data submitted. The
permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted
to proceed shall correct deficiencies detected by such review. Failure to
submit the survey or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be
cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.
      (3)   V-Zone certification. When a structure is located in Zones V, VE,
or VI-30, certification shall be provided from a registered professional
engineer or architect, separate from submitted plans, that new construction and
substantial improvement meets the criteria for the coastal high hazard areas
outlined in Article IV.F.5.
      (4)   As-built certification. Upon completion of the development a
registered professional engineer or land surveyor, in accordance with South
Carolina law, shall certify according to the requirements of divisions (B)(1),
(2) and (3) above that the development is built in accordance with the
submitted plans and previous pre-development certifications.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 10-15-12; Am. Ord. 2022-03, passed 7-18-22)
§ 151.33 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE LOCAL FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. 
   The duties and responsibilities of the local Floodplain Administrator shall
include, but not be limited to:
   (A)   Permit review. Review all development permits to assure that the
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
   (B)   Requirement of federal and/or state permits. Review proposed
development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from those
governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law,
including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of
1972, 33 U.S.C 1334.
   (C)   Watercourse alterations. 
      (1)   Notify adjacent communities and the South Carolina Department of
Natural Resources, Land, Water, and Conservation Division, State Coordinator
for the National Flood Insurance Program, prior to any alteration or relocation
of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
      (2)   In addition to the notifications required watercourse alterations
per division (C)(1) above, written reports of maintenance records must be
maintained to show that maintenance has been provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is
maintained. This maintenance must consist of a comprehensive program of
periodic inspections, and routine channel clearing and dredging, or other
related functions. The assurance shall consist of a description of maintenance
activities, frequency of performance, and the local official responsible for
maintenance performance. Records shall be kept on file for FEMA inspection.
      (3)   If the proposed project will modify the configuration of the
watercourse and/or floodway or change the base flood elevations for which a
detailed Flood Insurance Study has been developed, §
151.41(G) shall apply.
      (4)   Within 60 days of completion of an alteration of a watercourse,
referenced in the certification requirements of §
151.32(B)(4), the applicant shall submit as-built certification, by a
registered professional engineer, to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   (D)   Floodway encroachments. Prevent encroachments within floodways unless
the certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of §
151.41(E) are met.
   (E)   Adjoining floodplains. Cooperate with neighboring communities with
respect to the management of adjoining floodplains and/or flood-related erosion
areas in order to prevent aggravation of existing hazards.
   (F)   Notifying adjacent communities. Notify adjacent communities prior to
permitting substantial commercial developments and large subdivisions to be
undertaken in areas of special flood hazard and/or flood-related erosion
hazards.
   (G)   Certification requirements.
      (1)   Obtain and review actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level)
of the lowest floor of all new or substantially improved structures, in
accordance with administrative procedures outlined in §
151.32(B)(2) or the coastal high hazard area requirements outlined in Article
IV.F.5.
      (2)   Obtain the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to
which the new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in
accordance with the floodproofing certification outlined in §
151.32(B)(1).
      (3)   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain
certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in
accordance with the non-residential construction requirements outlined in §
151.41(B).
      (4)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that
the design, specifications and plans for construction are in compliance with
the provisions contained in the coastal high hazard area requirements outlined
in Article IV.F.5.
   (H)   Map interpretation. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact
location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where
there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions), make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the
location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the
interpretation.
   (I)   Prevailing authority. Where a map boundary showing an area of special
flood hazard and field elevations disagree, the base flood elevations for flood
protection elevations (as found on an elevation profile, floodway data table,
etc.) shall prevail. The correct information should be submitted to FEMA as per
the map maintenance activity requirements outlined in §
151.41(G)(2).
   (J)   Use of best available data. When base flood elevation data and
floodway data has not been provided in accordance with §
151.04, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize best available base flood
elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other
source, including data developed pursuant to §
151.42(A), in order to administer the provisions of this chapter. Data from
preliminary, draft, and final Flood Insurance Studies constitutes best
available data from a federal, state, or other source, which must be developed
using hydraulic models meeting the minimum requirement of NFIP approved model.
If an appeal is pending on the study in accordance with 44 CFR Ch. 1, Part 67.5
and 67.6, the data does not have to be used.
   (K)   Special flood hazard area/topographic boundaries conflict. When the
exact location of boundaries of the areas special flood hazards conflict with
the current, natural topography information at the site; the site information
takes precedence when the lowest adjacent grade is at or above the BFE, the
property owner may apply and be approved for a Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA)
by FEMA. The local Floodplain Administrator in the permit file will maintain a
copy of the Letter of Map Amendment issued from FEMA.
   (L)   On-site inspections. Make on-site inspections of projects in
accordance with the administrative procedures outlined in §
151.34(A).
   (M)   Administrative notices. Serve notices of violations, issue stop-work
orders, revoke permits and take corrective actions in accordance with the
administrative procedures in §
151.34.
   (N)   Records maintenance. Maintain all records pertaining to the
administration of this chapter and make these records available for public
inspection.
   (O)   Annexations and detachments. Notify the South Carolina Department of
Natural Resources Land, Water and Conservation Division, State Coordinator for
the National Flood Insurance Program within six months, of any annexations or
detachments that include special flood hazard areas.
   (P)   Federally funded development. All federally funded development must
comply with all applicable Executive Orders. Evidence of compliance with the
executive order must be submitted as part of the permit review process.
   (Q)   Substantial damage determination. Perform an assessment of damage from
any origin to the structure to determine the percent damage, which is based on
the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   (R)   Substantial improvement determinations.  
      (1)   Perform an assessment of permit applications for improvements or
repairs (to include percent damage) to be made to a building or structure that
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction. Cost of work counted for determining if and when substantial
improvement to a structure occurs shall be cumulative for a period of five
years. If the improvement project is conducted in phases, the total of all
costs associated with each phase, beginning with the issuance of the first
permit, shall be utilized to determine whether “substantial improvement” will
occur.
      (2)   The market values shall be determined by one of the following
methods:
         (a)   The current assessed building value as determined by the
county's assessor's office or the value of an appraisal performed by a licensed
appraiser at the expense of the owner within the past six months.
         (b)   One or more certified appraisals from a registered professional
licensed appraiser in accordance with the laws of South Carolina. The appraisal
shall indicate actual replacement value of the building or structure in its
pre-improvement condition, less the cost of site improvements and depreciation
for functionality and obsolescence.
         (c)   Real estate purchase contract within six months prior to the
date of the application for a permit.
         (d)   Computed actual cash value. This value is based on the average
cost of construction per square foot less the depreciation value.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 10-15-12; Am. Ord. 2022-03, passed 7-18-22)
§ 151.34 ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Inspections of work in progress. As the work pursuant to a permit
progresses, the local Floodplain Administrator shall make as many inspections
of the work as may be necessary to ensure that the work is being done according
to the provisions of the local ordinance and the terms of the permit. In
exercising this power, the Floodplain Administrator has a right, upon
presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the
territorial jurisdiction at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection
or other enforcement action.
   (B)   Stop-work orders. Whenever a building or part thereof is being
constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in violation of this chapter,
the Floodplain Administrator may order the work to be immediately stopped. The
stop-work order shall be in writing and directed to the person doing the work.
The stop-work order shall state the specific work to be stopped, the specific
reasons for the stoppage, and the conditions under which the work may be
resumed. Violation of a stop-work order constitutes a misdemeanor.
   (C)   Revocation of permits. The local Floodplain Administrator may revoke
and require the return of the development permit by notifying the permit holder
in writing, stating the reason for the revocation. Permits shall be revoked for
any substantial departure from the approved application, plans, or
specifications; for refusal or failure to comply with the requirements of state
or local laws; or for false statements or misrepresentations made in securing
the permit. Any permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable state or
local law may also be revoked.
   (D)   Periodic inspections. The local Floodplain Administrator and each
member of his/her inspections department shall have a right, upon presentation
of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the territorial
jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour for the purposes of
inspection or other enforcement action. Inspections may be made during
construction and post construction to ensure continued compliance with the
NFIP.
   (E)   Violations to be corrected. When the local Floodplain Administrator
finds violations of applicable state and local laws, it shall be his/her duty
to notify the owner or occupant of the building of the violation. The owner or
occupant shall immediately remedy each of the violations of law on the property
he/she owns.
   (F)   Actions in event of failure to take corrective action. If the owner of
a building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective action, the
Floodplain Administrator shall give him/her written notice, by certified or
registered mail to his/her last known address or by personal service, that:
      (1)   The building or property is in violation of this chapter;
      (2)   A hearing will be held before the local Floodplain Administrator at
a designated place and time, not later than ten days after the date of the
notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard in person or by
counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter; and
      (3)   Following the hearing, the local Floodplain Administrator may issue
such order to alter, vacate, or demolish the building; or to remove fill as
appears appropriate.
   (G)   Order to take corrective action. If, upon a hearing held pursuant to
the notice prescribed above, the Floodplain Administrator shall find that the
building or development is in violation of this chapter, he/she shall make an
order in writing to the owner, requiring the owner to remedy the violation
within such period, not more than 180 days the Floodplain Administrator may
prescribe; provided that where the Floodplain Administrator finds that there is
imminent danger to life or other property, he/she may order that corrective
action be taken in such lesser period as may be feasible.
   (H)   Appeal. Any owner who has received an order to take corrective action
may appeal from the order to the local elected governing body by giving notice
of appeal in writing to the Floodplain Administrator and the Clerk within ten
days following issuance of the final order. In the absence of an appeal, the
order of the Floodplain Administrator shall be final. The local governing body
shall hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may affirm, modify and
affirm, or revoke the order.
   (I)   Failure to comply with order. If the owner of a building or property
fails to comply with an order to take corrective action from which no appeal
has been taken, or fails to comply with an order of the governing body
following an appeal, he/she shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
punished in the discretion of the court.
   (J)   Denial of flood insurance under the NFIP. If a structure is declared
in violation of this chapter and after all other penalties are exhausted to
achieve compliance with this chapter then the local Floodplain Administrator
shall notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to initiate a
Section 1316 of the National Flood insurance Act of 1968 action against the
structure upon the finding that the violator refuses to bring the violation
into compliance with the chapter. Once a violation has been remedied the local
Floodplain Administrator shall notify FEMA of the remedy and ask that the
Section 1316 be rescinded.
   (K)   The following documents are incorporated by reference and may be used
by the local Floodplain Administrator to provide further guidance and
interpretation of this chapter as found on FEMA's website at www.fema.gov:
      (1)   FEMA 55 Coastal Construction Manual;
      (2)   All FEMA Technical Bulletins;
      (3)   All FEMA Floodplain Management Bulletins;
      (4)   FEMA 348 Protecting Building Utilities from Flood Damage;
      (5)   FEMA 499 Home Builder’s Guide to Coastal Construction Technical
Fact Sheets.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 10-15-12; Am. Ord. 2022-03, passed 7-18-22)
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 151.40 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   Development may not occur in the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) where
alternative locations exist due to the inherent hazards and risks involved.
Before a permit is issued, the applicant shall demonstrate that new structures
cannot be located out of the SFHA and that encroachments onto the SFHA are
minimized. In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are
required:
   (A)   Reasonably safe from flooding. Review all permit applications to
determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from
flooding.
   (B)   Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure.
   (C)   Flood resistant materials and equipment.  All new construction and
substantial improvements shall be constructed with flood resistant materials
and utility equipment resistant to flood damage in accordance with Technical
Bulletin 2, Flood Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements, available from the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   (D)   Minimize flood damage. All new construction and substantial
improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood
damages.
   (E)   Critical development. All new construction and substantial
improvements that meet the definition of critical development shall be elevated
to the 500-year flood elevation or be elevated to the highest known historical
flood elevation (where records are available), whichever is greater. If no data
exists establishing the 500-year flood elevation or the highest known
historical flood elevation, the applicant shall provide a hydrologic and
hydraulic engineering analysis that generates 500-year flood elevation data.
   (F)   Utilities.  Electrical, ventilation, plumbing, heating and air
conditioning equipment (including ductwork), and other service facilities shall
be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of the base flood plus one foot.
   (G)   Water supply systems. All new and replacement water supply systems
shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
system.
   (H)   Sanitary sewage systems. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems
shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. On-site waste
disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them
or contamination from them during flooding.
   (I)   Gas or liquid storage tanks. All gas or liquid storage tanks, either
located above ground or buried, shall be anchored to prevent floatation and
lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads.
   (J)   Alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements. Any alteration,
repair, reconstruction, or improvement to a structure that is in compliance
with the provisions of this chapter, shall meet the requirements of “new
construction” as contained in this chapter. This includes post-FIRM development
and structures.
   (K)   Non-conforming buildings or uses.  Non-conforming buildings or uses,
including historic structures, may not be enlarged, replaced, or rebuilt unless
such enlargement or reconstruction is accomplished in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter.
   (L)   Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). A building must meet the
specific standards for floodplain construction outlined in § 151.41, as well as
any applicable ADA requirements. The ADA is not justification for issuing a
variance or otherwise waiving these requirements. Also, the cost of
improvements required to meet the ADA provisions shall be included in the costs
of the improvements for calculating substantial improvement.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 10-15-12; Am. Ord. 2022-03, passed 7-18-22)
§ 151.41 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazard (Zones A, AE, AH, AO, Al-30) unless
otherwise specified where base flood elevation data has been provided, as set
forth in §
151.04 or §
151.33(J), the following provisions are required:
   (A)   Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement
of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the
lowest floor elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. No
basements are permitted. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to
elevate a structure, flood openings sufficient to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces, shall be provided in accordance with the elevated
buildings requirements in §
151.31(D).
   (B)   Non-residential construction.
      (1)   New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial, or non-residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall
have the lowest floor elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the
base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to
elevate a structure, flood openings sufficient to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces, shall be provided in accordance with the elevated
buildings requirements in §
151.41(D). No basements are permitted. Structures located in A-zones may be
floodproofed in lieu of elevation provided that all areas of the structure
below the required elevation are watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water, using structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of
buoyancy.
      (2)   A registered, professional engineer or architect shall certify that
the standards of this division are satisfied. Such certifications shall be
provided to the official as set forth in the floodproofing certification
requirements in §
151.32(B)(1). A variance may be considered for wet-floodproofing agricultural
structures in accordance with the criteria outlined in §
151.54 of this chapter. Agricultural structures not meeting the criteria of §
151.54 must meet the non-residential construction standards and all other
applicable provisions of this chapter. Structures that are floodproofed are
required to have an approved maintenance plan with an annual exercise. The
local Floodplain Administrator must approve the maintenance plan and receive
notification of the annual exercise.
   (C)   Manufactured homes.
      (1)   Manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved on
sites outside a manufactured home park or subdivision, in a new manufactured
home park or subdivision, in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park
or subdivision, or in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on
which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as the result of a
flood, must be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of
the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood
elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system
to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
      (2)   Manufactured homes that are to be placed or substantially improved
on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision that are not
subject to the provisions for residential construction in division (C)(1) above
of this section must be elevated so that either:
         (a)   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower
than one foot above the base flood elevation, or
         (b)   The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers
or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less
than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement
or in accordance with Section 40-29 of the South Carolina Manufactured Housing
Board Regulations and SC Regulations Sec. 79-42, whichever is more restrictive.
      (3)   An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all
residents of all new, substantially improved or substantially damaged
manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within areas of special flood
hazard. This plan shall be filed with and approved by the local Floodplain
Administrator and the local emergency manager.
   (D)   Elevated buildings. New construction and substantial improvements of
elevated buildings that include fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor
that are usable solely for the parking of vehicles, building access, or limited
storage in an area other than a basement, and which are subject to flooding
shall be designed to preclude finished space and be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of floodwaters.
      (1)   Designs for complying with this requirement must either be
certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed all of the
following minimum criteria:
         (a)   Provide a minimum of two openings on different walls having a
total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area.
         (b)   The bottom of each opening must be no more than one foot above
the higher of the interior or exterior grade immediately under the opening.
         (c)   Only the portions of openings that are below the base flood
elevation (BFE) plus freeboard can be counted towards the required net open
area. If the Lowest Adjacent Grade (LAG) is between the BFE and the freeboard,
openings are still required until a LOMA has been approved.
         (d)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in
both directions.
         (e)   Fill placed around foundation walls must be graded so that the
grade inside the enclosed area is equal to or higher than the adjacent grade
outside the building on at least one side of the building.
      (2)   Hazardous velocities. Hydrodynamic pressure must be considered in
the design of any foundation system where velocity waters or the potential for
debris flow exists. If flood velocities are excessive (greater than five feet
per second), foundation systems other than solid foundations walls should be
considered so that obstructions to damaging flood flows are minimized.
      (3)   Enclosures below lowest floor.
         (a)   Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to
allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance
equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or
entry to the living area (stairway or elevator).
         (b)   The interior portion of such enclosed area shall be unfinished
or finished with flood resistant material and not partitioned into separate
rooms, must be void of utilities except for essential lighting as required for
safety, and cannot be temperature controlled. A ground fault interrupt breaker
may be installed below the required lowest floor elevation specified in the
specific standards outlined in divisions (A), (B) and (C) above of this
section.
         (c)   All construction materials below the required lowest floor
elevation specified in the specific standards outlined in divisions (A), (B),
(C) and (D) of this section should be of flood resistant materials.
   (E)   Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in
§
151.04, are areas designated as floodways. The floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters that carry debris and
potential projectiles and has erosion potential. The following provisions shall
apply within such areas:
      (1)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, additions, and other developments shall be permitted unless:
         (a)   It has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the
proposed encroachment would not result in any impact of the flood levels during
the occurrence of the base flood. Such certification and technical data shall
be presented to the local Floodplain Administrator, or
         (b)   A Conditional Letter of Map revision (CLOMR) has been approved
by FEMA. A Letter of Map Revision must be obtained upon completion of the
proposed development.
      (2)   If division (E)(1) above is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this subchapter (§§
151.40 through
151.44).
      (3)   A replacement manufactured home may be allowed provided the
anchoring and the elevation standards of division (C) above of this section and
the encroachment standards of division (E)(1) above may apply except when the
replacement manufactured home is the same size as the existing.
      (4)   Permissible uses within floodways may include general farming,
pasture, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, forestry, wildlife sanctuary,
game farm, and other similar agricultural, wildlife, and related uses. Also,
lawns, gardens, play areas, picnic grounds, and hiking and horseback riding
trails are acceptable uses, provided that they do not employ structures or
fill. Substantial development of a permissible use may require a no-impact
certification. The uses listed in this division are permissible only if and to
the extent that they do not cause any increase in base flood elevations or
changes to the floodway configuration.
   (F)   Recreational vehicles.
      (1)   A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is:
         (a)   On wheels or jacking system,
         (b)   Attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and
security devices; and
         (c)   Has no permanently attached additions.
      (2)   Recreational vehicles placed on sites shall either be:
         (a)   On site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
         (b)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or
         (c)   Meet the development permit and certification requirements of §
151.32, general standards outlined in §
151.40, and manufactured homes standards in divisions (C) and (D) above of this
section.
   (G)   Map maintenance activities. The National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP) requires flood data to be reviewed and approved by FEMA. This ensures
that flood maps, studies and other data identified in §
151.04 accurately represent flooding conditions so appropriate floodplain
management criteria are based on current data. The following map maintenance
activities are identified and shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard:
      (1)   Requirement to submit new technical data.
         (a)   For all development proposals that impact floodway/floodplain
delineations or base flood elevations, the community shall ensure that a Letter
of Map Revision reflecting the impacts be submitted to FEMA as soon as
practicable, but no later than six months from the end of construction of the
impact. These development proposals include but not limited to:
            1.   Floodway encroachments that increase or decrease base flood
elevations or alter floodway boundaries;
            2.   Fill sites to be used for the placement of proposed structures
where the applicant desires to remove the site from the special flood hazard
area;
            3.   Alteration of watercourses that result in a relocation or
elimination of the special flood hazard area, including stream restoration and
the placement of culverts;
            4.   Subdivision or large-scale development proposals requiring the
establishment of base flood elevations in accordance with §
151.42(A); and
            5.   Any development that will alter the boundaries of the area of
special flood hazard.
         (b)   It is the responsibility of the applicant to have technical
data, required in accordance with this division (G), prepared in a format
required for a Conditional Letter of Map Revision or Letter of Map Revision,
and submitted to FEMA. Submittal and processing fees for these map revisions
shall also be the responsibility of the applicant.
         (c)   The Local Floodplain Administrator shall require a Conditional
Letter of Map Revision prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit
for:
            1.   Proposed floodway encroachments that increase the base flood
elevation; or
            2.   Proposed development which increases the base flood elevation
by more than one foot in areas where FEMA has provided base flood elevations
but no floodway.
         (d)   The Local Floodplain Administrator may require a Conditional
Letter of Map Revision for any development that they want the impacts to be
evaluated prior to issuance of a permit.
         (e)   Floodplain development permits issued by the local Floodplain
Administrator shall be conditioned upon the applicant obtaining a Letter of Map
Revision from FEMA for any development proposal subject to this division (G).
      (2)   Right to submit new technical data. The Floodplain Administrator
may request changes to any of the information shown on an effective map that
does not impact floodplain or floodway delineations or base flood elevations,
such as labeling or planimetric details. Such a submission shall include
appropriate supporting documentation made in writing by the local jurisdiction
and may be submitted at any time.
   (H)   Accessory structures. Detached accessory structures used only for
parking of vehicles and storage are permitted at grade if:
      (1)   In special flood hazard areas other than coastal high hazard areas
(Zones A, AE, AH, AO and Al -30), they are not larger than one story and 600
square feet in area. Walls must have openings in compliance with division (D)
(1) above of this section.
      (2)   In coastal high hazard areas (Zones V, VE, VI -30 and VO) they are
not larger than 100 square feet and in compliance with Article IV-F.
      (3)   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
      (4)   Flood damage resistant materials used below the base elevation in
accordance with Technical Bulletin 2, Flood Damage Resistant Materials
Requirement.
      (5)   Mechanical, electrical, and utility equipment comply with the
requirements of §
151.40.
      (6)   Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential.
      (7)   Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the
building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
   (I)   Swimming pool utility equipment rooms. If the building cannot be built
at or above the BFE, because of functionality of the equipment then a structure
to house the utilities for the pool may be built below the BFE with the
following provisions:
      (1)   Meet the requirements for accessory structures in division (H)
above of this section.
      (2)   The utilities must be anchored to prevent flotation and shall be
designed to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components
during conditions of the base flood.
   (J)   Elevators.
      (1)   Install a float switch system or another system that provides the
same level of safety necessary for all elevators where there is a potential for
the elevator cab to descend below the BFE during a flood per FEMA's Technical
Bulletin 4 Elevator Installation for Buildings Located in Special Flood Hazard
Areas.
      (2)   All equipment that may have to be installed below the BFE such as
counter weight roller guides, compensation cable and pulleys, and oil buffers
for traction elevators and the jack assembly for a hydraulic elevator must be
constructed using flood-resistant materials where possible per FEMA's Technical
Bulletin 4 Elevator Installation for Buildings Located in Special Flood Hazard
Areas.
   (K)   Fill. An applicant shall demonstrate that fill is the only alternative
to raising the building to meet the residential and non-residential
construction requirements of divisions (A) or (B) above of this section, and
that the amount of fill used will not affect the flood storage capacity or
adversely affect adjacent properties. The following provisions shall apply to
all fill placed in the special flood hazard area:
      (1)   Fill may not be placed in the floodway unless it is in accordance
with the requirements in division (E)(1) above of this section.
      (2)   Fill may not be placed in tidal or non-tidal wetlands without the
required state and federal permits.
      (3)   Fill must consist of soil and rock materials only. A registered
professional geotechnical engineer may use dredged material as fill only upon
certification of suitability. Landfills, rubble fills, dumps, and sanitary
fills are not permitted in the floodplain.
      (4)   Fill used to support structures must comply with ASTM Standard D-
698, and its suitability to support structures certified by a registered,
professional engineer.
      (5)   Fill slopes shall be no greater than two horizontal to one
vertical. Flatter slopes may be required where velocities may result in
erosion.
      (6)   The use of fill shall not increase flooding or cause drainage
problems on neighboring properties.
      (7)   Fill may not be used for structural support in the coastal high
hazard areas.
      (8)   Shall meet the requirements of FEMA Technical Bulletin 10, Ensuring
That Structures Built On Fill In or Near Special Flood Hazard Areas Are
Reasonably Safe From Flooding.
   (L)   Standards for subdivision proposals and other development.
      (1)   All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall
be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and are subject to all
applicable standards in these regulations.
      (2)   All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall
have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
      (3)   All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall
have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.
      (4)   The applicant shall meet the requirement to submit technical data
to FEMA in division (G) above of this section when a hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis is completed that generates base flood elevations.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 10-15-12; Am. Ord. 2022-03, passed 7-18-22)
§ 151.42 STANDARDS FOR STREAMS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS AND
FLOODWAYS.
   Located within the areas of special flood hazard (Zones A and V) established
in §
151.04, are small streams where no base flood data has been provided and where
no floodways have been identified. The following provisions apply within such
areas.
   (A)   In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data
are not available, the applicant shall provide a hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering analysis that generates base flood elevations for all subdivision
proposals and other proposed developments containing at least 50 lots or five
acres, whichever is less.
   (B)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and new development shall be permitted within 100 feet of the
stream bank unless certification with supporting technical data by a registered
professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachments shall
not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base
flood discharge.
   (C)   If division (A) above is satisfied and base flood elevation data is
available from other sources, all new construction and substantial improvements
within such areas shall comply with all applicable flood hazard ordinance
provisions of this subchapter and shall be elevated or floodproofed in
accordance with elevations established in accordance with this chapter.
   (D)   Data from preliminary, and draft flood insurance studies constitutes
best available data. Refer to FEMA Floodplain Management Technical Bulletin 1-
98 Use of Flood Insurance Study (FIS) Data as Available Data. If an appeal is
pending on the study in accordance with 44 CFR Ch. 1, Part 67.5 and 67.6, the
data does not have to be used.
   (E)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is not available from a federal,
state, or other source one of the following methods must be used to determine a
BFE in Approximate Zone A Areas:
      (1)   Contour interpolation.
         (a)   Superimpose approximate Zone A boundaries onto a topographic map
and estimate a BFE.
         (b)   Add one-half of the contour interval of the topographic map that
is used to the BFE.
      (2)   Data extrapolation. A BFE can be determined if a site within 500
feet upstream of the project site has a full detailed study for which a 100-
year profile has been computed, and the floodplain and channel bottom slope
characteristics are relatively similar to the downstream reaches. No hydraulic
structures shall be present.
      (3)   Hydrologic and hydraulic calculations. Perform hydrologic and
hydraulic calculations to determine BFEs using FEMA approved methods and
software.
      (4)   A Zone model. A BFE can be pulled from the model and applied if
determined that the BFE is useable.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 10-15-12; Am. Ord. 2022-03, passed 7-18-22)
§ 151.43 STANDARDS FOR STREAMS WITH ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS BUT
WITHOUT FLOODWAYS.
   Along rivers and streams where base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided
but no floodway is identified for a special flood hazard area on the FIRM or in
the FIS.
   (A)   No encroachments including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, or other development shall be permitted unless certification with
supporting technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided
demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase
the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point
within the community.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 10-15-12; Am. Ord. 2022-03, passed 7-18-22)
§ 151.44 STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (AO ZONES).
   Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in §
151.04, are areas designated as shallow flooding. The following provisions
shall apply within such areas.
   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures shall have the lowest floor elevated to at least as high as the
depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, in feet, above the
highest adjacent grade. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor shall
be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade.
   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential
structures shall:
      (1)   Have the lowest floor elevated to at least as high as the depth
number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, in feet, above the highest
adjacent grade. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor shall be
elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade; or
      (2)   Be completely flood-proofed together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities to or above that level so that any space below that level
is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Certification is required as stated
in §
151.32.
   (C)   All structures on slopes must have drainage paths around them to guide
water away from the structures.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 10-15-12; Am. Ord. 2022-03, passed 7-18-22)
VARIANCE PROVISIONS
§ 151.50 ESTABLISHMENT OF APPEAL BOARD.
   The Kingstree Planning Commission, as established by the Town of Kingstree
shall hear and decide requests for variances from the requirements of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 10-15-12; Am. Ord. 2022-03, passed 7-18-22)
§ 151.51 RIGHT TO APPEAL.
   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board or any taxpayer may
appeal such decision to the court.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 10-15-12; Am. Ord. 2022-03, passed 7-18-22)
§ 151.52 HISTORIC STRUCTURES.
   Variances may be issued for the repair of rehabilitation of historic
structures upon the determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure
and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character
and design of the structure.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 10-15-12; Am. Ord. 2022-03, passed 7-18-22)
§ 151.53 FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDANT USES.
   Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a
functionally dependant use, provided the criteria of this subchapter are met,
no reasonable alternative exist, and the development is protected by methods
that minimize flood damage and create no additional threat to public safety.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 10-15-12; Am. Ord. 2022-03, passed 7-18-22)
§ 151.54 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND AGRICULTURAL STRUCTURES.
   A variance is authorized to be issued for the construction or substantial
improvement of accessory structures and agricultural structures provided the
requirements of this section and the following are satisfied:
   (A)   Accessory structures. A determination that the proposed accessory
structure:
      (1)   Represents a minimal investment and has low damage potential
(amount of physical damage, contents damage, and loss of function).
      (2)   Is larger than the size limits specified in §
151.41(H).
      (3)   Complies with the wet floodproofing construction requirement of
division (C) below.
   (B)   Agricultural structures. A determination that the proposed
agricultural structure:
      (1)   Is used exclusively in connection with the production, harvesting,
storage, raising, or drying of agricultural commodities and livestock, or
storage of tools or equipment used in connection with these purposes or uses,
and will be restricted to such exclusive uses.
      (2)   Has low damage potential (amount of physical damage, contents
damage, and loss of function).
      (3)   Does not increase risks and pose a danger to public health, safety,
and welfare if flooded and contents are released, including but not limited to
the effects of flooding on manure storage, livestock confinement operations,
liquified natural gas terminals, and production and storage of highly volatile,
toxic, or water-reactive materials.
      (4)   Complies with the wet floodproofing construction requirements of
division (C) below.
   (C)   Wet floodproofing construction requirements. Wet floodproofed
structures shall:
      (1)   Be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
      (2)   Have flood damage resistant materials below the base flood
elevation built in accordance with Technical Bulletin 2, Flood Damage Resistant
Materials Requirement.
      (3)   Have mechanical, electrical, and utility equipment in compliance
with the requirements of §
151.40(F).
      (4)   In special flood hazards area, have flood openings in compliance
with the requirements of §
151.41(D)(1).
   (D)   Variances shall not be allowed in Coastal High Hazard Areas.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 10-15-12; Am. Ord. 2022-03, passed 7-18-22)
§ 151.55 CONSIDERATIONS.
   In passing upon such applications, the Appeal Board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other
sections of this chapter, and:
   (A)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury
of others;
   (B)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage, and
the safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles;
   (C)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
   (D)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
   (E)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
   (F)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or
erosion damage, for the proposed use;
   (G)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development, and the relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for that area;
   (H)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site; and
   (I)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 10-15-12; Am. Ord. 2022-03, passed 7-18-22)
§ 151.56 FINDINGS.
   Findings listed above shall be submitted to the Appeal Board, in writing,
and included in the application for a variance. Additionally, comments from the
Department of Natural Resources, Land, Water and Conservation Division, State
Coordinator's Office, may be provided to the Appeal Board upon request and
included in the permit file.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 10-15-12; Am. Ord. 2022-03, passed 7-18-22)
§ 151.57 FLOODWAYS.
   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase
in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result unless a CLOMR is
obtained prior to issuance of the variance. In order to ensure the project is
built in compliance with the CLOMR for which the variance is granted the
applicant must provide a bond for 100% of the cost to perform the development.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 10-15-12; Am. Ord. 2022-03, passed 7-18-22)
§ 151.58 CONDITIONS.
   Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this
chapter, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. The
following conditions shall apply to all variances.
   (A)   Variances may not be issued when the variance will make the structure
in violation of other federal, state, or local laws, regulations, or
ordinances.
   (B)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance
is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
   (C)   Variances shall only be issued upon a showing of good and sufficient
cause, a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship, and a determination that the granting of a variance will
not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
   (D)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation (BFE) and the
elevation to which the structure is to be built and a written statement that
the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk. Such
notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions.
   (E)   The local Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) upon request.
   (F)   Variances shall not be issued for unpermitted development or other
development that is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
Violations must be corrected in accordance with §
151.34.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 10-15-12; Am. Ord. 2022-03, passed 7-18-22)
LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS
§ 151.60 EFFECTS ON RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES UNDER EXISTING FLOOD DAMAGE
PREVENTION ORDINANCE.
   This chapter in part comes forward by re-enactment of some of the provisions
of the flood damage prevention ordinance enacted October 15, 2012 and it is not
the intention to repeal but rather to re-enact and continue to enforce without
interruption of such existing provisions, so that all rights and liabilities
that have accrued there under are reserved and may be enforced. The enactment
of this chapter shall not affect any action, suit or proceeding instituted or
pending. All provisions of the flood damage prevention ordinance of The Town of
Kingstree enacted on October 15, 2012, as amended, which are not reenacted
herein, are repealed.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 10-15-12; Am. Ord. 2022-03, passed 7-18-22)
§ 151.61 EFFECT UPON OUTSTANDING BUILDING PERMITS.
   Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans,
construction, size or designated use of any building, structure or part thereof
for which a building permit has been granted by the Chief Building Inspector or
his authorized agents before the time of passage of this chapter; provided,
however, that when start of construction has not begun under such outstanding
permit before the passage of this chapter, construction or use shall be in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 10-15-12; Am. Ord. 2022-03, passed 7-18-22)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of
its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a
misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any
of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more that $500
or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both. Each day the violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained
shall prevent the town from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to
prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. 2012-06, passed 10-15-12; Am. Ord. 2022-03, passed 7-18-22)
CHAPTER 152: MOBILE HOMES
Section
   
152.01   Provisions of zoning ordinance apply
   
152.02   Permit required
   
152.03   Establishment of mobile home parks
   
152.04   Provisions of State Board of Health
   
152.05   Manufactured and mobile home standards
   
152.06   Violations; abatement
§ 152.01 PROVISIONS OF ZONING ORDINANCE APPLY.
   All mobile homes, manufactured housing, house cars, coaches, trailers or
similar structures, hereinafter called units, for human habitation shall be
subject to the same regulations as now govern other lots and residences under
what is known as the zoning ordinance of the town. Definitions, restrictions
and provisions of the zoning ordinance shall be applicable to such units
insofar as the same may be applied thereto. For the purpose of classification
all such units are hereby declared to be residences and zoned as such.
('86 Code, § 5.601)
§ 152.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Before any such unit described in §
152.01 for human habitation may be placed or located on any lot or parcel of
land within the limits of the town, the owner thereof or person using the same
for the purpose of such habitation, shall obtain from the proper authorities of
the town a permit for the location thereof, which shall be known as a
"situation permit" for the same.
('86 Code, § 5.602)
§ 152.03 ESTABLISHMENT OF MOBILE HOME PARKS.
   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the establishment of mobile home
courts or parks where more than one such unit might be parked, but the
establishment of such shall be only by application to the Board of Adjustment
for reclassification of the premises to that of such court or park and it shall
be zoned as commercial and licensed as such.
('86 Code, § 5.603)
§ 152.04 PROVISIONS OF STATE BOARD OF HEALTH.
   All such units and mobile home courts or parks shall be subject to all
rules, regulations and provisions of the State Board of Health relating to
environmental sanitation and sanitation engineering.
('86 Code, § 5.604)
§ 152.05 MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOME STANDARDS.
   (A)   General requirements. All manufactured and mobile home housing shall
conform to the following requirements:
      (1)   All manufactured housing shall be built according to the Federal
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Code (245 CFR 3280),
enacted June 15, 1976, as evidenced by the HUD certifications plats;
      (2)   No manufactured home over ten years old will be allowed to be
brought in and set up within the town limits. All housing must be wind zone
two;
      (3)   All manufactured housing shall be installed in conformance with the
requirements of Section 19-425.39 of the South Carolina Code of Regulations;
      (4)   It shall be unlawful to relocate a manufactured home from any site
within the town to any other site without first obtaining a Zoning
Certification Statement, a setup permit and/or moving permit from the
Department;
      (5)   It shall be unlawful to install or store a manufactured home on any
parcel in the town without a permit from the Department;
      (6)   No power company shall connect any source of power to a
manufactured home without an electric power release from the Department;
      (7)   It shall be unlawful for any manufactured home to receive
electricity by any means other than a separated electric meter;
      (8)   No manufactured home shall receive an installation permit unless it
complies with all the relevant criteria of this Code;
      (9)   When a manufactured home is replaced with another unit, the
replaced unit shall be removed from the subject parcel within 14 days;
      (10)    Connection to water/sewer is approved upon CEO inspection;
      (11)    It shall be unlawful to use a manufactured home, unless otherwise
specifically certified by HUD, for any purpose other than living
accommodations;
      (12)    It shall be unlawful for any person, manufactured home
contractor, manufactured home installer, manufactured home manufacturer,
manufactured home repairer, manufactured home retail dealer, manufactured home
retail salesman or manufactured home representative to deliver, place, or cause
to be delivered or placed, any manufactured home on any prospective site in the
incorporated portion of the town without first obtaining a Zoning Certification
Statement from the Department;
      (13)    The Zoning Certification Statement shall not be issued unless the
Department finds the proposed location of the manufactured home is in
substantial compliance with all the relevant site development regulations in
force at the time the request is submitted to the Department; and
      (14)    The Zoning Certification Statement shall apply only to the
specific site being requested and shall not be transferable to another site.
   (B)   Safety and appearance standards. All manufactured homes shall have
underpinning around the entire exterior of the unit. Acceptable underpinning
includes brick, vinyl or masonry block.
(Ord. 2001-17, passed 1-28-02)
§ 152.06  VIOLATIONS; ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation violating the requirements and
provisions of this section shall be liable to penalties stated in §
10.99.
   (B)   In addition to the penalties provided herein, the town may secure the
abatement of the violation or a removal of any unit by proceeding in any court
of competent jurisdiction.
(86 Code, § 5.605)
CHAPTER 153: ZONING
Section
   
153.01   Zoning ordinance adopted by reference
§ 153.01 ZONING ORDINANCE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The zoning ordinance of the town, adopted 11-16-82, is hereby adopted by
reference and made a part of this code the same as if set forth at length
herein. Copies are available for public inspection in the office of the Town
Clerk.
(Ord. passed 11-16-82; Am. Ord. 87-1, passed 4-20-87; Am. Ord. 89-14, passed 7-
17-89; Am. Ord. 89-15, passed 7-17-89; Am. Ord. 89-16, passed 7-17-89; Am. Ord.
89-19, passed 7-31-89; Am. Ord. 90-4, passed 2-28-90; Am. Ord. 92-8, passed 8-
17-92; Am. Ord. 93-9, passed 8-16-93; Am. Ord. 93-11, passed 12-20-93; Am. Ord.
94-7, passed 5-16-94; Am. Ord. 96-7-B, passed 3-17-97; Am. Ord. 97-2, passed 4-
21-97; Am. Ord. 97-6, passed 7-28-97; Am. Ord. 98-6, passed 5-20-98; Am. Res.
98-12, passed 9-21-98; Am. Ord. 98-13, passed - -98; Am. Ord. 99-06, passed 6-
21-99: Am. Ord. 2000-5, passed 6-19-00; Am. Ord. 2000-09, passed 12-18-00; Am.
Ord. 2002-11, passed 8-19-02; Am. Ord. 2003-01, passed 2-17-03; Am. Ord. 2003-
008, passed 5-19-03; Am. Ord. 2007-03, passed 11-12-07; Am. Ord. 2007-04,
passed 11-12-07; Am. Ord. 2007-08, passed 8-20-07; Am. Ord. 2008-08, passed 4-
21-08; Am. Ord. 2009-02, passed 5-18-09; Am. Ord. 2009-08, passed 12-14-09; Am.
Ord. 2010-09, passed 1-24-11; Am. Ord. 2011-11, passed 1-3-12; Am. Ord. 2013-
12, passed 11-18-13; Am. Ord. 2013-14, passed 11-18-13; Am. Ord. 2013-15,
passed 11-18-13; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 6-19-17; Am. Ord. 2017-03, passed 6-
19-17; Am. Ord. 2017-07, passed 8-21-17; Am. Ord. 2019-03, passed 4-15-19; Am.
Ord. 2019-04, passed 4-15-19; Am. Ord. 2024-03, passed 6-17-24)
CHAPTER 154: HISTORIC PRESERVATION
Section
   
154.01   Title
   
154.02   Purpose
   
154.03   Definitions
   
154.04   Architectural Review Board established
   
154.05   Powers and duties
   
154.06   Historic property inventory
   
154.07   Designation of historic properties
   
154.08   Jurisdiction of the Board of Architectural Review
   
154.09   Nominations to the National Register of Historic Places
   
154.10   Certification of appropriateness
   
154.11   Design guidelines
   
154.12   Appeals
§ 154.01 TITLE.
   The title of this chapter shall be the Historic Preservation Chapter.
(Ord. 2002-12, passed 8-19-02)
§ 154.02 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is:
      (1)   To protect, preserve and enhance the distinctive architectural and
cultural heritage of the town;
      (2)   To promote the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare
of the people of the town;
      (3)   To foster civic pride;
      (4)   To encourage harmonious, orderly and efficient growth and
development of the town;
      (5)   To strengthen the local economy; and
      (6)   To improve property values.
   (B)   It is the hope of the town that by encouraging a general harmony of
style, form, proportion and material between buildings of historic design and
those of contemporary design, the town historic buildings and historic
districts will continue to be a distinctive aspect of the town and will serve
as visible reminders of the significant historical and cultural heritage of the
town and State of South Carolina.
   (C)   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the S.C. Code §§ 6-29-710 and 6-
29-870 et seq.
(Ord. 2002-12, passed 8-19-02)
§ 154.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALTERATION.  A change in the external architectural features of any historic
structure or in the interior of any such structure if the interior feature is
specifically included in the historic designation; a change in the landscape
features of any historic site or place; or work having an adverse effect upon
designated archaeological resources.
   CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS.  Document issued by the Board of
Architectural Review, following a prescribed review procedure, certifying that
the proposed actions by an applicant are found to be acceptable in terms of
design criteria relating to the individual property of the historic district.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT.  An area, designated by the Council, upon the
recommendation of the Board of Architectural Review and pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
   HISTORIC PROPERTY. Any place (including an archaeological site or the
location of a significant historical event), building, structure, work of art,
fixture or similar object that has been individually designated by the Council
or designated as a contributing property within a historic district.
   PUBLIC SPACE WITHIN A BUILDING. Spaces designed for the use by the public,
such as auditoriums, court rooms, lobbies, entrance halls and the like. These
spaces are usually gathering places as opposed to corridors for public use.
   SUBSTANTIAL HARDSHIP.  Hardship, caused by unusual and compelling
circumstances, based on one or more of the following:
      (1)   The property cannot reasonably be maintained in the manner dictated
by this chapter;
      (2)   There are no other reasonable means of saving the property from
deterioration, or collapse; or
      (3)   The property is owned by a nonprofit organization and it is not
feasible financially or physically to achieve the charitable purposes of the
organization while maintaining the property appropriately.
(Ord. 2002-12, passed 8-19-02)
§ 154.04 ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BOARD ESTABLISHED.
   The Architectural Review Board, as established pursuant to §
33.10 shall be charged with the implementation of this chapter.
(Ord. 2002-12, passed 8-19-02; Am. Ord. 2007-06, passed 8-20-07; Am. Ord. 2008-
07, passed 4-21-08)
§ 154.05 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The responsibility of the Board is to promote the purposes and objectives of
this chapter, to review and recommend to Town Council the designation of
individual historic properties and historic districts, and to review plans and
applications, as hereinafter provided, for all construction within historic
districts and construction or demolition pertaining to or affecting duly
designated historic properties. The Board shall have the power to approve,
approve with modifications or deny approval for such applications in accordance
with the prescribed procedures and guidelines.
(Ord. 2002-12, passed 8-19-02)
§ 154.06 HISTORIC PROPERTY INVENTORY.
   The Board shall maintain a local inventory of buildings, structures,
objects, and sites more than 50 years old. These records shall be available to
the public.
(Ord. 2002-12, passed 8-19-02)
§ 154.07 DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC PROPERTIES.
   (A)   Criteria for historic designation.
      (1)   The Board shall review the local inventory and make recommendations
for historic designation(s) to Town Council based on the following criteria:
      (2)   A property may be designated historic if it:
         (a)   Has significant inherent character, interest, or value as part
of the development or heritage of the community, state, or nation;
         (b)   Is the site of an event significant in history; or
         (c)   Is associated with a person or persons who contributed
significantly to the culture and development of the community, state, or
nation;
         (d)   Exemplifies the cultural, political, economic, social, ethnic,
or historic heritage of the community, state, or nation;
         (e)   Individually, or as a collection of resources, embodies
distinguishing characteristics of a type, style, period or specimen in
architecture or engineering;
         (f)   Is the work of a designer whose work has influenced
significantly the development of the community, state or nation;
         (g)   Contains elements of design, detail, materials, or craftsmanship
which represent a significant innovation;
         (h)   Is part of or related to a square or other distinctive element
of community planning;
         (i)   Represents an established and familiar visual feature of the
neighborhood or community; or
         (j)   Has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in
pre-history or history.
   (B)   Owner notification. Owners of properties proposed to be designated
historic shall be notified in writing 30 days prior to consideration by Town
Council. Owners may appear before the Council to voice approval or opposition
to such designation.
   (C)   Identification on Town Zoning Map. All locally designated historic
properties and historic districts shall be clearly shown on the zoning map.
   (D)   Opposition to designation. Any property owner may object to the
decision by the Council to designate his property as historic by filing suit
against the town before the Courts of the State of South Carolina.
(Ord. 2002-12, passed 8-19-02)
§ 154.08 JURISDICTION OF THE BOARD OF ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW.
   The jurisdiction of the Board, in general, is the town limits. The
jurisdiction of the Board for the recommendation of properties to be designated
historic is the town limits. The jurisdiction of the Board for the review of
proposed alteration to exteriors of buildings, new construction, and demolition
is the individual properties and areas that have been designated by the Council
as historic.
(Ord. 2002-12, passed 8-19-02)
§ 154.09 NOMINATIONS TO THE NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES.
   The Board may conduct first review and evaluation of all proposed
nominations for the National Register of Historic Places for properties that
are within its jurisdiction, prior to consideration by the State Board of
Review. The Board may send their recommendations to the State Historic
Preservation Office for consideration at the meeting of the State Board of
Review. The Board shall not nominate properties directly to the National
Register; only the State Board of Review shall have this final review authority
unless expressly authorized by federal statute.
(Ord. 2002-12, passed 8-19-02)
§ 154.10 CERTIFICATION OF APPROPRIATENESS.
   (A)   Certificate. A Certificate of Appropriateness is required before a
building permit can be issued for the demolition, new construction, exterior
alteration, modification or addition to a designated historic property. Any
building permit not issued in conformity with this chapter shall be considered
void. Application for a Certificate of Appropriateness must be signed by the
owner or his authorized representative and the form must be signed by the
Chairman or Vice-Chairman of the Board stating its approval, denial, or
approval with conditions and the reasons for the decision.
   (B)   Required procedure. An application for a Certificate of
Appropriateness shall be obtained from the town, and when completed, filed with
the appropriate administrative official as designated by the Board.
   (C)    Time limits . Applications for a Certificate of Appropriateness shall
be considered by the Board at its next regular meeting, provided they have been
filed at least seven calendar days before the regularly scheduled meeting of
Board. If the Board fails to take action upon any application within 45 days
after the complete application is received, the application shall be considered
approved, except in cases where the Board has postponed an application to
demolish a structure under the provisions contained in this chapter.
   (D)   Board action on application. The Board shall review the application,
using the design guidelines appearing in §
154.11 to make findings of fact to decide whether or not the applicant's plans
are appropriate. The decision of the Board, along with the reasons for each
decision, will be recorded in the minutes and will be available upon request as
a public reference for preservation procedures.
   (E)   Contents of application. The Board shall, in its rules of procedure,
require data as are reasonable and necessary to determine the nature of the
application. An application shall not be considered complete until all the
required data have been submitted.
   (F)   Notification of affected property owners. Prior to the issuance of an
approval or denial of a Certificate of Appropriateness, the Board shall inform
the owners of any property likely to be materially affected by the application,
and shall give the applicant and such owners an opportunity to be heard.
   (G)    Submission of a new application . If the Board determines that a
Certificate of Appropriateness should be denied, a new application affecting
the same property may be submitted only if substantial change is made in the
plans for the proposed work.
   (H)   Maintenance, repair, and interior projects. Nothing in this document
shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair or any
exterior architectural feature of structures designated as historic when that
repair does not involve a change in design, material, color, or outer
appearance of the structure. The Board shall not consider the interior
arrangements or alterations to the interior of a building unless the interior
of a public building or the public space of a private building is specifically
described and designated as historic. The Board may authorize a staff member to
approve minor projects involving repairs and ordinary maintenance that do not
alter design, materials, color or the outer appearance of a structure or
interior projects not subject to design review.
   (I)   Fines and penalties. The system of fines applied by the town in §
150.99 will apply to this chapter.
   (J)   Substantial hardship.
      (1)   In the event a Certificate of Appropriateness is denied, the
property owner may apply for a exemption based on the substantial hardship of
maintaining the property according to the design guidelines for historic
properties. Substantial hardship is to be considered by the Commission where
one or more of the following unusual and compelling circumstances exists:
         (a)   The property cannot reasonably be maintained in the manner
dictated by this chapter;
         (b)   There are no other reasonable means of saving the property from
deterioration, or collapse; or
         (c)   The property is owned by a nonprofit organization and it is not
feasible financially or physically to achieve the charitable purposes of the
organization while maintaining the property appropriately.
      (2)   The owner may be required to submit documents to show that he
cannot comply with the design guidelines and earn a reasonable rate of return
on his investment in the property. Information required may include:
         (a)   Costs of the proposed development with and without modification
needed to comply with the design guidelines as determined by the Board,
         (b)   Structural report and/or a feasibility report;
         (c)   Market value of the property in its present condition and after
completion of the proposed project;
         (d)   Cost of the property, date purchased, relationship, if any,
between seller and buyer, terms of financing;
         (e)   For the past two years, annual gross income from the property
with operating and maintenance expenses, depreciation, and annual cash flow
before and after debt service during that time; and
         (f)   Other information considered necessary by the Board to
determined whether or not the property may yield a reasonable return.
   (K)   Demolition. If the Board denies, or postpones for 180 days, a request
to demolish a historic building, the Board shall work closely with the owner to
find an appropriate use for the property, to help find a buyer or to obtain
funding for rehabilitation, including low interest loans and grants. The Board
shall inform the community concerning the threat to the building, its value as
part of the fabric and the community and, through publicity and contacts with
civic groups, seek to provide assistance in preserving the property.
(Ord. 2002-12, passed 8-19-02)
§ 154.11 DESIGN GUIDELINES.
   (A)   Intent. It is the intent of this chapter to ensure, insofar as
possible, that properties designated as historic shall be in harmony with the
architectural and historic character of the town. In granting a Certificate of
Appropriateness, the Board shall take into account the architectural and
historic significance of the structure under consideration and the exterior
form and appearance of any proposed additions or modifications to that
structure as well as the effect of such change or additions upon other
structures in the vicinity.
   (B)   The Secretary of the Interior's standards for rehabilitation.
      (1)   When considering an application for a Certificate of
Appropriateness for new construction, alteration, repair, or restoration, the
Commission shall use the Secretary of the Interior's standards for
rehabilitation as guidelines in making its decisions. In addition, the Board
may adopt more specific guidelines for local historic districts and local
historic buildings. These guidelines serve as the basis for determining the
approval, approval with modifications, or denial of an application.
      (2)   The Secretary's standards for rehabilitation are:
         (a)   A property will be used as it was historically or be given a new
use that requires minimal change to its distinctive materials, features,
spaces, and spatial relationships;
         (b)   The historic character of a property shall be retained and
preserved. The removal of distinctive materials or alteration of features,
spaces and spatial relationships that characterize a property will be avoided;
         (c)   Each property will be recognized as a physical record of its
time, place and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical
development, such as adding conjectural features or elements from other
buildings, will not be undertaken;
         (d)   Changes to a property that have acquired historic significance
in their own right will be retained and preserved;
         (e)   Distinctive materials, features, finishes, and construction
techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a property will be
preserved;
         (f)   Deteriorated historic features will be repaired rather than
replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a
distinctive feature, the new feature will match the old in design, color,
texture, and, where possible, materials. Replacement of missing features will
be substantiated by documentary and physical evidence.
         (g)   Chemical or physical treatments, if appropriate, will be
undertaken using the gentlest means possible. Treatments that cause damage to
historic materials will not be used.
         (h)   Archeological resources will be protected and preserved in
place. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures will be
undertaken.
         (i)   New additions, exterior alterations, or related new construction
will not destroy historic materials, features, and spatial relationships that
characterize the property. The new work will be differentiated from the old and
will be compatible with the historic materials, features, size, scale, and
proportion, and massing to protect the integrity of the property and its
environment.
         (j)   New additions and adjacent or related new construction will be
undertaken in such a manner that, if removed in the future, the essential form
and integrity of the historic property and its environment would be unimpaired.
(Ord. 2002-12, passed 8-19-02)
§ 154.12 APPEALS.
   Any person may appeal a decision of the Board to the Courts of South
Carolina pursuant to S.C. §§ 6-29-900 et seq.
(Ord. 2002-12, passed 8-19-02)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
      Table
         
I.   ANNEXATIONS
         
II.   CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS
         
III.   FRANCHISES
         
IV.   REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS
         
V.   REZONINGS
         
VI.   STREET NAME CHANGES
         
VII.   VACATIONS
 
TABLE I: ANNEXATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Annexing all property contained within the area beginning
                     at the northeast corner of the lot owned by Mr. J.H.
                     Stuckey and running north, being that part of Lot 4 in
82-17    12-21-82    Block B, that part of Lots 8, 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14, and
                     all of Lot 9 in Block E, and that portion of Lot 4 in
                     Block F lying outside of the present corporate limits of
                     the town
                     Annexing the property known as tax map numbers 18-34-23
99-12    7-26-99     and 18-34-22 upon which sits the Best Western Hotel and
                     Dollar General, respectively
                     Annexing the property known as tax map numbers 11-041-004,
2007-09  8-28-07     11-041-005, 11-041-007, 11-041-008 and 11-041-009
                     (formally a portion of 18-041-001) upon which will be
                     constructed a Wal-Mart in to the town
2011-06  8-1-11      Annexing the property known as tax map number 18-053-006
                     owned by Johnnie Mae S. Canty located at 911 Cahn Street
                     Annexing the property known as portion of tax map numbers
2011-07  8-1-11      11-036-77, 18-036-078 and 18-036-202, owned by the
                     Felician Sisters of Pennsylvania located at 1000 Thorne
                     Avenue
                     Annexing the property known as tax map number 18-21-076,
2012-04  5-14-12     owned by Williamsburg Academy, Inc. located at 1000 Sandy
                     Bay Road
                     Annexing the right-of-way of Sandy Bay Road (S-44) and
                     Stallion Drive (S-389) abutting property (Williamsburg
2013-10  9-16-13     Academy) annexed May 14, 2012, not exceeding the width
                     thereof lying beyond but abutting the corporate limits of
                     the town
                     Annexing property known as Tax Map Numbers 45-176-009, 18-
2023-06  9-18-23     036-179, 18-036-178, and 18-036-217, owned by Lillie C.
                     McGill, located at 699 Eastland Avenue
                    
 
TABLE II: CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.    Date   Description
No.     Passed
Res.    8-15-  Agreement with the County of Williamsburg to provide water and/or sewer
88-5    88     services to an area of Williamsburg County commonly known as Holy Woods
Res.    4-20-  Agreement with the County of Williamsburg to provide water and/or sewer
92-3    92     services to an area of Williamsburg County commonly known as Holy Woods
Res.    4-27-  Authorizing a contract with CDS, Inc. to provide collection of garbage,
92-4    92     trash and recyclable materials
Res.           Authorizing a contract with Tideland Utilities, Inc. of Summerville, S.C.
97-6    6-9-97 for Project No. 96625, Wastewater System Improvements - Pump Station
               Upgrades
Ord.    6-1-98 Authorizing the Mayor and Clerk to execute the waste disposal agreement
98-7           with Olin Howard, d/b/a Carolina Vermiculture & Vermiconversion
        9-21-  Agreement between Fulton's Septic Tank Service and the town, to pump and
Res. -  98     haul the waste water from the holding tank located at Palmetto Synthetics,
               LLC and dispose into the town's treatment plant
Res.    10-19- Authorizing the Mayor and Clerk to execute the water meter agreement with
98-13   98     U.S. Filter Distribution Group, Inc., concerning the purchase and
               installation of water meters
Res.    10-19- Awarding the contract for Project No. 98324, Water System Improvements -
98-14   98     Water Line Extension on Hodges Road, to Southeastern Utilities, Inc.
Res.    11-9-  Awarding the contract for Project No. 98489, Water and Sewer to
98-16   98     Williamsburg County Industrial Park, to Tom Brigman Contractors, Inc.
Ord.    11-16- Authorizing the town to enter into a lease/purchase transaction relating to
98-12   98     the financing of water meters
               Awarding the contract for Project 97340 - Brockington Street Well Upgrade,
Res.    11-30- 97341 - Sanitary Sewer System Rehabilitation, 93741A - Recreation Facility
98-17   98     Pump Station, and 97342 - Wastewater Treatment Plant Expansion to
               Southeastern Utilities et al.
Ord.    5-15-  Authorizing the Mayor and the Clerk to execute water purchase contract
2000-4  00     between the town and Williamsburg County
Ord.    11-3-  Authorizing the town to enter into a lease/purchase transaction relating to
2000-12 00     the financing of water meters and a street sweeper
Ord.    2-8-01 Authorizing the town to enter into a lease/purchase transaction relating to
2001-02        the financing of eight 2001 Crown Victoria police package vehicles
Res.    4-4-01 Authorizing the town to waive water and sewer fees for the Hodges and
2001-02        Greenlee Roads residents to complete a water and sewer line project
Res.    1-15-  Mutual aid agreement between the South Lynches Fire Department and the
2002-01 02     Kingstree Fire Department.
Res.    4-22-  Amending the equipment lease-purchase agreement of 2001 with the Exchange
2002-04 02     Bank of South Carolina.
Ord.    4-15-  Mutual aid agreement with the State of South Carolina for catastrophic
2002-05 02     disaster response and recovery.
Res.    6-17-  Awarding a bid for the recreation complex to Coastal Structures Corporation
2002-06 02     of Georgetown and Henley's Construction Company, Inc.
Ord.    11-18- Authorizing the town to enter into a lease/purchase transaction relating to
2002-17 02     the financing of fencing and lights for baseball fields and tennis courts
               and relating to the refinancing of existing lease purchase debt.
Res.    6-23-  Awarding a bid for a waterline to Jennyville to Gerald L. Davis and
2003-03 03     Associates of Stone Mountain, Georgia.
Res.    7-21-  Awarding a bid for a waterline to Cades to Alderman Brothers Construction,
2003-04 03     Inc.
Ord.    5-19-  Authorizing the Mayor and Clerk to execute a notice of transfer of
2003-09 03     limitation of use agreement from the Kennedy Park property to the present
               recreation complex property.
Res.    6-20-  Authorizing execution of an agreement to participate in the WACCAMAW HOME
2005-01 05     Investment Partnerships Consortium.
Res.    8-15-  Awarding a bid for the Nelson Blvd. Sidewalks to Coastal Structures
2005-03 05     Corporation of Georgetown.
Res.    - -    Adopting the Williamsburg County Hazards Mitigation Plan.
2007-02
Res.    5-19-  Authorizing execution of an agreement to participate in the WACCAMAW HOME
2008-01 08     Investment Partnerships Consortium.
Res.    9-2-09 Authorizing the commitment of payment of the sum of $59,500 in engineering
2009-03        fees to BP Barber.
Res.    11-16- Awarding contract to Watertree Construction Company, Inc. of Sumter.
2009-04 09
2010-3  5-17-  Authorizing the waste disposal agreement between the town and Williamsburg
        10     County Recycling, LLC.
        11-29- Authorizing a finance agreement in an amount not to exceed $500,000 to be
2010-07 10     paid from and secured by a pledge of the town's local hospitality fees and
               state and local accommodation taxes.
               Authorizing the Mayor and Clerk to execute the lease with Kingstree Depot,
2015-03 6- -15 LLC and to suspend the town’s procurement policy in order that additional
               equipment can be purchased by the town in an amount not to exceed $50,000.
2015-09 8-17-  Authorizing the Mayor and Clerk to execute the lease with trustees of
        15     Louise Gilland Memorial Park.
        7-28-  Approving the contract of sale between Julian S. Holliday, trustee of the
2016-04 16     Holliday Investment Trust and the town to authorize the Mayor and Clerk to
               execute said contract of sale and participate in closing.
        7-28-  Approving the contract of sale between Kingco, Inc. and the town and to
2016-05 16     authorize the Mayor and Clerk to execute said contract of sale and
               participate in closing.
Res. -  6-15-  Authorizing execution of an agreement to participate in the Horry County
-       17     Home Consortium.
               Reestablishing, ratifying and approving multi-jurisdictional agreements
Res. -  10-16- entered into by the Kingstree Police Department with surrounding law
-    17     enforcement agencies and authorizing the Town Manager to approve and sign
               materiality equivalent agreements entered into the Police Department.
        12-18- Approving the gate/tipping fee reimbursement contract between the town and
2017-12 17     Williamsburg County and to authorize the Mayor and Clerk to execute said
               contract.
Res.    8-20-  Approving the contract between the town and J. S. Dismuke, Inc., for the
2018-04 18     purchase of an automatic chlorinator system, and authorizing the Mayor and
               the Clerk to execute all documents to effectuate this purchase.
Res.    10-29- Authorizing the Town Manager to enter into an agreement with the Municipal
2018-6  18     Association of South Carolina for the collection of debt owed the town.
        6-27-  Authorizing contracts with Main Street South Carolina, Community Design
2019-06 19     Solutions, Inc., and other consultants to provide services for downtown
               revitalization efforts.
Res.    8-9-22 Authorizing municipal state highway project agreement concerning E. Main
2022-03        Street and MLK Jr.
Res.    - -22  First amendment to the municipal materials management agreement between the
2022-05        town and Allied Services, LLC dba Republic Services of Lee County.
 
TABLE III: FRANCHISES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.    Date    Description
No.     Passed
                Authorizing Williamsburg Cablevision to transfer to Alert Cable
                TV of South Carolina, Inc. the franchise previously awarded to
84-2    2-20-84 Williamsburg Cablevision by Ord. No. 7677-1 as amended by Ord.
                No. 1977-76 and to provide a new term of 15 years for said
                franchise
85-5    5-29-85 Providing for a new schedule of rates and charges to be charged
                by Alert Cable TV of South Carolina, Inc.
97-37   11-17-  Franchise agreement between Santee Electric Cooperative, Inc.
        97      and the town
                Granting a non-exclusive right and franchise to Time Warner
99-01   2-15-99 Entertainment - Advance/Newhouse Partnership to construct,
                operate and maintain a cable communications system in the town
                Authorizing the Mayor and Clerk to execute all documents to
99-09   6-28-99 effectuate a franchise agreement between FTC Diversified
                Services, Inc. and the town
        10-21-  Authorizing the Mayor and Clerk to execute all documents to
2002-15 02      effectuate a franchise agreement between South Carolina
                Electric and Gas Company and the town
                Authorizing the Mayor and Clerk to execute the franchise
2015-05 6-15-15 agreement between the town’s General Fund and Water and Sewer
                Fund
 
TABLE IV: REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.    Date   Description
No.     Passed
               Lease agreement with Katherine A. Marshall, Louise M. Easterling, and
       - -79  Katherine M. Whitlock to lease a parcel of land at the northern side of the
               building known as Marshall's Liquor Store
               Conveying to Roscoe M. Hinson, his heirs and assigns, by way of quit claim
               deed, all of the right, title and interest of the town in and to that certain
81-12   6-16-  unnamed street right-of-way extending in an easterly direction from
        81     Longstreet Street across lands of Roscoe M. Hinson to a lot owned by Roscoe
               M. Hinson, which street right-of-way was previously dedicated to the town by
               Roscoe Hinson
        7-21-  Transferring from the town to the Kingstree Housing and Economic Development
81-15   81     Corporation certain real property acquired by the town with community
               development funds
        8-18-  Transferring from the town to the Kingstree Housing and Economic Development
81-19   81     Corporation certain real property acquired by the town with community
               development funds
81-23   10-20- Taking of certain property by eminent domain for town purposes, tax assessor
        81     parcel numbers 11-26-51, 11-26-31, 11-26-32, 11-26-67, 11-26-68, 11-26-14
        11-17- Authorizing the vacation and conveyance to the Kingstree Housing and Economic
81-28   81     Development Corporation a portion of the street right-of-way of Cedar Street
               previously dedicated to the town
        10-19- Authorizing the town to convey to Sue Britton McElveen, as Executrix of the
82-14   82     last will and testament of Maybelle Scott, deceased, a lot of land situated
               in the town
82-16   11-16- Accepting conveyance from Kingstree Housing Associates of a lift pump station
        82     and sewer line and easements on property known as King's Crossing Apartments
83-8    2-23-  Authorizing the town to convey to Kingstree Housing and Economic Development
        83     Corporation the following lots:
             1.    Lot No. B on map of property of Riverside
             2.    Lot No. 17 on a map of Riverside
             3.    Lot No. 18 on a map of Riverside
               4.    A lot of land situate in the town being the same lot conveyed to the
             town by deed of Haven H. McClam dated 4-12-82 and recorded in Deed Book A-158
               at page 748 in the Clerk's Office for Williamsburg County
        10-26- Reconveying to GB Fermentation Industries, Inc., those parcels of land
83-13   83     conveyed by GB Fermentation Industries, Inc. to the town by deed dated 10-17-
               77
               Conveyance from Kingstree Housing Authority to Kingstree Housing and Economic
Res.    6-18-  Development Corporation of that parcel of land situate in the town containing
84-6    84     9,215 square feet, bounded on the south by Short Street and on all other
               sides by lands of the Housing Authority
        4-25-  Providing for conveyance of a right-of-way easement along Road No. S-763 from
85-4    85     S.C. Highway No. 527 to Survey Station 5+85 as shown on plans of S.C.
               Department of Highways and Public Transportation
        6-28-  Conveying to the South Carolina Department of Highways and Public
85-6    85     Transportation a tract of land containing 15.078 acres, more or less, situate
               just north of the town
85-10   8-27-  Authorizing conveyance by the town of certain right-of-way easements to the
        85     South Carolina Department of Highways and Public Transportation
        10-3-  Authorizing conveyance by the town of certain right-of-way easements to the
85-11   85     South Carolina Department of Highways and Public Transportation covering
               roads S-308, S-309, S-310 and S-311 in the town
        10-3-  Authorizing conveyance by the town of certain right-of-way easements to the
85-12   85     South Carolina Department of Highways and Public Transportation along Roads
               S-511 and S-655 in the town
86-9    8-18-  Purchasing a parcel of land on Second Avenue in the town from F.W. Thomas and
        86     Son, Inc. for a purchase price of $20,000
86-11   11-17- Amending Ord. 85-6 as to the purchase price
        86
87-3    3-24-  Authorizing conveyance by the town to Williamsburg County of all its right,
        87     title and interest in and to a swimming pool located at Tomlinson High School
Res.    8-24-  Leasing the premises known as the Scout Cabin for a period of 20 years
87-11   87
Res.    7-20-  Confirming purchase of premises in Kingstree known as Brown's alley
87-12   87     containing 1.58 acres, more or less, from Myers C. Floyd, Wilbur B. Brown and
               Thomas R. Perrin for the sum of $28,000
               Lease agreement with Elizabeth M. Nexsen, Margaret I. Kinder and J.D.
Res.    10-9-  O'Bryan, Jr., as trustees of Kellahan Park, to lease the lot of land known as
87-14   87     Kellahan Park, containing one acre, more or less, for a period of 20 years at
               a rental of $1 per year
               Lease to the town from Allen M. Levin and Mitzi L. Kirshtein, all of the
Res.           vacant portion of those certain lots formerly owned by A.M. Schreiberg
88-6    8- -88 included within that certain block of the town bounded on the north by Mill
               Street, on the east by Hampton Avenue, on the south by Main Street and on the
               west by Academy Street
Res.    5-15-  Accepting a gift of land from Harold R. Lesselbaum and Herman Mischner, dba
89-3    89     Williamsburg Building Supply Company to the town
               Granting Carolina Power and Light Company an easement or right-of-way across
        2-28-  a strip of land 30 feet in width for purposes of constructing and maintaining
90-2    90     underground or overhead electrical wires and equipment to assist in operation
               of the waste water treatment system situate at or near International
               Biosynthesis
        4-17-  Authorizing the town to convey to the Kingstree Housing and Economic
90-5    90     Development that parcel of land with the buildings and improvements thereon
               known as the J.M. Gardner Court
               Authorizing the town to enter into a lease-purchase financing arrangement
90-7    5-21-  with Bell Atlantic Tricon Government Finance, Inc. by which the town will
        90     lease to Bell Atlantic its parcel of land situate on Longstreet Street in the
               town for a period of 15 years
Res.    6-28-  Authorizing the town to add an additional $60,000 to its agreement with Bell
90-5    90     Atlantic (Tricon) for lease of new town hall facilities as provided in Ord.
               90-7
Res.    7-26-  Authorizing the town to add an additional $30,000 to its agreement with Bell
90-6    90     Atlantic (Tricon) for lease of new town hall facilities as provided for in
               Ord. 90-7 and Res. 90-5
94-4    - -94  Condemnation of property for the purpose of street construction
94-5    - -94  Authorizing conveyance of real property and fixtures known as the GB
               Wastewater Treatment facility
        10-4-  Transferring a strip of land measuring five feet to Springfield Realty
96-5    96     Corporation which joins and abuts property belonging to Springfield Realty
               Corporation along West Railroad Avenue
97-1    2-17-  Accepting the donation by Weaver Investment Company of a 1.8 acre lot of land
        97     (tax map # 11-037-230) located on Main Street
               Accepting a .26 acre tract purchased from Burns Philp Food, Inc. containing a
97-3    5-9-97 well, and authorizing the Mayor to execute two easements, one being a water
               and sewer line easement and one being a gas line easement to Burns Philp
               Good, Inc. through said property
97-33   8-18-  Transferring a strip of land abutting the property purchased by Springfield
        97     Realty Corporation located between Hampton and West Railroad Avenues
Res.    3-9-98 Purchase of real estate known as the Depot for the purchase price of $65,000
98-4
98-5    4-4-98 Conveying to the County of Williamsburg by quit claim deed the property known
               and designated as parcel B on a map prepared by J.B. Ellis, Jr., Surveyor
Res.    6-29-  Resolution to purchase 3.14 acre tract of land behind the town treatment
98-7    98     plant.
Res.    8-17-  Authorizing the Town Manager and the Town Attorney to purchase the 0.15 acre
98-10   98     tract of land belonging to the Williamsburgh Historical Society, Inc.
99-2    2-22-  Authorizing the Mayor and the Clerk to execute the right-of-way/easement to
        99     FTC Diversified Services, Inc.
               Authorizing the Mayor and Clerk to execute all documents to effectuate the
99-08   5-17-  lease agreement between the town and Williamsburg County for the lease of 1.2
        99     acres located at the corner of Jackson and Church Streets for a term of 50
               years for $1.00 per year
               Authorizing the Mayor and Clerk to execute a quit-claim deed to Margaret C.
99-17   11-15- Campbell for a 50 x 200 square foot piece of property, which was previously a
        99     portion of Bostwick Street which abuts and adjoins her property on Ashton
               Avenue in exchange for a $500.00 contribution to the new recreation facility
               Accepting the offer proposed by W. Spencer Hill, II, of New Town Land, LLC:
        12-18- to purchase three parcels of land (Tax Map Nos. 11-024-159, 11-024-178, and
2000-15 00     11-024-179) for $29,000.00; and to grant an 18-month option on Tax Map No.
               11-25-277 to purchase for $10,000.00. Authorizing the Mayor and the Clerk to
               execute all closing documents on behalf of the town
2001-14 9-17-  Authorizing th Mayor and Clerk to execute a lease agreement between the Town
        01     of Kingstree and the heirs of the estate of Thomas R. Speights
2002-10 8-19-  Approving the Water Tower lease agreement between the town and Verizon
        02     Wireless and authorize the Mayor and Clerk to execute said lease
               Authorizing the sale to W. Spencer Hill, II of New Town Land 2, LLC the
2002-   11-18- following parcel of land: Tax Map number 11-25-277 for $100,000 and to
019     02     authorize the Mayor and Clerk to execute all closing documents on behalf of
               the town
        2-24-  Approving the option and lease agreement between the town and Scana
2003-03 03     Communications, Inc., and authorizing the Mayor and Clerk to execute said
               lease
               Authorizing the sale to New Town Land II, LLC the following parcels of land:
2003-04 2-24-  Tax Map numbers 11-23-173, 11-036-191, 11-036-001, 11-036-003 and 11-035-002,
        03     known as Kennedy Park for $100,000 and to authorize the Mayor and Clerk to
               execute all closing documents on behalf of the town
        4-30-  Approving the water tower lease agreement between the town and Cellco
2003-07 03     Partnership, D/B/A Verizon Wireless and authorize the Mayor and Clerk to
               execute said lease
               Approving the conveyance of a 60-foot strip of land located at the former GB
               Fermentation Industries, Inc./Baxter Pretreatment Facility to Ferm Pro
2003-12 8-28-  Manufacturing LP to support their expansion efforts and to authorize the
        03     Mayor and Clerk to execute any and all said documents and deeds to effectuate
               any and all documents and deeds to effectuate the transfer of said property
               on behalf of the town
               Authorizing the sale to J. Conner Brown the following parcels of land: Tax
        10-28- Map number 11-025-177 located on Main Street, known as "Courtney Lot" and Tax
2005-06 05     Map number 11-025-178, located on Main Street known as "Welch Lot" for the
               sum of $7,000 and authorizing the Mayor and Clerk to execute all closing
               documents on behalf of the town
               Authorizing the sale to Williamsburg County the following parcels of land:
2006-02 4-17-  Tax Map numbers 11-038-043 and 11-038-044, being the property surrounding 911
        06     Center on Brooks Street, for the sum of $30,000 net and to authorize the
               Mayor and Clerk to execute all closing documents on behalf of the town
               Authorizing the sale to Godwin Properties, LLC the following parcel of land:
2007-05 11-12- Tax Map number 11-036-006, being the 7.2 acres, known as the Drexel Property,
        07     located on Second Avenue, for the sum of $40,000 and to authorize the Mayor
               and Clerk to execute all closing documents on behalf of the town
2008-01 2-25-  Approving the lease agreement between the town and Harry Carter and
        08     authorizing the Mayor and Clerk to execute said lease
2008-03 4-21-  Approving the lease agreement between the town and trustees of Louise Gilland
        08     Memorial Park and authorizing the Mayor and Clerk to execute said lease
2008-04 4-21-  Approving the lease agreement between the town and trustees of Kellahan
        08     Memorial Park and authorizing the Mayor and Clerk to execute said lease
               Authorizing the sale to Dr. Tyrone Wallace the following parcel of land: 3
               lots split from Tax Map number 11-25-164, identified as lots 2, 3 and 4 on a
2008-10 5-21-  map titled "Plat of 4 Lots in the town of Kingstree Surveyed for Town" by
        08     Kevin Wilson, P.L.S., located on Mill Street being known as "Old Town Hall,"
               for the sum of $30,000 and to authorize the Mayor and Clerk to execute all
               closing documents on behalf of the town
2008-13 6-4-08 Approving the lease agreement between the town and Sahrab Fransi and Gus S.
               Sawa and authorizing the Mayor and Clerk to execute said lease
2009-   1-11-  Authorizing the sale of the lot located on Gilland Avenue to Chalmers M.
012     10     Hammett.
2011-02 6-20-  Approving lease between town and Earl Williams for property located at 134
        11     East Main Street
        7-28-  Approving the contract of sale between Julian S. Holliday, trustee of the
2016-04 16     Holliday Investment Trust and the town to authorize the Mayor and Clerk to
               execute said contract of sale and participate in closing
        7-28-  Approving the contract of sale between Kingco, Inc. and the town and to
2016-05 16     authorize the Mayor and Clerk to execute said contract of sale and
               participate in closing
Res. -  5-15-  Authorizing the Mayor and the Clerk to authorize lease agreements with the
-    17     affected land owners for the parking area located in the center of the block
               bounded by Mill Street, Hampton Avenue, Main Street, and Academy Street.
2017-09 8-21-  Approving the lease between the town and the Front Porch, LLC to authorize
        17     the Mayor and Clerk to execute said lease.
        2-19-  Approving, and authorizing the Mayor and the Clerk to execute, a memorandum
2018-02 18     of understanding and a lease agreement between the town and the Williamsburgh
               Historical Society, in order to:
             1. Convey to the town the Museum Annex on Academy Street and the parking lot
               extending from behind the Annex for a period of 50 years; and
             2. Convey to the Williamsburgh Historical Society the Carnegie Library Museum
               Annex for a period of 50 years.
2019-02 2-26-  Approving the lease between Kingstree and Monkey Bottom Boys, LLC, to operate
        19     a restaurant and/or bar serving alcoholic beverages.
2020-09 8-17-  Authorizing the transfer of Tax Map No. 11- 038-044 from Kingstree to Law
        20     Properties, LLC in exchange for a sewer line easement.
2020-12 11-16- Authorizing the transfer of Tax Map Nos. 11- 038-163 and 11-038-043 from
        20     Kingstree to Law Properties, LLC in exchange for a sewer line easement.
        12-20- Approving the lease between the town and the Gravein Corp. of real property
2021-08 21     known as “The Depot” and authorizing the Mayor and Clerk to execute said
               lease.
        9-18-  Authorizing Town Manager to execute all documents necessary for the transfer
2023-07 23     of real property identified by Tax Map Numbers 11-025-171, 11-025-172, and
               11-025-173 to J. Dail Investments, LLC in exchange for $22,000.
              
 
TABLE V: REZONINGS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.     Date Passed Description
                         Rezoning all those certain pieces or lots of land
81-20        9-15-81     situate in the town designated as Lots Nos. 40, 41,
                         46, 47, 48, and 49 as shown on a map of Riverside
                         Subdivision from R-1A to R-2
                         Rezoning certain property beginning at an iron pin
82-19        1-3-83      approximately 18 feet northeast of the curb of Main
                         Street from Highway Commercial to Limited Industry
                         Rezoning that certain tract of land bounded on the
                         north by lands of D.C. Brown, on the east by the
84-4         3-29-84     Kingstree Canal, on the south by the lands known as
                         the town barn, and on the west by Railroad Avenue from
                         R-8 Medium Density Residential to HC Highway
                         Commercial
85-3         5-9-85      Rezoning that lot situate at the intersection of
                         Florida Street and S.C. Highway No. 261 from R-6 to HC
                         Rezoning that block of land situate between Scott
86-12        1-19-87     Street and Kelley Street and between Thorne Avenue and
                         the right-of-way of the Seaboard Coast Line Railroad
                         from R-8 to NC
87-2         3-16-87     Rezoning a lot of land on Mayes Street from R-10 to HC
                         Highway Commercial
                         Rezoning all that certain piece of land designated as
87-14        11-17-87    Lot No. 60 on a map of property of Mary S. Thorne from
                         R-10 Low Density Residential to HC Highway Commercial
88-5         6-27-88     Rezoning certain parcels of land from HC Highway
                         Commercial to R-10 Low Density Residential
                         Rezoning certain parcels of land being in form and
                         shape a triangle, bounded on the east by the extension
                         of Longstreet Street, on the southwest by Nelson
88-6         8-15-88     Boulevard, and on the west by the right-of-way of
                         Seaboard Coastline Railroad, said parcels being
                         designated Nos. 11-26-105 and 11-26-115, from R-
                         8 Medium Density Residential and CP Conservation
                         Preservation to LI Limited Industrial
                         Rezoning parcels of land situate in the town and being
                         bounded on the north by property of Ina Mae Carlton,
89-4         4-6-89      et al., on the east by Longstreet Street of the town,
                         on the south by property of the estate of D.C. Brown,
                         and on the west by property of B.W. Baker, from R-10
                         Low Density Residential to HC Highway Commercial
                         Rezoning lands of the estate of Scott from R-6 High
89-11        4-25-90     Density Residential to include PUD Planned Unit
                         Development
                         Rezoning a parcel of land known as the jail house
89-17        7-31-89     property from HC Highway Commercial to CC Core
                         Commercial
                         Rezoning the parcel of land known as 1423 Longstreet
90-3         2-28-90     Street from Low Density Residential R-10 to Highway
                         Commercial HC
                         Rezoning a portion of the estate lands of Marie L.
90-6         4-25-90     Nelson and lands of Samuel E. McIntosh from Forest and
                         Agriculture FA to Highway Commercial HC
                         Rezoning that certain parcel of land bounded on the
                         north by lot of Kelly, on the east by Longstreet
91-4         6-17-91     Street, on the west by property of Gilland and on the
                         south by a lot of Eleanor McMaster from R-10 Low
                         Density Residential to HC Highway Commercial
                         Rezoning that parcel of land bounded on the north by
                         lot of Harriett W. Horton, on the east by Harriett W.
92-1         3-16-92     Horton, on the west by property of Harriett W. Horton
                         and on the south by Singleton Avenue from CP
                         Conservation-Preservation to R-10 Low-Density
                         Residential
                         Rezoning a certain parcel of land bounded on the north
                         by Main Street, on the east by lands of Eva G. Towne,
92-2         3-16-92     on the west by the Kingstree Branch and on the South
                         by Ashton Avenue, from HC Highway Commercial to also
                         include PUD Planned Unit Development
                         Rezoning a certain parcel of land bounded on the north
                         by a lot of Williamsburg County Historical Society, on
92-3         5-28-92     the east by John Yancey McGill, on the west by
                         property of the town and on the south by a 100 foot
                         right-of-way of Santee Cooper, from LI Limited
                         Industry to R-10 Low-Density Residential
                         Rezoning a certain parcel of land bounded on the north
                         by Nelson Boulevard, on the east by lands of John
92-7         1-5-93      Yancy McGill, on the west by lands of John Yancy
                         McGill and on the south by lands of John Yancy McGill
                         from HC to R-8 and PUD
                         Rezoning a parcel of land bounded on the north by a
                         lot of William B. McAllister and Regina W. Lee, on the
92-10        1-5-93      east by Longstreet Street, on the south by a lot of
                         Jane B. Wheeler, and on the west by a lot of Mary
                         Setzler, from R-10 Low Density Residential to HC
                         Highway Commercial
                         Rezoning two certain parcels of land designated as
93-12        12-20-93    Lots 3 and 4 on a plat made by P.G. Gourdin, dated 1-
                         18-42, from R-10 Low-Density Residential to NC
                         Neighborhood Commercial
                         Rezoning that parcel of land bounded on the north by
                         land of the estate of Paul Wiehrs, on the east by land
94-1         1-24-94     of Frank H. McGill, on the south by Singleton Avenue,
                         and on the west by land of Tony Burrows, from R-10
                         Low-Density Residential to NC Neighborhood Commercial
                         Rezoning a parcel of land bounded on the north by
                         Gilland Avenue, on the east by Longstreet Street, on
94-12        8-22-94     the south by a lot formerly of Cornelia W. Kelley, and
                         on the west by lot of Jack Burrows, from R-10 Low-
                         Density Residential to HC Highway Commercial
                         Rezoning a certain block of land situated in the town
                         and bounded on the northeast by Jackson Street, on the
95-6         8-31-95     southeast by Short Street, on the Southwest by Main
                         Street, and on the northwest by Longstreet Street,
                         from HC Highway Commercial to CC Core Commercial
                         Rezoning the Kingstree Nursing Facility Property
97-32        9-15-97     located on Academy Street from R-10 Single Family
                         Dwelling to C-C Core Commercial
                         Rezoning the area located within the boundaries of
                         Lexington Avenue from Lawrence Street to Frierson
                         Homes, Benson Street from Anderson Street to Town
97-34        9-15-97     Limits, Wilcox Street from Lexington Avenue to Town
                         Limits, Anderson Street from Lexington Avenue to
                         Eastland Avenue from R-6 High Density Dwellings to R-
                         10 Low Density Dwellings
98-4         5-4-98      Rezoning the area behind Royal Knights Apartments from
                         R-10 to R-8 PUD
                         Rezoning a 4.29 acre tract belonging to Alice H.
98-11        11-16-98    Kellahan and Lydia F. Duke, as shown on the map
                         attached to Ord. 98-11, from R-10 to Highway
                         Commercial
                         Rezoning the portion of the parcel of land owned by
99-4         3-15-99     Russell Marlowe on Gilland Avenue (Tax Map No. 11-013-
                         071) from R-10 Low Density to OC Office Commercial
                         Rezoning lots 1319 North Longstreet Street and 1421
99-19        12-20-99    North Longstreet Street from R-10 Single Family
                         Residential to HC Highway Commercial
2000-08      8-21-00     Rezoning Tax Map No. 11-022-064 from Low Density
                         Residential (R-10) to Highway Commercial (HC).
                         Rezoning Tax Map Nos. 11-037-001, 11-037-002,11-037-
2000-14      01-22-01    003, 11-037-004, 11-037-005, 11-037-006, 11-037-007,
                         and 11-037-226 from Neighborhood Commercial (NC) to
                         Highway Commercial (HC).
                         Rezoning Tax Map No. 11-022-054 and the west corner of
2001-1       02-19-01    Tax Map No. 11-022-053 (including Lot 10) from Low
                         Density Residential (R-10) to Highway Commercial (HC).
                         Rezoning Madison to Eastland to Wilcox to Franklin
2001-04      4-16-01     from High Density Residential (R-6) to Low Density
                         Residential (R-10).
2001-08      7-16-01     Rezoning Tax Map No. 11-025-075 from Residential (R-
                         10) to Highway Commercial (HC).
                         Authorizing the change in PUD status for the Food Lion
2002-01      2-6-02      conceptual plan to include Residential usage
                         (Kingstree Square Apartments).
                         Rezoning Tax Map No. 11-039-011 located on Ashton
2004-01      2-2-04      Avenue from Highway Commercial to Planned Unit
                         Development.
                         Rezoning Tax Map Nos. 11-23-104, 11-23-184 and 11-23-
2006-06      6-19-06     103, located on Longstreet Street from R-10 to Office
                         Commercial.
2007-04      11-12-07    Rezoning Tax Map No. 11-036-006 from LI to R-8.
                         Rezoning Tax Map Nos. 11-041-004 (Tract A-1), 11-041-
                         005 (Tract A-1), 11-041-006 (Tract A-2), 11-041-007
2007-09      8-28-07     (Tract A-3), 11-041-008 (Tract A-4), and 11-041-009
                         (Tract A-5) from R-10 to Highway Commercial, and 18-
                         041-001 and 11-041-003 from R-10 to Highway
                         Commercial.
2007-10      12-17-07    Rezoning Tax Map No. 11-038-095 (Kings Square II) from
                         PUD (Development Commercial) to PUD (Multi-Family).
                         Rezoning property located at 110 West Mill Street from
2010-10      12-20-10    Low Density Residential (R-10) to Core Commercial
                         (CC).
                         Rezoning former Tax Map No. 11-038-041 property
2011-12      1-3-12      located at 315 East Main Street (The Old Armory) from
                         Limited Industrial (L1) to Highway Commercial (HC).
                         Rezoning property located at 909 North Longstreet
Res. 2013-02 10-21-13    Street from Residential, Single Family (R-10) to
                         Highway Commercial (HC).
2018-05      4-16-18     Rezoning property located at 215 West Main Street from
                         Core Commercial (CC) to Highway Commercial (HC).
                         Rezoning property located at 412 and 414 North
2020-002     4-20-20     Longstreet from Residential, Single Family (R-10), to
                         Highway Commercial (HC).
                         Rezoning property located between North Academy Street
2023-003     5-15-23     and Hampton Street, Tax Map Number 11-025-186 from R-
                         10 to Core Commercial Zoning District.
                        
 
TABLE VI: STREET NAME CHANGES
 
Ord. No.  Date Passed Description
Res. 88-2 2-16-88     Changing the name of Harold Street to Harrell Street
                      Changing the name of South Carolina Highway No. 377 or
Res. 93-1 2-25-93     the Andrews Highway from its intersection with Main
                      Street to the city limits of the town to Martin Luther
                      King, Jr. Avenue
                      Changing the name of Warsaw Highway (S.C. 527) from its
Res. 93-2 2-25-93     intersection with Lane Road or S.C. 377 south to the city
                      limits of the town to Thurgood Marshall Avenue
2006-10   12-18-06    Changing the name of Tec Drive to College Drive
 
TABLE VII: VACATIONS
 
Ord. No.     Date Passed Description
                         Closing that portion of Second Avenue lying within the
81-21        9-23-81     boundary lines of property of Santee Electric
                         Cooperative, Inc.
                         Closing and abandoning that certain street or way
92-9         9-28-92     known as a portion of Fidelity Lane extending between
                         Green Street and Live Oak Street in the town
                         Closing and abandoning a portion of the alley leading
                         from Hampton Avenue to a parking lot at the rear of
                         the buildings fronting on Hampton Avenue, Main Street,
97-29        8-18-97     and Academy Street; further authorizing the town to
                         convey the alleyway to Springfield Realty Corporation
                         for the further development of United Telemarketing
                         revitalization effort in the town
                         Closing a portion of Stallion Drive from the corner of
Res. 2013-06 12-16-13    a proposed, 50-foot, undeveloped road to Sandy Bay
                         Road
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to South Carolina Code
References to 1986 Code of Ordinances
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO SOUTH CAROLINA CODE
S.C. Section Code Section
S.C. Section             Code Section
Title 5                  151.01
5-5-10                   Charter
5-5-10(c)                30.01
                         30.40,
5-7-30                   53.99,
                         94.40
5-7-80                   92.15
5-7-170                  30.05
5-7-190                  30.05
5-7-220                  31.30,
                         31.32
5-7-230                  31.45
5-7-240                  10.20
5-7-250(d)               30.41
5-7-260                  30.40
5-7-280                  30.42
5-7-290                  30.42
5-11-40(b)               32.20
5-11-40(c)               34.03,
                         34.10
Title 5, Ch. 13          Charter
5-13-10 et seq.          30.01
5-13-20                  10.05
Title 5, Ch. 15          36.01
5-15-20                  30.02
5-15-40                  30.03
5-15-62                  36.02,
                         36.05
5-15-125                 36.05
5-15-150                 30.06
Title 5, Ch. 17          30.45
5-23-310                 33.10
5-25-160                 32.05
5-27-120                 94.15
5-31-20                  51.20
5-31-250                 51.40
5-31-900                 51.40
Title 6                  151.01
6-1-410                  110.11,
                         110.16
6-9-50                   150.02
6-11-280                 51.20
6-29-310 et seq.         33.45
6-29-360                 33.49
6-29-710                 154.02
6-29-760(A)              33.50
6-29-870 et seq.         154.02
6-29-870(C)              154.04
6-29-900 et seq.         154.12
7-13-190                 36.05
8-13-700 - 8-13-795      30.30
Title 11, Chapter 35     34.80
12-21-2720(A)(1)         Ch. 110 Appendix A
12-21-2720(A)(2)         Ch. 110 Appendix A
12-21-2720(A)(3)         Ch. 110 Appendix A
12-21-2720(B)            Ch. 110 Appendix A
12-21-2728               Ch. 110 Appendix A
12-21-2746               Ch. 110 Appendix A
12-23-210                Ch. 110 Appendix A
12-56-10 et seq.         34.70
14-1-150                 30.27
14-25-15                 35.02
14-25-35                 35.21
                         10.99,
                         35.05,
14-25-65                 70.99,
                         130.99,
                         134.01
14-25-85                 35.05
14-25-125                35.20
14-25-135                35.15
14-25-145                35.15
14-25-165                35.16
14-25-175                35.19
Title 16, Ch. 3          92.10
16-1-40                  134.03
16-3-1010                133.08
16-3-1020                133.09
16-5-50                  134.01
16-5-120                 133.04
16-5-130                 133.04
16-9-420                 134.03
16-11-510                131.20
16-11-520                131.20
16-11-600                131.24
16-11-610                131.22,
                         131.24
16-11-620                131.25
16-11-650                131.21
16-11-700                130.99
16-13-30                 131.02
16-13-110                131.02
16-13-240                131.04
16-13-290                131.05
16-13-340                131.06
16-13-385                51.23
16-15-90                 135.02,
                         135.03
16-15-110                135.02
16-15-130                135.01
16-17-420                133.02
16-17-520                133.02
16-17-530                130.99
16-17-570                133.06
16-19-40                 135.08
16-23-410                132.02,
                         136.01
16-23-460                136.02
20-7-400                 135.99
20-7-8920                130.99
20-7-8925                130.99
Title 23, Ch. 3          10.20
Title 23, Ch. 23         91.99
Title 23, Ch. 35         Ch. 91
23-35-30                 91.36
23-35-40                 91.36
23-35-60                 91.37
23-35-130(A)             91.39
23-35-175                91.47
30-4-60                  30.28
30-4-70                  30.28
30-4-70(a)(I)            30.48
30-4-80                  30.20,
                         30.22
34-11-80                 34.90
34-11-90                 34.91
34-11-95                 34.92
34-11-100                34.93
34-11-110                34.94
34-11-120                34.95
34-11-130                34.96
                         110.02,
Title 38, Ch. 7          110.16,
                         Appendix A
38-7-20                  110.02
                         110.02,
Title 38, Ch. 45         110.16,
                         Appendix A
38-57-10 - 38-57-160     32.06
44-53-370                130.99
47-1-10 et seq.          90.03
47-3-10 et seq.          90.35
47-5-10 et seq.          90.44,
                         90.49
51-15-20                 Ch. 93
51-15-30                 Ch. 93
56-1-20                  70.06
56-1-460                 70.99
56-1-480                 70.99
56-1-490                 70.99
56-1-1720                70.99
56-2-4410                70.99
56-3-1240                70.99
56-3-1950 - 56-3-1975    72.06
56-3-2320                70.99
56-5-20                  70.99
56-5-50                  70.99
56-5-110                 70.99
56-5-110 et seq.         70.02
56-5-170                 70.99
56-5-190                 70.99
56-5-270                 70.99
56-5-350                 70.99
56-5-510                 70.99
56-5-740                 70.99,
                         130.99
56-5-750                 70.99
56-5-950                 70.99
56-5-970                 70.99
56-5-1210                70.99
56-5-1210 et seq.        71.24
56-5-1220                70.99
56-5-1250                70.99
56-5-1270                71.24
56-5-1360                70.99
56-5-1520                70.99
56-5-1520 et seq.        71.35
56-5-1520(a)             71.35
56-5-1540                71.36
56-5-1590                70.99
56-5-1600                70.99
56-5-1810                70.99
56-5-1840                70.99
56-5-1850                70.99
56-5-1890                70.99
56-5-1900                70.99
56-5-1930                70.99
56-5-1960                70.99,
                         91.17
56-5-2110                70.99
56-5-2120                70.99
56-5-2140                70.99
56-5-2150                70.99
56-5-2320                70.99
56-5-2330                70.99
56-5-2350                70.99
56-5-2360                70.99
56-5-2510 et seq.        72.01
56-5-2530                91.17
56-5-2540                70.99
56-5-2710                70.99
56-5-2740                70.99
56-5-2770                70.99
56-5-2910                70.99
56-5-2920                70.99,
                         71.14
56-5-2930                70.99
56-5-2930 - 56-5-3000    71.23
56-5-2945                70.99
56-5-2947                70.99
56-5-3180                70.99
56-5-3660                70.99
56-5-3810                70.99
56-5-3835                70.99
56-5-3850                91.20
56-5-4410 - 56-5-5050    70.03
56-5-4460                70.99
56-5-4780                70.99
56-5-5015                70.99
56-5-5140                70.03
56-5-5150                70.99
56-5-6120                70.07
56-5-6410                70.99
56-5-6420                70.99
57-7-20                  94.18
Title 58, Ch. 9, Art. 20 110.02,
                         110.16
58-9-2200                Ch. 110 Appendix A
61-4-110                 130.99
61-6-2600                130.99
                         
 
REFERENCES TO 1986 CODE OF ORDINANCES
1986 Code Section 1997 Code Section
1986 Code Section 1997 Code Section
1.201             10.01
1.202             10.02
1.203             10.03
1.205             10.05
1.206             10.06
                  10.99,
1.207             51.99,
                  70.99,
                  150.99
1.209             10.07
1.210             10.08
1.211             10.09
1.212             10.10
1.213             10.11
1.214             11.01
2.101             30.01
2.102             30.02
2.103             30.03
2.104             30.04
2.105             30.05
2.106             30.06
2.107             30.40
2.108             30.44
2.109             30.40
2.110             30.41
2.111             30.42
2.112             30.43
2.113             30.44
2.114             30.45
2.115             30.46
2.116             30.46
2.117             30.47
2.118             30.48
2.119             30.48
2.120             31.03
2.201             30.20
2.202             30.22
2.203             30.23
2.204             30.24
2.205             30.27
2.206             30.25
2.207             30.27
2.208             30.30
2.209             30.26
2.210             30.30
2.211             30.30
2.212             30.21
2.213             30.28
2.214             30.31
2.215             30.31
2.216             30.31
2.217             30.29
2.218             30.29
2.219             30.29
2.220             30.29
2.301             36.01
2.303             36.04
2.308             36.04
2.309             36.06
2.310             36.06
2.311             36.07
2.313             36.08
2.401             31.01
2.402             31.02
2.403             134.01
2.405             30.08
2.501             31.30
2.502             31.31
2.503             31.32
2.504             31.33
2.505             31.34
2.601             31.45
2.602             31.46
2.603             31.47
2.701             31.15
2.702             31.16
2.703             31.17
2.704             31.18
2.705             31.19
2.801             31.60
3.101             90.35
3.102             90.01
3.103             90.36
3.104             90.37
3.105             90.38
3.106             90.39
3.107             90.45
3.108             90.41
3.109             90.40
3.110             90.42
3.112             90.46
3.113             90.44
3.114             90.47
3.115             90.48
3.116             90.48
3.117             90.49
3.118             90.49
3.119             90.99
3.201             90.02
3.202             90.02
3.203             90.04
3.204             90.05
3.205             90.06
3.206             90.03
3.401             90.20
3.403             90.22
3.404             90.23
4.101             33.25
4.103             33.29
4.104             33.28
4.105             33.30
4.106             33.26
4.107             33.27
4.402             90.21
5.101             150.01
5.107             150.02
5.109             150.02
5.112             150.03
5.114             150.04
5.115             150.05
5.116             150.05
5.120             91.99
5.201             133.06
5.202             91.15
5.203             91.16
5.204             91.17
5.205             91.17
5.206             91.18
5.207             91.15
5.208             91.19
5.209             91.20
5.210             91.21
5.211             91.22
5.212             91.23
5.401             32.01
5.402             32.03
5.403             32.02
5.404             32.03
5.405             32.04
5.406             32.04
5.407             32.05
5.408             32.06
5.409             32.06
5.410             32.07
5.501             91.35,
                  91.99
5.502             91.36
5.503             91.36
5.504             91.37
5.505             91.37
5.601             152.01
5.602             152.02
5.603             152.03
5.604             152.04
5.605             152.06
7.101             35.01
7.102             35.01
7.103             35.02
7.104             35.02
7.105             35.03
7.106             35.04
7.201             35.15
7.202             35.16
7.203             35.17
7.204             35.18
7.205             35.19
7.206             35.19
7.207             35.19
7.208             35.20
7.209             35.21
7.301             35.05
7.302             35.05
8.101             34.01
8.102             34.01
8.103             34.02
8.104             34.03
8.105             34.04
8.106             34.05
8.107             34.05
8.108             34.06
8.109             34.06
8.110             34.07
8.111             34.07
8.112             34.08
8.113             34.09
8.115             34.09
8.116             34.09
8.117             34.10
8.118             34.11
8.119             34.11
8.120             34.11
8.121             34.12
8.122             34.13
8.123             34.14
8.401             34.50
8.402             34.51
8.403             34.51
8.404             34.51
8.405             34.51
8.406             34.52
8.407             34.53
8.408             34.54
8.409             34.55
8.410             34.56
8.411             34.56
10.101            92.01
10.201            92.10
10.202            92.11
10.203            92.11
10.208            92.15
10.301            50.01
10.302            50.15
10.303            50.35
10.304            50.02
10.305            50.36
10.307            50.99
10.308            50.16
10.309            50.20
10.310            50.20
10.311            50.21
10.312            50.18
10.313            50.19
10.314            50.20
10.315            50.17
10.316            50.36
10.318            50.38
10.319            50.39
10.501            51.03
10.502            51.03
10.503            51.03
11.101            131.08
12.101            93.01
12.102            93.15
12.103            93.15
12.104            93.16
12.105            93.17
12.106            93.18
12.107            93.19
12.108            93.21
13.101            32.20
13.102            32.20
13.103            32.20
13.104            32.21
13.106            32.22
13.107            32.23
14.204            133.02
14.205            112.02
14.210            112.01
14.211            133.99
14.301            135.01
14.302            135.02
14.303            135.03
14.304            135.04
14.305            135.05
14.306            135.06
14.307            135.08
14.308            135.08
14.309            112.03
14.310            133.02
14.311            135.09
14.312            135.09
14.313            133.11
14.314            135.07
14.315            94.25
14.316            113.01,
                  113.02
14.317            131.02
14.318            131.26
14.401            136.01
14.402            136.02
14.403            136.03
14.404            133.01
14.405            134.01
14.406            133.02
14.407            133.04
14.411            94.04
14.412            134.03
14.413            133.05
14.414            133.10
14.415            135.10
14.416            130.04
14.501            131.01
14.502            131.20
14.503            131.25
14.504            131.21
14.505            131.03
14.506            131.04
14.507            131.05
14.508            131.06
14.509            131.24
14.510            131.22
14.511            131.23
14.512            114.01
14.513            133.07
14.514            131.07
14.601            133.02
14.602            134.04
14.603            134.03
14.604            134.05
14.605            134.06
14.606            134.02
14.701            132.01
14.702            132.02
14.703            133.08
14.704            133.09
14.705            132.03
14.801            130.02
14.802            130.03
14.803            130.99
14.804            130.01
15.101            94.01
15.102            94.02
15.201            94.15
15.202            94.16
15.203            94.17
15.204            94.17
15.205            94.18
15.206            94.19
15.207            94.20
15.208            94.15
15.209            94.15
15.210            94.21
15.211            94.22
15.212            94.22
15.213            94.22
15.214            94.23
15.215            94.24
15.216            94.26
15.217            94.26
15.218            94.27
15.301            94.40
15.302            94.41
15.303            94.42
15.304            94.41
15.305            94.43
16.101            111.01
16.102            111.01
16.103            111.02
16.104            111.03
16.105            111.04
16.106            111.05
17.101            53.02
17.102            53.03
17.103            53.01
17.104            53.99
17.201.1          51.40
17.201.2          51.01
17.202.1          51.04
17.202.2          51.04
17.202.3          51.05
17.202.4          51.06
17.202.5          51.07
17.202.6          51.08
17.202.7          51.09
17.202.8          51.10,
                  51.99
17.203.1          51.20
17.203.2          51.21
17.203.3          51.22
17.203.4          51.23
17.203.5          51.24
17.203.6          51.25
17.203.7          51.26
17.203.8          51.21
17.203.9          51.27
17.203.10         51.99
17.204.1          51.43
17.204.3          51.41
17.204.4          51.47
17.204.5          51.40
17.205.1          51.44
17.205.2          51.45
17.205.4          51.44,
                  51.47
17.206.2          51.46
17.206.3          51.48
17.206.6          51.28
18.101            70.01
18.102            70.02
18.103            70.04
18.104            70.05
18.105            70.06
18.106            70.07
18.107            70.08
18.108            70.09
18.201            70.03
18.202            70.11
18.203            71.01
18.205            71.02
18.206            71.03
18.207            71.04
18.208            71.05
18.209            71.06
18.210            71.07
18.211            71.08
18.212            71.09
18.213            71.10
18.214            71.11
18.215            71.12
18.216            71.13
18.217            71.14
18.218            71.15
18.219            71.16
18.220            71.17
18.221            71.18
18.222            70.12
18.223            71.19
18.224            71.35
18.225            71.35
18.226            71.36
18.227            71.37
18.228            71.38
18.229            71.39
18.230            71.40
18.231            71.38
18.301            71.50
18.302            71.51
18.303            71.52
18.304            71.52
18.401            72.02
18.402            72.03
18.403            72.01
18.404            72.04
18.405            72.05
18.405(b)         72.01
18.406            72.06
18.407            72.05
18.408            72.05
18.409            72.08
18.410            72.09
18.411            72.07,
                  72.99
18.501            71.20
18.502            71.21
18.503            71.20
18.504            71.22
18.505            94.27
18.508            71.23
18.509            71.24
18.510            71.24
18.511            70.10
18.601            73.01
18.602            73.02
18.603            73.03
18.604            73.04
18.605            71.26
18.702            74.01
18.703            74.03
18.704            74.04
18.705            74.05
18.706            74.06
18.707            74.07
18.708            74.02
18.709            74.08
18.710            74.08
18.711            74.09
18.712            74.08
18.801            74.01
18.901            115.01
18.902            115.02
18.903            115.03
18.905            115.04
                  
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
84-6     6-18-84     T.S.O. IV
87-12    7-20-87     T.S.O. IV
87-11    8-24-87     T.S.O. IV
87-14    10-9-87     T.S.O. IV
88-2     2-16-88     T.S.O. VI
88-5     8-15-88     T.S.O. II
88-6     8- -88      T.S.O. IV
89-3     5-15-89     T.S.O. IV
89-4     5-15-89     93.22
90-5     6-28-90     T.S.O. IV
90-6     7-26-90      
92-3     4-20-92     T.S.O. II
92-4     4-27-92     T.S.O. II
93-1     2-25-93     T.S.O. VI
93-2     2-25-93     T.S.O. VI
94-4     5-5-94      33.01
94-3     5-16-94     33.02
97-6     6-9-97      T.S.O. II
97-11    8-18-97     33.01
98-4     3-9-98      T.S.O. IV
98-7     6-29-98     T.S.O. IV
98-10    8-17-98     T.S.O. IV
98-12    9-21-98     153.01
—      9-21-98     T.S.O. II
98-13    10-19-98    T.S.O. II
98-14    10-19-98    T.S.O. II
98-16    11-9-98     T.S.O. II
98-17    11-30-98    T.S.O. II
2001-02  4-4-01      T.S.O. II
2002-01  1-15-02     T.S.O. II
2002-04  4-22-02     T.S.O. II
2002-06  6-17-02     T.S.O. II
2003-03  6-23-03     T.S.O. II
2003-04  7-21-03     T.S.O. II
2005-01  6-20-05     T.S.O. II
2005-03  8-15-05     T.S.O. II
2007-02  – –     T.S.O. II
2008-01  5-19-08     T.S.O. II
2009-03  9-2-09      T.S.O. II
2009-04  11-16-09    T.S.O. II
2013-02  10-21-13    T.S.O. V
2013-06  12-16-13    T.S.O. VII
- -      6-15-17     T.S.O. II
- -      10-16-17    T.S.O. II
- -      5-15-17     T.S.O. IV
2018-04  8-20-18     T.S.O. II
2018-06  10-29-18    T.S.O. II
2022-03  8-9-22      T.S.O. II
2022-05  - -22       T.S.O. II
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
—      4-5-58      31.15 -
                     31.19
—      11-9-62     33.25 -
                     33.30
1972-3   - -72       90.38,
                     90.44
—      - -79       T.S.O. IV
—      6-17-80     113.01
                     50.01,
                     50.02,
                     50.15 -
                     50.19,
—      9-16-80     50.21,
                     50.35 
                     50.36,
                     50.38,
                     50.99,
                     51.42
81-12    6-16-81     T.S.O. IV
81-15    7-21-81     T.S.O. IV
81-19    8-18-81     T.S.O. IV
81-20    9-15-81     T.S.O. V
81-21    9-23-81     T.S.O. VII
81-23    10-20-81    T.S.O. IV
81-28    11-17-81    T.S.O. IV
82-7     7-28-82     51.27,
                     51.47
82-10    7-28-82     32.23
82-11    8-17-82     70.09
82-14    10-19-82    T.S.O. IV
—      11-16-82    153.01
82-16    11-16-82    T.S.O. IV
82-17    12-21-82    T.S.O. I
82-19    1-3-83      T.S.O. V
83-2     2-10-83     51.44,
                     51.45
83-2     - -83       51.23
83-8     2-23-83     T.S.O. IV
83-13    10-26-83    T.S.O. IV
84-2     2-20-84     T.S.O. III
84-4     3-29-84     T.S.O. V
85-1     4-15-85     72.07,
                     72.99
85-4     4-25-85     T.S.O. IV
85-3     5-9-85      T.S.O. V
85-5     5-29-85     T.S.O. III
85-7     5-29-85     51.21
85-6     6-28-85     T.S.O. IV
85-10    8-27-85     T.S.O. IV
85-11    10-3-85     T.S.O. IV
85-12    10-3-85     T.S.O. IV
86-7     8-18-86     52.01
86-9     8-18-86     T.S.O. IV
86-11    11-17-86    T.S.O. IV
86-13    1-5-87      150.03
86-12    1-19-87     T.S.O. V
87-2     3-16-87     T.S.O. V
87-3     3-24-87     T.S.O. IV
87-1     4-20-87     153.01
87-14    11-17-87    T.S.O. V
88-5     6-27-88     T.S.O. V
88-6     8-15-88     T.S.O. V
89-3     3-7-89      93.20
89-4     4-6-89      T.S.O. V
89-5     6-19-89     94.04
89-9     6-26-89     51.45
89-12    6-26-89     51.44
89-14    7-17-89     153.01
89-15    7-17-89     153.01
89-16    7-17-89     153.01
89-17    7-31-89     T.S.O. V
89-19    7-31-89     153.01
89-22    1-15-90     30.20
90-2     2-28-90     T.S.O. IV
90-3     2-28-90     T.S.O. V
90-4     2-28-90     153.01
90-5     4-17-90     T.S.O. IV
89-11    4-25-90     T.S.O. V
90-6     4-25-90     T.S.O. V
90-7     5-21-90     T.S.O. IV
91-3     4-15-91     113.01
91-4     6-17-91     T.S.O. V
91-7     6-24-91     51.45
92-1     3-16-92     T.S.O. V
92-2     3-16-92     T.S.O. V
92-3     5-28-92     T.S.O. V
92-5     6-22-92     51.46
92-8     8-17-92     153.01
92-9     9-28-92     T.S.O. VII
92-7     1-5-93      T.S.O. V
92-10    1-5-93      T.S.O. V
93-2     5-17-93     33.28
93-6     6-28-93     50.35
93-7     6-28-93     51.45
93-9     8-16-93     153.01
93-10    9-20-93     71.25
93-11    12-20-93    153.01
93-12    12-20-93    T.S.O. V
94-4     - -94       T.S.O. IV
94-5     - -94       T.S.O. IV
94-14    1-16-94     150.03
94-1     1-24-94     T.S.O. V
94-7     5-16-94     153.01
94-6     6-29-94     94.03
94-9     6-29-94     50.35
94-11    7-18-94     30.07
94-12    8-22-94     T.S.O. V
94-13    11-24-94    133.03,
                     133.99
94-15    12-19-94    51.49
                     116.01 -
94-16    1-16-95     116.10,
                     116.99
95-5     7-17-95     50.35
95-6     8-31-95     T.S.O. V
95-8     - -95       116.08
96-3     9-16-96     135.10
96-5     10-4-96     T.S.O. IV
97-1     2-17-97     150.02,
                     T.S.O. IV
96-7-B   3-17-97     153.01
97-4     4- -97      51.02
97-2     4-21-97     153.01
97-3     5-9-97      T.S.O. IV
97-6     7-28-97     153.01
                     36.02,
97-31    8-8-97      36.05,
                     36.08
                     10.99,
                     35.05,
                     50.99,
97-7     8-18-97     70.03,
                     70.04,
                     70.99,
                     130.99,
                     150.99
                     51.46,
97-8     8-18-97     94.24,
                     113.01,
                     113.02
97-9     8-18-97     31.19
97-10    8-18-97     32.07
97-11    8-18-97     33.01
97-12    8-18-97     34.11
97-13    8-18-97     35.21
97-14    8-18-97     51.42
97-16    8-18-97     72.06
97-17    8-18-97     50.20
97-18    8-18-97     72.99
97-19    8-18-97     90.41
97-21    8-18-97     90.48
97-22    8-18-97     90.99
97-25    8-18-97     94.04
97-26    8-18-97     113.01,
                     113.02
                     131.01,
97-27    8-18-97     131.04,
                     131.05
97-29    8-18-97     T.S.O. VII
97-30    8-18-97     91.99
97-33    8-18-97     T.S.O. IV
97-32    9-15-97     T.S.O. V
97-34    9-15-97     T.S.O. V
97-35    9-29-97     36.05
97-36    11-17-97    51.45,
                     51.46
97-37    11-17-97    T.S.O. III
97-40    11-17-97    36.05
98-4     5-4-98      T.S.O. V
98-5     5-4-98      T.S.O. IV
98-3     5-18-98     51.45,
                     51.46
98-6     5-20-98     153.01
98-7     6-1-98      T.S.O. II
98-10    9-28-98     50.35
98-11    11-16-98    T.S.O. V
98-12    11-16-98    T.S.O. II
98-13    - -98       153.01
98-15    4-19-99     33.10 -
                     33.16
99-01    2-15-99     T.S.O. III
99-02    2-22-99     T.S.O. IV
99-03    3-15-99     33.45 -
                     33.50
99-04    3-15-99     T.S.O. V
99-06    6-21-99     153.01
99-08    5-17-99     T.S.O. IV
99-09    6-28-99     T.S.O. III
99-10    7-19-99     Adopting Ord.
99-12    7-26-99     T.S.O. I
99-16    10-18-99    51.42
99-17    11-15-99    T.S.O. IV
99-19    12-20-99    T.S.O. V
2000-1   3-21-00     51.42
2000-2   3-21-00     90.43
2000-3   5-15-00     70.99,
                     130.99
2000-4   5-15-00     T.S.O. II
2000-5   6-19-00     153.01
2000-7   8-21-00     51.44,
                     51.47
2000-8   8-21-00     T.S.O. V
2000-9   12-18-00    153.01
2000-10  10-16-00    150.02
                     117.01 -
2000-11  10-16-00    117.08,
                     117.99
2000-12  10-26-00    T.S.O. II
2000-13  12-18-00    51.44
2000-14  1-22-01     T.S.O. V
2000-15  12-18-00    T.S.O. IV
2001-1   2-19-01     T.S.O. V
2001-02  2-08-01     T.S.O. II
2001-04  4-16-01     T.S.O. V
                     70.99,
2001-05  4-16-01     72.99,
                     130.99
2001-06  5-21-01     91.22,
                     91.23
2001-07  6-18-01     92.14,
                     92.15
2001-08  7-16-01     T.S.O. V
2001-09  8-20-01     111.03
2001-13  8-20-01     51.44
2001-14  9-17-01     T.S.O. IV
2001-016 - -01       51.02
2001-17  1-28-02     152.05
2001-18  1-28-02     72.09
2001-19  1-28-02     70.99,
                     130.99
2002-01  2-6-02      T.S.O. V
2002-03  4-15-02     90.46
2002-05  4-15-02     T.S.O. II
2002-09  6-27-02     70.99
2002-10  8-19-02     T.S.O. IV
2002-11  8-19-02     153.01
2002-12  8-19-02     154.01 -
                     154.12
2002-13  10-21-02    118.01 -
                     118.04
2002-15  10-21-02    T.S.O. III
2002-17  11-18-02    T.S.O. II
2002-019 11-18-02    T.S.O. IV
2003-01  2-17-03     153.01
2003-03  2-24-03     T.S.O. IV
2003-04  2-24-03     T.S.O. IV
2003-06  5-19-03     52.01
2003-07  4-30-03     T.S.O. IV
2003-008 5-19-03     153.01
2003-09  5-19-03     T.S.O. II
2003-12  8-28-03     T.S.O. IV
2003-13  8-18-03     36.04
2003-14  8-18-03     131.22
2003-15  9-15-03     30.20
2004-01  2-2-04      T.S.O. V
                     72.09,
2004-02  3-15-04     92.10 -
                     92.15
                     110.01 -
                     110.19,
2004-05  7-19-04     110.99,
                     Appendices A,
                     B
                     119.01 -
2004-06  8-16-04     119.08,
                     119.99
2004-08  9-20-04     110.19,
                     Appendix A
2004-09  10-18-04    116.08
2004-10  11-15-04    110.19,
                     Appendix A
2005-01  3-21-05     51.11
2005-04  8-15-05     130.99
2005-06  10-28-05    T.S.O. IV
2006-1   3-20-06     51.42
2006-02  4-17-06     T.S.O. IV
                     50.35,
2006-03  5-15-06     51.42,
                     51.44
2006-06  6-19-06     T.S.O. V
2006-07  9-18-06     34.70
2006-08  10-16-06    51.21
2006-09  11-27-06    Adopting Ordinance
2006-10  12-18-06    T.S.O. VI
2006-11  12-18-06    110.19,
                     Appendix A
                     50.35,
                     51.42,
2007-02  6-25-07     51.45,
                     51.46,
                     51.47
2007-03  11-12-07    153.01
2007-04  11-12-07    153.01,
                     T.S.O. V
2007-05  11-12-07    T.S.O. IV
2007-06  8-20-07     33.10,
                     154.04
2007-07  8-20-07     33.46
2007-08  8-20-07     153.01
2007-09  8-28-07     T.S.O. I,
                     T.S.O. V
2007-10  12-17-07    T.S.O. V
2008-01  2-25-08     T.S.O. IV
2008-02  2-25-08     90.46
2008-03  4-21-08     T.S.O. IV
2008-04  4-21-08     T.S.O. IV
2008-05  3-17-08     92.10 -
                     92.15
2008-06  3-17-08     150.10 -
                     150.20
2008-07  4-21-08     33.10,
                     154.04
2008-08  4-21-08     153.01
2008-10  5-21-08     T.S.O. IV
2008-12  6-16-08     51.42
2008-13  6-4-08      T.S.O. II
2008-14  8-18-08     150.02
2008-16  10-20-08    33.28
2008-17  1-21-09     116.08
2009-02  5-18-09     153.01
2009-03  6-15-09     51.45,
                     51.47
2009-04  8-21-09     51.44
2009-05  8-17-09     150.07
2009-06  10-19-09    110.04,
                     110.12
2009-07  11-16-09    34.25 -
                     34.27
2009-08  12-14-09    153.01
2009-012 1-11-10     T.S.O. IV
2010-2   5-17-10     51.44
2010-3   5-17-10     T.S.O. II
2010-04  5-17-10     93.02
2010-07  11-29-10    T.S.O. II
2010-09  1-24-11     153.01
2010-10  12-20-10    T.S.O. V
2011-02  6-20-11     T.S.O. IV
2011-05  7-18-11     91.01
2011-06  8-1-11      T.S.O. I
2011-07  8-1-11      T.S.O. I
2011-08  8-15-11     50.35
2011-11  1-3-12      153.01
2011-12  1-3-12      T.S.O. V
2011-13  1-3-12      135.10
2012-01  3-19-12     34.80
2012-02  3-19-12     51.02
2012-04  5-14-12     T.S.O. I
                     54.001 -
                     54.004,
                     54.010 -
                     54.015,
                     54.020 -
                     54.023,
                     54.030 -
                     54.036,
                     54.050 -
                     54.056,
                     54.065 -
2012-06  4- -12      54.077,
                     54.085 -
                     54.088,
                     54.095 -
                     54.102,
                     54.110 -
                     54.113,
                     54.120 -
                     54.124,
                     54.130 -
                     54.132,
                     54.140 -
                     54.142
                     151.01 -
                     151.09,
                     151.20,
                     151.30 -
                     151.34,
2012-06  10-15-12    151.40 -
                     151.44,
                     151.50 -
                     151.58,
                     151.60 -
                     151.61,
                     151.99
2012-07  12-3-12     51.02
2012-09  12-3-12     110.19,
                     Appendix A
2012-10  12-27-12    119.99
2012-11  12-27-12    117.99
2013-02  6-17-13     36.03
2013-08  9-16-13     51.46
2013-10  9-16-13     T.S.O. I
2013-12  11-18-13    153.01
2013-14  11-18-13    153.01
2013-15  11-18-13    153.01
2013-016 12-16-13    50.35
                     95.01 -
2014-01  3-17-14     95.19;
                     95.99
2014-02  4-21-14     91.01,
                     150.02
2014-03  5-12-14     10.05
                     92.02,
                     92.11,
2014-04  5-12-14     92.14 -
                     92.18,
                     92.99
                     150.01,
                     150.10 -
2014-05  5-12-14     150.15,
                     150.17 -
                     150.20,
                     150.99
2014-08  8-18-14     10.20
                     91.35 -
2014-10  9-15-14     91.47,
                     91.99
2014-11  12-15-14    51.49
                     51.40 -
2015-01  5-18-15     51.49,
                     51.99
2015-02  4-20-15     51.02
2015-03  6- -15      T.S.O. II
2015-05  6-15-15     T.S.O. III
2015-06  7-20-15     93.02
2015-07  7-20-15     72.05
2015-09  8-17-15     T.S.O. II
2016-02  5-16-16     135.01,
                     135.99
2016-03  5-16-16     91.24
2016-04  7-28-16     T.S.O. II,
                     T.S.O. IV
2016-05  7-28-16     T.S.O. II,
                     T.S.O. IV
2016-06  7-28-16     91.01,
                     150.02
2017-02  6-19-17     153.01
2017-03  6-19-17     153.01
2017-04  7-17-17     34.90 -
                     34.96
2017-05  7-17-17     51.46
2017-06  7-17-17     51.45
2017-07  8-21-17     153.01
2017-09  8-21-17     T.S.O. IV
2017-12  12-18-17    T.S.O. II
2018-01  2-19-18     72.10
2018-02  2-19-18     T.S.O. IV
2018-03  4-16-18     71.27
2018-05  4-16-18     T.S.O. V
                     110.03,
2018-008 5-21-18     110.04,
                     110.12
2018-13  9-17-18     50.35
2018-14  11-5-18     34.70
2019-02  2-26-19     T.S.O. IV
2019-03  4-15-19     153.01
2019-04  4-15-19     153.01
2019-06  6-27-19     T.S.O. II
2020-002 4-20-20     T.S.O. V
2020-003 4-20-20     150.02
2020-06  6-15-20     51.45
2020-07  6-15-20     51.46
2020-09  8-17-20     T.S.O. IV
2020-12  11-16-20    T.S.O. IV
                     54.001,
2021-01  3-15-21     54.010,
                     54.023,
                     54.078
2021-02  5-17-21     51.11
2021-04  6-21-21     30.04
                     110.01 -
2021-07  1-14-22     110.19,
                     Appendices A,
                     B
2021-08  12-20-21    T.S.O. IV
2022-02  7-18-22     51.42
                     151.01 -
                     151.09,
                     151.20,
                     151.30 -
                     151.34,
2022-03  7-18-22     151.40 -
                     151.44,
                     151.50 -
                     151.58,
                     151.60,
                     151.61,
                     151.99
2022-06  11-21-22    150.02
2022-08  12-19-22    50.35
2023-003 5-15-23     T.S.O. V
2023-06  9-18-23     T.S.O. I
2023-07  9-18-23     T.S.O. IV
                     Ch. 110,  
2024-01  2-19-24     Appendices A,
                     B
                     33.26,
2024-03  6-17-24     33.27,
                     153.01
2024-04  9-16-24     90.07
2024-05  8-19-24     50.36
2024-06  9-16-24     51.42
2024-09  10-21-24    51.44
2024-10  10-21-24    51.47
2024-11  10-21-24    51.42
2024-12  11-18-24    150.07
2025-01  3-17-25     54.100
                    
 
