MOUNT PLEASANT, SOUTH CAROLINA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-76 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through August 18, 2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
11.   MUNICIPAL SEAL
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Short titles
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of construction
   
10.07   Construction of revised ordinances
   
10.08   Conflicting provisions
   
10.09   Severability
   
10.10   Reference to other sections
   
10.11   Reference to offices
   
10.12   Errors and omissions
   
10.13   Official time
   
10.14   Ordinances repealed
   
10.15   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.16   Ordinances saved
   
10.17   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.18   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.19   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.20   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.21   Violations of rules, regulations and orders
   
10.22   Liability of corporations and agents for violations
   
10.23   Hate intimidation
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 SHORT TITLES.
   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the municipality
as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters, and sections shall be known and designated as the
Mount Pleasant Code, for which designation “codified ordinances” or “code” may
be substituted. Code, title, chapter, and section headings do not constitute
any part of the law as contained in the code.
   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters, and sections are to such
components of the code unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be
referred to and cited by its name, such as the “traffic code.” Sections may be
referred to and cited by the designation “§ ” followed by the number, such as
“§
10.01.”
('81 Code, § 10.01)
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation, shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
('81 Code, § 10.02)
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AND. May be read “or,” and “or” may be read “and,” if the sense requires it.
   ANOTHER. When used to designate the owner of property which is the subject
of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other owner of
property.
   CITY, TOWN, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, or MUNICIPALITY. When used in this code
shall denote the Municipality of Mount Pleasant irrespective of its population
or legal classification.
   COUNCIL. The legislative authority of the municipality.
   COUNTY. County of Charleston, South Carolina.
   GOVERNOR. The Governor of South Carolina.
   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by themselves or
as a servant, agent, or employee.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   MUNICIPALITY. The Municipality of Mount Pleasant, South Carolina.
   OATH. Includes affirmation and SWEAR includes affirm.
   OFFICERS OF MUNICIPALITY and OFFICIALS OF MUNICIPALITY. The officials,
boards, commissions, and departments of the municipality.
   OWNER. When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner, or
tenant in common of the whole or part of such property.
   PERSON. Includes an individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership, and association.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes money, goods, chattels, things in action, and
evidence of debt. (S.C. Code § 15-1-40)
   PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
   PROPERTY. Includes both real and personal property. (S.C. Code § 15-1-50)
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Includes boards of education; the municipal, county,
state, or federal government, its officers or an agency thereof; or any duly
authorized public official.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard,
body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place for the
sale of merchandise, public accommodation, or amusement.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments. (S.C. Code §
15-1-30)
   REGISTERED MAIL. Includes certified mail, and CERTIFIED MAIL includes
registered mail.
   ROADWAY. That portion of a street improved, designed, or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel.
   S.C. CODE. The Code of Laws of South Carolina.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of the street between the curb line, or the lateral
lines of a roadway where there is no curb, and the adjacent property line
intended for the use of pedestrians.
   STATE. The State of South Carolina.
   STREET. Includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, highways,
viaducts, and all other public thoroughfares within the municipality.
   SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in
the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have subchapters.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding a
written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of such
premises, alone or with others.
   WEEK. Seven consecutive days.
   WHOEVER. Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners; principals,
agents, and employees; and all officials, public or private.
   WRITTEN, or IN WRITING. Includes printing and any representation of words,
letters, symbols, or figures. When the written signature of any person is
required, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he
is unable to write, his proper mark.
   YEAR. Twelve consecutive months.
('81 Code, § 10.03)
§ 10.06 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A) Words and phrases shall be read in context and construed according to
the rules of grammar and common usage. Words and phrases that have acquired a
technical or particular meaning, whether by legislative definition or
otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.
   (B)   As used in the code, unless the context otherwise requires:
      (1)   The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the
singular.
      (2)   Words of one gender include the other genders.
      (3)   Words in the present tense include the future.
   (C)   Calendar; computation of time.
      (1)   The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by
excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day be Sunday it
shall be excluded. (S.C. Code § 15-1-20)
      (2)   In all cases where the law requires any act to be done in a
reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, such reasonable time or
notice shall mean the time as only may be necessary for the prompt performance
of such duty or compliance with such notice.
   (D)   Authority. When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as
well be done by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be
construed to include such acts when done by an authorized agent.
   (E)   Joint authority. All words purporting to give joint authority to three
or more municipal officers or to other persons shall be construed as giving
such authority to a majority of the officers or other persons, unless it is
otherwise expressly declared in the law giving the authority or inconsistent
with state statute or other provisions.
   (F)   Exceptions. The rules of construction shall not apply to any law which
contains any express provision excluding such construction, or when the subject
matter or context of such law may be repugnant thereto.
('81 Code, § 10.04)
§ 10.07 CONSTRUCTION OF REVISED ORDINANCES.
   The provisions of this code, so far as they are consistent with any prior
ordinances, shall be construed as continuations of the prior provisions and not
as new enactments.
('81 Code, § 10.05)
§ 10.08 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   If the provisions of different codes, chapters, or sections of the codified
ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions bearing the
latest passage date shall prevail. If the conflicting provisions bear the same
passage date, the conflict shall be construed so as to be consistent with the
meaning or legal effect of the subject matter taken as a whole.
('81 Code, § 10.08)
§ 10.09 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of a section of these codified ordinances or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of the section or
related sections which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end the provisions are severable.
('81 Code, § 10.09)
§ 10.10 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
section or an inclusive group of sections, such reference shall be construed to
mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections included in such
reference.
   (B)   References in the code to action taken or authorized under designated
sections of the code include, in every case, action taken or authorized under
the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by this code.
   (C)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
such reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered, unless the subject
matter be changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
('81 Code, § 10.07)
§ 10.11 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of the town exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
('81 Code, § 10.10)
§ 10.12 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and such word
or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
such error.
('81 Code, § 10.11)
§ 10.13 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be
the official time within this municipality for the transaction of all municipal
business.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
('81 Code, § 10.12)
§ 10.15 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.
('81 Code, § 10.13)
§ 10.16 ORDINANCES SAVED.
   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the
legislative body, or a certain municipal officer or employee, to make
additional ordinances or regulations for the purpose of carrying out the intent
of the ordinance, all ordinances and regulations of a similar nature serving
such purpose effected prior to the codification and not inconsistent thereto,
shall remain in effect and are saved.
('81 Code, § 10.14)
§ 10.17 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from
their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.18 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   The repeal of an ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any
provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued, any offense
committed, any penalty or punishment incurred, or any proceeding commenced
before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired.
   (B)   When an ordinance which repealed another shall itself be repealed, the
previous ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect.
('81 Code, § 10.06)
§ 10.19 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   Any chapter, section, or division amended or added to this code by
ordinances passed subsequent to this code may be numbered in accordance with
the numbering system of this code and printed for inclusion herein. Any
chapter, section, or division repealed by subsequent ordinances may be excluded
from this code by omission from reprinted pages. Subsequent ordinances as
printed or omitted shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances
until the legislative body of the municipality shall adopt a new code of
ordinances.
   (B)   The following language should be used by the municipality to amend,
add, or repeal a chapter, section, or division:
      (1)   Section amended. “Section        of the Mount Pleasant Code of
Ordinances is amended to read as follows: ...”
      (2)   Section added. “Section       , which reads as follows, is added to
and amends the Mount Pleasant Code of Ordinances: ...”
      (3)   Section repealed. “Section        of the Mount Pleasant Code of
Ordinances, which reads as follows, is repealed: ...”
('81 Code, § 10.15)
§ 10.20 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending ordinances,
if any, are listed following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10,
passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-80; Am.
Ord. 25, passed 1-1-85)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (S.C. Code § 16-11-700) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-80; Am. Ord. 20, passed
1-1-85).
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information.
Example:
   § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
      This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
   Statutory reference:
      For provisions concerning the inspection of public records, see S.C. Code
§§ 30-1-10 et seq.
   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the city published in 1981 and subsequently amended, the 1981
code section number shall be indicated in the history by “('81 Code, §      ).”
§ 10.21 VIOLATIONS OF RULES, REGULATIONS AND ORDERS.
   Except as otherwise provided in this code, the violation of any rules,
regulations, or orders promulgated by any officer or agency of the municipality
under authority vested in him, her, or it by law, by the provisions of this
code, or by any ordinance or resolution, shall be unlawful.
('81 Code, § 10.16)
§ 10.22 LIABILITY OF CORPORATIONS AND AGENTS FOR VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Any violation of this code by any officer, agent, or other person
acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or
organization while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall
in every case also be deemed to be a violation by such corporation,
association, or organization.
   (B)   Any officer, agent, or other person acting for, or employed by, any
corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and
liable to punishment as well as such corporation or unincorporated association
or organization for the violation by it of any provision of this code, where
such violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act, omission, or
order of any such person.
('81 Code, § 10.17)
§ 10.23 HATE INTIMIDATION.
   (A)   A person who violates Title XIII of the Town of Mount Pleasant Code of
Ordinances, any act or omission which is prohibited or declared unlawful under
this Code of Ordinances, or any provision of state law within the municipal
limits of the Town of Mount Pleasant, with the intent to intimidate a person or
persons, in whole or in part, because of the actual or perceived race, color,
creed, religion, ancestry, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity,
physical or mental disability, or national origin of any person is guilty of
the separate offense of hate intimidation and shall be punished as provided in
division (B) below. Sentences shall run consecutive to one another unless the
Court specifies on the record good cause why they should run concurrently.
   (B)   Fines imposed under this section for contemporaneous or concurrent
violations of this section shall be assessed for each violation.
      (1)   A violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor and punishable
by a fine of not more than $500 and/or by imprisonment for not more than 30
days. The sentence imposed must be consecutive to the sentence for the
underlying criminal offense unless the Court articulates on the record the
reasons why the sentences should run concurrently.
      (2)   The Court may impose community service or participation in an
educational program for violation of this section.
      (3)   Any sentence may be suspended upon completion by the defendant of
appropriate education, counseling or community service employment as ordered by
the Court.
      (4)   The Court may also designate that all or part of the imposed fine
be directed to the support of programs designed to combat bias based on
ethnicity, national origin, color, religion, sexual orientation, gender and
gender identity or physical or mental disability.
   (C)   Restitution authorized. In addition to the penalties provided for
above, the Court may order restitution up to the limits of the Court's
jurisdiction for damages sustained by the victim of this offense directly
related to the commission of the crime, which may include compensation for
medical bills, counseling or therapy or damage to property sustained by the
victim as a result of the underlying criminal offense.
(Ord. 23038, passed 1-11-24)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Where an act or omission is prohibited or declared unlawful in this
code of ordinances, and no penalty of fine or imprisonment is otherwise
provided, the offender shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned for not
more than 30 days. However, no penalty shall exceed the penalty provided by
state law for similar offenses. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day that a violation occurs or continues.
   (B)   In addition to the penalties provided in division (A) above, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this code shall be deemed a public nuisance, and may be abated by the
municipality as provided by law.
('81 Code, § 10.99)
Cross-reference:
   Uniform ordinance summons, fine and imprisonment imposed by Municipal Court,
see §
35.99
Statutory reference:
   Maximum penalty under state law, see S.C. Code § 5-7-30.
CHAPTER 11: MUNICIPAL SEAL
Section
   
11.01   Municipal seal
§ 11.01 MUNICIPAL SEAL.
   The seal of the municipality shall be a circle, within which and following
the arc at the top thereof shall be the word and figures “*CRESCO*,” (the
translation of which is “I increase” or “I grow”) and within which and
following the arc at the bottom thereof shall be the words “MOUNT PLEASANT;”
and there shall be an inner circle in the center of which shall be the
representation of an oak tree.
('81 Code, § 11.01)
Cross-reference:
   Custodian of municipal seal, see §
31.045
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   TOWN COUNCIL
      
31.   TOWN OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
      
32.   DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, COMMITTEES, COMMISSIONS AND OTHER ENTITIES
      
33.   FIRE DEPARTMENT
      
34.   POLICE DEPARTMENT
      
35.   MUNICIPAL COURT
         
APPENDIX: UNIFORM ORDINANCE SUMMONS
      
36.   ELECTIONS
      
37.   PERSONNEL POLICIES
      
38.   PROCUREMENT CODE
      
39.   PUBLIC RECORDS
      
40.   TAXATION AND FINANCE
      
41.   CIVIL EMERGENCIES
      
42.   DEPARTMENT OF ENGINEERING AND DEVELOPMENT SERVICES
      
43.   TOWN POLICIES
      
44.   LOBBYISTS
CHAPTER 30: TOWN COUNCIL
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Form of government
   
30.02   Composition; election of Council
   
30.03   Eligibility for office
   
30.04   Term
   
30.05   Oath
   
30.06   Inauguration of members; Mayor Pro Tempore
   
30.07   Powers
Meetings and Procedures
   
30.21   Meetings of Council
   
30.22   Special and adjourned meetings
   
30.23   Notice of meetings
   
30.24   Attendance at meetings
   
30.25   Presiding officer; quorum
   
30.26   Preservation of order
   
30.27   Sergeant at arms
   
30.28   Council minutes
   
30.29   Order of business
   
30.30   Personal interest of members
   
30.31   Voting by Mayor; tie votes
   
30.32   Appeals from decision of chair
   
30.33   Consent agenda
   
30.34   Executive session
   
30.35   Rules of order
   
30.36   Public comments at town public meetings
Ordinances and Resolutions
   
30.45   Ordinances
   
30.46   Procedure for enactment of town ordinances
   
30.47   Emergency ordinances
   
30.48   Ordinance book; amending and repealing ordinances
   
30.49   Additional rules
   
30.50   Form of ordinances
   
30.51   Initiation of ordinances
   
30.52   Introduction of resolutions
   
30.53   Adoption of resolutions
Committees
   
30.65   Standing committees
   
30.66   Special committees
   
30.67   Duty of Councilmembers
   
30.68   Reference to standing committees
   
30.69   Reference when more than one standing committee
   
30.70   Investigations and reports
   
30.71   Control of appropriations
   
30.72   Examination of ordinances; suggestions for revision
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   The form of government for the municipality shall be the Council form
provided in S.C. Code § 5-11-10 et seq. as amended.
('81 Code, § 30.01)
§ 30.02 COMPOSITION; ELECTION OF COUNCIL.
   The Council shall be composed of a Mayor and eight Councilmembers who shall
be elected from the municipality at large.
('81 Code, § 30.02) (Ord. passed 8-23-76; Am. Ord. passed 3-6-78)
§ 30.03 ELIGIBILITY FOR OFFICE.
   To be eligible for the position of Mayor or Councilmember, a person shall be
a duly qualified elector of the state and of the county and shall have resided
within the municipality at least six months immediately preceding the date of
election.
('81 Code, § 30.03)
§ 30.04 TERM.
   (A)   The Mayor and Councilmembers shall hold office for the period of four
years or until their successors shall be duly elected and qualified.
   (B)   All Councilmembers elected in regularly scheduled general elections
will have terms of four years.
('81 Code, § 30.04) (Am. Ord. passed 8-23-76; Am. Ord. passed 5-8-78)
§ 30.05 OATH.
   Before entering on the duties of their respective offices, the Mayor and
Councilmembers shall take the following oath:
   “I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I am duly qualified, according to the
Constitution of this State, to exercise the duties of the office to which I
have been elected and that I will, to the best of my ability, discharge the
duties thereof, and preserve, protect, and defend the Constitution of this
State and of the United States. So help me God.
   As Mayor (or Councilmember) of the town, I will equally, fairly, and
impartially, to the best of my ability, and skill, exercise the trust reposed
in me, and will use my best endeavors to preserve the peace and carry into
effect according to law the purposes for which I have been elected. So help me
God.”
('81 Code, § 30.05)
Statutory reference:
   Oath of public officers, see Const. S.C., Art. 3, § 26
§ 30.06 INAUGURATION OF MEMBERS; MAYOR PRO TEMPORE.
   (A)   At the first Council meeting in November following the declaration of
the result of a regular municipal election, the Council shall install the Mayor
and/or Councilmembers elect.
   (B)   The Council shall, at the first meeting of the newly constituted
Council after any general election for municipal Council, elect one of its
members as Mayor Pro Tempore for a term of two years. It shall be the duty of
the Mayor Pro Tempore to act as Mayor during the absence or disability of the
Mayor, or in the case of a vacancy in the office of the Mayor.
('81 Code, § 30.06) (Am. Ord. passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. passed 10-11-88; Am. Ord.
passed 9-11-90; Am. Ord. 93077, passed 1-11-94; Am. Ord. 09064, passed 10-13-
09)
§ 30.07 POWERS.
   The Councilmembers, with the Mayor, shall have power as the Council, to
establish and enforce all such rules, regulations, bylaws, resolutions, and
ordinances regarding the finances, streets, health, and police as it shall
appear to them proper for the security, welfare, and convenience of the
municipality and for preserving the health, peace, order, and good government
within the municipality, and to do all things which lawfully may be done by
them as provided by the constitution and state statutes.
('81 Code, § 30.07)
Statutory reference:
   Administrative and legislative powers, see S.C. Code § 5-11-30
MEETINGS AND PROCEDURES
§ 30.21 MEETINGS OF COUNCIL.
   Regular meetings of the Town Council shall be held each month of the year in
the Mount Pleasant Town Council Chambers. The regular monthly meeting shall be
held on the second Tuesday of the month, and shall be called to order at 6:00
p.m., unless otherwise determined by Town Council. Pursuant to the stated, Town
Council may change the location and/or time of the regular monthly meeting, so
long as special circumstances exist to justify the change, the change is
approved in advance by a majority vote at a regular monthly meeting, and the
change is properly advertised to the public.
(‘81 Code, § 30.16) (Am. Ord. passed 11-10-86; Am. Ord. passed 5-11-87; Am.
Ord. passed 12-29-87; Am. Ord. 08069, passed 12-9-08; Am. Ord. 11076, passed
11-4-11)
§ 30.22 SPECIAL AND ADJOURNED MEETINGS.
   The Mayor shall, whenever in his or her judgment the good of the
municipality requires it, summon special meetings of the Council, although any
meeting may stand adjourned to a more distant day. The Mayor shall call special
meetings when requested in writing so to do by any three Councilmembers.
('81 Code, § 30.17)
§ 30.23 NOTICE OF MEETINGS.
   The Clerk of Council shall give notice to all members of the Council of all
regular and special meetings.
('81 Code, § 30.18)
§ 30.24 ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS.
   It shall be the duty of the Mayor and the Councilmembers to attend all
regular meetings of the Council and, when notified, to attend all extra or
special meetings called pursuant to this subchapter. For failure to attend any
meeting they shall, unless excused by the Council, be subject to such fine as
the Council may impose.
('81 Code, § 30.19)
§ 30.25 PRESIDING OFFICER; QUORUM.
   Immediately at the hour appointed for meeting of the Council, the Mayor
shall take the chair, and if a quorum be present, shall proceed with the
business of Council. A majority of the members of Council shall constitute a
quorum.
('81 Code, § 30.20)
§ 30.26 PRESERVATION OF ORDER.
   It shall be the duty of the chair at all meetings of the Council to preserve
order inviolate, and on the first appearance of disorder, whether in language
or action in a member, to call him or her to order.
('81 Code, § 30.21)
§ 30.27 SERGEANT AT ARMS.
   The Chief of Police shall maintain a roster of members of the Police
Department so that one police officer shall attend each regular meeting of the
Council, and each special meeting thereof unless otherwise provided by the
Mayor or Councilmembers calling such special meeting. The police officer so in
attendance at any meeting of the Council shall act as sergeant at arms to the
Council, and he or she shall maintain order at such meeting and execute the
orders of the Council as given by the presiding officer.
('81 Code, § 30.22)
§ 30.28 COUNCIL MINUTES.
   The Clerk of Council or designee shall attend all meetings of the Council
and keep minutes of the proceedings of the Council. The Clerk shall write such
minutes out in a book to be known as The Minutes of Meetings of the Town
Council of Mount Pleasant, S.C. It shall also be the responsibility of the
Clerk of Council, or his or her designee, to maintain records on all town
committees, boards, and commissions.
('81 Code, § 30.23) (Am. Ord. passed 3-9-93)
§ 30.29 ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   (A)   The order of business for regular Town Council meetings shall be as
follows:
      (1)   Prayer.
      (2)   Pledge of Allegiance to the Flag.
      (3)   Approval of the agenda.
      (4)   Awards and presentations.
      (5)   Public hearings.
      (6)   Public comments.
      (7)   Approval of the minutes from the last regular Council meeting and,
if applicable, any recent special Council meeting(s), and approval of the
financial statement/report.
      (8)   Consent agenda.
      (9)   Planning matters.
         (a)   New business, planning ordinances and approvals.
         (b)   Old business, planning ordinances and approvals.
      (10)   Committee action items.
      (11)   Council business.
         (a)   New business: ordinances, resolutions, items for discussion and
approval.
         (b)   Old business: ordinances, resolutions, items for discussion and
approval.
      (12)   Executive session (if applicable).
      (13)   Adjournment.
   (B)   The chair shall allow a deviation from the foregoing order of business
for regular meetings only by majority consent of all members present.
   (C)   The order of business of special Town Council meetings shall be
determined on a meeting-by- meeting basis.
   (D)   All Council meetings shall be conducted in accordance with Robert’s
Rules of Order, unless otherwise adopted by Council.
(‘81 Code, § 30.24) (Am. Ord. passed 10-11-88; Am. Ord. 11076, passed 11-4-11;
Am. Ord. 19016, passed 4-9-19)
§ 30.30 PERSONAL INTEREST OF MEMBERS.
   No member of the Council shall vote on any question of a private nature, in
the event of which he or she is personally or pecuniarily interested.
('81 Code, § 30.31)
§ 30.31 VOTING BY MAYOR; TIE VOTES.
   The Mayor shall vote in all cases, except when personally interested, or
shall be excused, his or her name being called last in the call of the “yeas”
and “nays.” If with, his or her vote, the Council shall be equally divided, the
question shall be declared in the negative.
('81 Code, § 30.32)
§ 30.32 APPEALS FROM DECISION OF CHAIR.
   In all cases where an appeal is made from the decision of the chair, the
chairman shall refer the question to the Council, and the final decision shall
be determined by majority vote.
('81 Code, § 30.33)
§ 30.33 CONSENT AGENDA.
   Town Council agendas may contain a section entitled consent agenda. This
agenda section may include ordinances eligible for final reading which have
been unanimously approved by all eligible Councilmembers at first reading. All
items on the consent agenda may be collectively approved by one vote without
debate. Should any Councilmember wish to debate or amend any consent agenda
item, it shall be removed from the consent agenda and either moved to the
appropriate section of the agenda upon proper amendment to the agenda or,
alternatively and without amendment to the agenda, all items on the consent
agenda shall be individually addressed.
(Ord. 19016, passed 4-9-19)
§ 30.34 EXECUTIVE SESSION.
   (A)   Meetings which may be closed. The Town Council may hold an executive
session (a meeting closed to the public) for one or more of the following
reasons, in accordance with S.C. Code § 30-4-70:
      (1)   Discussion of employment, appointment, compensation, promotion,
demotion, discipline or release of an employee, or the appointment of a person
to a public body; provided, however, that if an adversary hearing involving the
employee is held such employee shall have the right to demand that the hearing
be conducted publicly.
      (2)   Discussion of negotiations incident to proposed contractual
arrangements and proposed sale or purchase of property, the receipt of legal
advice, settlement of legal claims, or the position of the town in other
adversary situations involving the assertion against the town of a claim.
      (3)   Discussion regarding the development of security personnel or
devices.
      (4)   Investigative proceedings regarding allegations or criminal
misconduct.
      (5)   Discussion of matters relating to the proposed location, expansion,
or the provision of services encouraging location or expansion of industries or
other businesses in the municipality.
   (B)   An executive session (or closed meeting) of the Town Council may be
called by the Mayor or a majority of the Council members; provided, however,
prior to going into executive session the Council shall vote in public on the
questions and when such vote is favorable the Chair shall announce the specific
purposes of the executive session. No formal action (a recorded vote committing
the Council to a specific course of action) may be taken in executive session.
No vote may be taken in executive session.
(‘81 Code, § 30.39) (Ord. passed 10-11-88; Am. Ord. 19016, passed 4-9-19)
§ 30.35 RULES OF ORDER.
   (A)   Parliamentary authority. Robert’s Rules of Order (newly revised) shall
govern all proceedings except as provided by law or this section. The Town
Attorney shall act as parliamentarian. Decisions of the Chair may be appealed
in accordance with §
30.32.
   (B)   Agenda. All matters will be placed on the Council agenda for regular
monthly meetings if submitted in writing by three Councilmembers to the Town
Administrator by 4:30 p.m. on the Wednesday prior to the scheduled Council
meeting. All matters will be placed on Special Town Council agendas if
submitted in writing by three Councilmembers to the Town Administrator at least
48 hours before the scheduled Special Council meeting. The following additional
provisions shall apply to Council agendas:
      (1)   Matters requested by fewer than three Councilmembers for inclusion
on any Council agenda shall first be submitted in writing to the appropriate
Committee chairperson for inclusion on the Committee agenda. To be considered,
requests shall be submitted three full business days before the scheduled
Committee meeting. Committee chairpersons shall respond in writing to the
request no later than two full business days before the scheduled Committee
meeting. Matters placed on a Committee agenda shall be eligible for placement
on the next Council agenda. Should the Committee chairperson decline to place
the matter on the next Committee agenda or fail to provide a timely response,
the matter shall be eligible for placement on the next Council agenda;
      (2)   Councilmembers who request matters to be placed on any Council
agenda in accordance with this section, unless approved for inclusion on an
agenda by a Committee, shall be identified by name on the agenda as sponsors of
the matter: and
      (3)   The provisions in this section are subject to the requirements of
S.C. Code § 30-4-80(A) regarding exigent circumstances.
   (C)   Public comments to Council. 
      (1)   Public comments. Any person wishing to address Council on a matter
not on the agenda or to speak on a matter on the Council agenda may sign in
prior to the Council meeting. All public comments shall be made during the
designated public comments period on the agenda. Two minutes and 30 seconds
will be allowed for each speaker. The Mayor or Chairperson, subject to appeal,
may elect to allow those public comments related to published agenda items to
speak prior to those making general comments on non-agenda items.
      (2)   Follow-up/questions/comments. Councilmembers may respond to those
persons speaking to Council by addressing questions to speakers through the
Chair.
   (D)   Recognition of speakers. In order to speak, a Councilmember or staff
member must be recognized by the Chair. A member should raise his/her hand and
be recognized before speaking. If more than one hand is raised, the Chair shall
decide the order of speakers. Provided, however, that the member introducing
the matter shall have the first opportunity to speak following a “second” if
one is required.
   (E)   Councilmembers speaking.
      (1)   A Councilmember, upon recognition by the Chair, shall have the
floor until he/she relinquishes it.
      (2)   Each Councilmember who wishes to speak will be afforded the utmost
opportunity.
      (3)   No Councilmember shall interrupt while another is speaking, except
where otherwise provided in the rules.
   (F)   Manner of voting. All votes taken by Council shall be by voice vote or
roll call, at the direction of the Chair or upon request by any Councilmember.
Votes for election to a position on Council shall be by secret ballot. The
reasons for a member’s vote may be stated once the vote is called, or a member
may state the reasons for his/her decision on the question during the
discussion of the motion. Town Council will allow absent members to listen by
telephone but will not allow participation and voting by telephone. The latter
rules shall also apply to committee meetings.
   (G)   Public attendance. In accordance with state law, the public is
entitled to attend all public meetings, including those of Council, and no
person may be removed from public meetings for any reason except willful
disruption of the meeting.
(Ord. 06001, passed 2-15-06; Am. Ord. 14095, passed 1-13-15; Am. Ord. 16011,
passed 2-10-16; Am. Ord. 19016, passed 4-9-19; Am. Ord. 19041, passed 6-11-19;
Am. Ord. 21025, passed 4-13-21; Am. Ord. 21044, passed 6-8-21; Am. Ord. 22057,
passed 11-14-22)
§ 30.36 PUBLIC COMMENTS AT TOWN PUBLIC MEETINGS.
   Public comments shall be permitted at all town public meetings. Public
comments at Town Council meetings are governed by other provisions in this
code. Any person shall address the public body only during the designated time
period. Two minutes and 30 seconds will be allowed for each speaker. The
Chairperson, subject to appeal pursuant to the applicable rules of the
presiding public body, of any public meeting may elect to allow those public
comments related to published agenda items to speak prior to those making
general comments on non-agenda items.
(Ord. 16012, passed 2-10-16; Am. Ord. 19016, passed 4-9-19; Am. Ord. 20016,
passed 3-11-20; Am. Ord. 22044, passed 7-13-2022; Am. Ord. 22057, passed 11-14-
22)
ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS
§ 30.45 ORDINANCES.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Council to pass, from time to time, such
ordinances as in its judgment shall best promote the interest of the citizens
and property holders of the municipality.
   (B)   All ordinances shall read: “Be it ordained by the Mayor and
Councilmembers of the Municipality of Mount Pleasant, in Council assembled.”
('81 Code, § 30.34)
§ 30.46 PROCEDURE FOR ENACTMENT OF TOWN ORDINANCES.
      (A)   Form and procedures. Every proposed town ordinance shall be
introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. (See §§
30.50 and
30.51). All ordinances shall be read two times on two separate days with at
least six days between each reading.
      (B)   First reading. The first reading of a town ordinance shall be for
information and no amendments shall then be in order. Ordinances shall be read
by ordinance number only.
      (C)   Second reading. The second reading of an ordinance shall be by
ordinance number only, and shall be for the purpose of passing the same to have
the full force of law. Amendments and privileged motions are appropriate at
this time and shall be made prior to second reading.
      (D)   Signing, sealing, and delivering. After an ordinance shall have
received its second reading, it shall be signed by the Mayor and Clerk of
Council, affixed with the seal of the municipality of the town and placed in
the Town’s Book of Ordinances by the Clerk of Council.
(‘81 Code, § 30.35) (Am. Ord. passed 5-9-89; Am. Ord. 94003, passed 2-8-94; Am.
Ord. 01002, passed 1-31-01; Am. Ord. 19016, passed 4-9-19)
§ 30.47 EMERGENCY ORDINANCES.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of §
30.46, an ordinance may be introduced, read two times, and engrossed and
ratified as an ordinance at one meeting of the Council by affirmative vote of
seven members of the Council on a finding that conditions of emergency exist
which require immediate enactment of such ordinance, and the facts which
constitute such conditions of emergency shall be stated clearly in the
ordinance as it is enacted. Emergency ordinances shall expire automatically as
of the sixty-first day following the enactment.
('81 Code, § 30.36)
Statutory reference:
   Emergency ordinances, see S.C. Code § 5-7-250
§ 30.48 ORDINANCE BOOK; AMENDING AND REPEALING ORDINANCES.
   (A)   The book in which the ordinances are engrossed shall be known as the
Ordinances of the Town of Mount Pleasant, S.C.
   (B)   The Clerk of Council shall write on the first page of every ordinance
that has been amended or repealed the words “amended” or “repealed,” as the
case may be. The amended or repealed sections of the amended ordinance shall be
redlined and a cross-reference made to the amending ordinance, giving the
ordinance number and the page thereof in the ordinance book.
('81 Code, § 30.37)
§ 30.49 ADDITIONAL RULES.
   The Council may, from time to time, by resolution, adopt such additional
rules, not inconsistent with this subchapter, as may be necessary or expedient
for the transaction of its business, and in all matters not covered by this
subchapter or by resolution of the Council the current rules of the House of
Representatives of the state, when applicable, shall govern the Council.
('81 Code, § 30.38)
§ 30.50 FORM OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Every proposed ordinance in the town shall be introduced in writing
and in the form required for final adoption which shall include:
      (1)   A title briefly describing the content;
      (2)   Findings, reasons or basis for the ordinance if desired and
appropriate;
      (3)   An enacting clause;
      (4)   Citation of any ordinance repealed;
      (5)   The provisions of the ordinance including section numbers if the
ordinance is to be codified or amends an existing codified ordinance;
      (6)   The effective date of the ordinance;
      (7)   The approval of the Town Attorney as to form and the assignment of
an ordinance number;
      (8)   Space for the signature of the Mayor or presiding member of Council
and the attesting signature of the Clerk of Council and the date of adoption.
   (B)   Written resolutions shall be in such similar form as deemed
appropriate by the Town Attorney.
('81 Code, § 30.39) (Ord. 93021, passed 5-11-93)
§ 30.51 INITIATION OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   An ordinance may be proposed by any member of Town Council, the Town
Administrator, or the head of any department of the town with the approval of
the Town Administrator. A proposed ordinance shall be referred to the Town
Attorney for the assignment of an ordinance number and approval as to form. The
Town Attorney shall render assistance in the preparation of notices and
ordinances. After an ordinance is in proper form and required notices have been
given, the Town Attorney shall send the ordinance to the Clerk of Council to be
held for public inspection with a copy to the Town Administrator who shall
place it on a regular agenda or special agenda as appropriate. An ordinance
shall be deemed to be introduced when it appears on an agenda for a public
meeting of Council and its title is read.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the stated, Town Council by majority vote may initiate
any ordinance at a Town Council meeting and conduct first reading thereof at
that time, upon a finding of the same being in the best interests of the town.
('81 Code, § 30.41) (Ord. 93021, passed 5-11-93; Am. Ord. 03035, passed 7-8-03)
§ 30.52 INTRODUCTION OF RESOLUTIONS.
   A voice motion of a member of Town Council shall be considered to be the
introduction of an oral resolution which shall require no written record other
than a notation of the Clerk of Council in the minutes. A resolution proposed
in writing shall be introduced in the same manner as an ordinance.
('81 Code, § 30.42) (Ord. 93021, passed 5-11-93)
§ 30.53 ADOPTION OF RESOLUTIONS.
   Written or oral resolutions may be adopted on one reading unless a public
hearing is set by a majority of the members of Council present.
('81 Code, § 30.43) (Ord. 93021, passed 5-11-93)
COMMITTEES
§ 30.65 STANDING COMMITTEES.
   (A)   Except as may be provided otherwise in this subchapter, the standing
committees shall be appointed by the Mayor at the first meeting of Council
after each regular municipal election, to serve for a two-year term. Council
members may provide their individual qualifications and indicate their
preference for appointments to the Mayor for any standing committee. Within ten
days after each municipal election or in the event of a vacancy in accordance
with division (B) below, the Mayor shall make a good faith effort to meet and
consult with each member of Council to consider the Council members’ indicated
preferences and individual qualifications to serve on standing committees.
   (B)   In the event of a vacancy, the vacant seat shall remain vacant until a
special election is held to fill the unexpired term of the Council position.
Upon election, the newly-elected member shall automatically fill the vacant
seat.
(‘81 Code, § 30.50) (Am. Ord. passed 8-11-86; Am. Ord. 24009, passed 3-14-24)
Cross-reference:
   Specific committees, see §§
32.01 through
32.14
§ 30.66 SPECIAL COMMITTEES.
   All special committees shall be appointed by the Mayor unless a ballot be
called for.
('81 Code, § 30.51)
§ 30.67 DUTY OF COUNCILMEMBERS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Councilmembers to serve on the various
committees to which they are appointed.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of each member of a committee to attend all
meetings of the committee of which he or she is a member.
('81 Code, § 30.52)
§ 30.68 REFERENCE TO STANDING COMMITTEES.
   Matters to be referred to the several standing committees are such as
appertain or relate to the subjects designated in the names of the committees.
Whenever matters are brought before the Council by petition or otherwise,
connected with or relating to such subjects exclusively, the matters shall be
referred as a matter of course to the standing committees having charge of such
subjects.
('81 Code, § 30.53)
§ 30.69 REFERENCE WHEN MORE THAN ONE STANDING COMMITTEE.
   Whenever any matter shall come before the Council by petition or otherwise,
which shall be connected with or related to two or more of the subjects with
which the standing committees are especially charged, the Council shall
determine whether such matter shall be referred to a special committee or to a
joint committee to be composed of two or more of the standing committees
concerned therewith or to one of the standing committees and, in the later
case, to which one the reference is to be made.
('81 Code, § 30.54)
§ 30.70 INVESTIGATIONS AND REPORTS.
   It shall be the duty of each committee to examine carefully and to report on
all petitions and other matters referred to it by the Council. It shall be the
duty of each member of a committee to lend aid and assistance to the proper
investigation into, and report on, all matters referred to the committee.
('81 Code, § 30.55)
§ 30.71 CONTROL OF APPROPRIATIONS.
   (A)   The Department Managers of the several departments of town government,
with the approval of the Mayor, or in his or her absence the Town
Administrator, shall be authorized to incur expenses to the extent that
expenditures would be for normal operations or capital projects as authorized
by the annual budget enacted by Council, and in compliance with the provisions
of the procurement code. Any expense involving other budgeted items falling
within the category of unforeseen requirements or proposed projects shall be
brought before Council for approval and fund appropriations. Emergency needs
shall be addressed as set forth in §
30.47.
   (B)   The Town Administrator may temporarily suspend expenditure of funds
for cause, but must report to Council his or her findings and cause within 30
days of the temporary suspension.
('81 Code, § 30.57)
§ 30.72 EXAMINATION OF ORDINANCES; SUGGESTIONS FOR REVISION.
   It shall be the duty of each of the standing committees and the members
thereof to examine carefully the ordinances appertaining to the subject with
which such committee is especially charged and to endeavor to ascertain, from
time to time, whether the ordinances appertaining to the subject are being
properly regarded and enforced and whether these ordinances are sufficient and
satisfactory, and to suggest to the Council from time to time such changes in
the ordinances as they may deem proper.
('81 Code, § 30.58)
CHAPTER 31: TOWN OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
General Provisions
   
31.001   Deputies, assistants and acting municipal officers
   
31.002   Drawing on municipal funds
   
31.003   Vacancies
   
31.004   Restriction as to contracting indebtedness
   
31.005   Official bonds
   
31.006   Insurance
   
31.007   Right of entry for purposes of inspection
Mayor
   
31.020   Chief Executive Officer; powers and duties
   
31.021   Office hours
   
31.022   Specific powers and duties
Town Administrator
   
31.030   Communication with Town Council
   
31.031   Job description
   
31.032   General duties; delegation of authority
   
31.033   Town Attorney/Corporation Counsel not a department manager
Director of Financial and Corporate Services
   
31.040   Election and term
   
31.041   Bond
   
31.042   Attendance at Council meetings
   
31.043   Keeping of accounts; monthly reports to Council
   
31.044   Publication of quarterly statements
   
31.045   Receipt and deposit of money
   
31.046   Disbursement of payroll and accounts payable
   
31.047   Chief Financial Officer
Clerk of Council
   
31.063   Appointment
   
31.064   Duties
Corporation Counsel
   
31.070   Election and term
   
31.071   Duties
   
31.072   Compensation
Director of Planning, Land Use, and Neighborhoods
   
31.080   Appointment of the Director of Planning, Land Use, and Neighborhoods
   
31.081   Duties and powers of the Director of Planning, Land Use, and
Neighborhoods
Other Officials
   
31.090   Code Enforcement Officials
Cross-reference:
   Personnel policies, see
Ch. 37
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.001 DEPUTIES, ASSISTANTS AND ACTING MUNICIPAL OFFICERS.
   (A)   The Mayor, with the approval of the Council, may designate a qualified
person to serve as deputy or assistant to any municipal officer, either for an
indefinite or a contingent or fixed period of time, and any such deputy or
assistant shall have such authority and perform such duties as shall be
specified by his or her principal, or by the Mayor.
   (B)   During the vacancy of any municipal office or the prolonged absence or
disability of any municipal officer, the Mayor, with the approval of the
Council, may appoint a qualified person to act in the place and stead of the
absent or disabled officer, or to fill a vacancy until such time as a permanent
appointment is made, and the person so appointed shall have the title of acting
officer, with all of the powers and duties of the office in which he or she so
acts.
('81 Code, § 31.01)
Statutory reference:
   Public officers and employees, see S. C. Code § 8-1-10 et seq.
§ 31.002 DRAWING ON MUNICIPAL FUNDS.
   Any municipal funds deposited shall be subject to the joint order of either
the Mayor, Town Administrator, Director of Financial and Corporate Services, or
the Finance Division Chief. In the absence or disability of the Mayor, the
Mayor Pro- Tem shall have authority to act in his or her place.
(‘81 Code, §31.02) (Am. Ord. 21030, passed 5-11-21)
§ 31.003 VACANCIES.
   The Mayor, in case of any vacancy that may occur in any municipal appointive
office or when any appointive municipal officer may be suspended, shall be
authorized to appoint persons to fill such vacancies until they can be filled
by the Council.
('81 Code, § 31.06)
§ 31.004 RESTRICTION AS TO CONTRACTING INDEBTEDNESS.
   No indebtedness shall be contracted against the municipality by any officer,
person, or board whatsoever, except on the authority of the Council, nor by any
committee of the Council except within the limits of the appropriation made
therefor.
(‘ 81 Code, § 31.07)
§ 31.005 OFFICIAL BONDS.
   (A)   The Mayor, Town Administrator, Director of Financial and Corporate
Services, and Finance Division Chief shall be required to secure a bond with
good sureties, in the amount of $10,000, payable to the town, conditioned on
the faithful performance of their duties and a true accounting for all funds of
the town which may come into their hands, custody, or control, which bond shall
be approved as to form by the Town Attorney and as to substance by the Council,
and deposited with the Director of Financial and Corporate Services. All other
town employees shall be covered by a public blanket bond in the amount of at
least $2,500 per loss, also deposited with the Director of Financial and
Corporate Services.
   (B)   Premiums on bonds required by this section shall be paid by the
municipality.
   (C)   Bonds required by this section shall be subject to annual audit by a
competent auditor designated by the Council.
(‘81 Code, §31.08) (Am. Ord. 21030, passed 5-11-21)
§ 31.006 INSURANCE.
   The Council, by ordinance or resolution, may authorize the Mayor, on behalf
of the municipality, to contract with one or more insurance companies licensed
to do business in this state, to protect the municipality, and municipal
officers, employees, and agents while acting in line of duty, against losses
arising from public liability, fire, theft, hail, windstorm, and other causes,
the amount and terms of policies to be as prescribed by the Council and agreed
to by the insurers.
('81 Code, § 31.09)
§ 31.007 RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR PURPOSES OF INSPECTION.
   Whenever any officer or employee is required or authorized by statute, the
provisions of this code or any ordinance or resolution, or rules and
regulations or orders issued thereunder, in order to carry out his or her
duties thereunder, to enter any premises or vehicle for the purpose of making
an inspection thereof or of anything therein contained, such officer or
employee shall have the right to enter any such premises or vehicle, on
compliance with all applicable provisions of law, at any reasonable time in
pursuance of such duties. ('81 Code, § 31.10)
MAYOR
§ 31.020 CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Mayor shall be the C HIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER. As such, the Mayor shall
have the powers and perform the duties prescribed by statute, this code, and
other ordinances, and he or she shall be vigilant and active at all times in
causing the ordinances and laws for the municipal government to be duly
executed and put in force.
('81 Code, § 31.20)
§ 31.021 OFFICE HOURS.
   It shall be the duty of the Mayor to represent the municipality in the
Mayor’s office in the Town Hall or elsewhere on municipally related activities
to insure that the business of the municipality is properly conducted and that
all persons having business with the municipality may be assured of seeing the
Mayor.
('81 Code, § 31.21) (Am. Ord. passed 2-11-79)
§ 31.022 SPECIFIC POWERS AND DUTIES.
   It shall be the duty of the Mayor, among other duties, to:
   (A)   As delegated by the Council, as Chief Executive Officer, the Mayor
shall have the power and authority to discipline department heads and other
town officials appointed by Council, including the authority to terminate,
demote, or suspend provided that the Mayor shall report to Council any such
action taken and the reasons therefor. Prior to any such action, he or she
shall give the reasons for the action to the appointed official and that
official will have an opportunity to state in writing why such action should
not be taken.
   (B)   Give such direction to subordinate officers as may be necessary to
carry the ordinances and the police laws and regulations into effect.
   (C)   Direct an annual audit to be made of the books of the Director of
Financial and Corporate Services, the Finance Division Chief, and other
officers of the municipality having custody or control of any funds or
securities.
   (D)   Call on officers, boards, commissions, and agencies, from time to time
as be may deem necessary, to furnish the Mayor, in writing, with any
information connected with any of their respective offices.
   (E)   Inspect, from time to time, all work being undertaken at town expense,
whether such work be on buildings, on the streets, drains, canals, or of any
kind or nature whatsoever, and report to the Council concerning such
inspections, either at a regular meeting of Council or at any special meeting.
   (F)   Communicate to the Council from time to time such information, and
recommend to the Council such measures, as may tend to the improvement of the
finances, the police, the health, security, cleanliness, ornament, and general
welfare of the municipality.
(‘81 Code, §31.22) (Am. Ord. passed 9-9-85; Am. Ord. 99005, passed 2-9-99; Am.
Ord. 21030, passed 5-11-21)
§ 31.023 PROCEDURE TO FILL VACANCIES.
   Vacancies on Boards, Commission, Citizen Committees and all other like
entities shall be filled by the entire Council. In filling vacancies the
following procedures shall be followed:
   (A)   The Clerk of Council shall monitor the expiration date of all terms on
Town Boards, Commissions, Citizen Committees and other like entities.
Approximately 60 days prior to any expiration of a term (vacancy), the Clerk of
Council will advertise the same in a local newspaper and announce the vacancy
on the record to Town Council as soon as reasonably possible thereafter.
Appropriate requirements for the vacant position will be included in the
advertisement and announcement. This procedure shall also apply to
resignations. All appointments, including appointments after resignations and
second term appointments, are to be treated alike, with all due care and
deliberation being afforded to each.
   (B)   The Clerk of Council will receive applications and resumes for a
specified period of time beginning with the date the vacancy is advertised. All
applicants must complete the official Town Board/Commission application form.
The form will include information pertaining to the Board/ Commission vacancy.
   (C)   The Clerk of Council will provide all members of the Town Council with
all applications received.
   (D)   Thereafter, the Town Administrator will ensure that this issue is
placed on a regular Council meeting agenda as soon as reasonably possible, and
no later than 60 days after the date of the vacancy.
   (E)   The Mayor will automatically schedule an executive session prior to
the designated regular Council meeting for the purpose of discussion. During
the designated regular Council meeting in open session, the entire Council will
vote pursuant to parliamentary procedure. If none of the candidates prevail,
the entire procedure herein will be repeated.
   (F)   All applications will be maintained by the Clerk for a period of two
years from the effective date the vacancy is filled. If the application process
is opened for the same position at another time or any other position, original
candidates will be notified by the Clerk of Council. In such instances,
candidates may ask that their original application be reconsidered.
(Ord. 990005, passed 2-9-99; Am. Ord. 01032, passed 6-12-01; Am. Ord. 05037,
passed 6-14-05; Am. Ord. 05076, passed 11-9-05; Am. Ord. 06003, passed 2-15-06)
TOWN ADMINISTRATOR
§ 31.030 COMMUNICATION WITH TOWN COUNCIL.
   (A)   The Town Administrator shall relate to and communicate with the Mayor
and the Town Council as a whole, any problems, situations, and conditions
concerning any town department or activity that, in the opinion of the Town
Administrator, is of significance.
   (B)   Except for the purpose of inquiry, the members of the Council shall
communicate directly to the Town Administrator, or his or her designee, in
matters concerning any town department or activity.
(Ord. 7003, passed 2-13-07)
§ 31.031 JOB DESCRIPTION.
   (A)   Function. The Town Administrator plans, directs, and coordinates town
administrative and operational activities; appoints and supervises all
appointed department managers; performs duties involving formulation of broad
policies and long-term programs, including decision making, which establish
guides and general directives for the organization as a whole.
   (B)   Examples of work performed. The following are examples of work
performed:
      (1)   Approves preparation of, and submits annual budget to Mayor and
Town Council.
      (2)   Recommends organization changes and assists in formulation of
internal plans, policies, and programs.
      (3)   Supervises all appointed department managers.
      (4)   Coordinates activities of all town departments.
      (5)   Performs related duties as required by the Mayor and Town Council.
(Ord. 7003, passed 2-13-07)
§ 31.032 GENERAL DUTIES; DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY.
   The Town Administrator shall be responsible to the Mayor and to the Town
Council for the proper administration of the policies and affairs of the town,
and to that end, shall have the power and authority, and be required to:
   (A)   Assist the Mayor. Assist the Mayor in carrying out the duties of the
Mayor's office;
   (B)   Administrative activities and operations. Direct, supervise, and
coordinate administrative activities and operations;
   (C)   Appoint department managers. The Administrator will review intended
appointments of new department managers with the Mayor and Council prior to
their appointment;
   (D)   Appoint other city employees. Reviews and approves the appointment of
other city employees;
   (E)   Discipline, suspend, or dismiss department managers. 
      (1)   The Administrator will review any intended dismissal of a
department manager with the Mayor and Council prior to dismissal.
      (2)   The Town Administrator will inform Council of any formal
disciplinary actions of a department manager;
   (F)   Suspend or dismiss other town employees. Review and approve the
suspension or dismissal of other town employees;
   (G)   Annual operating budget.
      (1)   Prepare a proposed annual operating budget, and submit the proposed
budget to the Mayor and Council for review and consideration;
      (2)   Have responsibilities for administration of annual operating budget
after adoption;
   (H)   Capital program and budget. Prepare an annually updated, seven-year
capital program and budget;
   (I)   Spokesperson for town. Act as spokesperson for the Town regarding
established policies and decisions as required or directed by the Mayor and/or
Town Council.
(Ord. 7003, passed 2-13-07)
§ 31.033 TOWN ATTORNEY/CORPORATION COUNSEL NOT A DEPARTMENT MANAGER.
   The Town Attorney/Corporation Counsel is directly responsible to the Mayor
and Town Council. As such, the references to department managers herein do not
apply to the Town Attorney/Corporation Counsel.
(Ord. 7003, passed 2-13-07)
DIRECTOR OF FINANCIAL AND CORPORATE SERVICES
§ 31.040 ELECTION AND TERM.
   The Director of Financial and Corporate Services will be appointed by the
Council and will serve at the pleasure of Council.
(‘81 Code, §31.30) (Am. Ord. passed 3-5-79; Am. Ord. passed 9-9-85; Am. Ord.
21030, passed 5-11-21)
§ 31.041 BOND.
   Before entering on the duties of office, the Director of Financial and
Corporate Services shall enter into bond as specified in §
31.005.
(‘81 Code, §31.31) (Am. Ord. 21030, passed 5-11-21)
§ 31.042 ATTENDANCE AT COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   The Director of Financial and Corporate Services or his or her designee
shall be present at all Council Meetings. (‘81 Code, §31.33) (Am. Ord. passed
12-10-84; Am. Ord. 21030, passed 5-11-21)
§ 31.043 KEEPING OF ACCOUNTS; MONTHLY REPORTS TO COUNCIL.
   The Director of Financial and Corporate Services shall keep an account of
all money belonging to the municipality in such form as may be required by the
Council or its Committee on Finance. He or she shall balance the accounts on
the first day of every month and make a report to the Council at its next
meeting thereafter, showing an itemized statement of all money received and
expended.
(‘81 Code, §31.34) (Am. Ord. 21030, passed 5-11-21)
§ 31.044 PUBLICATION OF QUARTERLY STATEMENTS.
   The Director of Financial and Corporate Services shall make and publish in
accordance with the requirements of state law the quarterly statements of the
financial condition of the municipality.
(‘81 Code, §31.35) (Am. Ord. 21030, passed 5-11-21)
Statutory reference:
   Required to publish financial statements, see S. C. Code § 5-21-50
§ 31.045 RECEIPT AND DEPOSIT OF MONEY.
   Except as may be provided otherwise by statute, this code, or other
ordinance, the Director of Financial and Corporate Services shall receive all
fees for town licenses and permits, and all claims and accounts that may be due
and payable to the municipality, and shall deposit all money belonging to the
municipality in such bank as the Finance Committee may direct.
(‘81 Code, §31.38) (Am. Ord. 21030, passed 5-11-21)
§ 31.046 DISBURSEMENT OF PAYROLL AND ACCOUNTS PAYABLE.
   It shall be the duty of the Director of Financial and Corporate Services to
prepare the biweekly payroll, sign and issue checks on each payday. The
Director of Financial and Corporate Services is also responsible for ensuring
the preparation, signing, and issuing of all other checks for the town, in
accordance with approved budget allocations, authorized purchases and
indebtedness. The Director of Financial and Corporate Services shall provide
Council with a monthly accounting of all disbursements from town accounts.
(‘81 Code, §31.39) (Am. Ord. 21030, passed 5-11-21)
§ 31.047 CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER.
   The Chief Financial Officer shall be the Director of Financial and Corporate
Services unless the Director designates another individual, in writing, to act
as same. Any such designation shall be subject to written approval of the Town
Administrator, and may be terminated, in writing, at any time by the Director
of Financial and Corporate Services, with the written approval of the Town
Administrator. The Director of Financial and Corporate Services shall also
perform such other duties as may be annexed to the office or that he or she may
be required by the Council to perform.
(‘81 Code, §31.42) (Am. Ord. 21030, passed 5-11-21)
CLERK OF COUNCIL
§ 31.063 APPOINTMENT.
   The Clerk of Council shall be appointed by the Town Council, upon the
recommendation of the Mayor and Town Administrator.
§ 31.064 DUTIES.
   (A)   The Clerk of Council or his or her designee shall be present at all
meetings of Council or Committees of Council and record, prepare and maintain
written minutes of meetings for the records of the town. The Clerk of Council
shall also prepare and post agendas for such meetings and ensure that the
public has been duly notified.
   (B)   The Clerk of Council shall have custody of the seal of the town, which
shall be carefully preserved and kept by the Clerk of Council in his or her
office at all times.
CORPORATION COUNSEL
§ 31.070 ELECTION AND TERM.
   Council shall appoint an attorney or attorneys whose designation shall be
the Corporate Counsel, also known as the Town Attorney, who shall serve at the
pleasure of Council.
('81 Code, § 31.50) (Am. Ord. passed 9-9-85)
§ 31.071 DUTIES.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Corporation Counsel to enter appearance in
all actions, cases, and special proceedings and to conduct all suits in all
courts in which the municipality is, or shall be a party, to investigate titles
and give opinions on questions of law, when requested to do so by the Council
or the Mayor.
   (B)   The Corporation Counsel shall be present at all Council meetings.
('81 Code, § 31.51)
§ 31.072 COMPENSATION.
   For the usual and ordinary professional services, advice, and opinions in
respect of municipal business,
the Corporation Counsel shall receive such salary as may be fixed by Council.
('81 Code, § 37.03(B))
DIRECTOR OF PLANNING, LAND USE, AND NEIGHBORHOODS
§ 31.080 APPOINTMENT OF THE DIRECTOR OF PLANNING, LAND USE, AND NEIGHBORHOODS.
   The Director of Planning, Land Use, and Neighborhoods will be appointed by
Council and will serve at the pleasure of Council.
(‘81 Code, §31.60) (Am. Ord. passed 12-10-84; Am. Ord. passed 9-9-85; Am. Ord.
passed 9-8-86; Am. Ord. 21030, passed 5-11-21)
§ 31.081 DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE DIRECTOR OF PLANNING, LAND USE, AND
NEIGHBORHOODS.
   (A)   The Director of Planning, Land Use, and Neighborhoods shall be
responsible for coordinating and directing the planning, zoning and engineering
functions for the town.
   (B)   The Director of Planning, Land Use, and Neighborhoods, or his or her
appointed designee, shall administer and enforce the provisions of this code
relating to land development regulations, the Zoning Code, and municipal impact
fees, and he or she shall have such powers and perform such duties as may be
provided for him or her in this code of ordinances, or as provided in any other
town or state ordinances/ statutes.
   (C)   The Zoning Administrator shall be the Director of Planning, Land Use,
and Neighborhoods, unless the Director specifically designates another
individual, in writing, to act as same. Any such designation shall be subject
to written approval of the Town Administrator, and may be terminated, in
writing, at any time by the Director of Planning, Land Use, and Neighborhoods,
with the written approval of the Town Administrator.
(‘81 Code, §§31.61, 31.73) (Am. Ord. passed 9-8-86; Am. Ord. passed 12-8-92;
Am. Ord. 08076, passed 1-14-09; Am. Ord. 21030, passed 5-11-21)
Cross-reference:
   For municipal ordinance summons, see §
35.10
OTHER OFFICIALS
§ 31.090 CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding language elsewhere in the code to the contrary,
directors of town departments (and the Zoning Administrator in the case of the
Land Codes Inspector) shall designate Code Enforcement Officials to administer
and enforce the provisions of this code as defined herein. Such designees shall
have such powers and perform such duties as may be provided for him or her in
those chapters or as provided in any other town or state ordinances or
statutes.
      (1)   Fire Department. Any fire- or fire hazard-related code sections as
described in Section 101.2 of the 2018 South Carolina Fire Code, as may be
amended, as well as
Chapter 92 of this code.
      (2)   Engineering and Development Services, Building Inspection Division.
All items related to building codes pertaining to residential and
nonresidential buildings as covered and referenced in
Chapters 150 and
152 of this code.
      (3)   Engineering and Development Services.  All items related to the MS4
Program as permitted, constructed, and maintained in the town, as well, as
provisions of
Chapters 153,
155. and
158 of this code.
      (4)   Planning, land use, and neighborhoods. The code official in the
PLAN Department is known as the Land Codes Inspector. The duties of Land Codes
Inspector include enforcement of
Chapter 156, Zoning Code,
Chapter 50, Garbage and Refuse.
Chapter 93, Nuisances,
Chapter 95, Streets and Sidewalks, and
Chapter 96, Political Signs, of this code, except as hereinafter expressly
designated to another code official, as well as any codes related to usage of
land and yards outside the envelope of a building.
      (5)   Police. Maintain their typical authority as proscribed by state
code for any and all enforcement of codes within the town.
   (B)   In complex situations, where there are a variety of related violations
and concerns across the authority of different departments, the departments
will coordinate responses to improve response time, as appropriate.
(Ord. 23016, passed 5-9-23)
CHAPTER 32: DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, COMMITTEES, COMMISSIONS AND OTHER ENTITIES
Section
Council Standing Committees
   
32.01   Committee on Finance
   
32.02   Committee on Public Services
   
32.03   Committee on Health, Recreation and Events
   
32.04   Committee on Fire Department
   
32.05   Committee on Police, Municipal Court, and Legal Department
   
32.06   Human Resources Committee
   
32.07   Committee on Planning and Development
   
32.08   Committee on Bids and Purchases
   
32.09   [Reserved]
   
32.10   Committee on Budget
   
32.11   Committee on Water Supply and Resources
   
32.12   Committee on Transportation
   
32.13   Committee on Economic Development
   
32.14   Committee on Education
   
32.15   Committee on Flood Resilience
Culture, Arts, and Pride Commission
   
32.20   Creation
   
32.21   Mission
   
32.22   Main objectives
   
32.23   Organization
Accommodations Tax Advisory Committee
   
32.30   Creation
   
32.31   Organization
   
32.32   Purpose; powers and duties
Cross-reference:
   Board of Zoning Appeals, see
Ch. 156
   Design Review Board, see
Ch. 156
   Historic District Preservation Commission, see
Ch. 156
   Historical Commission, see
Ch. 156
   Planning Commission, see
Ch. 156
COUNCIL STANDING COMMITTEES
§ 32.01 COMMITTEE ON FINANCE.
   The Committee on Finance shall consist of four members of Council whose
duties it shall be to receive all annual audits; to receive and review
information and inquiries from departmental committees through the Town
Administrator regarding town revenues; to receive all appropriate matters
connected with the town’s general finances, licenses, and values for land
sales. The Committee on Finance shall also review the General Government,
Nondepartmental and Computer Automation budget programs. A member of the
Committee on Finance shall act as liaison between the Town Council and the
Accommodation Tax Advisory Committee.
('81 Code, § 30.60) (Am. Ord. passed 10-11-88; Am. Ord. 98055, passed 1-12-99;
Am. Ord. 04065, passed 12-14-04)
§ 32.02 COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICES.
   The Committee on Public Services shall consist of a minimum of three and a
maximum of four members of Town Council, said numerical make-up being at the
discretion of the Mayor, to whom shall be referred all appropriate matters
related to public works and services in the town and all issues pertaining
thereto.
(‘81 Code, § 33.61) (Am. Ord. passed 10-11-88; Am. Ord. passed 10-13-92; Am.
Ord. 17064, passed 1-10-18)
§ 32.03 COMMITTEE ON HEALTH, RECREATION AND EVENTS.
   The Committee on Recreation Services shall consist of a minimum of three and
a maximum of four members of the Town Council, said numerical make- up being at
the discretion of the Mayor, to whom shall be referred all appropriate matters
governing the provision of public health, recreation, public leisure time
pursuits, and events.
(‘81 Code, §30.62) (Am. Ord. 17064, passed 1-10-18; Am. Ord. 21077, passed 1-
11-22)
§ 32.04 COMMITTEE ON FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   The Committee on the Fire Department shall consist of a minimum of three and
a maximum of four members of the Town Council, said numerical make-up being at
the discretion of the Mayor, to whom shall be referred all appropriate matters
related to the fire safety of municipal residents.
(‘81 Code, § 30.64) (Am. Ord. 17064, passed 1-10-18)
§ 32.05 COMMITTEE ON POLICE, MUNICIPAL COURT, AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT.
   The Committee on the Police, Municipal Court, and Legal Department shall
consist of the Mayor, acting as Chairperson, and three members of Council to
whom shall be referred all appropriate matters related to the public safety,
peace, and tranquility and general welfare of the municipality in regard to the
Police Department, the Municipal Court and Legal Department, in addition to
appropriate matters related to the daily operations of the departments.
('81 Code, § 30.65) (Am. Ord. passed 11-5-84; Am. Ord. passed 10-11-88; Am.
Ord. passed 10-9-90; Am. Ord. 92-3A-2-G, passed 3-25-92; Am. Ord. 98055, passed
1-12-99)
§ 32.06 HUMAN RESOURCES COMMITTEE.
   The Human Resources Committee shall consist of a minimum of three and a
maximum of four members of the Town Council, said numerical make-up being at
the discretion of the Mayor, to whom shall be referred all personnel matters
pertaining to the policies as may be stipulated in the Human Resources
Guidelines.
(‘81 Code, § 30.66) (Am. Ord. 12039, passed 6-12-12; Am. Ord. 17064, passed 1-
10-18)
§ 32.07 COMMITTEE ON PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT.
   The Committee on Planning and Development shall consist of four members of
the Town Council to whom shall be referred all appropriate matters governing
the safe construction of public and private buildings, and any policy matters
concerning zoning and planning in the town and all issues pertaining thereto.
('81 Code, § 30.67) (Am. Ord. passed 10-11-88; Am. Ord. passed 10-9-90; Am.
Ord. passed 10-13-92; Am. Ord. 98055, passed 1-12-99)
§ 32.08 COMMITTEE ON BIDS AND PURCHASES.
   The Committee on Bids and Purchases shall consist of a minimum of three and
a maximum of four members of the Town Council, said numerical make- up being at
the discretion of the Mayor, to whom shall be referred all appropriate matters
related to the supply of goods and services to the town government over $10,000
in value.
(‘81 Code, § 30.68) (Am. Ord. 17064, passed 1-10-18)
§ 32.09 [RESERVED].
§ 32.10 COMMITTEE ON BUDGET.
   The Committee on Budget shall consist of nine members [the Mayor and all
eight members of Council] whose duty it shall be to prepare the annual supply
ordinance for approval of the Council, upon the advice and recommendation of
the Town Administrator.
('81 Code, § 30.71) (Ord. passed 9-9-86)
§ 32.11 COMMITTEE ON WATER SUPPLY AND RESOURCES.
   The Committee on Water Supply shall consist of a minimum of three and a
maximum of four members of the Town Council, said numerical make-up being at
the discretion of the Mayor, to whom shall be referred all appropriate matters
relating to water and sewer in the town and all issues pertaining thereto. The
first appointments to the Committee shall be made by the Mayor within 30 days
of the date of the establishment of this Committee for a period of time until
the next regular appointment time by the Mayor pursuant to §
30.65. The Chairman of this Committee and the Mayor shall serve on the Town
Waterworks and Sewer Commission as provided by state statute.
(Ord. 95035, passed 8-7-95; Am. Ord. 17064, passed 1-10-18; Am. Ord. 21078,
passed 1-11-22)
§ 32.12 COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION.
   (A)   Mission and purposes. Study, analyze, plan, and develop policy
recommendations for Council and respond to issues which are associated with
vehicular and pedestrian transportation, and public transportation
infrastructure, including roads, streets, signalization, sidewalks, bikes
paths, and mass transit equipment and facilities.
   (B)   Composition. The Committee on Transportation shall consist of the
Mayor, acting as Chairperson, and a minimum of two and a maximum of three
members of Town Council, said numerical make-up being at the discretion of the
Mayor.
   (C)   Duties. The Committee shall be responsible for the following:
      (1)   Citizen requests for installation or modification of traffic
control devices such as stop signs.
      (2)   Citizen requests for the alteration of existing transportation
system infrastructure such as the closure of existing roads and streets.
      (3)   Planning for expansion of pedestrian and bike way systems
throughout the town.
      (4)   Monitoring of the Charleston Transportation Committee road
maintenance and improvement program.
      (5)   Review data, information, traffic trends, and proposed plans
pertaining to the modification and expansion of the road network in Mount
Pleasant. Routine maintenance will continue to be a function of the Public
Services Committee.
      (6)   Prepare recommendations pertaining to review, amendment, and
implementation of the Mount Pleasant Transportation Plan.
      (7)   Review broad and specific issues, of both a long and short term
nature related to traffic and transportation in Mount Pleasant.
      (8)   Review budget recommendations from the Town Administrator relative
to transportation system improvements other than routine maintenance which will
continue to be reviewed by the Public Services Committee.
      (9)   Review and recommend consultant services to support transportation
programs.
      (10)   Review requests for abandonment and acquisition of street right of
ways.
      (11)   Coordinate RTA issues prior to submittal to Town Council. A
representative of the Transportation Committee will serve as a second
representative to the RTA pursuant to statutory authorization.
      (12)   Review matters pertaining to the maintenance and/or installation
of traffic signalization.
      (13)   Review annual submittal of projects to CHATS enhancement
subcommittee for recommendation to Council.
      (14)   Review and approve, or recommend approval, as appropriate,
modifications to street light system.
      (15)   Any and all other matters necessary to accomplish the stated
mission and purpose.
(Ord. 97063, passed 11-7-97; Am. Ord. 98055, passed 1-12-99; Am. Ord. 14094,
passed 1-13-15; Am. Ord. 17064, passed 1-10-18)
§ 32.13 COMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   Composition. The Committee on Economic Development shall consist of a
minimum of three and a maximum of four members of Town Council, said numerical
make-up being at the discretion of the Mayor, and one voting ex officio member
of the Mount Pleasant Waterworks.
   (B)   Purpose. The Committee on Economic Development shall be responsible
for the following:
      (1)   Receive regular reports from Town Administrator and Economic
Development Coordinator regarding economic development plans/projects.
      (2)   Consider requests for economic development incentives and make
recommendations to Town Council.
      (3)   Review ordinances and policies relative to economic development and
make recommendations to Town Council on approval.
      (4)   Review proposals to provide public infrastructure projects in
support of economic development.
      (5)   Recommend land use, zoning, and other policy changes to Town
Council.
   (C)   Notwithstanding division (A) of §
30.65, members of the Committee on Economic Development shall be appointed by
the Mayor each year at the regular monthly meeting in December to serve a one-
year term, commencing January 1 and ending December 31.
(Ord. 04065, passed 12-14-04; Am. Ord. 05096, passed 1-11-06; Am. Ord. 17064,
passed 1-10-18)
§ 32.14 COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION.
   The Committee on Education shall consist of a minimum of three and a maximum
of four members of Town Council, said numerical make-up being at the discretion
of the Mayor, to whom shall be referred all appropriate matters relating to
education in the town and all issues pertaining thereto.
(Ord. 14093, passed 1-13-15; Am. Ord. 17064, passed 1-10-18)
§ 32.15 COMMITTEE ON FLOOD RESILIENCE.
   The Committee on Flood Resilience shall consist of four members of the Town
Council to whom shall be referred all appropriate matters governing flooding
and drainage issues, public projects and any policy matters concerning flooding
and drainage in the town and all issues pertaining thereto.
(Ord. 20008, passed 2-19-20)
CULTURE, ARTS, AND PRIDE COMMISSION
§ 32.20 CREATION.
   The Town Council hereby finds that it is in the best interests of the town
to create and form the Culture, Arts, and Pride Commission.
(Ord. 12090, passed 1-8-13; Am. Ord. 14047, passed 8-12-14)
§ 32.21 MISSION.
    It shall be the mission of the Culture, Arts, and Pride Commission to:
improve the community's quality of life through the appreciation and promotion
of artistic and cultural expressions, as well as the demonstration of civic
pride and volunteerism; identify opportunities for the public to experience the
arts and to give back to the community through volunteer efforts; make
recommendations to Town Council about these opportunities; and through the
support of the Community Development and Tourism Office, organize and lead
various events pertaining to its purpose.
(Ord. 12090, passed 1-8-13; Am. Ord. 14047, passed 8-12-14)
§ 32.22 MAIN OBJECTIVES.
   The Commission's main objectives shall be to: organize community cleanup and
beautification events; encourage volunteerism and civic pride; promote public
interest in the preservation of the town's unique culture and heritage by
providing opportunities for citizens to experience cultural events and
activities; highlight local artists and local art traditions; and sponsor
local, public art events and art education programs.
(Ord. 12090, passed 1-8-13; Am. Ord. 14047, passed 8-12-14)
§ 32.23 ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   The Commission shall be comprised of seven numbered seats. All members
shall be approved by the Town Council and shall serve as volunteers without
compensation.
   (B)   Terms for each seat shall be four years. However, initial terms for
seats one through four shall be for two years, and terms thereafter shall be
for four years. Initial terms for seats five through seven shall be for three
years, and terms thereafter shall be for four years. No member shall be
immediately eligible for reappointment after serving two consecutive terms,
however such members shall be eligible following a period of two years.
   (C)   Members shall be an art professional, a member of a community
development or art-focused nonprofit, an art educator, a benefactor of local
culture and tradition, or a civic-minded citizen, and must live in the town.
   (D)   The Commission shall meet on a quarterly basis, at a minimum, and
shall be subject to all state and federal disclosure laws. Each member is
required to attend 75% of called meetings per year on a rolling- year basis
which shall be measured on the first of every month for the preceding year.
Each member shall be afforded one excused absence which shall not be counted
towards the attendance requirement. If removal due to attendance is necessary,
the Town Administrator shall then remove that member from the Commission prior
to the next scheduled meeting and notify Town Council.
   (E)   The Commission shall establish and maintain by-laws consistent with
the provisions of this subchapter. By-laws and subsequent amendments shall be
approved by the Town Council
(Ord. 12090, passed 1-8-13; Am. Ord. 14047, passed 8-12-14; Am. Ord. 18035,
passed 6-14-18)
ACCOMMODATIONS TAX ADVISORY  COMMITTEE
§ 32.30 CREATION.
   Pursuant to S.C. Code § 6-4-5, et seq., as amended, an Accommodations Tax
Advisory Committee was created by Town Council and is currently composed of
seven members who are appointed and approved by Town Council.
(Ord. 24041, passed 1-21-25)
§ 32.31 ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   Membership.
      (1)   The Accommodations Tax Advisory Committee shall be composed of
seven members appointed and approved by Town Council.
      (2)   At least four members shall be selected from the hospitality
industry of the town, with at least two of the hospitality industry members
from the lodging industry.
      (3)   One member shall represent a cultural organization(s) in the town.
   (B)   Terms of office. Committee members shall serve staggered terms. Three
members shall serve two-year terms, and four members shall serve three-year
terms; provided that upon the creation of a vacancy on the Committee, the
replacement member shall fill the unexpired term of the member he or she has
replaced. In no case shall a member be eligible to serve more than four
consecutive terms.
   (C)   Vacancy, absence, and removal.
      (1)   A vacancy in a term of office shall occur whenever it is found that
a member has resigned, is unable to serve for whatever reason, or is removed in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
      (2)   Neglect of duty, no longer representing the hospitality or lodging
industry in the town, if applicable, or misconduct in office shall constitute
just cause.
         (a)   Each member is required to attend 75% of called meetings per
year on a rolling-year basis which shall be measured on the first of every
month for the preceding year. Each member shall be afforded one excused absence
which shall not be counted towards the attendance requirement.
         (b)   Excused and un-excused absences are to be determined by the
Chairperson or, in his or her absence, the Vice-Chairperson, and are to be
stated on the record at each meeting.
            1.   Excused absences are generally defined as medical or family
emergencies or unavoidable business/personal conflicts.
            2.   Each member is responsible for notifying the Chairperson or
the appropriate staff at least two full working days prior to the meeting, if
he or she will not be in attendance.
            3.   The member shall also state a reason for the anticipated
absence.
            4.   Emergency situations that arise within this 48-hour period can
be considered excused by the Chairperson.
      (3)   If removal for cause, except due to attendance, appears imminent,
the Chairperson shall contact the member and ascertain whether removal should
be considered by the Mayor and Town Council. The Chairperson shall then make a
recommendation to Council, prior to Council action on the matter.
      (4)   If removal due to attendance is necessary, the Town Administrator
shall remove the member from the Committee prior to the next scheduled meeting
and shall notify Town Council.
      (5)   Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired
term, as soon as may reasonably be accomplished by the Mayor and Town Council,
in the same manner as the original appointment.
   (D)   Compensation. All members shall serve without compensation.
   (E)   Chairperson; Secretary; rules of procedure.
      (1)   The Committee shall organize itself, electing by secret ballot and
majority vote a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson from among its members.
         (a)   The election shall be held at the first meeting of each calendar
year.
         (b)   If a vacancy occurs in an office prior to the expiration of the
full term, another election to fill the remainder of the term of office shall
be conducted at the first meeting thereafter.
         (c)   The election procedures stated herein shall be followed in
filling an unexpired term of office.
      (2)   A staff member of the town shall serve as Secretary of the
Committee.
      (3)   The Committee shall adopt rules of procedure at the first meeting
in each calendar year. Such rules shall not conflict with the procedures stated
in this section or applicable state law.
         (a)   The Committee shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the
vote of each member upon each question, in accordance with applicable state and
federal laws and regulations.
         (b)   Robert’s Rules of Order shall govern the conduct of meetings
except as otherwise provided by the Committee.
   (F)   Meetings and quorum.
      (1)   A majority of members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum
for conducting business.
      (2)   Meetings of the Committee must be held at the call of the
Chairperson, and at such other times as the Committee may determine.
      (3)   All meetings shall be advertised in accordance with applicable
state and federal laws and regulations.
      (4)   The Committee shall meet as often as necessary to perform its
designated function, but no less than once per year.
      (5)   Upon request by Town Council, the Committee shall meet to consider
and make recommendations concerning any matter within its purview, as set forth
in §
32.32.
(Ord. 24041, passed 1-21-25)
§ 32.32 PURPOSE; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Accommodations Tax Advisory Committee shall be an advisory
committee to Town Council and shall make recommendations to Town Council
concerning the expenditure of revenues received by the town which have been
generated from the accommodations tax, consistent with the requirements of S.C.
Code §§ 6-4-5, et seq., as amended.
   (B)   The Accommodations Tax Advisory Committee shall, in furtherance of the
purpose stated herein and the requirements of S.C. Code §§ 6-4-5, et seq., as
amended, have the following powers and duties:
      (1)   Ensure that accommodations tax revenue is used to maximize tourism
benefits for the town with the primary goal to increase room night sales within
the town’s limits.
      (2)   Establish procedures for organizations to submit funding requests.
These procedures shall include informing applicants of any reporting
requirements, including, but not limited to, required accountings for awarded
funds.
      (3)   Make recommendations based on the eligible funding determined
annually by Town Council in its budget process and return any unused funds to
the Accommodations Tax Fund. In making its recommendations, the Accommodations
Tax Advisory Committee shall give funding priority to applicants who are a
nonprofit organization, as defined under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal
Revenue Code.
      (4)   For funds expended for a specific event, ensure that the event
occurs and require a full return of funds to the town if the event is postponed
more than 180 days from the originally approved date or if the event is
canceled for reasons other than an Act of God (e.g., rain, hurricane).
(Ord. 24041, passed 1-21-25)
CHAPTER 33: FIRE DEPARTMENT
Section
   
33.01   Established
   
33.02   Functions of the Fire Department
   
33.03   Composition
   
33.04   Chief of the Fire Department
   
33.05   Powers and duties
   
33.06   Control at scene of fire or emergency
   
33.07   Local Inspector of Buildings and Grounds
   
33.08   Assistant Fire Chief
   
33.09   Battalion Chiefs
   
33.10   Fire Marshals
   
33.11   Driving of vehicles while responding to fire alarms or emergencies
   
33.12   Response to calls beyond municipal limits
   
33.13   Firefighters’ Insurance and Inspection Fund
Cross-reference:
   Fire Prevention, see
Ch. 92
§ 33.01 ESTABLISHED.
   A Fire Department is established for the municipality.
('81 Code, § 33.01) (Am. Ord. 01060, passed 11-13-01)
Statutory reference:
   Fire departments in cities and towns; fire limits and construction, see S.C.
Code § 5-25-20
§ 33.02 FUNCTIONS OF THE FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   The Fire Department shall provide comprehensive programs and services
to the municipality, including but not be limited to, fire prevention and
inspection, fire suppression, emergency medical assists to the sick and
injured, hazardous materials response. weapons of mass destruction response,
shipboard firefighting, confined space rescue, and other related emergency
operations and functions approved by Council.
   (B)   The Chief of the Fire Department shall ensure that the Department
trains on and follows the National Incident Command System and establishes
written standard operating procedures for general and specific duties and
responses encountered when responding to fire, medical assist, rescue or other
emergency management and mitigation functions where their services are used.
   (C)   The Fire Department shall identify and design standards of response to
risk hazards associated within the town and/or their primary response district.
   (D)   The Fire Department shall utilize an appropriate system of
accountability when operating in an emergency mode.
(Ord. 01060, passed 11-13-01)
§ 33.03 COMPOSITION.
   The personnel of the Fire Department shall consist of both full-time paid
and volunteer members, the number in each category to be determined by Council,
and shall include a Chief, Assistant Chief, Fire Marshals and Battalion Chiefs,
as approved by Council, provided the Chief Assistant Chief and Battalion Chiefs
are full-time paid officers. The names of such persons who desire to become
members of the Fire Department, other than the Chief, shall be submitted by the
Chief, with his or her recommendations to the Town Administrator, who shall
approve all, or as many of those persons suggested, as he or she may deem
advisable. Only those persons so approved shall become members of the Fire
Department.
('81 Code, § 33.02) (Am. Ord. 01060, passed 11-13-01)
§ 33.04 CHIEF OF THE FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   The Fire Chief will be appointed by the Town Council, with the
recommendation of the Town Administrator, and will serve at the pleasure of
Council.
('81 Code, § 33.05) (Am. Ord. passed 3-5-79; Am. Ord. passed 9-9-85; Am. Ord.
01060, passed 11-13-01)
Cross-reference:
   Public Safety and Housing Officer ex officio duty of Fire Chief, see §
150.050
§ 33.05 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Chief of the Fire Department shall be the commanding officer of
the Fire Department, and shall be responsible for its proper management and for
the preservation and maintenance of its property. The Chief shall enforce all
rules and regulations of the Fire Department, and when any violation comes to
his or her attention, the Chief shall forthwith take such action as may be
appropriate with respect thereto.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department to inspect
the engines, ladder trucks, and special apparatus for service at fires or
emergencies on a continuous basis, and to conduct a formal pumping test
annually.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department to establish
and conduct a training program to thoroughly familiarize all members of the
Department with the operation of the engines, aerial and ground ladders, rescue
and special equipment, firefighting tactics and strategy, and medical and
rescue equipment.
('81 Code, § 33.06) (Am. Ord. 01060, passed 11-13-01)
§ 33.06 CONTROL AT SCENE OF FIRE OR EMERGENCY.
   The Chief of the Fire Department shall have control of operations at the
scene of a fire, hazardous materials incident, entrapment, rescue, or other
Fire Department-related emergency. In the event of the Chief’s incapacity or
absence, such control shall devolve upon the Assistant Chief, Battalion Chiefs,
and company officers. In the event of the incapacity or absence of the
Assistant Chief, Battalion Chiefs, or company officers, such control shall
devolve on a the most senior paid member of the Fire Department present at the
scene.
('81 Code, § 33.04) (Am. Ord. 01060, passed 11-13-01)
§ 33.07 LOCAL INSPECTOR OF BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS.
   (A)   The Chief of the Fire Department is designated the local Inspector of
Buildings and Grounds, with respect to fire hazards and safety, and it shall be
his or her duty to make reports to the Mayor, the Town Administrator and
Council, of the condition of such buildings and grounds he or she has
inspected.
   (B)   The Chief of the Fire Department is also designated as the local
Inspector of Buildings with respect to inquiries into the origin of fires
within the municipality and reporting thereon to law enforcement, other fire
departments, insurance companies or their agents as required by law, and in
this capacity the Chief shall have the powers and perform the duties prescribed
for local inspectors of buildings in S.C. Code §§ 5-25-160 through 5-25-210.
('81 Code, § 33.07) (Am. Ord. 01060, passed 11-13-01)
§ 33.08 ASSISTANT FIRE CHIEF.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department to appoint an
Assistant Fire Chief.
   (B)   The Chief shall submit the name of such person selected, with his or
her recommendation, to the Town Administrator for final approval.
   (C)   The Assistant Fire Chief shall be second in command of all Fire
Department operations and administration, and in the Chief’s absence shall
assume all duties and responsibilities of that position.
(Ord. 01160, passed 11-13-01)
§ 33.09 BATTALION CHIEFS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department to appoint
any one of several Battalion Chiefs.
   (B)   The Battalion Chiefs shall be responsible for the daily emergency and
routine operations of the Fire Department, and at emergency scenes shall assume
command of the Department.
   (C)   In the event of the incapacity or absence of the Chief or the
Assistant Chief, the most senior Battalion Chief shall be in charge of
Department administration and operations.
('81 Code, § 33.08) (Am. Ord. 01060, passed 11-13-01)
§ 33.10 FIRE MARSHALS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department to appoint
any one of several Fire Marshals.
   (B)   As designated by the Chief of the Fire Department, the Fire Marshals
shall administer and enforce the provision of Chapter 92 of this code, and he
or she shall have such powers and perform such duties as may be provided for
him or her in the chapter or as provided in any other town or state ordinances/
statutes.
('81 Code, § 31.78) (Ord. Passed 12-8-92; Am. Ord. 01060, passed 11-13-01)
Cross-reference:
   Fire prevention, see
Ch. 92
   Municipal ordinance summons, see §
35.10
Statutory reference:
   Resident fire marshals, see S.C. Code § 23-9-30
§ 33.11 DRIVING OF VEHICLES WHILE RESPONDING TO FIRE ALARMS OR EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   When answering a fire alarm, medical assist, rescue or other
emergency, members of the Fire Department will proceed to the scene of the
fire, medical assist, rescue or other emergency, as instructed by the Chief,
and shall observe all traffic regulations, provided drivers of town vehicles
equipped to meet the requirements for, and duly designated as, emergency
vehicles as defined in S.C. Code § 56-5-170, shall observe the traffic
regulations applicable to such authorized emergency vehicles.
   (B)   Vehicles and apparatus of the Fire Department shall be driven only by
members of the Fire Department.
('81 Code, § 33.09) (Am. Ord. 01160, passed 11-13-01)
§ 33.12 RESPONSE TO CALLS BEYOND MUNICIPAL LIMITS.
   The Fire Department shall not answer any fire, medical assist, rescue or
other emergency calls outside the municipal limits, except under the following
conditions:
   (A)   Responding to a call from another municipality or government agency
under a pre-signed and approved automatic or mutual aid agreement, including
the statewide mutual aid program.
   (B)   Responding to a call from within an area designated as the East Cooper
Fire District.
   (C)   Responding to a call from Charleston County Emergency Medical
Services, the Charleston County Rescue Squad, or town, county or state police
for assistance at entrapment, wreck, drowning or other life-threatening
emergency.
(Ord. 01060, passed 11-13-01)
§ 33.13 FIREFIGHTERS’ INSURANCE AND INSPECTION FUND.
   Since the state has enacted a law providing for the payment of a
firefighters’ fund tax by fire insurance companies for business done in cities
and municipalities within the state, and since the firefighting equipment of
the municipality, fire inspection of buildings, and membership in the South
Carolina State Fireman’s Association qualifies it to partake from this fund,
under certain prescribed regulations, the municipality accepts all terms and
conditions of the act of the State General Assembly pertaining to the same.
('81 Code, § 33.13) (Am. Ord. 01060, passed 11-13-01)
Statutory reference:
   Firefighter’s Insurance and Inspection Fund, see S.C. Code §§ 23-9-310
through 23-9-470
CHAPTER 34: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
   
34.01   Composition
   
34.02   Chief of Police; bond
   
34.03   Powers and duties; patrol
   
34.04   Employment of special police officers
   
34.05   Chain of command; ranks and grades
   
34.06   Uniforms and equipment
   
34.07   Bail
Cross-reference:
   Parking Enforcement Officer, see §
72.19
§ 34.01 COMPOSITION.
   The Police Department shall consist of the Chief of Police and such other
personnel, having such ranks or grades, as may from time to time be determined
by the Council.
('81 Code, § 34.01)
§ 34.02 CHIEF OF POLICE; BOND.
   (A)   The Police Chief will be appointed by the Council and will serve at
the pleasure of Council.
   (B)   Before entering on the discharge of the duties of office, the Chief of
Police shall enter into Bond for the municipality in the amount of $5,000,
conditioned on the faithful performance of all duties and a true accounting for
all funds of the municipality which may come into his or her hands, custody, or
control, and such bond shall be provided by a bonding or casualty company
licensed to do business in this state, and shall be approved by the Mayor and
Council or its appropriate committee.
('81 Code, § 34.03) (Am. Ord. passed 3-5-79; Am. Ord. passed 9-9-85)
§ 34.03 POWERS AND DUTIES; PATROL.
   The Chief of Police shall be the commanding officer of the Police
Department. The property of the Police Department shall be within the care of
the Chief of Police, who shall be directly responsible therefor. The Chief of
Police shall be the principal law enforcement officer and shall enforce within
the municipality all provisions of state law, this code, and other ordinances
not the primary concern of some other officer to enforce, and he or she shall
cooperate with and assist other officers in the enforcement of statutes and
ordinances for which they are primarily responsible. It shall be the duty of
the Chief of Police to see that all departmental rules, regulations, and orders
are promptly and faithfully respected and obeyed, and whenever any violation
thereof is reported to the Chief or comes under the Chief’s personal
observation, he or she shall promptly investigate the matter and report it to
the Mayor and Police Department Committee of the Council. The Chief of Police
is authorized to summarily terminate and suspend from duty any member of the
Police Department for cause. The Chief of Police shall perform such other
duties as may be required by the Council.
('81 Code, § 34.04)
Cross-reference:
   Police Chief as Sergeant at Arms, see §
30.27
§ 34.04 EMPLOYMENT OF SPECIAL POLICE OFFICERS.
   The Police Chief, upon the approval of the Mayor, shall, whenever he or she
deems it necessary, appoint temporarily such number of special police officers
as may in the Chief’s sound discretion be deemed necessary for carrying out and
enforcing any or all ordinances of the municipality for the preservation of the
public health, safety, and general welfare, subject to availability of funds
for such purpose.
('81 Code, § 34.02)
§ 34.05 CHAIN OF COMMAND; RANKS AND GRADES.
   (A)   All personnel of the Police Department shall be subject to the
supervision and control of the Chief of Police and shall perform such general
and special duties and acts as the Chief may from time to time require and
direct, subject to the policies, rules and regulations of the town. In the
event of the absence or incapacity of the Chief of Police, the Police
Department chain of command shall be followed.
   (B)   Members of the Police Department subordinate to the Chief of Police
shall be appointed, promoted, and demoted in rank or grade by the Chief of
Police.
('81 Code, § 34.05)
§ 34.06 UNIFORMS AND EQUIPMENT.
   Members of the Police Department shall be provided by the municipality with
such articles of uniform, insignia, weapons, and equipment as may from time to
time be prescribed for them by the Chief of Police.
('81 Code, § 34.06)
§ 34.07 BAIL.
   On any arrest being made by any police officer, such arrest shall be
communicated immediately to the municipal judge or a magistrate for
instruction, and until the police officer receives such instruction the party
arrested shall be detained in custody, unless such deposit of money is made
with the Clerk of Court as will be required for his or her appearance before
the municipal judge or magistrate to answer the charges preferred against him
or her.
('81 Code, § 34.07)
CHAPTER 35: MUNICIPAL COURT
Section
   
35.01   Establishment
   
35.02   Judge
   
35.03   Clerk
   
35.04   Jury commissioners
   
35.05   Jurisdiction
   
35.06   Disposition of fines and penalties
   
35.07   Appeals
   
35.08   Jury trial
   
35.09   Stenographic and mechanical recordings
   
35.10   Municipal uniform ordinance summons
   
35.11   Court fees
 
   
35.99   Penalty
   
Appendix: Uniform Ordinance Summons
§ 35.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is established a Municipal Court for the municipality which shall be a
part of the unified judicial system of the state, pursuant to Act No. 480 of
1980 (S.C. Code §§ 14-25-5 et seq.) for the trial and determination of all
cases within its jurisdiction.
('81 Code, § 35.01)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to establish Municipal Court, S.C. Code § 14-25-5
§ 35.02 JUDGE.
   (A)   The Court shall be presided over by one or more full-time or part-time
Judges at the discretion of Council. The Municipal Court Judge or Judges shall
be appointed for a term of two years. All terms hereunder shall, however,
continue until a successor is appointed, approved, and sworn by Town Council.
The Mayor and Council shall act promptly after the expiration of a term to make
appointments and swear in Judges as soon as may reasonably be accomplished.
   (B)   In the event a Judge does not complete his or her term, Council may
appoint a new Judge to fill the unexpired term. Vacancies shall be filled in
accordance with S.C. Code § 14-25-25.
   (C)   The compensation of the Municipal Judge shall be as from time to time
may be determined by Council.
('81 Code, § 35.02) (Am. Ord. passed 7-7-86; Am. Ord. 94040, passed 9-22-94;
Am. Ord. 96041, passed 9-20-96; Am. Ord. 01038, passed 6-25-01; Am. Ord. 04042,
passed 8-10-04; Am. Ord. 10050, passed 10-12-10)
§ 35.03 CLERK.
   Council shall designate a Clerk of Municipal Court, who shall keep such
records and make such reports as may be required by the Council and/or the
State Court Administrator.
('81 Code, § 35.03)
§ 35.04 JURY COMMISSIONERS.
   The Clerk of Court and his or her assistant shall serve as jury
commissioners for the Municipal Court. The Council shall appoint not less than
three nor more than five persons to serve as jury commissioners for the
Municipal Court in accordance with S.C. Code § 14-25-155.
('81 Code, § 35.09)
§ 35.05 JURISDICTION.
   The Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction to try all cases arising under
the ordinances of the municipality. The Court shall also have all such powers,
duties, and jurisdiction in criminal cases made under state law and conferred
upon magistrates. The Court shall have the power to punish for contempt of
court by imposition of sentences up to the limits imposed on municipal courts.
The Court shall have no jurisdiction in civil matters.
(S.C. Code § 14-25-45) ('81 Code, § 35.04)
§ 35.06 DISPOSITION OF FINES AND PENALTIES.
   All fines and penalties collected by the Municipal Court shall be forthwith
turned over to the Director of Administrative Services for deposit to the
general fund of the municipality.
('81 Code, § 35.06)
§ 35.07 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any party shall have the right to appeal from the sentence or judgment
of the Municipal Court to a court of competent jurisdiction. Notice of
intention to appeal, setting forth the grounds for appeal, shall be given in
writing and served on the Municipal Judge or the Clerk of the Municipal Court
within ten days after sentence is passed or judgment rendered, or the appeal
shall be deemed waived. The party appealing shall enter into a bond, payable to
the municipality, to appear and defend such appeal in the court to which the
appeal is taken, or shall pay the fine assessed.
   (B)   In the event of an appeal, the Municipal Judge shall make a return to
the court to which the appeal is taken as provided by S.C. Code § 14-25-105.
(S.C. Code §§ 14-25-95 and 14-25-105) ('81 Code, § 35.07)
§ 35.08 JURY TRIAL.
   Any person to be tried in the Municipal Court may, prior to trial, demand a
jury trial, and such jury when demanded, shall be composed of six persons drawn
from the qualified electors of the municipality in the manner prescribed by
law. The right to a jury trial shall be deemed to have been waived unless
demand is made prior to trial.
(S.C. Code § 14-25-125) ('81 Code, § 35.08)
Statutory reference:
   Council may act as jury commissioners, see S.C. Code § 14-25-135
   Juries, see S.C. Code §§ 14-25-145 through 14-25-185
§ 35.09 STENOGRAPHIC AND MECHANICAL RECORDINGS.
   Any party shall have the right to have the testimony given at a jury trial
in the Municipal Court taken stenographically or mechanically by a reporter;
provided that nothing herein shall operate to prevent any such party from
mechanically recording the proceedings himself or herself. The requesting party
shall pay the charges of such reporter for taking and transcribing if testimony
is recorded by a Municipal Court reporter.
(S.C. Code § 14-25-125) ('81 Code, § 35.10)
§ 35.10 MUNICIPAL UNIFORM ORDINANCE SUMMONS.
   (A)   Any person or entity violating any provision of this code, or any code
adopted pursuant thereto, within the corporate limits of the town may be issued
a uniform ordinance summons. Issuance of the uniform ordinance summons shall
vest jurisdiction in the Town Municipal Court to hear and dispose of the charge
for which the uniform ordinance summons was issued and served. The uniform
ordinance summons may be issued by any town law enforcement officer or any
other town employee designated as a code enforcement officer pursuant to this
Code or by Town Council or the Town Administrator. The bond amount for
violations shall be prescribed by a Municipal Court Judge. Town law enforcement
or code enforcement officers are prohibited from accepting bonds. The uniform
ordinance summons shall not be used to perform a custodial arrest.
   (B)   This section does not apply to any ordinance which regulates the use
of motor vehicles on the public roads.
   (C)   An ordinance summons must cite only one violation per summons and must
contain at least the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the person or entity charged;
      (2)   The name and title of the issuing officer;
      (3)   The time, date, and location of the hearing;
      (4)   A description of the ordinance the person or entity is charged with
violating;
      (5)   The procedure to post bond; and
      (6)   Any other notice or warning otherwise required by law.
   (D)   The ordinance summonses must be consecutively and discretely numbered.
The ordinance summonses must be audited as part of the annual independent audit
required in S.C. Code § 5-7-240, 1976 as amended and a separate copy of each
audit must be furnished to the chief administrative officer of the
municipality.
   (E)   Any law enforcement officer or code enforcement officer who serves an
ordinance summons must allow the person served to proceed without first having
to post bond or to appear before a Municipal Judge. Acceptance of an ordinance
summons constitutes a person’s recognizance to comply with the terms of the
summons.
   (F)   This statute does not prohibit the municipality from enforcing
ordinances by means otherwise authorized by law.
   (G)   The form set out in the appendix following this chapter is adopted as
the Town Uniform Ordinance Summons.
('81 Code, § 35.11) (Ord. passed 12-8-92) Penalty, see §
35.99
§ 35.11 COURT FEES.
   (A)   Deferred prosecution fee.
      (1)   The following findings of facts are adopted herewith:
         (a)   Deferred prosecution of a charge is beneficial to an accused.
         (b)   Deferred prosecution involves additional time, effort and
follow-up on the part of the court staff, which involves a cost to taxpayers.
         (c)   The cost of the follow-up involved with a deferred prosecution
shall be borne by the recipient of this favorable option.
         (d)   Based on all of the specifics involved with monitoring and
follow-up in a deferred prosecution, $50 is a fair and reasonable cost to
charge each accused/recipient involved.
      (2)   A deferred prosecution fee for the deferred prosecution program is
hereby established for the Municipal Court in the amount of $50. This fee shall
apply to any charge or charges deferred for an accused based on certain
conditions being accomplished. The Municipal Court shall promulgate paperwork,
procedures and policies to administer this program and fee.
   (B)   Administrative service fee.
      (1)   The following are adopted as findings of fact as evidence of
specific work done by the court for offenders who are found guilty in the Mount
Pleasant Municipal Court:
         (a)   Court continuances due to conflicts with the assigned court
date.
         (b)   Record checks for other agencies and for employment purposes.
         (c)   Researching information requested on court case dispositions.
         (d)   Faxing information, then mailing the original.
         (e)   Processing warrants for non- sufficient checks. Takes staff away
from the office in order to process with the magistrate’s office.
         (f)   Processing cases with the Court of General Sessions results in
staff going to the Charleston County Clerk of Court’s office to have tickets
signed off, which verifies that specific cases were disposed of.
         (g)   Sending notices to offenders by certified mail to insure
individuals are notified. This is done to avoid having offenders tried in their
absence.
         (h)   As a courtesy to offenders, this court sends certified letters
notifying them of pending bench warrants. This letter is to advise them that
they have ten days in which to pay their fine in order to avoid a formal
arrest.
         (i)   Expungement of offenders’ court records.
         (j)   Requests for copies of tickets, letters, and the like are made
on a daily basis.
      (2)   The amount of $10 is found to be a fair and reasonable amount to
charge all guilty offenders in the Municipal Court.
      (3)   An administrative service fee for offenders who are found guilty in
the Municipal Court is hereby established for the Municipal Court in the amount
of $10. The Municipal Court shall promulgate paperwork, procedures and policies
to administer the fee.
(Ord. 00045, passed 8-8-00)
Cross-Reference:
   Collection of delinquent debts, see §
40.20
§ 35.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Uniform ordinance summons. Any person who fails to appear before the
Court as required by an ordinance summons, without first having posted such
bond as may be required or without having been granted a continuance by the
Court, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, must be fined not more
than $500 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days; provided, however, that no
penalty shall exceed that provided for a similar offense under state law.
('81 Code, § 35.11) (Ord. passed 12-8-92)
   (B)   Violation of ordinance.
      (1)   Whenever the Municipal Judge of the Town Municipal Court finds a
party guilty of violating a municipal ordinance or a state law within the
jurisdiction of the Court, he or she may impose a fine of not more than $500 or
imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both; provided, however, that no
penalty shall exceed that provided for a similar offense under state law. This
provision supersedes any and all other provisions in this code.
      (2)   The Municipal Judge of the Town Municipal Court may suspend
sentences imposed by him or her on such terms and conditions as deemed
appropriate, including restitution and/or community service. The Municipal
Judge is further specifically authorized in criminal cases to order a defendant
to make restitution to their victim(s) in an amount the Judge deems
appropriate, as a condition of a suspended sentence or in addition to any other
penalty imposed.
(S.C. Code §§ 14-25-65 and 14-25-75) ('81 Code, § 35.05) (Am. Ord. 93048,
passed 9-14-93)
APPENDIX: UNIFORM ORDINANCE SUMMONS
Note: For a printer-friendly, PDF version of this form, click HERE
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10124.jpg]
 
CHAPTER 36: ELECTIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
36.01   Qualified voters
   
36.02   Registration of voters
   
36.03   Polling places
   
36.04   Voting hours
Elections
   
36.20   Special elections
   
36.21   Regular election date for Mayor and Councilmembers
   
36.22   Nonpartisan elections; plurality method
   
36.23   Filing of statement of candidacy
   
36.24   Advance notice of general and special elections
   
36.30   Transfer of certain authority to the Charleston County Board of
Elections and Voter Registration
Election Results
   
36.40   Counting of votes
   
36.41   Certification of election results
   
36.42   Special meeting of Council to receive election returns
   
36.43   Announcement of election results
   
36.44   Determination of election; formal declaration
Statutory reference:
   Elections, see S.C. Code Title 7
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 36.01 QUALIFIED VOTERS.
   All electors of the municipality duly qualified to vote under the
constitution and laws of the state shall be permitted to vote.
('81 Code, § 36.01)
§ 36.02 REGISTRATION OF VOTERS.
   The appointment of the supervisor of municipal registration and the conduct
of the registration by such supervisor shall conform to the requirements of the
state statutes applicable thereto.
('81 Code, § 36.02)
§ 36.03 POLLING PLACES.
   All elections shall be held at such places as shall be designated by
Council, in conformity with state law.
('81 Code, § 36.03)
§ 36.04 VOTING HOURS.
   The polls shall be open on each election day from 7:00 a.m. until 7:00 p.m.
('81 Code, § 36.04) (Am. Ord. passed 4-12-88)
ELECTIONS
§ 36.20 SPECIAL ELECTIONS.
   Special elections shall be ordered from time to time, as occasion may
demand. When required or permitted by law, candidates must file a statement of
candidacy with the Charleston County Board of Elections and Voter Registration,
together with a $150 filing fee, not later than twelve o’clock noon, 45 days
prior to the election. If, however, S.C. Code § 7-13-190(C) is applicable, the
notice requirements of said section of the State Code shall be controlling over
this section.
('81 Code, § 36.05) (Am. Ord. passed 1-9-90; Am. Ord. 99018, passed 6-8-99; Am.
Ord. 09064, passed 10-13-09)
§ 36.21 REGULAR ELECTION DATE FOR MAYOR AND COUNCILMEMBERS.
   General elections will be held in the town on the first Tuesday after the
first Monday in November in odd-numbered years. Offices for Mayor and
Councilmembers filled in the election of 2004 will be up for election in 2009
and every four years thereafter. Offices for Mayor and Councilmembers filled in
the election of 2006 will be up for election in 2011 and every four years
thereafter, saving and excepting one Council seat filled as a two-year vacancy,
which will be up for election in 2009 and every four years thereafter.
('81 Code, § 36.06) (Am. Ord. 93077, passed 1-11-94; Am. Ord. 07033, passed 6-
12-07)
Statutory reference:
   Nominations and elections for municipal offices, see S.C. Code §§ 5-15-10 et
seq.
§ 36.22 NONPARTISAN ELECTIONS; PLURALITY METHOD.
   All regular and special elections for the offices of Mayor and Council shall
be nonpartisan general elections using the plurality method, pursuant to S.C.
Code § 5-15-61.
(‘81 Code, § 36.07) (Ord. passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. passed 5-12-80; Am. Ord.
passed 4-12-88; Am. Ord. passed 4-10-90; Am. Ord. 13040, passed 8-13-13; Am.
Ord. 19034, passed 5-14-19)
§ 36.23 FILING OF STATEMENT OF CANDIDACY.
   (A)   Statements of candidacy for the offices of Mayor, Council and for the
Commissioners of Public Works in a general election shall be filed with the
Charleston County Board of Elections and Voter Registration, together with a
$150 filing fee, not later than 60 days prior to the election. The Charleston
County Board of Elections and Voter Registration shall verify the information
in the statements and shall place the name of the candidate on the ballot.
   (B)   Any person declaring candidacy under this section who cannot afford
the required filing fee and so declares himself or herself to be an indigent
shall file a written appeal for relief with the Charleston County Board of
Elections and Voter Registration, not later than 60 days prior to the election.
('81 Code, § 36.08) (Ord. passed 3-6-78; Am. Ord. passed 6-6-88; Am. Ord.
passed 1-9-90; Am. Ord. passed 4-10-90; Am. Ord. 99018, passed 6-8-99; Am. Ord.
99039, passed 9-21-99; Am. Ord. 09064, passed 10-13-09)
§ 36.24 ADVANCE NOTICE OF GENERAL AND SPECIAL ELECTIONS.
   Two notices of the time, place, and object of any general or special
election held in the town shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the town. The first notice must appear not later than 90 days
before the election and the second notice must appear not later than two weeks
after the first notice.
('81 Code, § 36.10) (Am. Ord. passed 12-10-91; Am. Ord. 99039, passed 9-21-99)
§ 36.30 TRANSFER OF CERTAIN AUTHORITY TO THE CHARLESTON COUNTY BOARD OF
ELECTIONS AND VOTER REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Pursuant to Mount Pleasant Ordinance Nos. 08027 and 09028, and
Charleston County Council Ordinance Nos. 1561 and 1605, certain authority to
conduct municipal elections was transferred to, and accepted by, the Charleston
County Council and the Charleston County Board of Elections and Voter
Registration.
   (B)   The Charleston County Board of Elections and Voter Registration shall
have the following authority and responsibilities with respect to all Mount
Pleasant regular and special elections:
      (1)   Publishing proper notices of elections.
      (2)   Insuring the provision of proper books for registration.
      (3)   Preparing and distributing ballots and election materials.
      (4)   Preparing and staffing an absentee ballot precinct.
      (5)   Appointing and training poll managers.
      (6)   Providing voting machines.
      (7)   Joint supervision, along with the Mount Pleasant Election
Commission, of the polls on election day. Ultimate decisions and final
authority in this regard shall remain with the Mount Pleasant Election
Commission.
      (8)   Tabulating all election votes.
      (9)   Certifying election results to the Mount Pleasant Election
Commission.
      (10)   Conducting all Mount Pleasant municipal elections, special and
general, pursuant to the requirements of the South Carolina Code of Laws.
      (11)   Review of and decisions on challenges from candidates.
      (12)   Review of and decisions on challenged ballots.
      (13)   Protest filed or litigation commenced, in connection with the
conduct of a municipal election, shall be heard by the Charleston County Board
of Elections and Voter Registration and defended by its attorney, with the town
being responsible for all fees, costs and expenses incurred in such protest or
litigation.
      (14)   Supervision of the polls on election day.
      (15)   Certification of results to the Mount Pleasant Town Council.
      (16)   Statements of candidacies, and fees therewith, shall be filed with
the Charleston County Board of Elections and Voter Registration.
      (17)   Any and all other authority relative to conducting a municipal
election that is not specifically excluded hereinbelow.
   (C)   The following specific authority is maintained by the Mount Pleasant
Election Commission and is not granted to the Charleston County Board of
Elections and Voter Registration:
      (1)   Authority to call special elections and to set the date of same
pursuant to the requirements of the South Carolina Code of Laws, if applicable,
in addition to drafting and proposing referendum questions to the voters.
      (2)   Authority to cancel/revoke this transfer of authority by ordinance,
at anytime, shall remain with the Town Council.
      (3)   Expenses for municipal elections will be borne by the town and, as
such, the county will be reimbursed for any such expenses incurred.
(Ord. 08027, passed 6-11-08; Am. Ord. 09014, passed 4-14-09; Am. Ord. 09064,
passed 10-13-09)
ELECTION RESULTS
§ 36.40 COUNTING OF VOTES.
   Immediately upon the closing of the polls, the Charleston County Board of
Elections and Voter Registration shall proceed to count publicly the votes cast
and shall continue such count until completed.
('81 Code, § 36.12) (Am. Ord. 09014, passed 4-14-09)
§ 36.41 CERTIFICATION OF ELECTION RESULTS.
   The Charleston County Board of Elections and Voter Registration shall
certify all election results, including the whole number of votes cast,
together with the number cast for each candidate for Mayor and for each
candidate for Councilmember, and, when applicable, the number of votes cast for
and against each proposition voted on at the election, and transmit the same in
writing to the Town Council in a timely manner.
('81 Code, § 36.13) (Am. Ord. 09014, passed 4-14-09; Am. Ord. 09064, passed 10-
13-09)
§ 36.42 SPECIAL MEETING OF COUNCIL TO RECEIVE ELECTION RETURNS.
   A special meeting of the Council shall be held within three days after a
municipal election as the Charleston County Board of Elections and Voter
Registration shall be ready to transmit their statement of the result of the
election to the Council as provided in §
36.41.
('81 Code, § 36.14) (Am. Ord. 95067, passed 12-8-95; Am. Ord. 09064, passed 10-
13-09)
§ 36.43 ANNOUNCEMENT OF ELECTION RESULTS.
   Immediately upon receipt by the Council of the statement of the Charleston
County Board of Elections and Voter Registration, the Mayor shall open and
publish the statement by announcing the total number of votes cast for each
candidate for Mayor and for each candidate for Councilmember, and, when
applicable, the total number of votes cast for and against each proposition
voted on at the election.
('81 Code, § 36.16) (Am. Ord. 09064, passed 10-13-09)
§ 36.44 DETERMINATION OF ELECTION; FORMAL DECLARATION.
   The person receiving the highest number of votes for Mayor shall be declared
duly elected Mayor. The persons receiving the highest number of votes for
Councilmember, in number equal to the number of Councilmembers to be chosen,
shall be declared duly elected Councilmembers. Such declaration shall be by
resolution of the Council.
('81 Code, § 36.17)
CHAPTER 37: PERSONNEL POLICIES
Section
General Provisions
   
37.01   Misconduct
   
37.02   Compensation
   
37.03   Town’s status as an at-will employer
Retirement and Social Security
   
37.20   State retirement system
   
37.21   Federal Social Security benefits
Cross-reference:
   Town officials and employees, see
Ch. 31
Statutory reference:
   Public officers and employees, see S.C. Code § 8-1-10 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 37.01 MISCONDUCT.
   (A)   Any person elected or appointed to any office in the municipal
government and any person employed by the municipality shall abide by the state
Ethics, Government and Accountability and Campaign Reform Act of 1991. All
employees shall also be governed by the policies, rules and regulations as set
forth in the town Personnel Manual.
   (B)   The Council may by resolution adopt, and from time to time amend,
personnel regulations governing such matters as, among others, the terms and
conditions for employment, promotion, demotion, suspension, and dismissal,
vacation leaves, sick leaves, and military leaves, classification of positions,
and all other matters customarily governed by municipal personnel regulations.
On the adoption of any such resolution and the filing thereof in the office of
the Clerk of Council, the rules and regulations contained therein shall apply
to all persons to whom they are by such resolution made applicable, and it
shall be unlawful for any such person to violate or fail to comply therewith.
§ 37.02 COMPENSATION.
   The Mayor, Councilmembers, and other municipal officers and the municipal
employees shall be entitled to receive and shall be paid such salary or
compensation during their respective terms of office or employment as may be
provided for and regulated by resolution or ordinance of the Council.
('81 Code, § 37.03(A)) (Ord. passed 12-7-70)
§ 37.03 TOWN’S STATUS AS AN AT-WILL EMPLOYER.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the town that, notwithstanding any
policies, memoranda or handbooks it has promulgated, or any of its employment
practices:
   (A)   All town employees are employed at-will and may resign or be
discharged from employment at any time.
   (B)   As authorized by the Mayor and Town Council, only the town shall have
the right to enter into contracts for other than at-will employment on the
town’s behalf.
   (C)   Any contract for other than at-will employment must:
      (1)   Be in writing;
      (2)   Be executed by the Town Council;
      (3)   Specify the duration of the employment; and
      (4)   Specifically state that the contract is being created pursuant to
the town’s authority under this section.
(Ord. 03056, passed 10-14-03)
RETIREMENT AND SOCIAL SECURITY
§ 37.20 STATE RETIREMENT SYSTEM.
   As a member of the state retirement system, the town shall abide by all
applicable laws, rules and regulations governing membership and its
responsibility in the system.
('81 Code, § 37.10)
Statutory reference:
   Retirement systems, see S.C. Code §§ 9-1-10 through 9-1-1970
§ 37.21 FEDERAL SOCIAL SECURITY BENEFITS.
   The town shall abide by all applicable laws, rules and regulations of the
federal Social Security Act and all related statutory regulations of the state.
('81 Code, § 37.11)
Statutory reference:
   Contribution fund established, see S.C. Code § 9-3-550
   Contributions of state employees, see S.C. Code § 9-3-510 et seq.
   Coverage of public officers and employees under Federal Social Security Act,
see S.C. Code § 9-3-20 et seq.
CHAPTER 38: PROCUREMENT CODE
Section
   
38.01   Title
   
38.02   Authority
   
38.03   Compliance with other laws and regulations
   
38.04   Ethical procurements
   
38.05   Procurement limitations and authorization
   
38.06   Local vendor partnership procurement
   
38.07   Resolution of protested solicitations and awards
   
38.08   Open records
   
38.09   Disposal of town property other than real property
§ 38.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be referred to as the “Procurement Code for the Town of
Mount Pleasant, South Carolina.”
(Ord. 18010, passed 2-14-18)
§ 38.02 AUTHORITY.
   (A)   This chapter is adopted pursuant to and in compliance with South
Carolina law and with the authority of Town Council. The Bids and Purchases
Committee (“Committee”), as appointed by the Mayor, shall act as the principal
public procurement governing authority of the town, unless the full Town
Council, by majority vote of a quorum of Council, decides a matter otherwise in
advance of any final decision by the Committee. Final actions by the Committee
must be by the majority vote of a quorum of the Committee. In the event of a
tie vote the matter under consideration will be referred to the full Town
Council for resolution. In other words, normally the Committee shall act with
full and final authority relative to all procurement matters, pursuant to the
specific requirements of this chapter; however, Town Council herein reserves
the right to exercise such authority, as deemed appropriate. Specifically, Town
Council has the right to assume full and final authority in any procurement
matter, but only before a final, majority decision and vote by a quorum of the
Committee is placed on the public record. This section is not intended to
contravene the appeals process requirement identified in this chapter, when
applicable.
   (B)   As used in this chapter, PROCUREMENT is defined as the process and
procedure for obtaining goods and services, including all activities from the
planning steps including the preparation and processing of a requisition,
through receipt and acceptance of delivery and processing of a final invoice
for payment. However, Committee authority in procurement does not include the
authority to materially alter or amend any contract or agreement approved by a
majority vote of Town Council; material alteration and amendment of such
contracts and agreements is reserved solely to the Town Council.
   (C)   The Committee of the town delegates to the Town Administrator, or
designee, the duties and responsibilities for administering the procurement of
all supplies, services, and construction, as well as the management and
disposal of surplus supplies and equipment in accordance with this chapter.
   (D)   The Procurement Officer or authorized designee, shall provide for
implementation and compliance with all requirements of this chapter in order to
maximize the purchasing value of public funds, providing safeguards for
maintaining quality and integrity within the procurement system, yet providing
for the fair and equitable treatment of all involved in public procurement. The
Procurement Officer shall act under the direction of the Chief Financial
Officer, or designee, and shall organize and execute all procurement activities
for the town as set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 18010, passed 2-14-18)
§ 38.03 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent any municipal department from
complying with the terms and conditions of state or federal laws and/or
regulations which may be applicable.
   (B)   Procurement which involves the expenditure of federal assistance,
contract funds, any grants, gifts, or bequest shall also comply with such
federal and state laws and authorized regulations as are mandatorily applicable
regardless of whether they are presently reflected in this chapter.
Notwithstanding where requirements within this chapter are more restrictive,
federal or state requirements shall be followed.
(Ord. 18010, passed 2-14-18)
§ 38.04 ETHICAL PROCUREMENTS.
   (A)   In all actions involving the procurement of supplies, services, or
construction for the town, the provisions of S.C. Code, Title 8, Chapter 13
(State Ethics Act), 1976, as amended, shall be complied with and observed.
Every contract or duty imposes an obligation of good faith in the negotiation,
performance, or enforcement by town staff. GOOD FAITH means honesty in fact in
the conduct or transaction concerned and the observance of reasonable
commercial standards of fair dealing. All procurement activities shall be
performed in an ethical manner. No member of Town Council or any officer or
employee of the town, shall have a financial interest in any contract or in the
sale to the town or to a contractor supplying the town of any land or rights or
interest in any land, material supplies or services; except when a majority of
the Town Council determines such exception in the best interest of the town,
provided, that no Councilperson whose interest is involved shall vote on the
question. Any willful violation of this section shall constitute malfeasance in
office, and any officer or employee of the town found guilty thereof shall
thereby forfeit his or her office or position. Any violation of this section
with the knowledge, expressed or implied, of the person or corporation
contracting with the town shall render the contract voidable by the Town
Administrator or the Town Council.
   (B)   The following actions are prohibited and shall be avoided by all those
involved in the procurement activities of the town:
      (1)   Not obligate the town financially or otherwise by any means,
including but not limited to purchase orders and contracts, when the employee
or Councilmember has a personal, financial, or other interest in the
obligation;
      (2)   Prohibited from directly or indirectly soliciting or accepting any
rebate, kickback, gift, gratuity, or favor for personal gain from any
individual, corporation, organization, or group. Doing so may lead to
disciplinary action, up to termination of employment.
      (3)   Prohibited from accepting any form of gratuities, with the
exception of non-consumable marketing or promotional mementos valued at $25 or
less which may be accepted but shared with all town employees (i.e., pens,
paper clips, pencils, cups, etc.). Accepting any other such form of gratuities,
may lead to disciplinary action, up to termination of employment.
(Ord. 18010, passed 2-14-18)
§ 38.05 PROCUREMENT LIMITATIONS AND AUTHORIZATION.
   (A)   It is the town’s policy to develop competition to ensure maximum
purchasing value for all procurements and to make awards based on the lowest,
responsive, responsible bid/offer received. Nothing in this section shall
prohibit a higher level, more stringent procurement method being used if it is
determined that the town’s best interest would be better served. No contract or
purchase shall be subdivided to avoid the requirements of this section.
   (B)   Upon verification of adequate monies, procurement of goods and/or
services shall be executed as follows:
      (1)   $1 to $9,999 - Administrative Process “Delegated Authority.”
Competitive bidding is not required. The department initiating the purchase
should exercise good judgement in accordance with this chapter.
      (2)   $10,000 to $24,999 - Written Quotations.
         (a)   Competitive pricing is required. The departments will request
written quotations from vendors in order to obtain competitive pricing. At
minimum, three written quotes shall be solicited.
         (b)   The department manager, the Procurement Officer, and the Chief
Financial Officer, or designees, must approve before the purchase is made.
         (c)   Purchases inclusive of grants and those with federal funds shall
be referred to the Procurement Division for processing.
      (3)   $25,000 to $99,999 - Informal Solicitations for Bids or Proposals.
         (a)   Competitive bidding is required. The Procurement Division will
issue a written Invitation for Bids (IFB), Request for Proposals (RFP), or
Request for Qualifications (RFQ) depending on the type of procurement. At
minimum, three written bids or responses should be solicited.
         (b)   The department manager, the Procurement Officer, the Chief
Financial Officer, or designees shall approve the purchase.
      (4)   $100,000 - Formal Solicitations for Bids or Proposals.
         (a)   Competitive, sealed bidding is required; however, approval by
the Committee is required before the purchase is made.
         (b)   Procurements involving construction may use a construction
contracting administration method which is most advantageous to the town and
will result in the most timely, acceptable quality, economical, and successful
completion of the construction project. The Town Administrator and Chief
Financial Officer or designees, shall make a determination regarding the
appropriate method of construction contracting administration for a particular
construction project.
         (c)   When it is determined that competitive, sealed bidding is either
not practical, appropriate, or advantageous, competitive, formal sealed
proposals shall be used. Approval by the Committee is required before the
purchase is made.
   (C)   Exceptions to bidding include the sole source, professional services,
emergency procurements, purchasing cooperatives, and critical procurements as
defined below.
      (1)   SOLE SOURCE.
         (a)   Sole source procurement is acceptable when, after a good faith
review of all possible sources, it is determined there is only one viable
source for material, supply, or service. Sole source requests should not be
made unless town staff is confident the request is reasonable and appropriately
justified.
         (b)   For sole source procurements between $10,000 and $24,999, the
department manager, Procurement Officer, and the Chief Financial Officer, or
their designees, must approve the written sole source justification prior to
the purchase being made. Additional approval by the Town Administrator, or
designee is required for procurements between $25,000 to $99,999.
      (2)   PROFESSIONAL SERVICES. Professional services shall be advertised
formally when the services are expected to be $100,000 or greater.
      (3)   EMERGENCY PROCUREMENTS. The Town Administrator, or designee, may
make or authorize others to make emergency procurements when there exists a
threat to public health, welfare, or safety under emergency conditions or where
normal daily operations are affected or in jeopardy.
      (4)   PURCHASING COOPERATIVES. The State of South Carolina and its
agencies, Charleston County and other South Carolina counties, similarly sized
South Carolina municipalities or purchasing cooperatives write numerous
indefinite-delivery-type contracts yearly with manufacturers, service providers
and contractors for regional and/or nationwide items or services. In all cases,
town procurement of equipment, goods or services may be made from suppliers
which have contracts in place through the State of South Carolina or one of its
agencies, or Charleston County or other South Carolina county, or a similarly
sized South Carolina municipality, or the U.S. General Services Administration,
or purchasing cooperative, without seeking competitive bids or proposals.
      (5)   CRITICAL PROCUREMENT. The Town Administrator, or designee, may make
or authorize procurements that in nature are critical to the town, and time
does not permit for solicitation or re-solicitation, and that the procurement
may be accomplished in such a method that provides the town’s best interest be
served.
(Ord. 18010, passed 2-14-18)
§ 38.06 LOCAL VENDOR PARTNERSHIP PROCUREMENT.
   (A)   Procurement of goods and non-professional services shall be solicited
from local vendors who avail themselves to the terms and conditions of the
vendor partnership program. Local preference shall be given to those vendors
who enter into a partnership agreement with the town. To be eligible, the
vendor must have a principal place of business located within the corporate
limits of the town and register in official documents filed with the Secretary
of State, the Internal Revenue Service, or state Tax Commission. A post office
box or temporary construction or office trailer shall not be considered a place
of business to comply with the provisions of this section. The local vendor
must also have a current town business license and be in compliance with other
local ordinance requirements. A principal place of business must be either
owned or rented real property used for business purposes.
   (B)   Local vendors must also agree to and comply with the following
provisions:
      (1)   Sell the town the best product or service for the best price
available;
      (2)   Respond to the town’s needs in a timely fashion;
      (3)   Provide future maintenance and services for the products they sell;
and
      (4)   Must also agree to allow the town to audit the vendor’s records
relating to the town’s purchases at any time the town requests, in order to
ensure the town is receiving the best product or service for the best price.
   (C)   Once the vendor has executed and has filed the partnership agreement
with the town, the town and its designated representatives shall solicit bids
or proposals for products or non-professional services which shall be evaluated
on a percentage-reduction basis. In evaluating the price of eligible local
vendor’s bids or proposals, the bids or proposals shall be evaluated as though
the prices proposed by local bidders were either 5%, 2% or 1% lower than
actually proposed in accordance with the following schedule:
      (1)   If the local bidder submits bids or proposals for products or non-
professional services costing less than $10,000, the business or individual
shall be evaluated on a 5% reduction basis;
      (2)   For products or services costing between $ 10,000 and $50,000, the
evaluation shall be based on a 2% reduction basis;
      (3)   For products or services costing $50,000 or more, the evaluation
shall be based on a 1% reduction basis, but will not exceed a total reduction
of more than $2,000.
   (D)   In the event of a tie bid, ties between one local vendor and one or
more non-local vendors meeting specifications, shall be broken in favor of the
local vendor. Ties between two or more local vendors meeting specifications,
will be broken through a coin toss method until the winner remains. However,
the local preference stated herein shall not apply if all vendors, bidders, or
proposers are local, eligible, partnership vendors.
   (E)   For purposes of this section, NON-PROFESSIONAL SERVICES are
construction or renovation of facilities, janitorial services, general
maintenance, including fleet management, landscaping, and lawn or tree
services, vector services, printing services, travel services, food services,
recreational services, training assistance, and temporary job placement
services. Further decisions regarding the classification of items or services
as professional or non-professional shall be determined by the Town
Administrator, or designee.
   (F)   Nothing herein shall be construed as increasing or decreasing the
actual price of a bid or proposal and the resulting contract in accordance with
their terms and conditions; this section is intended only to be used for
purposes of comparing and evaluating bids and proposals for products and
services. Nothing within this section shall be construed to create any private
rights, claims, or cause of actions on behalf of any person, including but not
limited to, bidders, proposers, and contractors.
   (G)   Should it be determined that any portion of this section is in
conflict with any federal and state laws, regulations, or provisions, then that
portion of this section shall be invalid but should not affect the remaining
portions of this section.
   (H)   The requirements of this section may be waived by Town Council upon a
formal finding that the best interest of the town would not be served by
adhering to the provisions as stated in this section.
   (I)   This section shall not apply in emergency, sensitive, or critical
procurement situations. The town reserves the right to specify brand names
based on its experience, current inventory, and other qualifications specified
by the user department.
(Ord. 18010, passed 2-14-18) Penalty, see §
38.99
§ 38.07 RESOLUTION OF PROTESTED SOLICITATIONS AND AWARDS.
   (A)   Right to protest. Any actual or prospective bidder, offeror,
contractor, or subcontractor who is aggrieved in connection with the
solicitation or award of a contract may protest in writing by hand-delivered or
certified mail, return receipt requested to the Town Administrator. The
protest, setting forth, in detail, the grievance shall be submitted in writing,
and received within five calendar days from the time of award of the goods or
services being grieved.
   (B)   Authority to resolve protests.
      (1)   Informal solicitation of purchases less than $100,000, and its
award.
         (a)   The Town Administrator, or designee, shall have the authority to
settle and resolve a protest of the aggrieved concerning the solicitation or
award of an informal contract, of which the value of the solicitation or award
was not expected to exceed an amount of $99,999.99.
         (b)   The Town Administrator, or designee, shall meet with the
aggrieved, within five business days to review and receive comments and facts
giving rise thereto.
      (2)   Formal solicitation and its award.
         (a)   The Town Administrator, or designee, shall deliver to the
Chairperson of the Committee to settle and resolve a protest of the aggrieved
concerning the solicitation or award if it would have or was expected to exceed
$100,000.
         (b)   The Chairperson of the Committee, having received a protest of
the aggrieved shall:
            1.   Schedule and convene, within ten business days, a special
committee; or
            2.   Put on the agenda for the next scheduled meeting, whichever is
quicker.
         (c)   The Committee shall review and offer to hear comments from the
aggrieved setting forth their grievance and the facts giving rise thereto.
         (d)   The Committee’s authority shall be utilized in a manner
consistent with this chapter and regulations governing the procurement of
supplies, services, and construction for the town.
   (C)   Decision.
      (1)   Informal solicitation of purchases less than $100,000 and its
award. The Town Administrator, or designee, shall promptly issue a decision in
writing to the protestor. The Town Administrator’s response shall be issued
within ten business days from the date of meeting with the protestant.
      (2)   Formal solicitation of purchases of $100,000 and greater and its
award. The Committee Chairperson shall promptly issue a decision in writing to
the protestor. The Chairperson’s response shall be issued within ten business
days from the date of having convened the Committee and received or heard
comments from the protestant.
   (D)   Notice of decision. A copy of the notice of the decision under
division (C) of this section shall be delivered by certified mail, return
receipt requested immediately upon issuance to the protestor and any other
party intervening.
   (E)   Finality of decision. A decision under division (C) of this section
shall be final and conclusive, unless fraudulent, or unless any person
adversely affected by the decision requests a final appeal in writing, setting
forth the grievance, within five business days of receipt of notice of the
decision.
   (F)   Appeal. Any actual or prospective bidder, offeror, contractor, or
subcontractor, having received the notice of decision, may file a final appeal.
      (1)   Appeal of Administrator’s decision (informal solicitations). The
final appeal, setting forth the specific reasons and basis for the appeal of
the Administrator’s decision, shall be received in writing, by hand-delivery or
by certified mail, return receipt requested, within five business days of
receipt of notice of the Administrator’s decision, to the Chairperson of the
Committee.
      (2)   Appeal of Committee’s decision (formal solicitations). The final
appeal, setting forth reasons for and the basis for the appeal of the
Committee’s decision, shall be submitted in writing, by hand-delivery or by
certified mail, return receipt requested within five business days of receipt
of notice of the Committee’s decision, to the Mayor.
   (G)   Authority to resolve appeals.
      (1)   Final appeal of Administrator’s decision. The Chairperson, having
received a request for appeal of a decision rendered by the Administrator shall
bring before full Committee and resolve in like manner as protests under
division (B)(2) of this section.
      (2)   Final appeal of Committee’s decision.
         (a)   The Mayor, having received in writing a request for appeal
rendered by the Committee, shall resolve by scheduling and convening full
Council. It shall be the Mayor’s discretion as whether this matter shall be
brought before the next scheduled meeting or to schedule and convene a called
special meeting of Council.
         (b)   Town Council, at the request of the Mayor, shall convene,
review, and hear comments from the appellant and any other party intervening.
Council’s authority shall be rendered in a manner consistent with this chapter
and regulations governing the procurement of supplies, services and
construction for the town.
   (H)   Decision of appeal.
      (1)   The Chairperson shall promptly issue the decision of the Committee,
in writing to the appellant within ten business days of having heard and
reviewed the appeal. The decision shall state the reasons for the actions
taken.
      (2)   The Mayor shall promptly issue a decision of Council, in writing,
to the appellant within ten business days of the Council hearing. The decision
shall state the reasons for the actions taken.
   (I)   Finality of decision. A decision rendered under division (H) of this
section is considered final and conclusive, unless fraudulent. Such a decision
is the final administrative review and the decision of the town which can be
appealed to the Circuit Courts of the state.
(Ord. 18010, passed 2-14-18)
§ 38.08 OPEN RECORDS.
   The Procurement Division shall keep a record of all open solicitations and
bids submitted in competition thereon, and such records shall be open to public
inspection in accordance with the town policies on the Freedom of Information
Act.
(Ord. 18010, passed 2-14-18)
§ 38.09 DISPOSAL OF TOWN PROPERTY OTHER THAN REAL PROPERTY.
   The sale, lease, or disposal of surplus supplies, inventories, and other
town properties, other than real properties, shall be by in-house auction,
outside auction, formal or informal bidding process, online auction services,
broker services, or other appropriate competitive methods designated herein or
otherwise as authorized by the Committee. The sale, lease, or disposition of
real properties rests within the authority of full Council. The Town
Administrator, or authorized designee, shall be responsible for management and
disposal of town property other than real property.
(Ord. 18010, passed 2-14-18)
CHAPTER 39: PUBLIC RECORDS
Section
   
39.01   Definitions
   
39.02   Importance of town public records
   
39.03   Purpose of the town public records program
   
39.04   Objectives of the town public records program
   
39.05   Town Records Custodian
   
39.06   Town Records Manager
   
39.07   Department Records Custodians/Records Coordinators
   
39.08   Town employees
   
39.09   Town Council
§ 39.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ARCHIVES. The State Department of Archives and History.
   DEPARTMENT MANAGER. Includes the town department heads and the Clerk of
Council.
   PUBLIC RECORD. Includes all books, papers, maps, photographs, cards, tapes,
recordings, information stored on magnetic media, or other documentary
materials regardless of physical form or characteristics prepared, owned, used,
in the possession of, or retained by the town.
('81 Code, § 39.01) (Ord. passed 3-9-93)
§ 39.02 IMPORTANCE OF TOWN PUBLIC RECORDS.
   Records are vital to the administration of the government of the town.
Records contain the information that allows the town government to function,
providing officials with necessary information for administering and monitoring
programs. Records document the delivery of services, show the legal
responsibilities of the government, and prove that statutes and ordinances have
been carried out, thereby protecting the rights of citizens. In addition,
records give evidence on taxation and on the management and expenditure of
public funds. Records also document the historical development of the town and
are an important cultural asset. Without good records, the town cannot render
good public services.
('81 Code, § 39.02) (Ord. passed 3-9-93)
§ 39.03 PURPOSE OF THE TOWN PUBLIC RECORDS PROGRAM.
   The Town Public Records Program is established to systematically manage
public records of the town to achieve economy of operation, ready access to
information, and promote overall efficiency in the town government. The town
records management program will ensure the systematic creation, proper filing,
maintenance, use, and periodic legal disposition of our government records.
This program also documents town compliance with municipality requirements
pursuant to state statute.
('81 Code, § 39.03) (Ord. passed 3-9-93)
§ 39.04 OBJECTIVES OF THE TOWN PUBLIC RECORDS PROGRAM.
   The Town Public Records Program objectives are to:
   (A)   Facilitate the creation of accurate, complete, and readily available
records;
   (B)   Prevent creation of unnecessary records;
   (C)   Save the taxpayers money through efficient use of administrative
staff, storage media, and equipment;
   (D)   Minimize time spent in researching and locating information;
   (E)   Ensure the systematic legal disposition of records that are no longer
needed; and
   (F)   Identify and preserve archival records.
('81 Code, § 39.04) (Ord. passed 3-9-93)
§ 39.05 TOWN RECORDS CUSTODIAN.
   The Director of Financial and Corporate Services shall be the overall legal
custodian of the public records of the town and shall be responsible for
carrying out the duties and responsibilities of the Town’s Public Records
Program pursuant to this chapter and S.C. Code Chapter 1, Title 30, 1976, as
amended. The Records Custodian shall appoint in writing a Town Records Manager
to act on his or her behalf in carrying out program responsibilities as
specified hereinbelow.
(‘81 Code, §§31.32; 39.05) (Ord. passed 3-9-93; Am. Ord. 21034, passed 5-11-21)
§ 39.06 TOWN RECORDS MANAGER.
   The Town Records Manager shall administer the Town Public Records Program of
the town and his or her duties shall include the following:
   (A)   Pursuant to state statute and town ordinance, establish and develop
standards, procedures, techniques, and schedules for the proper and efficient
management of town records.
   (B)   Communicate and coordinate with the archives as the liaison for the
town.
   (C)   Assist Department Managers and Records Coordinators in records
surveys, schedule development and approval, training, and recordkeeping
activities.
   (D)   Monitor and recommend improvements in use of space, equipment,
supplies, computer-aided records management, off-site storage, and security of
town records.
   (E)   Prepare and update a Records Manual as approved upon motion of Town
Council detailing public records policy and procedure of the town.
('81 Code, § 39.06) (Ord. passed 3-9-93)
§ 39.07 DEPARTMENT RECORDS CUSTODIANS/RECORDS COORDINATORS.
   Department managers shall be Records Custodians for all public records
within their department. It shall be their responsibility to:
   (A)   Implement, maintain, and direct a public records management program
within their respective departments in cooperation with the Town Records
Manager; and
   (B)   Appoint a Department Records Coordinator to work with the Town Records
Manager in administering the department public records program.
('81 Code, § 39.07) (Ord. passed 3-9-93)
§ 39.08 TOWN EMPLOYEES.
   All town employees shall abide by the requirements of this chapter and the
policies and procedures adopted hereto in addition to all other applicable
state and federal regulations pertaining to public records management. All
information received, created, compiled, and filed by employees or officials of
the town is official record material and is the property of the town. Unlawful
use, disclosure, removal, defacement, or destruction of town records is
prohibited and subjects the offender to disciplinary action in accordance with
the Personnel Manual of the town.
('81 Code, § 39.08) (Ord. passed 3-9-93)
§ 39.09 TOWN COUNCIL.
   The Town Council shall review all records retention and disposition
schedules for the town for approval or disapproval and any changes thereto as
required. The Town Records Custodian shall sign all approved schedules as the
Council designates.
('81 Code, § 39.09) (Ord. passed 3-9-93)
CHAPTER 40: TAXATION AND FINANCE
Section
Taxation
   
40.01   Definition
   
40.02   Annual levy and assessment
   
40.03   Uniformity of property tax levy
   
40.04   Liability for taxes
   
40.05   Tax lien on property
   
40.06   To whom taxes are payable; due date
   
40.07   Nonpayment of taxes
Finance
   
40.20   Collection of delinquent debts
   
40.21   Recreation fee charges
Statutory reference:
   For constitutional provisions as to taxation by municipal corporation, see
S.C. Const. Art. 10, § 5, Cl. 1 and 13
   Authorization to collect taxes in installments, see S.C. Code § 5-21-120
   Property subject to municipal taxes, see S.C. Code, § 5-21-110
   Taxation, see S.C. Code, Title 12
   Unlawful for proceeds of tax specially levied to be applied for other
purposes, see S.C. Code § 5-21-130
TAXATION
§ 40.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Vehicles, business personal property, rental residential
personal, marine equipment, stock tax (SCTC), manufacturer, utilities,
railroads, special levy, and airplanes.
('81 Code, § 98.01(A))
§ 40.02 ANNUAL LEVY AND ASSESSMENT.
   The Council shall impose by ordinance an annual tax at such rate, in its
discretion, as will yield an amount necessary for the general purpose of the
municipality not exceeding the limit permitted by law, exclusive of any tax
levied with respect to any outstanding bond issues. Such tax shall be levied by
the Council on the property within the municipality as assessed for taxation
for county and state purposes, as provided in this chapter.
('81 Code, § 98.15)
Statutory reference:
   Assessment of property taxes, see S.C. Code §§ 12-37-10 et seq.
§ 40.03 UNIFORMITY OF PROPERTY TAX LEVY.
   Taxes for township, schools, municipal, and all other purposes provided for
or allowed by law shall be levied on the assessment, which shall be that made
for county taxes.
('81 Code, § 98.25)
§ 40.04 LIABILITY FOR TAXES.
   Any person owning real and personal property within the municipality as of
December 31 of any calendar year shall be subject to taxation for the ensuing
fiscal year.
('81 Code, § 98.01(B))
§ 40.05 TAX LIEN ON PROPERTY.
   That all ad valorem taxes herein levied and imposed shall constitute a
specific lien on the property taxed for a term of ten years from the time the
liability for the taxes shall accrue, which lien shall be paramount and in
preference to all judgments, mortgages, liens, and pledges, general and
specific, except taxes imposed by the state, and it shall be the duty of the
Treasurer of the county to record in the tax duplicates kept by him or her for
this purpose the amount of the taxes claimed against each piece of property so
taxable, and that each piece of property must be separate and apart, on a line
by itself, which record shall show the names of the person in whose name the
piece is returned, an accurate description of the property, and the value of
the property as fixed by the County Board of Assessment Control, and the amount
of the taxes claimed and the cost and penalties accruing thereto, and shall be
open to the public for personal inspection in the office of the Treasurer of
county.
('81 Code, § 98.05)
§ 40.06 TO WHOM TAXES ARE PAYABLE; DUE DATE.
   All taxes levied in accordance with this chapter shall be paid to the
Treasurer of the county in conformity with all of the rules and regulations in
effect for the collection in the county and shall be payable at such time as
the Treasurer of the county shall prescribe.
('81 Code, § 98.02)
§ 40.07 NONPAYMENT OF TAXES.
   That for nonpayment of ad valorem taxes levied at the time at which they are
made payable such penalties, collection costs, and execution costs as are now
in the county shall be added for the nonpayment of such taxes within the
prescribed time.
('81 Code, § 98.04)
FINANCE
§ 40.20 COLLECTION OF DELINQUENT DEBTS.
   (A)   The town may impose a collection cost of up to $25 to defray its
internal costs of collection for any delinquent debts that are sought to be
collected pursuant to the provisions of the Setoff Debt Collection Act, S.C.
Code §§ 12-56-10 et seq. This cost is hereby declared to be a collection cost
that arises by operation of law and shall be added to the delinquent debt and
recovered from the debtor.
   (B)   The town hereby declares that the administrative fee charged by the
Municipal Association of South Carolina is also a collection cost to the town,
which shall also be added to the delinquent debt and recovered from the debtor.
(Ord. 18088, passed 11-13-18)
§ 40.21 RECREATION FEE CHARGES.
   (A)   Recreation fees.
Program/ Activity/Facility Current Fee Proposed Fee
Program/ Activity/Facility Current Fee                Proposed Fee
Recreational youth sports
(excluding baseball and    $50/100                    $60/120
tackle football)           per season                 per season
(res/non-res)
Youth tackle football      $50/100                    $70/$140
(res/non-res)              per season                 per season
Youth baseball             $50/100                    $70/$140
(res/non-res)              per season                 per season
Allstar sports fee         $15                        $30
(res/non-res)              per person                 per person
Athletic field rentals     $50/$100 per hour then $25 $50/$100 per hour
(res/non-res)              each additional hour
Gym rentals                $50/$100 per hour per      $75/$150 per hour per
(res/non-res)              court                      court
Track rental               $75/$150 first hour then   $75/$150
(res/non-res)              $50/$100 each additional   per hour
                           hour
Lake pavilion building     $350/$500 per day plus     $35/$70 per hour or $250/
rental                     $100/$200 deposit          $500 per day plus $100/
(res/non-res)                                         $200 deposit
Aquatic membership         $25/$175 per year plus $2  $200/$350
(res/non-res)              per visit ($1 for seniors) per year
                                                      (no daily fee)
Aquatic family membership  $70/$175 per year plus $2  $400/$700
(res/non-res)              per visit ($1 for seniors) per year
                                                      (no daily fee)
Swim pass                  $30 for 30 visits with     $40/80
(res/non-res)              membership                 for 10 visits
Senior swim pass           $15 for 30 visits with     $30/$60
(res/non-res)              membership                 for 10 visits
Daily pool visit           $5/visit                   $5/$10 visit
(res/non-res)
                           1-15 participants
                           $75/$150
Hourly pool rental during  16-50 participants         $40/$80/
business hours             $100/$200                  lane/hour
(res/non-res)              51-75 participants         (max 10 people per lane)
                           $125/$250
                           76-100 participants
                           $150/$300
Senior Center membership   $125/$250                  $140/$280
(res/non-res)              per person                 per person
Senior Center daily visit  $4/$8                      $5/$10
(res/non-res)              per person                 per person
 
   (B)   All funds collected under the authority of this section, except as
herein directed, are to be held, used and expended for expenses incurred for
the fiscal year fees are effective; but any balance not used or specifically
set aside for use, shall revert to the General Fund balance at the close of the
fiscal year.
   (C)   The fees imposed under this section, with the exception of facility
rental fees, shall be waived for any veteran of the Armed Forces of the United
States, who is a resident of the town and is permanently and totally disabled
as a result of a service-connected disability, as determined by the U.S.
Department of Veterans’ Affairs. Veterans seeking a waiver of fees under this
section shall file with the town’s Recreation Department a certificate signed
by the County Service Officer or the Department of Veterans’ Affairs certifying
this disability.
(Ord. 19060, passed 9-10-19; Am. Ord. 24037, passed 12-16-24)
CHAPTER 41: CIVIL EMERGENCIES
Section
   
41.01   Existence of emergency
   
41.02   Declaration of emergency
   
41.03   Specific restrictions authorized
   
41.04   Extension, alteration, and recision of proclamation
   
41.05   Compliance with restrictions
   
41.06   Authority to request state police and military forces
   
41.07   End of emergency period
   
41.08   Powers of Mayor Pro Tempore
Statutory reference:
   Offenses against civil rights, see S.C. Code §§ 16-5-10 et seq.
§ 41.01 EXISTENCE OF EMERGENCY.
   For the purposes of this chapter, a state of emergency shall be deemed to
exist whenever, during times of great public crisis, disaster, rioting,
catastrophe, or similar public civil emergency, for any reason, municipal
public safety authorities are unable to maintain public order or afford
adequate protection for lives or property.
('81 Code, § 92.01)
§ 41.02 DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY.
   (A)   In the event of an existing or threatened state of emergency
endangering the lives, safety, health, and welfare of the people within the
municipality, or threatening damage to or destruction of property, the Mayor is
empowered to issue a public proclamation declaring to all persons the existence
of such a state of emergency, and, in order to more effectively protect the
lives and property of people within the municipality, to place in effect any or
all of the restrictions authorized by this chapter.
   (B)   The Mayor is authorized and empowered to limit by such proclamation
the application of all or any part of such restrictions to any area
specifically designated or described within the municipality and to specific
hours of the day or night; and to exempt from all or any part of such
restrictions law enforcement officers, firemen, and other public officers and
employees, doctors, nurses, employees of hospitals, and other medical
facilities; on-duty military personnel whether state or federal; on-duty
employees of public utilities, public transportation companies, and newspaper,
magazine, radio broadcasting, and television broadcasting corporations operated
for profit; and such other classes of persons as may be essential to the
preservation of public order and immediately necessary to serve the safety,
health, and welfare needs of the people within the municipality.
('81 Code, § 92.02)
§ 41.03 SPECIFIC RESTRICTIONS AUTHORIZED.
During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency, the Mayor may impose
by proclamation restrictions to establish hours during which a curfew shall be
in effect, and, unless otherwise provided in such proclamation, it shall be
unlawful for any person to be found on any public property during such periods
as designated by Council. Authorized restrictions shall automatically expire on
the sixty-first day following the effective date.
(‘81 Code, § 92.03) (Am. Ord. 21015, passed 3-9-21) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 41.04 EXTENSION, ALTERATION, AND RECISION OF PROCLAMATION.
   Any proclamation of emergency promulgated pursuant to this chapter may be
extended, altered, or rescinded in any particular during the continued or
threatened existence of a state of emergency by the issuance of a subsequent
proclamation.
('81 Code, § 92.04)
§ 41.05 COMPLIANCE WITH RESTRICTIONS.
   During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency, it shall be
unlawful for any person to violate any provision of any restriction imposed by
any proclamation authorized by this chapter.
('81 Code, § 92.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 41.06 AUTHORITY TO REQUEST STATE POLICE AND MILITARY FORCES.
   If, in the sound discretion of the Mayor, it shall appear that the emergency
is, or that the imminent emergency is likely to be, of such proportions that
the means available to the municipality to maintain law and order within the
municipality and the police jurisdiction thereof are insufficient for such
purpose, the Mayor shall make written request to the Governor that such police
or military forces of the state as may be necessary be sent to the
municipality, and the Mayor shall forthwith, by the most expeditious means of
communication, inform the Governor of the situation and that written request is
being transmitted to the Governor for state police or military forces.
('81 Code, § 92.06)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of Governor to order out National Guard, see S.C. Code § 25-1-1840
   Offenses during state emergency, see S.C. Code §§ 16-7-10 through 16-7-40
§ 41.07 END OF EMERGENCY PERIOD.
   The Mayor shall proclaim the end of such state of emergency or all or any
part of the restrictions imposed as soon as circumstances warrant or when
directed to do so by the Council.
('81 Code, § 92.07)
§ 41.08 POWERS OF MAYOR PRO TEMPORE.
   If the Mayor is absent or unable for any reason, temporarily to perform his
or her duties, then during such absence or inability, the Mayor Pro Tempore is
empowered to exercise all the powers granted the Mayor by this chapter.
('81 Code, § 92.08)
CHAPTER 42: DEPARTMENT OF ENGINEERING AND DEVELOPMENT SERVICES
Section
   
42.01   Established
   
42.02   Purpose
   
42.03   Director
   
42.04   Functions and duties
   
42.05   Building Official
§ 42.01 ESTABLISHED.
   A Department of Engineering and Development Services is hereby established
for the Town of Mount Pleasant.
(Ord. 08080, passed 1-14-09; Am. Ord. 21035, passed 5-11-21)
§ 42.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Department of Engineering and Development Services is to
manage projects, programs and systems associated with the town's transportation
network, its natural water and manmade stormwater features, and its land
development and building activities.
(Ord. 08080, passed 1-14-09; Am. Ord. 21035, passed 5-11-21)
§ 42.03 DIRECTOR.
   The Director of the Department of Engineering and Development Services will
be appointed by the Town Council, and will serve at its pleasure.
(Ord. 08080, passed 1-14-09; Am. Ord. 21035, passed 5-11-21)
§ 42.04 FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES.
   The following functions and duties will be accomplished by the Department of
Engineering and Development Services:
   (A)   Coordinate with appropriate departments on development of the town's
Long Range Transportation Plan and Transportation Impact Fees:
   (B)   Propose, develop and manage projects and programs for the Town's
Capital Improvement and Capital Maintenance Programs;
   (C)   Manage and enhance infrastructure, traffic control systems and
programs related to vehicular, bicycle/pedestrian and other modal networks
within the town;
   (D)   Propose, develop and manage stormwater and water quality projects,
programs, and systems to address compliance with state and federal laws;
   (E)   Administer, coordinate, direct. and enforce code provisions relating
to land development regulations, building codes and regulations, collection of
impact fees, and other related matters as provided in this code of ordinances
or any other town or state ordinances/statutes.
   (F)   Any other matters related to divisions (A) through (E) hereinabove.
(Ord. 08080, passed 1-14-09; Am. Ord. 21035, passed 5-11-21)
§ 42.05 BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   The Building Official (also known as the Building Inspector), or his or her
appointed designee, as designated by the Director of Engineering and
Development Services, shall administer and enforce the provisions of this code
relating to flood damage prevention, the International Code Council Codes as
adopted by the State of South Carolina referenced in
Chapter 150, excluding only the provisions of
Chapter 150 specifically pertaining to the duties of the Fire Code Official.
The Building Official or his or her designee shall have such powers and perform
such duties as may be provided for him or her in the chapters or as provided in
any other town or state ordinances or statutes.
(Ord. 21057, passed 8-10-21; Am. Ord. 23016, passed 5-9-23)
CHAPTER 43: TOWN POLICIES
Section
   
43.01   Freedom of Information Act policy
   
43.02   Memorials and monuments policy
§ 43.01 FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT POLICY.
   Policy regarding requests for public records under the Freedom of
Information Act:
   (A)   Policy statement. It shall be the policy of the Town of Mount
Pleasant, South Carolina (the "Town") to comply with both the letter and the
spirit of the Freedom of Information Act ("FOIA"), as codified at S.C. §§ 30-4-
10 et seq., as amended, in regards to the processing of requests for access to
public records. This policy is applicable to all departments under the
supervision of the Town Administrator, and to any board or commission whose
members are appointed by the Town Council, the governing body of the town (the
“Council”).
   (B)   Making a FOIA request. All requests for public documents pursuant to
FOIA, except for those described below, must be made in writing, and preferably
submitted via email to the Town Administrator by this link. Requests made to
Council Members or Department Heads may be forwarded to the Legal Department,
but the requester should not assume they have been forwarded to the appropriate
party. If the requester does not receive an acknowledgement of receipt of the
FOIA request within 24 hours from the Town Attorney, the requester should
assume the FOIA request has not been properly submitted and should make their
request again. Requests may be made in person at the Town Hall, 100 Ann Edwards
Lane, Mount Pleasant, SC, 29464; by mail to Town of Mount Pleasant, Attn: Legal
Department; or by email to TownFOIA@tompsc.com.
   (C)   Ideally, requests should be made using the Freedom of Information Act
Request Form (the “request form”) provided by the town and made available to
the public, a copy of which is attached hereto. Requests made by letter or in
some other written form shall contain substantially the same information
provided for on the request form. In order to ensure the most accurate and
prompt response, requests should be as detailed, specific, and descriptive as
possible.
   (D)   Requests to inspect the following public records need not be in
writing, provided the requestor appears at the appropriate town office in-
person and within normal town business hours:
      (1)   Reports from the preceding 14 days which disclose the nature,
substance, and location of any crime or alleged crime reported as having been
committed (with the exception of records regarding juveniles);
      (2)   Documents identifying persons confined in any jail, detention
center, or prison for the preceding three months (with the exception of records
regarding juveniles); and
      (3)   Copy of any document distributed to or reviewed by members of a
public body during a public meeting within the last six months.
   (E)   The town's agendas and minutes are immediately available on our
website free of charge.
   (F)   Processing FOIA requests. Where any town employee or Council member
receives any written request for public records, the request should be stamped
with the date of receipt and immediately delivered to the Legal Department.
“Routine FOIA requests” may be handled directly by the respective Department
Head. All Department Heads shall consult with the Town Attorney on non-routine
FOIA requests and on any questions of law involving FOIA. Where an exemption,
restriction or limitation to FOIA possibly exists, the Town Attorney should be
consulted to determine if an exemption, restriction or limitation applies and
whether the town should decline to disclose or request a hearing for
declaratory judgment or injunctive relief based upon any perceived exemption,
restriction or limitation.
   (G)   As required by FOIA, the Town Administrator must respond to all FOIA
requests within ten business days of receipt of the request. It shall be the
policy of the town to respond to FOIA requests as quickly as possible. Where
possible, the response to the request should include the requested records.
Otherwise, the response should either inform the requestor that the requested
records will be made available, along with the means of obtaining them and any
additional costs that will be charged for making the records available, or it
should inform the requestor that the requested records fall under an exemption
to FOIA and will not be disclosed. The town shall not create new records, nor
summarize existing records. The town is not required to create an electronic
version of a public record where one does not exist.
   (H)   Records exempt from disclosure. The town adopts as a part of this
policy any and all exemptions, restrictions or limitations contained within
FOIA, as FOIA may be amended from time to time, along with any other
exemptions, restrictions or limitations that may be provided for now or in the
future under South Carolina or Federal law. As previously stated herein, the
Town Attorney shall be consulted to determine whether an exemption, restriction
or limitation to the disclosure requirements of FOIA applies. Where an
exemption, restriction or limitation applies, the town, based upon consultation
with the Town Attorney, should decide whether to deny disclosure based upon the
application of the available exemption, restriction or limitation. Where
records contain certain information exempt from disclosure but which otherwise
fall outside of an exemption, restriction or limitation, the exempted
information shall be redacted and requested records shall otherwise be
disclosed. It should be understood that certain items cannot be disclosed, such
as social security numbers, birthdays, home addresses, victim information, the
Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (FMLA) information, information that may
be protected by the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996
(HIPPA), including workers compensation claims, and other matters of personal
or private nature. If the requester feels some of the information requested may
fall under this category and there is a legitimate reason to have that
information in the public, the requester should specifically list that type of
information and why it is necessary to disclose. The town will not necessarily
disclose that they are exempting some of this information because disclosing
that they are exempting the information may in and of itself violate the
personal nature of the information.
   (I)   Commonly used exemptions. 
      (1)   Information of a personal nature where the public disclosure
thereof would constitute unreasonable invasion of personal privacy (S.C. Code §
30-4-40(2)).
      (2)   Records, video or audio recordings, or other information compiled
for law enforcement purposes, but only to the extent that the production of
such law enforcement records or information:
         (a)   Would interfere with a prospective law enforcement proceeding;
         (b)   Would deprive a person of a right to a fair trial or an
impartial adjudication;
         (c)   Would constitute an unreasonable invasion of personal privacy;
         (d)   Would disclose the identity of a confidential source, including
a state, local, or foreign agency or authority or any private institution which
furnished information on a confidential basis, and, in the case of a record or
information compiled by criminal law enforcement authority in the course of a
criminal investigation, by an agency conducting a lawful security intelligence
investigation, or information furnished by a confidential source;
         (e)   Would disclose current techniques and procedures for law
enforcement investigations or prosecutions, or would disclose current
guidelines for law enforcement investigations or prosecutions if such
disclosure would risk circumvention of the law;
         (f)   Would endanger the life or physical safety of any individual;
and
         (g)   Would disclose any contents of intercepted wire, oral, or
electronic communications not otherwise disclosed during a trial (S.C. Code §
30-4-40(3)).
   (J)   Appeal process. If the requester feels certain items have been
improperly exempted from disclosure he or she should immediately email the Town
Attorney with a brief description of the disagreement with the disclosure, and
note with specificity the types of material the requester believes should be
disclosed and why. If the requester does not receive an acknowledgement of
receipt of the disagreement within 24 hours from the Town Attorney, the
requester should assume the FOIA request has not been properly submitted and
should make their request again. Within five business days the Town Attorney
shall reply to the disagreement and indicate whether they have additional
information that will be disclosed. If at any time the Town Administrator or
Town Attorney indicates there is no other material they will disclose, the
requester or the town can file for declaratory judgment or injunctive relief.
The Chief Administrative Judge is required to schedule an initial hearing on
the matter within ten days of service of all parties.
   (K)   Failure to comply. In addition to penalties available under FOIA,
willful disregard of, or violation of, this Policy by any employee or other
person who is subject to it, may constitute insubordination and be grounds for
disciplinary action up to and including termination of employment.
   (L)   Costs for processing FOIA requests. The Council, pursuant to Section
30-4-30 of FOIA, has established the fee schedule below in order to compensate
the town for the actual cost of searching for and making copies of requested
public records. Where it is anticipated that the staff time necessary to comply
with a request may exceed five hours, the requestor may be required to pay a
deposit of twenty-five percent of the estimated costs of complying with the
request before staff will begin searching for or making copies of the requested
records. Costs shall not be charged for time spent examining records to
determine whether they may be disclosed.
   (M)   Fee schedule. All fees for staff time and copies as necessitated by
this section shall be as listed in Ord. 18087, as it shall be amended from time
to time.
(Ord. 17038, passed 9-14-17; Am. Ord. 18087, passed 11-13-18)
Cross-reference:
   Collection of delinquent debts, see §
40.20
§ 43.02 MEMORIALS AND MONUMENTS POLICY.
   (A)   Definitions. In addition to the common meaning of words, the following
definitions shall be used in interpreting this section.
      DEDICATED BENCHES. To commemo- rate a person(s). All DEDICATED BENCHES
are considered small memorials regardless of cost.
      DEDICATED TREES. To commemorate a person(s). All DEDICATED TREES will be
considered small monuments regardless of cost, and may only be installed
without a plaque.
      LANDSCAPE FEATURES. Memorials and monuments may also take the form of
LANDSCAPE FEATURES, such as water fountains, trees or areas of the town that
can be enhanced, redeveloped or reclaimed through the use of donor funds or
bequests in commemoration of a person, event, or place as applicable.
      LARGE MEMORIALS AND MONUMENTS.  Objects whose value (including design,
installation, and the object itself) is greater than $1,000, such as monuments,
works of art, busts, playground equipment, architectural items, or sculptures.
Any plaque, except when mounted on a bench, will be considered a large
monument.
      MEMORIAL. A statement, object or landscape feature intended to honor a
person or event of historical significance. This does not include historical
markers under the town’s Historical Marker Program.
      MONUMENT. An enduring physical object erected to commemorate the enduring
historic significance or association of a notable person, event, place, or
thing. This does not include historical markers under the town’s Historical
Marker Program.
      PLAQUES. Except when mounted on a bench, shall be considered large
monuments regardless of cost. This does not include historical markers under
the town’s Historical Marker Program.
      SMALL MEMORIALS AND MONUMENTS.  An enduring physical object or statement
of historic significance whose value (including design, installation, and the
object itself) is less than $1,000. All dedicated trees and benches are
considered small memorials regardless of cost.
      TOWN-SPONSORED. A monument or memorial, approved by Town Council, for
which town staff and/or elected officials are fully or primarily responsible
for conception, design, and funding.
   (B)   Criteria. All review and approval of memorials and monuments shall be
based on a totality of circumstances of the following criteria, with the town
having full and final discretion.
      (1)   Cost estimate.
      (2)   Subject.
         (a)   Small memorials. The subject may commemorate an individual or
event. Staff has authority to approve small memorial requests.
         (b)   Large memorials. The subject of a large memorial must
demonstrate a high-level significance by meeting at least one of the following
criteria:
            1.   The person or group has made an outstanding contribution to
the cultural, political, or social development of the Town of Mount Pleasant,
the State of South Carolina, the United States of America, or the international
community;
            2.   The site or event is historically or culturally significant
and/or represents an important and unique town or civic anniversary.
      (3)   Redundancy. Whether the person, event, or place is already
memorialized elsewhere in the town.
      (4)   Design. Whether the proposed design fits the aesthetic integrity or
interferes with the unique or cultural character of a public park or property.
      (5)   Content. Memorials must not contain content that demeans,
ridicules, maligns, disparages, expresses bias or disrespect of any individual
or group on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, gender, age,
disability, sexual orientation, marital status or any other protected class, is
obscene, violates any town, state or federal law, or promotes violence.
      (6)   Noncommercial content. Memorial content must not commercially
benefit any company or entity.
      (7)   Location.
         (a)   The proposed site or location is consistent with and does not
interfere with the master plan for the site. The proposed location will not
compromise the aesthetic integrity or interfere with the unique or cultural
character of the area.
         (b)   The applicant must demonstrate why the selected site is
appropriate and provide sufficient justification for the memorial being in that
location. Where appropriate, preference will be given to co-location of new
memorials within a site of common interest.
         (c).   Consideration will be given to existing uses of the proposed
location, with a goal of preventing a memorial from disrupting appropriate
public use of town park and recreation facilities.
      (8)   Risk assessment. An assessment of potential risks created by
placing the proposed memorial or monument at the proposed location will be
undertaken by the town’s Risk Management Department and Public Works
Department, with resulting opinions forming part of the decision-making
process. This will include an evaluation of any potential costs to the town.
      (9)   Artistic and design merit. Artwork must be approved by and meet
artistic and design merit standards as determined by the town’s Culture, Arts
and Pride Commission.
      (10)   Historic district. Memorials and monuments proposed within the
town’s historic district shall be reviewed for consistency with the town’s
Historic District Preservation Commission.
   (C)   Application process.
      (1)   Small memorials.
         (a)   To install a small memorial, bench, or tree at a town park or on
town property, an applicant shall submit a written application to town staff.
The application will be reviewed by town staff who will approve or deny the
installation of the small memorial, bench or tree.
         (b)   Town staff has the authority to approve or deny applications for
small memorials based on the criteria in division (B).
      (2)   Large memorials.
         (a)   Application for a non-town- sponsored and a town-sponsored
memorial at a town park or on town property.
            1.   Applicants wishing to install a large memorial at a town park
or on town property shall submit a written application, including conceptual
plan, to town staff for review.
            2.   Town staff will review and recommend approval or denial of the
request to install the memorial at the proposed town park or on town property,
based upon the criteria listed in division (B), Town staff shall forward the
application to the following town departments, boards, or commissions, if
applicable, for evaluation and recommendation of approval or denial of the
application:
               a.   Historical Commission;
               b.   Design Review Board;
               c.   Risk Management and Public Works Departments;
               d.   Historic District Preser- vation Commission (only reviews
applications for large memorials located in the historic district);
               e.   Culture, Arts and Pride Commission (only reviews
applications involving art).
         (b)   After review by town staff and any applicable town departments,
boards, or commissions, town staff shall submit the application to the Planning
Committee for review at a regularly scheduled Committee meeting, which will
take all comments into consideration when making a final recommendation
regarding whether the application should be approved or denied. The Planning
Committee may also refer the application to the town departments, boards, or
commissions, as listed in division (C)(2)(a)2. If the Planning Committee
recommends approval of the application, then the application shall be submitted
to Town Council for approval at a regularly scheduled Town Council meeting.
      (3)   The application process under this division shall not apply to
memorials or monuments identified by Town Council during the meeting of Council
to enact this section.
      (4)   After receiving recommendations from the Historical Commission, and
any other applicable town departments, boards, or commissions, Town Council
shall, by a two-thirds vote of Council assembled, be able to relocate,
disassemble, or remove and dispose of any memorial or monument on town
property, subject to the limitations of state law.
      (5)   Temporary and unapproved memorials. Town staff shall, upon proper
notice, have discretion to relocate, disassemble, or remove and dispose of any
temporary or unapproved memorials placed on public property or within a public
right-of-way within town limits. If the temporary or unapproved memorial poses
an immediate risk to public safety or is an obstruction to traffic, town staff
may remove the temporary or unapproved memorial to a place of safety pending a
final decision.
   (D)   Roles and responsibilities.
      (1)   Cost and funding. For memorials that are not town-sponsored, all
costs associated with designing, constructing, and maintaining the memorial
will be covered in full by the applicant, unless otherwise agreed upon in an
installation and maintenance agreement approved by Town Council.
      (2)   Installation and maintenance.
         (a)   Small memorials. 
            1.   Unless otherwise addressed by a written installation and
maintenance agreement, the town shall install and maintain the small memorial
for a minimum of five years. After that, the town will maintain the small
memorial subject to any changes to town park or town property master plans.
            2.   All dedicated trees will be maintained or replaced for a
minimum of five years by the town. After that, the town will maintain the tree
subject to all protections and priorities when considering any changes to town
park or town property master plans.
         (b)   Large memorials. Unless otherwise covered by installation and
maintenance agreement, all large memorials must be maintained by the applicant
for the first five years.
      (3)   Ownership. All memorials placed or commissioned at a town park or
on town property within the town are deemed to be under control of the town and
managed in accordance with standards established by Town Council.
(Ord. 22065, passed 1-10-23)
CHAPTER 44: LOBBYISTS
Section
   
44.01   Definitions
   
44.02   Registration of lobbyists
   
44.03   Prohibited acts
 
   
44.99   Penalty
§ 44.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LOBBYING.
      (1)   Promoting or opposing through direct communication with Town
Council members:
         (a)   The introduction or enactment of an ordinance or resolution; or
         (b)   The awarding of a town contract.
      (2)   LOBBYING does not include the activities of a member of Town
Council, town staff or any public official with regard to their public duties.
   LOBBYIST.
      (1)   A person who is employed or retained, with compensation, by another
person, governmental agency, a not-for-profit corporation, or private company
for the sole purpose of lobbying a member of Town Council.
      (2)   LOBBYIST does not include:
         (a)   An individual who expresses a personal opinion, or discusses a
constituent matter in relation to town services, or any other matter in which
that individual is not receiving compensation to lobby.
         (b)   An individual who is a full-time, permanent employee of a
governmental agency, a not-for-profit corporation, or a private company and is
lobbying as a result of his or her employment.
(Ord. 18009, passed 2-14-18)
§ 44.02 REGISTRATION OF LOBBYISTS.
   (A)   Any individual who acts as a lobbyist must, within 15 days of being
employed or retained as a lobbyist, register with the Town Clerk.
   (B)   The registration must be in a form approved by the Town Council that
includes only the name and business address of the lobbyist, the name and
business address of the person or entity who compensates the lobbyist, and the
issue or matter for which the lobbyist has been retained. A separate form shall
be submitted for each issue or matter and each person or entity who compensates
the lobbyist.
   (C)   Any lobbyist who is employed by the town or has contracts with the
town, must disclose to Town Council his or her intent to be a lobbyist for a
non-governmental client so long as he or she is employed or under contract.
(Ord. 18009, passed 2-14-18) Penalty, see §
44.99
§ 44.03 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   A lobbyist or a person acting on behalf of a lobbyist shall not offer,
facilitate or provide to or on behalf of a Town Council member or town
employee, any of the following that exceeds a total yearly value of $25:
lodging; transportation; entertainment; food; meals; beverages; money or any
other thing of value or contributions as defined in S.C. Code § 8-13-1300(7).
   (B)   No member of Town Council or any town employee shall knowingly solicit
or accept, for his or her personal use or benefit, from any person known to be
a lobbyist any of the following that exceeds a total yearly value of $25:
lodging; transportation: entertainment; food; meals; beverages; money or any
other thing of value or contributions as defined in S.C. Code § 8-13-1300(7).
This prohibition shall not apply to any function to which all members of town
council are invited.
   (C)   Divisions (A) and (B) of this section do not apply to the rendering of
emergency assistance given gratuitously and in good faith by a lobbyist.
(Ord. 18009, passed 2-14-18) Penalty, see §
44.99
§ 44.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates a provision of this chapter shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $1,000.
(Ord. 18009, passed 2-14-18)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   GARBAGE AND REFUSE
      
51.   WATER AND SEWERS
      
52.   STORMWATER UTILITY MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
      
53.   ENVIRONMENTALLY ACCEPTABLE PACKAGING AND PRODUCTS
CHAPTER 50: GARBAGE AND REFUSE
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Schedule for collection
   
50.02   Collection
   
50.03   Collection for properties other than single-family
   
50.04   Private roads and alleyways
   
50.05   Access of collection vehicles
   
50.06   Impeding traffic prohibited
   
50.07   Dumping prohibited
   
50.08   Open carts prohibited
   
50.09   Scattering garbage prohibited
   
50.10   Disposal of trash in public places or private property
Containers and Specifications
   
50.20   Containers
   
50.21   Material placement and damage caused by collection
   
50.22   Hazardous materials and electronic waste
   
50.23   Leaves, grass clippings and tree limbs
   
50.24   Paper and cardboard
   
50.25   Large items
   
50.26   Paint
   
50.27   Contractor-generated debris
   
50.28   Motorized equipment and vehicle parts
   
50.29   Home-generated medical waste
Administration and Enforcement
   
50.40   Promulgation of rules and regulations
   
50.41   Reporting and correcting concerns
 
   
50.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 SCHEDULE FOR COLLECTION.
   Garbage and trash shall be collected according to the schedule established
by the Director of Public Services Department. Property owners and tenants
shall be notified of such schedule by public notice.
(‘81 Code, §94.10) (Am. Ord. 99011, passed 4-13-99)
§ 50.02 COLLECTION.
   (A)   Garbage and trash from properties receiving service will be collected
once per week.
   (B)   If garbage or trash is missed on the regularly scheduled day due to
improper debris, access issues, failure to be curbside by 7:00 a.m.. or failure
to comply with any collection regulations described herein, it will be
collected the following week on the regularly scheduled collection day if in
compliance.
   (C)   Unless otherwise approved by the Public Service Director, containers
shall be placed curbside on a public street readily accessible to collection
vehicles. All containers and other items placed for pickup shall only be placed
at the address where the waste or debris was generated.
   (D)   To ensure pickup, containers should be placed out prior to 7:00 a.m.
on the day of pickup, but no more than 12 hours prior to pickup.
   (E)   After collection, containers should not be stored near the curbside.
   (F)   Containers must be removed within 12 hours after pickup.
   (G)   Containers shall be placed with handles facing away from the road and
at least six feet from all obstructions, including mailboxes, sewer manholes,
water meters, hydrants. communication pedestals, and the like.
   (H)   Trash and garbage service shall only be provided to the property
owners if access to the container(s) and/or debris can be accomplished safely
and efficiently.
(‘81 Code, § 94.11(A)(8)) (Am. Ord. passed 6-23-87; Am. Ord. passed 4-14-92;
Am. Ord. 99011, passed 4-13-99; Am. Ord. 04005, passed 5-11-04; Am. Ord. 23016,
passed 5-9-23)
§ 50.03 COLLECTION FOR PROPERTIES OTHER THAN SINGLE-FAMILY.
   Multi-family or commercial properties shall be responsible for arranging for
the disposal of garbage and trash for their occupants through sources other
than the town. Any such property currently receiving this service from the town
will be required to switch to private collection at the time of redevelopment
of the property.
(‘81 Code, § 94.11(A)(13)) (Am. Ord. passed 6-23-87; Am. Ord. passed 4-14-92;
Am. Ord. 04005, passed 5-11-04; Am. Ord. 23016, passed 5-9-23) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.04 PRIVATE ROADS AND ALLEYWAYS.
   Residents living on private alleyways or on private roads shall arrange
their collection points with the Public Services Department. If damage occurs
to privately-owned roads or private alleyways due to collection, the town will
not be held liable.
(Ord. 23016, passed 5-9-23)
§ 50.05 ACCESS OF COLLECTION VEHICLES.
   (A)   Communities and neighborhoods that have on-street parking shall ensure
that proper turning radii and travel width are available for collection
vehicles to adequately maneuver. If items are not collected due to insufficient
safe access, they will be collected al the next scheduled pickup once the
access problem is corrected.
   (B)   Fixed items that are placed within town-owned rights-of-way for
decorative purposes, to restrict access, and the like, are placed there at the
risk of the homeowner. If the items are damaged due to collection, the town
shall not be held liable.
   (C)   Residents and property management companies shall be responsible for
ensuring that there is adequate space to retrieve roll-carts with collection
equipment.
(Ord. 23016, passed 5-9-23)
§ 50.06 IMPEDING TRAFFIC PROHIBITED.
   In no case shall any trash, refuse or garbage placed curbside for collection
impede the flow of traffic on roadways or sidewalks.
(‘81 Code, § 94.11(A)(10)) (Am. Ord. passed 6-23-87; Am. Ord. passed 4-14-92;
Am. Ord. 23016, passed 5-9-23) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.07 DUMPING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Dumping of garbage or trash within the municipal limits is prohibited.
   (B)   Placing items on vacant parcels or on any public property shall be
considered illegal dumping.
(‘81 Code, § 94.11(A)(1)) (Am. Ord. passed 6-23-87; Am. Ord. passed 4-14-92;
Am. Ord. 23016, passed 5-9-23) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.08 OPEN CARTS PROHIBITED.
   It will be unlawful for any person to cart swill or garbage through the
streets in open vessels or vehicles.
(‘81 Code, § 94.11(A)(12)) (Am. Ord. passed 6-23-87; Am. Ord. passed 4-14-92;
Am. Ord. 23016, passed 5-9-23) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.09 SCATTERING GARBAGE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to scatter the contents of trash or
garbage containers placed out for collection.
(‘81 Code, § 94.11(A)(11)) (Am. Ord. passed 6-23-87; Am. Ord. passed 4-14-92;
Am. Ord. 23016, passed 5-9-23) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.10 DISPOSAL OF TRASH IN PUBLIC PLACES OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall deposit or dispose of any scrap, paper, junk, trash,
debris, or waste matter of any kind on any public place or on the property of
another except in receptacles provided for such purpose.
   (B)   Residents shall place any garbage or trash they generate curbside
abutting their own property.
(‘81 Code, § 94.01) (Am. Ord. 23016, passed 5-9-23) Penalty, see §
50.99
Statutory reference:
   Dumping trash, refuse, or garbage on property of another, see S.C. Code
§§16-11-700
CONTAINERS AND SPECIFICATIONS
§ 50.20 CONTAINERS.
   (A)   Garbage will be placed in a 64- or 95-gallon, roll-out container
provided by the town.
      (1)   If residents have garbage outside their container, it will not be
collected.
      (2)   Items other than household garbage that are placed in containers
are considered improper debris. Examples of improper debris include yard waste,
bulk items, and car parts. Containers with improper debris will not be
collected until the items have been removed.
      (3)   Owners of single-family properties in the town are entitled to one
town-issued container per property, unless, on application to the Public
Service Director, he or she determines that the needs of the property owner
require an additional container, in which case an additional container may be
purchased from the town. No other type of containers will be emptied.
      (4)   In no event shall a property owner be allocated more than two
containers per property.
   (B)   Containers reported stolen or lost must be reported to the Police
Department for a case number prior to replacement.
   (C)   Damaged containers must first be investigated by the Public Services
Department and, if damaged due to neglect, a new container must be purchased
before replacement.
(‘81 Code, § 94.11(A)(2), (3), and (9)) (Am. Ord. passed 6-23-87; Am. Ord.
passed 4-14-92; Am. Ord. 99011, passed 4-13-99; Am. Ord. 04005, passed 5-11-04;
Am. Ord. 23016, passed 5-9-23)
§ 50.21 MATERIAL PLACEMENT AND DAMAGE CAUSED BY COLLECTION VEHICLES.
   (A)   Items to be collected shall not be placed within six feet of a
stormwater structure. water meter, or cable, telephone or similar other utility
pedestal.
   (B)   If a homeowner places trash or debris in such a way that collection
causes damage to stormwater or utility infrastructure, sod, irrigation,
landscaping, driveways, curbs. decorative lighting, mailboxes, and the like
within the town right-of-way, the town will not be responsible for repair or
replacement.
(Ord. 23016, passed 5-9-23)
§ 50.22 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND ELECTRONIC WASTE.
   (A)   Empty containers of solvents, pesticides, ignitable materials,
corrosive materials, or toxic materials can be placed curbside with bulk
collection items.
   (B)   Lead-acid and lithium batteries, as well as electronic waste items
such as televisions, computers, hard drives, printers, laptops, and the like,
will not be collected by the town and will need to be disposed of at a proper
location.
(Ord. 23016, passed 5-9-23)
§ 50.23 LEAVES, GRASS CLIPPINGS AND TREE LIMBS.
   (A)   Natural trash and refuse such as limbs, bagged leaves, grass
clippings, and the like, must be deposited separately from manmade trash and
refuse in order to accommodate the recycling of natural trash and refuse.
   (B)   Leaves and grass clippings shall be placed in biodegradeable paper
leaf bags of 30-gallon capacity or greater. Tree limbs shall not exceed six
feet in length and ten inches in diameter.
   (C)   Tree stumps will not be collected by the town.
   (D)   If vegetative debris is mixed with other debris, it will not be
collected until the debris is separated. Vegetative debris and bulk items shall
be placed in distinct and separate piles.
   (E)   Debris resulting from commercial landscaping maintenance operations
shall be removed and legally disposed of by the landscaping contractor.
(‘81 Code, § 94.11(A)(4) and (10)) (Am. Ord. passed 6-23-87; Am. Ord. passed 4-
14-92; Am. Ord. 99011, passed 4-13-99; Am. Ord. 11027, passed 4-12-11; Am. Ord.
23016, passed 5-9-23)
§ 50.24 PAPER AND CARDBOARD.
   (A)   Paper and cardboard boxes in large quantities shall be disposed of at
a recycling center.
   (B)   If being disposed of with household garbage, cardboard boxes must be
broken down and fit loosely in the town-issued roll-cart.
(‘81 Code, § 94.11(A)(4)) (Am. Ord. passed 6-23-87; Am. Ord. passed 4-14-92;
Am. Ord. 99011, passed 4-13-99; Am. Ord. 23016, passed 5-9-23)
§ 50.25 LARGE ITEMS.
   Large items, such as appliances and furniture, and the like, should be
placed curbside for bulk-item collection separate from other piles.
Refrigerator doors must be removed prior to setting out for pickup.
(‘81 Code, § 94.11(A)(4)) (Am. Ord. passed 6-23-87; Am. Ord. passed 4-14-92;
Am. Ord. 99011, passed 4-13-99; Am. Ord. 23016, passed 5-9-23)
§ 50.26 PAINT.
   (A)   Paint material may be collected only after the paint in the can is
completely dried with the top removed. Dried out paint cans shall be collected
with bulk trash.
   (B)   Paint that is not dried can he disposed of at an approved disposal
location.
(Ord. 99011, passed 4-13-99; Am. Ord. 23016, passed 5-9-23)
§ 50.27 CONTRACTOR-GENERATED DEBRIS.
   (A)   Contractor-generated trash materials resulting from demolition,
construction, remodeling or destruction, such as bricks, scraps of lumber,
mortar plaster, roof tiles, guttering, shavings, and all other materials, will
not be collected by the town and should be removed by the contractor doing the
work.
(‘81 Code, § 94.11(A)(5))
   (B)   Debris resulting from land clearing for development purposes must be
removed by contractor, developer, or owner.
(‘81 Code, § 94.11(A)(6))
   (C)   Tree stumps and debris from tree trimming and removal by a contractor
on residential or commercial property shall be removed by contractor.
(Am. Ord. passed 6-23-87; Am. Ord. passed 4-14-92; Am. Ord. 99011, passed 4-13-
99; Am. Ord. 23016, passed 5-9-23)
§ 50.28 MOTORIZED EQUIPMENT AND VEHICLE PARTS.
   Motorized equipment and vehicle parts are not acceptable as trash and must
be removed by owner. This includes engine components, body parts, tires, and
the like.
(‘81 Code, §94.11(A)(7)) (Am. Ord. passed 6-23-87; Am. Ord. passed 4-14-92; Am.
Ord. 23016, passed 5-9-23)
§ 50.29 HOME-GENERATED MEDICAL WASTE.
   (A)   Home-generated medical waste must be disposed of in manner that helps
minimize health risks to sanitation and landfill workers.
   (B)   Sharp medical objects, such as needles, syringes and the like, must be
placed in a medical/health care container (sometimes referred to as a “sharps
container”), or another container pursuant to all of the requirements herein,
before being placed in a 64- or 95-gallon garbage container for town pickup.
   (C)   Other containers made out of heavy plastic or metal may be used for
sharp medical objects, if all of the following precautions are observed:
      (1)   Ensure that the container is as puncture-proof as possible;
      (2)   Ensure that the container has a tight-fitting lid;
      (3)   Write the words “Not Recyclable” on the container;
      (4)   Do not fill the container with objects over three-fourths full;
      (5)   Do not use glass containers.
(Ord. 04017, passed 5-11-04; Am. Ord. 23016, passed 5-9-23) Penalty, see
50.99
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 50.40 PROMULGATION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Chairman of the Public Services Committee, in consultation with the
Public Services Director, may promulgate rules and regulations for the
municipal garbage and trash collection service. Such rules and regulations,
when approved by the Council and placed on file in the office of the Clerk of
Council, shall be binding on all persons to whom they are made applicable, and
no such person shall violate or fail to comply with any such rule or
regulation.
(‘81 Code, § 94.11(B)) (Am. Ord. passed 6-23-87; Am. Ord. passed 4-14-92; Am.
Ord. 23016, passed 5-9-23)
§ 50.41 REPORTING AND CORRECTING CONCERNS.
   (A)   Violations of this chapter shall be reported to the Department of
Public Services for review, investigation, and enforcement, if necessary.
   (B)   If a reported concern is in conflict with the guidance of this
chapter, the Public Service Department will issue a written explanation of the
problem and an appropriate solution. Such written comments will be logged.
   (C)   Repeat offenders of the same offense on the same property can be
forwarded to the Land Codes Inspector or Police Department for enforcement
action under §
50.99.
(‘81 Code, § 94.11(A)(14)) (Ord. passed 12-6-76; Am. Ord. passed 6-23-87; Am.
Ord. passed 4-14-92; Am. Ord. 23016, passed 5-9-23)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
penalty is otherwise provided shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalty
in §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
50.23 through
50.26 shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $25 nor more than $500, or
imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both; and/or shall be subject to a
civil penalty that shall not exceed $1.000, not including attorney’s fees and
costs to collect and enforce the civil penalty, including, but not limited to,
any proceedings to create a lien on any properly owned by the person found in
violation of §§
50.23 through
50.26 for any unpaid civil penalties. A violation of §§
50.23 through
50.26 shall not be considered a continuing offense, but each day §§
50.23 through
50.26 is violated shall be considered a separate and distinct violation.
(‘81 Code, § 94.99(C)) (Ord. passed 6-23-87; Am. Ord. 23016, passed 5-9-23)
CHAPTER 51: WATER AND SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
51.001   Definitions
   
51.002   Management of system; rates and charges
   
51.003   Resolutions
   
51.004   Rules, regulations, and the like
   
51.005   Turning water on or off
   
51.006   Service agreements
   
51.007   Deposits required of new customers
   
51.008   Combined water and wastewater bill
   
51.009   Special assessments
   
51.010   Barricades and lights; property restoration
   
51.011   Duty of paving or other contractors as to valves, valve boxes, fire
hydrants, manholes and other appurtenances
   
51.012   Interfering with property belonging to Commissioners of Public Works
   
51.013   Public right-of-way planting and replacement
   
51.014   Theft of service
   
51.015   Failure to comply
   
51.016   Specific acts prohibited
   
51.017   Violations
   
51.018   Penalty
Public Water System
Water General Provisions
   
51.030   Purpose
   
51.031   Scope
   
51.032   Vandalism
Water Use Requirements
   
51.050   Water tap fee
   
51.051   Water meters
   
51.052   Multiple units receiving service through single meter
   
51.053   Existing building water
   
51.054   MPW policies and resolutions
   
51.055   Fire hydrant rates and use
   
51.056   Obstructing or damaging hydrants
   
51.057   Connection to water required
   
51.058   Water conservation
Building Water and Connections
   
51.070   Construction of system
   
51.071   Connection permit
   
51.072   Operating the system
   
51.073   Connection costs
   
51.074   Compliance with authority
   
51.075   Conformance to applicable codes
   
51.076   Connection inspection
   
51.077   Design requirements
Public Sewer System Sewer General Provisions
   
51.090   Purpose
   
51.091   Scope
   
51.092   Annexation for sewer service
   
51.093   Out-of-town wastewater rates and charges
   
51.094   Vandalism
Sewer Use Requirements; Discharges
   
51.110   Waste disposal
   
51.111   Wastewater discharges
   
51.112   Wastewater disposal
   
51.113   Connection to sewer required
   
51.114   Authorization to discharge required
   
51.115   Restricted discharges
   
51.116   Special agreements
   
51.117   Water conservation
   
51.118   Reclaimed wastewater
Private Sewer Systems
   
51.130   Private system required
   
51.131   Design requirements
   
51.132   Construction of system
   
51.133   Operating the system
   
51.134   Connection to the wastewater system when available
   
51.135   Sanitary operation required
   
51.136   Compliance with authority
Building Sewers and Connections
   
51.150   Connection permit
   
51.151   Connection costs
   
51.152   Existing building sewers
   
51.153   Building sewer design
   
51.154   Surface runoff and groundwater drain
   
51.155   Conformance to applicable codes
   
51.156   Connection inspection
   
51.157   Barricades and lights; property restoration
   
51.158   Protection of capacity for existing users
Industrial Use and Pretreatment
   
51.170   Information requirements
   
51.171   Provisions for monitoring
   
51.172   Determination of wastewater characteristics
   
51.173   Wastewater with special characteristics
   
51.174   Compliance with pretreatment requirements
   
51.175   Monitoring requirements
Storm Sewer and Drains
   
51.180   Compliance required
   
51.181   Form of application for connection permit
   
51.182   Damage, obstruction of storm sewers, drains, ditches
   
51.183   Uncovering of storm sewer, drains
   
51.184   Discharge of polluted waters
   
51.185   Discharge of storm waters
   
51.186   Discharge of grease, oil, gasoline
   
51.187   Stream or channel dumping; monitoring
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. All other
words shall be construed as having the meaning defined in the most recently
published volume of the Water and Wastewater Control Engineering Glossary,
published by the Water Pollution Control Federation (now known as the Water
Environmental Federation, Washington, D.C.), or by their general usage, if
undefined.
   ACT. The Federal Clean Water Act, as amended, being 33 USC 1251 et seq.
   ASTM. The American Society for Testing and Materials.
   AWWA. The American Water Works Association.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY or BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. A device
designed to prevent backflow or back-siphonage.
   BOD. As follows.
      (1)   Abbreviation for biochemical oxygen demand. The quantity of oxygen
used in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter in a specified time, at a
specified temperature, and under specified conditions.
      (2)   A standard test used in assessing wastewater strength.
   BUILDING SEWER. In plumbing, the extension from the building drain to the
public sewer or other place of disposal. Also called “house connection” or
“service connection”.
   COMMISSION or COMMISSIONERS OF PUBLIC WORKS OF THE TOWN OF MOUNT PLEASANT.
The public body responsible for the provision of water and wastewater services
within the Town of Mount Pleasant and other areas. Also known as the “Town
Waterworks”, “Mount Pleasant Waterworks” or “MPW”.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any actual or potential connection or structural
arrangement between a public water supply and any source or system through
which it is possible to introduce into any part of the potable system any used
water, industrial fluid or substance other than the intended potable water that
the system supplies. Any arrangements through which, or because of which,
backflow may occur are considered cross-connections.
   DAY. The 24-hour period beginning at 12:01 a.m.
   DOMESTIC USERS. All premises used only for human residency and that are
connected to the wastewater facilities.
   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   EPA. The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
   GARBAGE. The solid animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the domestic
or nondomestic handling, storage, dispensing, preparation, cooking, and serving
of foods.
   GROUNDWATER. Water within the earth.
   IMPACT FEE. Fee charged by the Commission and applied toward a capital
improvements fund whereby it may defray some costs associated with later
expansions to any facilities under the jurisdiction of the Commission.
   INTERFERENCE. Inhibition or disruption of any sewer system, wastewater
treatment process, sludge disposal system, or their operation, which
substantially contributes to a violation of applicable discharge permits.
   MANAGER. The Manager of the Commission or an authorized designee.
   MAY. Is permissible.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or any
other body of surface or groundwater.
   NONDOMESTIC USER. Any user of the wastewater system whose wastewater is not
classified as domestic.
   NPDES. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit program,
whether administered by the EPA or by the state.
   OWNER. The person or persons who legally own private property.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, partnership,
corporation, municipality, or other similar organization, agency, or group.
This does not apply to employees, agents, or representatives of the Commission.
   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration
expressed in grams per liter of solution, as determined by “standard methods”.
   PRETREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of
pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater before discharging to the Commission’s wastewater system.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. Garbage that has been shredded such that all
particles will be carried freely under flow conditions normally prevailing in
the wastewater sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any
dimension.
   RECLAIMED WASTEWATER. Wastewater used for some beneficial purpose, usually
after some degree of treatment tailored to the intended purpose.
   SANITARY WASTEWATER. Wastewater discharged from the sanitary conveniences of
dwellings, office buildings, industrial plants, or institutions.
   SCDHEC. South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control.
   SHALL. Is mandatory.
   STANDARD METHODS. The latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination
of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association,
the Water Pollution Control Federation, and the American Water Works
Association.
   STORM DRAIN. A sewer for conveying storm, surface, and other waters that are
not intended to be transported to a wastewater treatment facility.
   SURFACE WATER. Water that occurs when the rate of precipitation exceeds the
rate at which water may percolate into the soil.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. The total suspended matter that either floats on the
surface of, or is in suspension in, water or wastewater, as determined by 40
CFR 136.
   TOWN. The Town of Mount Pleasant, South Carolina.
   TOXICS. Any of the pollutants designed by federal regulations pursuant to §
307(a)(1) of the “act”.
   WASTEWATER. A combination of liquid and water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industries, and institutions, together with
any groundwater, surface water, or storm water that may be present.
   WASTEWATER SEWER. The structures, processes, equipment, and arrangements
necessary to collect and transport wastewaters to the wastewater treatment
facility.
   WASTEWATER SYSTEM. The combination of wastewater sewers and treatment
facilities.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITY. The structures, processes, equipment, and
arrangements necessary to treat and discharge wastewaters.
   WATER SYSTEM. The structures, processes, equipment and arrangements
necessary to transport water supplied by MPW to its customers.
   WEF. Water Environmental Federation (formerly the WPCF, Water Pollution
Control Federation).
('81 Code, § 51.1.01) (Ord. passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
§ 51.002 MANAGEMENT OF SYSTEM; RATES AND CHARGES.
   The Commission is fully empowered to operate, maintain, enlarge and improve
the water and wastewater systems, and to establish rates and charges as it may
deem proper for all services and facilities associated with the water and
wastewater systems owned by MPW.
(Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
§ 51.003 RESOLUTIONS.
   The Commissioner may from time to time promulgate guidelines, policies, and
adopt resolutions concerning the management and/or operations of the water and/
or wastewater facilities. The Commission has full authority to adopt
guidelines, policies, and resolutions as necessary.
(Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
§ 51.004 RULES, REGULATIONS, AND THE LIKE.
   The Commission has full authority to issue, modify and amend rules,
regulations, policies and guidelines for customers, builders, contractors, and
developers using its water and/or wastewater system.
(Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
§ 51.005 TURNING WATER ON OR OFF.
   No persons will be allowed to turn water on or off without authorization
from Mount Pleasant Waterworks.
(Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
§ 51.006 SERVICE AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   Service agreement. A SERVICE AGREEMENT is an agreement for service
between MPW and its customer, which form or agreement the Commission may change
from time to time.
   (B)   Contract between the Commission and consumer. A service agreement,
when executed between the consumer and by an authorized representative of Mount
Pleasant Waterworks, shall become a contract under which the Waterworks agrees
to furnish utility services to the individual consumer, and the consumer agrees
to receive and pay for the service in accordance with the rate schedule and the
service regulations of Mount Pleasant Waterworks on file in the office of MPW
current at the time the service agreement is executed. Such rate schedules and
service regulation may be modified from time to time. The rate schedules and
service regulations, and any changes thereto, shall be incorporated by
reference in the service agreements. The service agreement will be in such form
that can be modified by the Commission when deemed necessary.
   (C)   Payment responsibility. The consumer who establishes service agrees to
be responsible for receipt and payment of bills for these services until such
consumer requests disconnection of the service. Failure to receive a monthly
bill does not relieve the consumer of payment responsibility.
   (D)   Termination of service. The agreement may be terminated by either
party, one working day notice to the other. It is further agreed that the
Commission reserves the right to discontinue services if the consumer fails to
make timely payments, breaches the service agreement, or provides inaccurate
information in its application. If the service is disconnected for cause, the
consumer agrees to pay all outstanding bills. By agreeing to have service
provided, the applicant represents that he or she has the authority to request
utility service at the location, and attests that the information given is true
and accurate. Customers with outstanding bills will not be provided service at
other locations until all outstanding bills are paid.
(Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
§ 51.007 DEPOSITS REQUIRED OF NEW CUSTOMERS.
   Each new customer obtaining a water and/or wastewater connection shall
adhere to the Commission's current deposit policy.
(Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
§ 51.008 COMBINED WATER AND WASTEWATER BILL.
   The charge for wastewater service shall be added to the water bill, and
shall be collected by means of a combined water and wastewater bill.
(Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
§ 51.009 SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   From time to time, the Commission may apply special assessments to recover
cost associated with public water and wastewater systems.
(Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
§ 51.010 BARRICADES AND LIGHTS; PROPERTY RESTORATION.
   Excavations for building water installation shall be adequately guarded with
barricades and lights to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks,
parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall
be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Commission and to the town.
(Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11) Penalty, see §
51.018
§ 51.011 DUTY OF PAVING OR OTHER CONTRACTORS AS TO VALVES, VALVE BOXES, FIRE
HYDRANTS, MANHOLES, AND OTHER APPURTENANCES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or contractor, who may pave any streets
or sidewalks or perform other work in the town, to destroy, remove or
obliterate, by burying or covering up, any of the valves, valve boxes,
hydrants, curb stop valves, meter boxes, manholes, or any other similar
property, belonging to, owned, or controlled by the town or the Commission. It
shall be the duty of any such paving or other contractors, to obtain from the
Commission the exact location in such streets of all valves, valve boxes,
hydrants, curb stop boxes, and meter boxes in order to avoid paving over or
otherwise damaging valves, valve boxes, hydrants, manholes, and other
appurtenances.
(Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11) Penalty, see §
51.018
§ 51.012 INTERFERING WITH PROPERTY BELONGING TO COMMISSIONERS OF PUBLIC WORKS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere, tamper, damage, or block
any property controlled by the Commission.
(Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11) Penalty, see §
51.018
§ 51.013 PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY PLANTING AND REPLACEMENT.
   It shall be unlawful to plant, place or allow to become established,
vegetation, other than low-growing grass, or obstruct access in any way over or
within five feet of either side of any water main, water service line, water
meter, sewer main, sewer lateral, manhole cover or other apparatus owned by
Mount Pleasant Waterworks. Mount Pleasant Waterworks will not be responsible
for repair or replacement of any vegetation or obstruction removed or damaged.
It will be Mount Pleasant Waterworks' standard procedure to level and smooth
the area of excavation or disturbance, and rake in contractor grade seed.
(Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11; Am. Ord. 19052, passed 8-13-19) Penalty, see §
51.018
§ 51.014 THEFT OF SERVICE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to
make any connection to the water or wastewater system without the written
approval of Mount Pleasant Waterworks, or to reconnect service when it has been
disconnected for nonpayment of a bill for service.
   (B)   Mount Pleasant Waterworks is authorized to cut off the supply of water
from any house or building where the water meter is tampered or interfered with
by any person. Before reconnecting the water at such a location, the customer
shall be required to pay all costs and expenses incurred by the Commission in
adjusting and repairing the meter, and any loss resulting from the changing of,
tampering or interfering with the meter, as well as other fees required for
reconnection.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use any water supplied by the
Commission upon any premises while service to such premises remains
discontinued by the Commission for nonpayment of an overdue account for service
previously furnished to such premises or otherwise.
   (D)   If any person obtains water and/or wastewater service in violation of
any ordinances, guidelines, resolutions or policies in addition to other fines
or costs, such person shall be required to pay an investigative fee. This
charge shall not be in lieu of any other fee, charge or cost. Such person shall
also be required to pay the estimated cost of the water and wastewater service
unlawfully obtained and received.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person applying for utility or other
service to furnish to Mount Pleasant Waterworks any false or incorrect
information, and each person shall immediately notify Mount Pleasant Waterworks
of any change of name or other information given when service was initially
established.
(Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11) Penalty, see §
51.018
§ 51.015 FAILURE TO COMPLY.
   The Commission is authorized and empowered , at its sole discretion, to
discontinue any services it provides, if any customer or user violates,
refuses, or fails to comply with the current guidelines, policies, resolutions,
or ordinances set forth and amended from time to time by the Commission or the
town.
(Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
§ 51.016 SPECIFIC ACTS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any of the following acts or
omissions without proper authority.
   (A)   To turn, remove, raise, uncover, interfere with, open, make connection
with, obstruct, damage, deface, injure, or cause to be obstructed, removed,
damaged, defaced, or injured, or in any manner tamper with any public water
and/or wastewater main, laterals, service connection, fire hydrant, valves,
connection branches, lines, water tanks, meters, public drinking fountain,
public water fountain, valve cover, or any other appurtenance or property of
the municipal water and/or wastewater system.
   (B)   To place or deposit any building material, rubbish, merchandise, or
any other obstruction in front of any fire hydrant or water meter so as to
cause any interference with ready access thereto by the Fire Department or the
Commission, or to hitch any animal to a fire hydrant, drinking fountain, or
public well.
   (C)   To pollute the water supply in any manner.
   (D)   To willfully and intentionally withdraw, or cause to be withdrawn,
water in any manner and appropriate it for the use of such person for the
purposes other than those specified in or by contract, agreement, licenses, or
proper permission with the Commission, unless such person shall have a
contract, agreement, licenses, or proper permission from the Commission for the
use of water belonging to or furnished by the Commission for certain specified
purposes only.
   (E)   To willfully and/or with intention to cheat and defraud the
Commission, alter and interfere with any meter, meter box, connecting pipe or
any other property of the municipal water or wastewater system, if water is
furnished from or by means of such meter, meter box, connecting pipe, or other
property, or by any contrivance, pipe, or devise or unlawful means to withdraw
or take off water in any manner, except through such meter, meter box,
connecting pipe, or other property of the municipal water and wastewater
system.
   (F)   To willfully withdraw, or cause to be withdrawn, in any manner and/or
appropriate water of the municipal water system from the water mains or pipes
thereof for his/her own use, or for the use of any other person, without first
having entered into contract or agreement with the Commission for such water
service.
   (G)   To extend service pipe attached to the mains or water supply of the
municipal water system onto any premises without first having obtained proper
permission therefor from the Commission.
   (H)   To connect or cross-connect any private well or water system in any
way, shape or form to or with the public water supply.
   (I)   To discharge wastewater or any other substance into the public
wastewater system without first having entered into contract or agreement with
the Commission for such wastewater service.
(Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11) Penalty, see §
51.018
§ 51.017 VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any
guidelines, policies, resolutions or ordinances set by the Commission; or
without proper authority from the Commission, to tamper with or change any
water meter; or to make any connection to the water or wastewater system
without permission by the Commission to do so; or to reconnect a service that
has been discontinued by the Commission for nonpayment of a bill for such
service until such bill has been paid in full, including any penalty and the
service fee.
(Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11) Penalty, see §
51.018
§ 51.018 PENALTY.
   (A)   A violation of any provision of this chapter, or failure to comply
with any of its requirements, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Every person who
violates any of the provisions hereof, or who fails to comply with any of the
requirements hereof, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not
to exceed $500, or imprisonment up to 30 days, or both. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day that a violation occurs or continues. No
penalty hereunder shall exceed the penalty provided by state law.
   (B)   In addition to division (A), any violator hereunder shall be
responsible to pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Costs shall
include the cost of cleanup associated with the illegal activities if the
responsible party does not perform same, along with being responsible for any
fines the town or the Commission might incur for the illegal activities.
Nothing contained herein shall prevent the town or Commission from taking such
other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent any violation.
(Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11; Am. Ord. 11058, passed 9-13-11)
PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM 
WATER GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.030 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the maximum possible
beneficial public use of the Commission's water system through regulation of
water construction and water use; to provide for equitable distribution of the
costs of the water system; and to provide procedures for complying with the
requirements contained herein. All or parts of the ordinances and resolutions
of the town or the Commissioners of Public Works of the town in conflict with
the provisions of this chapter are repealed to the extent of such conflict.
(Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
§ 51.031 SCOPE.
   (A)   The definitions of terms used in this chapter are found in §
51.001. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the use of all water
provided by the Commission's water distribution system. This chapter provides
for use of the water system, regulation of water construction, control of the
quality, equitable distribution of costs, water construction plans, issuance of
water permits, minimum water construction standards and conditions, and
penalties and other procedures in cases of violation of this chapter.
   (B)   This chapter shall apply to the town and to persons outside the town,
who are, by connection contract or agreement with the Commission, users of the
water distribution facilities.
   (C)   Each owner will be held fully responsible and liable by and to the
Commission for all that is done or omitted on, in, or about any premises by any
agent or tenant or other persons not employed by the Commission who may gain
access thereto. The tenant in or upon any premises of any owner shall at all
times, and for all purposes connected with or arising from the Commission's
water service to and for such premises, except the making of the original
application for water service pipe and contract, be taken and construed to be
the properly constituted agent of the owner.
(Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
§ 51.032 VANDALISM.
   No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or
equipment that is part of the Commission's water system. Any person who
violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction,
punished by a fine as provided for in this chapter.
(Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11) Penalty, see §
51.018
WATER USE REQUIREMENTS
§ 51.050 WATER TAP FEE.
   For each new water connection, the person applying for water service shall
pay a tap-in or cut-in fee of such sum as may be set and determined from time
to time by the Commission, whether such tap-in or cut-in is inside or outside
the municipality.
(Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
§ 51.051 WATER METERS.
   In no case shall more than one house be supplied with water through the same
meter, but each separate house or premises shall have its own meter and receive
water only through that meter, except by permission of the Mount Pleasant
Waterworks.
(Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
§ 51.052 MULTIPLE UNITS RECEIVING SERVICE THROUGH SINGLE METER.
   Where multiple separate dwelling and multiple separate commercial units
receive water through a single meter billed as one account, whether within or
without the corporate limits, each such unit shall be subject to one minimum
charge for water service, which shall be billed against the single meter
account along with any additional sum due on account of total water consumption
through such single meter.
(Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
§ 51.053 EXISTING BUILDING WATER.
   If a building connected to the public water system is abandoned or
demolished, the existing meter must be disconnected and/or removed by MPW to
prevent any unauthorized use of water. Prior to issuance of a building permit
for the reconstruction of a building, the meter shall be reinstated for use by
MPW.
(Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
§ 51.054 MPW POLICIES AND RESOLUTIONS.
   All customers are required to adhere to all current policies of MPW, as set
forth and amended from time to time by the Commission, including but not
limited to, the cross-connection policy, rates, charges and fees resolution,
adjustment policy, discontinuation of water service policy, security deposit
policy and others.
(Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
§ 51.055 FIRE HYDRANT RATES AND USE.
   The rental fee for public or private fire hydrant meters shall be as
prescribed by the Commission from time to time. It shall be unlawful for any
person to take water from any public hydrant or private pipe connected to the
hydrant service controlled by the Commission, for domestic, industrial, fire or
other purposes, without having previously contracted for such service or needed
for use during a life-threatening emergency.
(Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11) Penalty, see §
51.018
§ 51.056 OBSTRUCTING OR DAMAGING HYDRANTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or deposit any building
material, rubbish, merchandise or any other obstruction in front of any public
fire hydrant so as to interfere with the ready access to the same by the
Commission or the Fire Department; or to injure, damage or interfere with any
fire hydrant in any way.
(Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11) Penalty, see §
51.018
§ 51.057 CONNECTION TO WATER REQUIRED.
   If a water connection or public water facilities of the Commission abuts or
comes within 250 feet of a property containing any house, building, or property
used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes under the
jurisdiction of this chapter, the owner of such house, building, or property is
required, at the owner's expense, to install suitable water-dispensing
facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly to the proper water
connection in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 90 days
after notice from the Commission to do so. Charges for water service (including
any special assessments) will commence at the end of the 90-day period for
which notice is given. Should the owner of the property fail to connect to the
Commission's water system as required herein, the owner is responsible for
payment of these charges for water service. Any action to collect charges for
water service in no way eliminates the owner's responsibility to connect to the
water system.
(Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11) Penalty, see §
51.018
§ 51.058 WATER CONSERVATION.
   In the event of a drought or emergency, all customers of the Commission are
required to follow guidelines as set forth in the South Carolina Drought
Management and Response Plan and the Commission Drought Response Plan.
(Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11) Penalty, see §
51.018
BUILDING WATER AND CONNECTIONS
§ 51.070 CONSTRUCTION OF SYSTEM.
   Before connecting to the public water services, the customer shall execute a
contract agreeing to pay for water services, which shall be in such form as the
Commissioners of Public Works (the Commission) shall from time to time
prescribe. The customer shall be responsible and liable for all service charges
accruing therefor.
(Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
§ 51.071 CONNECTION PERMIT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to extend service pipes attached
to the mains of water supply on any premises within the town, without first
obtaining permission therefor in writing from the Commission, and, before any
workman or plumber shall perform any work connected with the extension of such,
written permission for such extension shall be obtained from the Commission.
   (B)   The owner shall make application for a permit to connect to the water
system on a form furnished by the Commission. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any and all information required to administer this chapter. An
administrator and inspector fee (in accordance with the Mount Pleasant
Waterworks current budget resolution) shall be paid to the Commission when the
application is filed.
(Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11) Penalty, see §
51.018
§ 51.072 OPERATING THE SYSTEM.
   Before beginning operation of a private water system, the owner shall obtain
a permit to operate signed by SCDHEC, and shall satisfy any Commission
requirements. The operating permit shall not become effective until the
installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Manager. The Manager shall
be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction, and, in any event,
the applicant for the operating permit shall notify the Manager when the work
is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered.
(Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11) Penalty, see §
51.018
§ 51.073 CONNECTION COSTS.
   The costs and expenses incidental to the building water installation and
connection to the water system shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall
indemnify the Commission from any loss or damage that directly or indirectly
may result from the installation of the water service.
(Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
§ 51.074 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER AUTHORITY.
   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by any other applicable
authority.
(Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
§ 51.075 CONFORMANCE TO APPLICABLE CODES.
   The connection of a building into a water system shall conform to the
requirements of the applicable building and plumbing code, Commission
guidelines for development, and the procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the ASTMN or the AWWA. The connections shall be made
watertight and verified by proper testing. The Commission shall have the
authority to develop, adopt, and amend guidelines relative to construction and
use of the Commission's wastewater system. The guidelines for development and
water specifications so adopted (and as may be amended from time to time) are
incorporated into and made a part of this chapter. And deviation from the
prescribed procedures and materials must be approved, in writing, by the
Manager before installation.
(Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
§ 51.076 CONNECTION INSPECTION.
   The applicant for a building water connection permit shall notify the
Manager when such water connection is ready for inspection before connecting to
the water system. Such connection and testing, as deemed necessary by the
Manager, shall be made under the supervision of the Manager.
(Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
§ 51.077 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.
   The type, capacities, location, and layout of a water distribution system
shall comply with all requirement of SCDHEC, or applicable federal law. A copy
of the SCDHEC permit shall be filed with the Commission.
(Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
PUBLIC SEWER SYSTEM 
SEWER GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.090 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the maximum possible
beneficial public use of the Commission's wastewater system through regulation
of sewer construction, sewer use, and wastewater discharges; to provide for
equitable distribution of the costs of the wastewater system; and to provide
procedures for complying with the requirements contained herein. All or parts
of the ordinances and resolutions of the town or the Commissioners of Public
Works in conflict with the provisions of this chapter are repealed to the
extent of such conflict.
('81 Code, § 51.2.01) (Ord. passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
§ 51.091 SCOPE.
   (A)   The definitions of terms used in this chapter are found in §
51.001. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the discharge of all
wastewater to the Commission's wastewater system. This chapter provides for use
of the wastewater system, regulation of sewer construction, control of the
quantity and quality of wastewater discharged, wastewater pretreatment,
reclaimed wastewater, sludge reuse, equitable distribution of costs, sewer
construction plans, issuance of wastewater discharge permits, minimum sewer
construction standards and conditions, and penalties and other procedures in
cases of violation of this chapter.
   (B)   This chapter shall apply to the town and to persons outside the town
who are, by contract or agreement with the Commission, users of the wastewater
sewers or wastewater treatment facilities.
   (C)   Each and every owner will be held fully responsible and liable by and
to the Commission for all that is done or omitted on, in, or about any premises
by any agent or tenant or other persons not employed by the Commission who may
gain access thereto. The tenant in or upon any premises of any owner shall at
all times, and for all purposes connected with, or arising from, the
Commission's wastewater service to and for such premises, except the making of
the original application for wastewater service pipe and contract, be taken and
construed to be the properly constituted agent of the owner.
('81 Code, § 51.2.02) (Ord. passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
§ 51.092 ANNEXATION FOR SEWER SERVICE.
   (A)   Contiguous properties. Annexation into the town is required as a
condition prior to the Mount Pleasant Town Waterworks providing sanitary sewer
service to any lot, parcel, or piece of land located outside the corporate
limits of the town and contiguous to the town limits.
   (B)   Denied contiguous properties. If a formal annexation petition on any
lot, piece, or parcel of land, located outside the corporate limits of the town
and also contiguous to the town, is denied by the town, or if Town Council
makes such a determination on its own motion without a petition, sanitary sewer
services may be provided by the Mount Pleasant Waterworks to such property,
notwithstanding division (A) of this section.
   (C)   Noncontiguous properties. Except as permitted under division (D)
below, sanitary sewer service may be provided by the Mount Pleasant Waterworks
to noncontiguous properties located outside of the corporate limits of the town
and within the town's official planning area; provided that the owners of the
same execute a binding legal document acceptable to the town, requiring the
owners and their heirs, successors and assigns to annex the subject properties
into the town within 90 days of the same becoming contiguous to the town. The
referenced legal document shall be approved by the Town Attorney and recorded
by the owners in the Register Mesne Conveyance Office for Charleston County.
   (D)   Any lot, piece, or parcel of land, located outside the corporate
limits of the town, whether contiguous or noncontiguous, and within the town’s
official planning area that contains an existing residential structure serviced
by a septic system as of June 14, 2022 may obtain sanitary sewer service from
Mount Pleasant Town Waterworks without following the requirements of this
section; provided, however, that such lot, piece or parcel of land shall be
allocated and permanently limited to one Residential Equivalent Unit (REU) per
existing residential structure by Mount Pleasant Town Waterworks. Any such lot,
piece, or parcel of land requiring more than one REU per existing residential
structure by Mount Pleasant Waterworks shall be required to follow the
requirements of divisions (A) to (C) of this section, this exception contained
in division (D) of this section notwithstanding.
('81 Code, § 159.02) (Ord. 93019, passed 5-11-93; Am. Ord. 00012, passed 2-8-
00; Am. Ord. 10008, passed 4-13-10; Am. Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11; Am. Ord.
22034, passed 6-24-22)
§ 51.093 OUT-OF-TOWN WASTEWATER RATES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   Single-family residential. For each out-of-town connection to the
public wastewater system, the person applying for and/or receiving service
shall pay one and one-tenth times the current in-town wastewater rates and
charges as may be set and determined from time to time by the Commission.
   (B)   All other. For each out-of-town connection to the public wastewater
system, the person and/or business applying for and/or receiving service shall
pay two times the current in-town wastewater rates and charges as may be set
and determined from time to time by the Commission.
(Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
§ 51.094 VANDALISM.
   No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or
equipment that is part of the Commission's wastewater system. Any person who
violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction,
punished by a fine as provided for in this chapter.
('81 Code, § 51.2.05) (Ord. passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
Penalty, see §
51.018
SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS; DISCHARGES
§ 51.110 WASTE DISPOSAL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited, in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
town, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the Commission, any human
excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.
('81 Code, § 51.3.01) (Ord. passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
Penalty, see §
51.018
§ 51.111 WASTEWATER DISCHARGES.
   Wastewater discharges to the wastewater system are not authorized unless
approved by the Manager in accordance with provisions of this chapter.
('81 Code, § 51.3.02) (Ord. passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
Penalty, see §
51.018
§ 51.112 WASTEWATER DISPOSAL.
   Except as provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of wastewater.
('81 Code, § 51.3.03) (Ord. passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
Penalty, see §
51.018
§ 51.113 CONNECTION TO SEWER REQUIRED.
   If a wastewater sewer connected to a treatment facility of the Commission
abuts or comes within 250 feet of a property containing any house, building, or
property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes
under the jurisdiction of this chapter, the owner of such house, building, or
property is required, at the owner's expense, to install suitable toilet
facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly to the proper sewer
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 90 days after notice
from the Commission to do so. Charges for sewer service (including any special
assessments) will commence at the end of the 90-day period for which notice is
given. Should the owner of the property fail to connect to the Commission's
wastewater system, the owner is responsible for payment of these charges for
wastewater service. Such action to collect charges for sewer service in no way
eliminates the owner's responsibility to connect to the wastewater system.
('81 Code, § 51.3.04) (Ord. passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
Penalty, see §
51.018
§ 51.114 AUTHORIZATION TO DISCHARGE REQUIRED.
   No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to or into the
wastewater system. Any connection, drain, or arrangement that will permit such
waters to enter any wastewater sewer shall be deemed to be in violation of this
chapter, unless specifically authorized pursuant to another section herein.
('81 Code, § 51.6.01) (Ord. passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
Penalty, see §
51.018
§ 51.115 RESTRICTED DISCHARGES.
   (A)   Discharge restrictions. No person shall discharge, or cause to be
discharged, to the wastewater system any substances, materials, waters, or
wastes in quantities or concentrations that will:
      (1)   Create a fire or explosion hazard, including but not limited to,
gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid,
solid, or gas;
      (2)   Cause corrosive damage or hazard to structures, equipment, or
personnel of any wastewater system, and in no case will discharges be allowed
with a pH lower than 6.5 or higher than 8.5;
      (3)   Cause obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with
the operation of the wastewater system due to any accumulation of solid or
viscous materials;
      (4)   Constitute a rate of discharge or substantial deviation from normal
rates of discharge (“slug discharge”) sufficient to cause interference in the
operation and performance of the wastewater system;
      (5)   Contain heat in amounts that will accelerate the biodegradation of
wastes, causing excessive amounts of hydrogen sulfide to form in the wastewater
sewer, or inhibit biological activity in the wastewater treatment facilities,
and in no case shall the discharge of heat cause the temperature in the sewer
to exceed 66°C (150°F) or the temperature of the influent to the treatment
facilities to exceed 40°C (104°F);
      (6)   Contain more than 100 milligrams per liter of oils or grease of
petroleum, mineral, animal or vegetable origin, whether emulsified or not;
      (7)   Contain floatable oils, fat, grease, and the like;
      (8)   Contain noxious, malodorous gas, or substance in quantities that
create a public nuisance or a hazard to life;
      (9)   Contain radioactive wastes in harmful quantities as defined by
applicable state and federal guidelines;
      (10)   Contain any garbage that has not been properly shredded;
      (11)   Contain any odor- or color-producing substances exceeding
concentration limits that may be established by the Manager and/or the NPDES
permit.
      (12)   Condensate from air handling units, refrigeration equipment,
cooling equipment and other such condensate shall not be discharged into the
sanitary sewer system. Such condensate must he discharged to an approved
location, including but not limited to, a storm drainage retention area,
private on-site disposal or irrigation system. Condensate may not be discharged
to an area where it will cause danger of personal injury or pose any hazard to
the occupants of the facility.
      Existing systems. Existing systems that discharge into the sanitary sewer
may remain until the piece of equipment causing the discharge is replaced.
Existing systems to be modified are also required to comply with the Existing
Buildings Code as adopted by the Town.
   (B)   Toxic or poisonous discharges prohibited. No discharge shall be
allowed that contains toxic or poisonous substances, or any substances that may
impact the Commission's ability to beneficially reuse its effluent or sludge.
   (C)   Establishment of limits.
      (1)   The Manager shall establish discharge restrictions, discharge
limits, or pretreatment standards for nondomestic users in accordance with the
specific requirements of this chapter, as necessary to protect the effluent and
sludge for beneficial reuse.
      (2)   In lieu of concentration limits, the Manger may establish mass
limits of comparable stringency for a nondomestic user.
   (D)   Nondomestic user.
      (1)   NONDOMESTIC USER shall include any facility that discharges
wastewater containing toxic or poisonous substances, as defined in § 307 and §
502 of the Clean Water Act, or any substance(s) causing interference in the
wastewater facilities.
      (2)   NONDOMESTIC USER shall include any nonresidential user who:
         (a)   Is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards; or
         (b)   Has a nondomestic flow of 25,000 gallons or more per average
work day; or
         (c)   Contributes more than 5% of the average dry weather capacity of
the wastewater facility; or
         (d)   Is determined by the state regulatory agency or the Manager to
have the potential to adversely affect the wastewater facility.
   (E)   Discharge from ground water source heat pump prohibited. No discharge
shall be allowed from a ground water source heat pump.
('81 Code, § 51.6.02) (Ord. passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11; Am
Ord. 16099, passed 11-8-16) Penalty, see §
51.018
§ 51.116 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.
   Nothing herein shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or
arrangement between the Commission and any user of the wastewater facilities,
whereby wastewater of unusual strength or character is accepted into the system
and specially treated, subject to any applicable payments or user charges.
('81 Code, § 51.6.03) (Ord. passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
§ 51.117 WATER CONSERVATION.
   The conservation of water shall be encouraged by the Manager. In
establishing discharge restrictions for users, the Manager shall consider
already implemented or planned conservation steps revealed by the nondomestic
user. At the Manager's request, each nondomestic user will provide pertinent
information showing that the quantities of substances or pollutants have not
been, and will not be, increased as a result of the conservation steps. After
such a showing is deemed satisfactory, the Manager shall adjust the discharge
restrictions, which have been based on concentrations, to reflect the
conservation steps.
('81 Code, § 51.6.04) (Ord. passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
§ 51.118 RECLAIMED WASTEWATER.
   The Commission shall have the authority to develop, adopt, and amend
guidelines related to reclaimed wastewater. The guidelines for reclaimed
wastewater so adopted and amended are incorporated into and made a part of this
chapter.
('81 Code, § 51.6.05) (Ord. passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
PRIVATE SEWER SYSTEMS
§ 51.130 PRIVATE SYSTEM REQUIRED,
   (A)   Connection requirements. Where a public wastewater sewer is not
available according to the provisions of this chapter, at the owner’s expense,
building sewers shall be connected to private wastewater disposal systems,
subject to the requirements of this chapter and the requirements of the State
Department of Health and Environmental Control (SCDHEC).
   (B)   Design, construction, operation and maintenance requirements. Where
the owner desires the Commission to assume responsibility for the operation and
maintenance of a new wastewater treatment system and/or lift station, the
facilities shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the
Commission's requirements, and shall be subject to its review and approval.
Where the owner desires the Commission to assume responsibility for an existing
wastewater treatment system and/or lift station, the existing facilities shall
have been designed, constructed and operated in compliance with any applicable
SCDHEC requirements. Therefore, at the Commission's discretion and subject to
mutually agreed upon terms, the Commission may assume responsibility for the
operation and maintenance of wastewater treatment systems and lift stations.
   (C)   Grinder pump maintenance agreement. All new customers requiring a
grinder pump are required to enter into a grinder pump maintenance agreement
with the Commission, and pay the grinder pump maintenance fee as determined by
and changed from time to time by the Commission. Existing customers that have a
grinder pump may enter into a grinder pump maintenance agreement with the
Commission, and will be charged a grinder pump maintenance fee as determined by
and changed from time to time by the Commission.
('81 Code, § 51.4.01) (Ord. passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
Penalty, see §
51.018
§ 51.131 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.
   The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private wastewater disposal
system shall comply with all requirements of the SCDHEC and/or applicable
federal law. A copy of the SCDHEC permit shall be filed with the Commission. No
permit shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal system employing
subsurface soil disposal facilities where the site is deemed unsuitable. Septic
tank or cesspool discharges require the use of subsurface disposal. This
requirement excludes deep well disposal as defined by state and federal laws.
('81 Code, § 51.4.02) (Ord. passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
§ 51.132 CONSTRUCTION OF SYSTEM.
   Before beginning construction of a private wastewater disposal system
required under §
51.050, the owner shall first pay the Commission all related fees. After the
Commission has reviewed the SCDHEC construction permit with any supplementary
information deemed necessary by the Manager, and received all fees due, a
letter of approval will be issued to the owner.
('81 Code, § 51.4.03) (Ord. passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
§ 51.133 OPERATING THE SYSTEM.
   Before beginning operation of a private wastewater disposal system, the
owner shall obtain a permit to operate signed by SCDHEC, and shall satisfy any
Commission requirements. The operating permit shall not become effective until
the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Manager. The Manager
shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction, and, in any
event, the applicant for the operating permit shall notify the Manager when the
work is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are
covered.
('81 Code, § 51.4.04) (Ord. passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
Penalty, see §
51.018
§ 51.134 CONNECTION TO THE WASTEWATER SYSTEM WHEN AVAILABLE.
   At such time as a wastewater sewer becomes available, as defined under this
chapter, to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, a direct
connection shall be made to the wastewater sewer within 90 days after notice
from the Commission to do so, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar
wastewater disposal facilities shall be emptied as prescribed by local
regulations and filled with suitable material.
('81 Code, § 51.4.05) (Ord. passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
Penalty, see §
51.018
§ 51.135 SANITARY OPERATION REQUIRED.
   The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, in accordance with the conditions
of the operating permit, and at no expense to the Commission. Such facilities
shall be subject to inspection by the Manager at reasonable times.
('81 Code, § 51.4.06) (Ord. passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
Penalty, see §
51.018
§ 51.136 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER AUTHORITY.
   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by any other applicable
authority.
('81 Code, § 51.4.07) (Ord. passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
§ 51.150 CONNECTION PERMIT.
   (A)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any wastewater sewer without first
obtaining a written permit from the Manager.
   (B)   The owner shall make application for a permit to connect to the
wastewater system on a form furnished by the Commission. The permit application
shall be supplemented by wastewater information required to administer this
chapter. An administration and inspection fee (in accordance with the Town
Waterworks and Sewer Commission current rate schedule) shall be paid to the
Commission when the application is filed.
('81 Code, § 51.5.01) (Ord. passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
Penalty, see §
51.018
§ 51.151 CONNECTION COSTS.
   The costs and expenses incidental to the building sewer installation and
connection to the wastewater system shall be borne by the owner. The owner
shall indemnify the Commission from any loss or damage that directly or
indirectly may result from the installation of the building sewer.
('81 Code, § 51.5.02) (Ord. passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
§ 51.152 EXISTING BUILDING SEWERS.
   If a building connected to the public sewer system is abandoned or
demolished, the existing sewer lateral must be plugged by the property owner to
prevent any water from entering the wastewater sewer, and inspected by the
Commission. Prior to issuance of a building permit for the reconstruction of a
building, the sewer lateral shall be inspected and approved for use by the
Commission.
('81 Code, § 51.5.03) (Ord. passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
Penalty, see §
51.018 
§ 51.153 BUILDING SEWER DESIGN.
   Whenever practical, the building sewer shall be brought to a building at an
elevation below the lowest drain. In buildings where a drain is too low to
permit gravity flow to the Commission's wastewater sewer, wastewater carried by
such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the
Commission's wastewater system
('81 Code, § 51.5.04) (Ord. passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
§ 51.154 SURFACE RUNOFF AND GROUNDWATER DRAIN.
   No person shall maintain or connect roof, foundation, areaway, parking lot,
roadway, or other surface runoff or groundwater drains to any sewer that is
connected to the Commission's wastewater system, unless such connection is
authorized in writing by the Manager.
('81 Code, § 51.5.05) (Ord. passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
Penalty, see §
51.018
§ 51.155 CONFORMANCE TO APPLICABLE CODES.
   (A)   The connection of a building sewer into a wastewater sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the applicable building and plumbing code,
Commission guidelines and specifications, and the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the ASTM or the WEF. The connections shall be
made gastight and watertight, and verified by proper testing. The Commission
shall have the authority to develop, adopt, and amend guidelines related to
construction and use of the Commission's wastewater system. The guidelines for
development and sewer specifications so adopted (and as may be amended from
time to time) are incorporated into and made a part of this chapter. Any
deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved, in
writing, by the Manager before installation.
   (B)   The connection of a surface runoff or groundwater drain to a
wastewater sewer under special permit, as provided under this chapter, shall
conform to the requirements specified by the Manager as a condition of approval
of such permit.
('81 Code, § 51.5.06) (Ord. passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
Penalty, see §
51.018
§ 51.156 CONNECTION INSPECTION.
   The applicant for a building sewer or other drainage connection permit shall
notify the Manager when such sewer or drainage connection is ready for
inspection before connecting to the wastewater sewer system. Such connection
and testing, as deemed necessary by the Manager, shall be made under the
supervision of the Manager.
('81 Code, § 51.5.07) (Ord. passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
§ 51.157 BARRICADES AND LIGHTS; PROPERTY RESTORATION.
   Excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded,
with barricades and lights to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Commission and the town.
('81 Code, § 51.5.08) (Ord. passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
§ 51.158 PROTECTION OF CAPACITY FOR EXISTING USERS.
   The Manager shall not issue a permit for any connection to the wastewater
sewer or wastewater treatment facilities unless there is sufficient capacity,
not committed to other users, in the wastewater sewer and treatment facilities
to convey and adequately treat the quantity of wastewater that the requested
connection will add to the system. The Manager may permit such a connection if
there are legally binding commitments to provide the needed capacity.
('81 Code, § 51.5.09) (Ord. passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
INDUSTRIAL USE AND PRETREATMENT
§ 51.170 INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All nondomestic users shall file with the Commission all wastewater
information deemed necessary by the Manager for determination of compliance
with this chapter, the Commission's NPDES permit conditions, and state and
federal law. Such information shall be provided by completion of a
questionnaire designed and supplied by the Manager, by supplements thereto as
necessary, and by any other information requested by the Manager.
   (B)   A person who owns, operates, or occupies properties designated as a
nondomestic user at more than one location shall submit separate information
for each location as may be required by the Manager.
('81 Code, § 51.7.01) (Ord. passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
§ 51.171 PROVISION FOR MONITORING.
   (A)   When required by the Manager, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying nondomestic wastewater discharges shall provide
suitable access and necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building
sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurements of the wastewater.
Such access shall be in a readily and safely accessible location, and shall be
provided in accordance with plans approved by the Manager. The access shall be
provided and maintained at the owner's expense to be safe and accessible.
   (B)   The Manager shall consider such factors as the volume and strength of
discharge, rate of discharge, quantities of toxic materials in the discharge,
wastewater treatment facility removal capabilities, and cost effectiveness in
determining whether access and equipment for monitoring nondomestic wastewater
discharges shall be required.
   (C)   When the Manager determines that access and equipment for monitoring
or measuring nondomestic wastewater discharges are not practicable, reliable,
or cost effective, the Manager may specify alternative methods of determining
the characteristics of the wastewater's discharge that will, in the Manager's
judgment, provide an equitable measurement.
('81 Code, § 51.7.02) (Ord. passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
§ 51.172 DETERMINATION OF WASTEWATER CHARACTERISTICS.
   (A)   Measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of wastewater
to which reference is made in this chapter, shall be determined in accordance
with 40 CFR 136 methods approved by the Manager, and shall comply with state
and federal law. Sampling locations, times, durations, and frequencies shall be
determined on an individual basis, subject to approval by the Manager. The user
shall have the option to use, at the user's own expense, more completely
approved sampling methods, locations, times, durations, and frequencies than
specified by the Manager. Any additional results beyond those required by the
Commission are also to be reported to the Commission.
   (B)   Measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of wastewater
required by this chapter shall be performed by a qualified laboratory. When
such analyses are required of a user, the user shall make arrangements with a
qualified laboratory, which may include that of the user, to perform such
analyses.
   (C)   Monitoring of wastewater characteristics for any purpose shall be
conducted on a frequency deemed necessary by the Manager, unless more frequent
monitoring is required by authority other than this chapter.
   (D)   Upon demonstration by any person that the characteristics of the
wastewater discharged by that person are consistent, the Manager may reduce the
monitoring frequency as may be required by authority other than this chapter.
In no case shall the frequency of monitoring be less than semiannual for
determining compliance with federal, state, or Commission pretreatment
standards.
   (E)   In determining the discharge characteristics, factors such as
continuous, batch, or seasonal operation, as well as the information
requirements of other provisions in this chapter, shall be considered by the
Manager. The Manager may obtain wastewater samples as required to verify the
consistency of discharge characteristics.
   (F)   Fees for any given measurement, test, or analysis of wastewater
required by this chapter and performed by the Commission shall be the same for
all users, regardless of the quantity or quality of the discharge, and shall
reflect only direct cost. Costs of analyses performed by an independent
laboratory at the option of the user shall be borne directly by the user.
('81 Code, § 51.7.03) (Ord. passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
§ 51.173 WASTEWATER WITH SPECIAL CHARACTERISTICS.
   (A)   The Commission shall prohibit the discharge of any wastewater that
could restrict beneficial reuse of the effluent and/or sludge. All dischargers
shall be required to implement a zero discharge treatment system (“closed
loop”) if necessary to protect the Commission's effluent and sludge for
beneficial reuse. New dischargers may be considered if their wastewater
characteristics are similar to existing sources.
   (B)   The Manager may rely on the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards
to protect the wastewater system and receiving waters, as follows.
      (1)   No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, to the
wastewater system, wastewaters containing substances in excess of the quantity
prescribed by the applicable Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standard
promulgated by EPA, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. Compliance
with such applicable pretreatment standards shall be made within three years of
the date the standard is promulgated for existing systems. However, compliance
with a categorical pretreatment standard for new sources shall be required upon
connection to the wastewater system.
      (2)   Upon application by a nondomestic user, the Manager shall establish
limitations for substances specified in the applicable pretreatment standards
to require removal of the substances by the applicant's wastewater treatment
system. The discharge limit for specified substances shall, as a minimum, be
derived in accordance with federal law.
      (3)   Upon application by a nondomestic user, the Manager shall adjust
any limitation on substances specified in the applicable pretreatment standards
to consider factors relating to such users that are fundamentally different
from the factors considered by EPA during the development of the pretreatment
standard. Requests for and determinations of fundamentally different
adjustments shall be in accordance with federal law.
      (4)   Compliance.
         (a)   The Manager shall notify any nondomestic user affected by the
provisions of this section and establish an enforceable compliance schedule for
each.
         (b)   However, if any wastewater contains substances or
characteristics shown to have deleterious effect on the wastewater system,
receiving waters, effluent, or sludge reuse, or that constitute a public
nuisance or hazard if discharged or proposed for discharge to the wastewater
system, the Manager may:
            1.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharges;
            2.   Require payment to cover added cost of handling and treating
the wastewaters not covered by existing fees and charges;
            3.   Require pretreatment to a condition acceptable for discharge
to the wastewater system;
            4.   Require the development of compliance schedules to meet any
applicable pretreatment requirements;
            5.   Require the submission of reports necessary to ensure
compliance with applicable pretreatment requirements;
            6.   Carry out all inspection, surveillance, and monitoring
necessary to determine compliance with applicable pretreatment requirements;
            7.   Obtain remedies for noncompliance by any user. Such remedies
may include injunctive relief, the civil penalties specified in this chapter,
or appropriate criminal penalties; or
            8.   Reject the wastewater if evidence indicates the discharge will
create unreasonable hazards, have a deleterious effect on the wastewater system
or effluent and sludge reuse.
   (C)   When considering the above alternatives, the Manager shall ensure that
conditions of the Commission's NPDES permit are met. The Manager also shall
consider the cost effectiveness and the economic impact of the alternatives on
the discharger. If the Manager allows the pretreatment or equalization of
wastewater flows, the installation of necessary facilities shall be subject to
review by the Commission.
   (D)   Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or
required for any wastewater, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation at the owner's expense.
('81 Code, § 51.8.01) (Ord. passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
§ 51.174 COMPLIANCE WITH PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Persons required to pretreat wastewater in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter shall provide a statement, to be reviewed by an
authorized representative of the user, and certified by a qualified person as
determined by the Commission. Such statement shall indicate whether applicable
pretreatment requirements are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not,
describe the additional operation and maintenance or additional pretreatment
needed for the user to meet the pretreatment requirements.
   (B)   If the user needs to provide additional pretreatment or operation and
maintenance improvements to meet the pretreatment requirements, the user shall
submit a plan (including schedules) to the Manager. The plan (including
schedules) shall be consistent with applicable conditions of the Commission's
requirements, NPDES permit or other local, state, or federal laws.
('81 Code, § 51.8.02) (Ord. passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
§ 51.175 MONITORING REQUIREMENTS.
   Discharges of wastewater to the Commission's wastewater system from any user
shall be monitored in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
('81 Code, § 51.8.03) (Ord. passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 11011, passed 2-8-11)
STORM SEWER AND DRAINS
§ 51.180 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to make connections with the public
storm sewer in any other manner, or with any other material, than as provided
within the town code. Enforcement of storm sewer regulations shall be the
purview of the Director of the Engineering and Development Services Department
or his designee.
(‘81 Code, § 40.07) (Ord. passed 12-10-91; Am. Ord. 11058, passed 9-13-11; Am.
Ord. 23016, passed 5-9-23) Penalty, see §
51.018
§ 51.181 FORM OF APPLICATION FOR CONNECTION PERMIT.
   Application for a permit to make a storm sewer connection shall be made on
suitable forms provided by the Engineering and Development Services Department.
(‘81 Code, § 40.06) (Ord. passed 12-10-91; Am. Ord. 11058, passed 9-13-11; Am.
Ord. 21036, passed 5-11-21; Am. Ord. 23016, passed 5-9-23)
§ 51.182 DAMAGE, OBSTRUCTION OF STORM SEWERS, DRAINS, DITCHES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to do or cause to be done any injuries
or damage to, or to cause an obstruction of any kind or in any manner, or to
interfere with public storm drains, sewers, ditches, canals, easements or any
pipe, filter, bed or any appurtenance or parts of any waterworks, sewerage or
drainage of the town.
('81 Code, § 40.01) (Ord. passed 12-10-91; Am. Ord. 11058, passed 9-13-11)
Penalty, see §
51.018
§ 51.183 UNCOVERING OF STORM SEWER, DRAINS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to open, uncover, turn, remove, raise
for any purpose, or in any manner tamper with any cover or any public storm
sewer, drain, manhole, filter, bed, pipe, or other appurtenance or connection
branches thereof, or to make connection therewith, unless and except with the
written approval from the Department of Public Service, and no person except
those engaged by the Public Service Department shall enter the same without
written approval.
('81 Code, § 40.02) (Ord. passed 12-10-91; Am. Ord. 11058, passed 9-13-11)
Penalty, see §
51.018
§ 51.184 DISCHARGE OF POLLUTED WATERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to make, or cause to be made, any
connection for the removal of sewage from any premises, with any storm or
subwater drain, public sewer, ditch, canal, easement, and the like, or with any
stream or watercourse within the limits of the town
('81 Code, § 40.03) (Ord. passed 12-10-91; Am. Ord. 11058, passed 9-13-11)
Penalty, see §
51.018
§ 51.185 DISCHARGE OF STORM WATERS.
   On all construction or renovation required to conform to standards for new
buildings, it shall be unlawful for any person to collect rainwater for deposit
on any street, sidewalk, or right-of-way, or otherwise suffer or permit, or by
mechanical means or otherwise propel rainwater on such street, sidewalk, or
right-of-way
('81 Code, § 40.04) (Ord. passed 12-10-91; Am. Ord. 11058, passed 9-13-11)
Penalty, see §
51.018
§ 51.186 DISCHARGE OF GREASE, OIL, GASOLINE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drain or discharge, or cause to be
drained or discharged, grease, oil, gasoline, or other petroleum products,
hydrocarbons, alcohol, or chemicals or liquids of any kind, whether dangerous
or otherwise, upon or into any street, right-of-way, ditch, canal, storm
drainage system, or the like.
('81 Code, § 40.05) (Ord. passed 12-10-91; Am. Ord. 11058, passed 9-13-11)
Penalty, see §
51.018
§ 51.187 STREAM OR CHANNEL DUMPING; MONITORING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or place, or cause to be dumped
or placed, any debris or material of any kind that regularly or periodically
carries surface water, in any public drain, sewer, ditch, canal, easement, and
the like, or stream, channel, or watercourse within the limits of the town. It
shall be the duty of the town’s Engineering and Development Services Department
to regularly monitor all areas within the town; to ensure strict compliance
with this provision, and to actively pursue any violations and to respond to
any reports of the same.
(‘81 Code, § 40.08) (Ord. passed 12-10-91; Am. Ord. 11058, passed 9-13-11; Am.
Ord. 23016, passed 5-9-23) Penalty, see §
51.018
CHAPTER 52: STORMWATER UTILITY MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
Section
   
52.01   Findings of fact
   
52.02   Title and authority
   
52.03   Definitions
   
52.04   Stormwater Utility Management Program established; duties and powers
   
52.05   Boundaries and jurisdiction
   
52.06   Regulation of land-disturbing activity
   
52.07   Stormwater Utility Management Program fees
   
52.08   Classification of property and determination of fee
   
52.09   Investment and reinvestment of funds and borrowing
   
52.10   Billing of fees; late charges
   
52.11   Municipal liability
   
52.12   Requests for reconsideration
   
52.13   Appeals
   
52.14   Enforcement
Cross-reference:
   Stormwater management and water quality regulations, see
Ch. 153
§ 52.01 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   Mount Pleasant operates as a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) Phase II Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) under the
South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control (SCDHEC) General
Permit Number SCR030000.
   (B)   The NPDES permit allows the town to discharge stormwater to waters of
the state and U.S., provided that it is in compliance with the terms of the
permit to the maximum extent practical.
   (C)   The permit outlines tasks to be completed for compliance with the
terms and conditions of the federal NPDES program. The NPDES MS4 permit
requires a significant increase in the town's resource allocations for the
Stormwater Utility Management Program to be in compliance with requirements
related to water quality assessment and monitoring; system inventory,
inspection, and maintenance; legal requirements; illicit discharge detection
and elimination; post-development best management practice inspections; good
housekeeping and recording; public education; public participation; and
allocation of adequate resources to meet permit compliance.
   (D)   The management of stormwater runoff and sediment is necessary to
reduce pollution, siltation, sedimentation, local flooding and stream channel
erosion, all of which impact adversely on land and water resources and the
health, safety, property and welfare of the residents of the town.
   (E)   The town maintains a utility system of stormwater management
facilities, including but not limited to, inlets, conduits, manholes, channels,
ditches, drainage easements, infiltration facilities, and other components, as
well as natural waterways.
   (F)   The stormwater utility management facilities and components of the
town need to be regularly maintained, rehabilitated, upgraded or expanded, and
additional stormwater management facilities and measures need to be installed
throughout the town.
   (G)   There are chronic drainage problems in numerous areas the town which,
on an annual basis, threaten property, limit access to property, create
unpredictable driving conditions and present a negative image of the town's
ability to address community problems.
   (H)   There is current and continued growth which will impact the town's
stormwater utility system.
   (I)   There are limited resources (equipment, manpower, funds) in the town
to address stormwater utility system issues comprehensively and within a
defined time frame.
   (J)   There are natural and geographic conditions in the town which pose
significant constraints to problem resolutions.
   (K)   The town is a community comprised of citizens with a wide range of
incomes and ability to afford government services.
   (L)   In the town, current and anticipated growth will contribute to the
need for improvements in, and maintenance of, the stormwater management system.
   (M)   The town must continue to upgrade its capability to maintain existing
and future stormwater utility management facilities and measures.
   (N)   Every parcel of real property in the town either uses or benefits from
the stormwater utility management system; and the improvement of existing
facilities and construction of additional facilities in the system will
directly or indirectly benefit the owners of all real property.
   (O)   The extent of use of the stormwater utility management system by each
classification of real property is dependent on a variety of factors that
influence runoff, such as land use, topography, intensity of development,
amount of impervious surface, and location in a particular watershed or basin.
   (P)   Property owners shall finance the stormwater utility management system
in general relationship to their contribution and need for the system and to
the extent they benefit from the system, and charges therefor should bear a
reasonable relationship to the cost of the service, and every effort should be
made to fairly and equitably spread the cost of the system to all property
owners.
   (Q)   The town is utilizing a modified version of the intensity of
development method as detailed in this chapter and believes this decision to be
in the best interests of the community and environment.
   (R)   After careful review, a residential tiered stormwater utility fee
relative to dwelling unit size (square feet) is determined to be fair and
reasonable, and in the best interests of the community.
   (S)   That the stormwater utility fee reflects the on-going, increasing cost
of the stormwater utility management system and maintenance with reasonable
escalation over time.
   (T)   It is in the best interests of the citizens of this town and, most
specifically, the owners of real property, that a Stormwater Utility Management
Program be established by ordinance.
(Ord. 21059, passed 8-10-21)
§ 52.02 TITLE AND AUTHORITY.
   This chapter may be cited as the Stormwater Utility Management Program
Ordinance and is adopted pursuant to S.C. Code § 6-1-330, §§ 48-14-10 - 48-14-
120, and 26 S.C. Code, Regs. 61-9, 72-300 to 72-316.
(Ord. 21059, passed 8-10-21)
§ 52.03 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the definitions of
words and terms used in this chapter shall be as set forth in S.C. Code § 48-
14-20, and 26 S.C. Code, Reg. 72-301, mutatis mutandis.
   AGRICULTURAL RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. Property designated as a single parcel on
the Charleston County tax maps, containing no more than two dwelling units, and
used for agricultural purposes.
   BASE RATE. The annual stormwater utility management fee charged per
equivalent residential unit (ERU) is based on a 10-year analysis of the
anticipated costs of operations, staffing, debt, and capital needs and is as
follows:
Years Base Rate/ERU
Years    Base Rate/ERU
Existing $60.00
2021     $60.90
2022     $61.81
2023     $79.55
2024     $81.30
2025     $82.52
2026     $83.96
2027     $85.43
2028     $86.93
2029     $88.45
2030+    $90.00
 
   COMMERCIAL PROPERTY. Developed property that is not Single-Family
Residential property or Agricultural Residential (AR) property, to include but
not be limited to Light Industrial (LI) property, Neighborhood Commercial (NC)
property, Office Professional (OP) property, Areawide Business (AB) property,
Marine District (MD) property, Mixed Use (MU) property, Multifamily (MF)
property, parking lots and properties used for office, retail, industrial,
recreational, institutional, cultural, accommodation and assembly purposes.
   DEVELOPED PROPERTY. Real property which has been altered from its natural
state by the addition of any improvements such as buildings, structures, or
other impervious surface area. For new construction, property shall be
considered developed property upon final approval of site improvements.
   DWELLING UNIT. A unit providing complete, independent living facilities for
one population unit,  including permanent provisions for living, sleeping,
eating, cooking and sanitation. Dwelling units may include single-family homes
and mobile homes located on one or more individual lots or parcels of land and
residential condominium and townhouse units.
   EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT (ERU). One commonly accepted rate unit for
stormwater utility management program fees is the equivalent residential unit
(ERU). The ERU is defined, for residential computation purposes, as a Tier 2
Single-Family Residential property (1,301 square feet - 3,300 square feet). The
ERU is defined, for non-residential computation purposes, including any
improvements thereon, a lot less than or equal to 20,000 square feet.
   FEE. The annual amount charged to the property owner(s) of record as
indicated by the Charleston County Assessor's tax rolls as of January 1.
   MIXED USE PROPERTY. Developed property that includes a building or buildings
containing residential and commercial uses.
   MULTIFAMILY PROPERTY. Developed property containing a dwelling unit or units
designed for or occupied by three or more population units living independently
of each other, with the number of population units in residence not exceeding
the number of dwelling units, which may or may not have accessory uses related
to the purpose of providing permanent dwelling facilities, to include
apartments.
   REVENUES. Funds generated for the Stormwater Utility Management Program from
fees, revenue bond issuances, or interest.
   TIER 1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. Property designated as a single
parcel on the Charleston County tax maps, to include single family, townhouse
and residential condominium dwelling units, with total building square footage,
as assessed by the Charleston County Tax Assessor, of 1,300 square feet or less
and shall be considered 0.75 ERU.
   TIER 2 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. Property designated as a single
parcel on the Charleston County tax maps, to include single family, townhouse
and residential condominium dwelling units with total building square footage,
as assessed by the Charleston County Tax Assessor, of 1,301 to 3,300 square
feet and shall be considered 1.00 ERU.
   TIER 3 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. Property designated as a single
parcel on the Charleston County tax maps, to include townhouses and residential
condominiums with total building square footage, as assessed by the Charleston
County Tax Assessor, of 3,301 or more square feet and shall be considered 1.5
ERU.
   UNDEVELOPED PROPERTY. Real property which has not been altered from its
natural state by the addition of any improvements such as buildings, structures
or other impervious surface area, or which has less than 50% of the equivalent
residential unit of impervious surface area, to include golf courses and parks
and shall be considered 0.5 ERU.
(Ord. 21059, passed 8-10-21)
§ 52.04 STORMWATER UTILITY MANAGEMENT PROGRAM ESTABLISHED; DUTIES AND POWERS.
   (A)   Establishment. The Council hereby authorizes the establishment of a
Stormwater Utility Management Program for the town to carry out the purposes,
functions and responsibilities herein set forth. The Town Administrator shall
administer the Program.
   (B)   Duties and powers. The Stormwater Utility Management Program shall
have the following duties and powers:
      (1)   Stormwater utility management planning and preparation of
comprehensive watershed master plans for stormwater management.
      (2)   Regular inspections of public and private stormwater utility
management facilities and measures and the construction thereof.
      (3)   Maintenance and improvement of stormwater utility management
facilities that have been accepted by the town for that purpose.
      (4)   Plan review and inspection of stormwater utility management plans,
measures, and practices.
      (5)   Retrofitting designated watersheds to reduce existing flooding
problems or to improve water quality.
      (6)   Acquisition of interests in land, including easements.
      (7)   Design and construction of stormwater utility management facilities
and measures and acquisition of equipment.
      (8)   Water quantity and water quality management, including monitoring
and surveillance.
      (9)   Any and all powers and duties delegated or granted to it as a local
government implementing agency under the laws and regulations of the state, and
the ordinances of this town.
(Ord. 21059, passed 8-10-21)
§ 52.05 BOUNDARIES AND JURISDICTION.
   The boundaries and jurisdiction of the Stormwater Utility Management Program
shall extend to the corporate limits of the town, including all areas hereafter
annexed thereto, and such additional areas lying outside the corporate limits
of the town as shall be approved by the Town Council.
(Ord. 21059, passed 8-10-21)
§ 52.06 REGULATION OF LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITY.
   The Council shall establish by ordinance a system regulating land-disturbing
activities, including, but not limited to, provisions for reviewing and
approving stormwater management plans, creating design requirements for such
plans and land-disturbing activities, and providing operational and maintenance
requirements for stormwater utility management facilities and measures.
(Ord. 21059, passed 8-10-21)
§ 52.07 STORMWATER UTILITY MANAGEMENT PROGRAM FEES.
   (A)   The Town Council shall establish by ordinance the amounts and
classifications of Stormwater Utility Management Program fees to be implemented
to help fund the Program.
   (B)   The Town Council shall consider, among other things, the following
criteria in establishing fees:
      (1)   The fee system must be reasonable and equitable so that property
owners pay in general relationship to their contribution to the need for and
benefit from the Program, and the fees must bear a reasonable relationship to
the cost of the service. The fees shall be apportioned in an aggregately
reasonable basis of equality with due regard for the benefits conferred. The
Town Council recognizes that these benefits, while reasonable, in many cases
cannot be measured directly.
      (2)   Cost analysis, construction, maintenance, and the overall operation
of the stormwater utility system should be borne by all property owners in the
town, in that all will enjoy the direct and indirect benefits of an improved
and well-maintained utility system.
      (3)   All fees established should be in an amount that is reasonable and
equitable under the circumstances.
      (4)   The components of the calculations used to establish fees may
include, but shall not be limited to, the following component cost factors:
         (a)   Stormwater utility management planning and preparation of
comprehensive watershed master plans for stormwater management;
         (b)   Regular inspections of public and private stormwater utility
management facilities and measures and the construction thereof;
         (c)   Maintenance and improvement of stormwater utility management
facilities that have been accepted by the town for that purpose;
         (d)   Plan review and inspection of stormwater management plans,
measures, and practices;
         (e)   Retrofitting designated watersheds to reduce existing flooding
problems or to improve water quality;
         (f)   Acquisition of interests in land, including easements;
         (g)   Design and construction of stormwater utility management
facilities and measures and acquisition of equipment;
         (h)   Administration and cost of enforcement;
         (i)   Water quantity and water quality management, including
monitoring and surveillance; and
         (j)   Debt service and financing costs.
      (5)   The practical difficulties and limitations related to establishing,
calculating, and administering such fees.
      (6)   The components of the calculations used to establish fees shall be
based on an equivalent residential unit (ERU), to be determined by the Town
Council with reasonable general adjustments being made for, but not limited to,
the following factors:
         (a)   Commercial and land uses other than single-family residential;
         (b)   Vacant and/or undeveloped land; and
         (c)   Other generally accepted factors relevant to such calculations
based upon the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 21059, passed 8-10-21)
§ 52.08 CLASSIFICATION OF PROPERTY AND DETERMINATION OF FEE.
   (A)   Classification. For purposes of determining the fee, all properties in
the town are classified as follows:
      (1)   Tier 1 Single-Family Residential property.
      (2)   Tier 2 Single-Family Residential property.
      (3)   Tier 3 Single-Family Residential property.
      (4)   Agricultural Residential (AR) property.
      (5)   Commercial property, including but not limited to the following
classifications: Light Industrial (LI) property, Neighborhood Commercial (NC)
property, Office Professional (OP) property, Areawide Business (AB) property,
Marine District (MD) property.
      (6)   Recreation facilities, parks, golf courses and appurtenances
thereto.
      (7)   Multifamily (MF) property.
      (8)   Mixed Use (MU) property.
      (9)   Undeveloped property.
   (B)   Base rate.
Years Base Rate/ERU
Years    Base Rate/ERU
Existing $60.00
2021     $60.90
2022     $61.81
2023     $79.55
2024     $81.30
2025     $82.52
2026     $83.96
2027     $85.43
2028     $86.93
2029     $88.45
2030+    $90.00
 
   (C)   Runoff coefficient assignments by classification. For the purpose of
equating non-residential property to residential property in the fee
computation, the ERU is used in conjunction with the total gross land area and
classifications of the properties. Since the ERU is used to relate a rate
charged for a typical residential property, this becomes the common denominator
by which all other non- residential property classifications of properties are
evaluated. To do this, the town utilizes accepted land use coefficients to
relate to the intensity of development and thereby creates ratios that can be
used for the fee computation. Pursuant to this chapter, for non-residential
property calculations, an ERU is considered to be a single-family lot less than
or equal to 20,000 square feet. The runoff coefficient assigned to the ERU is
0.36. The runoff coefficients assigned to the classifications are as follows:
      (1)   Single-Family Residential
         (All tiers)            0.36
      (2)   Agricultural Residential (AR)   0.36
      (3)   Light Industrial (LI)         0.73
      (4)   Neighborhood Commercial
         (NC)               0.77
      (5)   Office Professional (OP)      0.78
      (6)   Area-wide Business (AB),
         Marine District (MD),
         Mixed Use (MU) or Recreation   0.86
      (7)   Multifamily (MF)         0.56
   (D)   Computation methodology of Stormwater Utility Management Program fee
and example calculation.
      (1)   Computation of Stormwater Utility Management Program fee.
         (a)   Determine the ERU base rate for the year.
         (b)   Equate base range (0 - 0.5 ac) of commercial to the ERU.
         (c)   Assign area ranges for commercial zones.
         (d)   Calculate ratios for parcels > 0.5 ac based on area.
         (e)   Using the ratios calculated in division (d), multiply by base
rate to obtain the yearly fee.
      (2)   Example calculation. In order to find the fee for 2.75-acre
property in an AB zone in 2021:
         (a)   ERU = $60.90/year.
         (b)   Ratio of AB to ERU 0.86/0.36 = 2.39. Therefore, a parcel </
=20,000 square feet has a ratio of 2.39.
         (c)   The property (2.75 ac) falls within the assigned area of 2.10 -
5.00 acre.
         (d)   Multiply ratio by avgerage value for this range: 2.39/9.50 x
3.55 = 16.97.
         (e)   Compute fee based on ERU: 16.97 x 60.90 = $1,033.47/year.
   (E)   Stormwater Utility Management Program fee: assigned ratios based on
"C" factors and acreage.
Area of parcels (acres)* Average areas (acres) AB OP NC LI MF
Area of parcels  Average areas (acres) AB      OP      NC      LI      MF
(acres)*
0 - 0.50                               2.39    2.17    2.14    2.03    1.56
0.51 - 1.0       0.76                  3.63    3.30    3.25    3.09    2.37
1.1 - 2.0        1.55                  7.41    6.73    6.63    6.29    4.84
2.1 - 5.0        3.55                  16.9 7  15.4 1  15.1 9  14.4 1  11.0 8
5.1 - 10.0       7.55                  36.0 9  32.7 7  32.3 1  30.6 5  23.5 6
10.1 - 15.0      12.5 5                59.9 9  54.4 7  53.7 1  50.9 5  39.1 6
15.1 - 20.0      17.5 5                83.8 9  76.1 7  75.1 1  71.2 5  54.7 6
20.1 - 30.0      25.0 5                119. 74 108. 72 107. 21 101. 70 78.1 6
Parcels larger than 30 ac based on actual acreage
*Note: Average area within each range is used to determine ratio
 
   (F)   Annual fees. Annual fees for all property, whether occupied or vacant,
shall be as follows:
      (1)   Tier 1 Single-Family Residential property. Tier 1 Single-Family
Residential property shall be charged a fee equal to the base rate times three
quarters (0.75) of an equivalent residential unit (ERU), regardless of the size
of the parcel or the improvements.
      (2)   Tier 2 Single-Family Residential property. Tier 2 Single-Family
Residential property shall be charged a fee equal to the base rate times one
equivalent residential unit (ERU), regardless of the size of the parcel or the
improvements.
      (3)   Tier 3 Single-Family Residential property. Tier 3 Single-Family
Residential property shall be charged a fee equal to the base rate times one
and a half (1.50) equivalent residential units (ERU), regardless of the size of
the parcel or the improvements.
      (4)   Agricultural Residential property. Agricultural Residential
property shall be charged a fee equal to the base rate times one equivalent
residential unit (ERU), regardless of the size of the parcel or the
improvements.
      (5)   Commercial property. The intensity of development factor is greater
than a single-family unit because of the amount of impervious area. Pursuant to
generally accepted engineering data, the runoff coefficient or C-Factor for
commercial property has been determined to be as set forth below in divisions
(a) through (e). An equation is used to relate the runoff coefficient of the
multi-family property to a base ERU equal to a single-family lot less than or
equal to 20,000 square feet for calculation purposes. This equation is then
multiplied by the average acreage for the appropriate size range of the
property in question. The determined ratio is then multiplied by the base rate
to determine the yearly fee. Commercial condominiums that have been assigned a
tax map number by the county shall be billed at the base rate.
         (b)   Neighborhood Commercial      0.77
         (c)   Office Professional         0.78
         (d)   Areawide Business,
            Marine District,
            Mixed Use or Recreation      0.86
         (e)   Multifamily            0.56
      (6)   Undeveloped property. Undeveloped property shall be charged one-
half (0.5) of the ERU rate. Pursuant to generally accepted engineering data,
the runoff coefficient is approximately one-half of the runoff coefficient for
the ERU definition stated herein.
      (7)   Recreation facilities, parks, golf courses, and appurtenances
thereto. Recreation facilities, parks, and golf courses shall be charged one-
half (0.5) of the ERU rate for each individual tax parcel. Clubhouses, tennis
and pool facilities, and appurtenances thereto shall be billed at the
appropriate AB Rate as previously defined in this section under division (E).
   (G)   Minimum fee.
      (1)   All dwelling units within the town that have been assigned a tax
map number by the county shall be charged the base rate multiplied by the
appropriate ERU.
      (2)   All non-residential/commercial property within the town that has
been assigned an individual tax map number by the county shall be charged a
minimum fee based upon a parcel size of less than one-half (0.5) acre within
the applicable classification, or a fee based upon an actual calculation as
prescribed by this chapter, whichever is greater.
(Ord. 21059, passed 8-10-21)
§ 52.09 INVESTMENT AND REINVESTMENT OF FUNDS AND BORROWING.
   Funds generated for the Stormwater Utility Management Program from fees,
bond issues, other borrowing, and other sources shall be utilized only for
those purposes for which the Program has been established, including but not
limited to: planning; acquisition of interest in land including easements;
design and construction of facilities; maintenance of the stormwater utility
system; billing and administration; and water quantity and water quality
management, including monitoring, surveillance, private maintenance inspection,
construction inspection, and other activities which are reasonably required.
Such funds shall be invested and reinvested pursuant to the same procedures and
practices established by the town for investment and reinvestment of funds. The
Town Council may use any form of borrowing authorized by the laws of the state
to fund capital acquisitions or expenditures for the Stormwater Utility
Management Program.
(Ord. 21059, passed 8-10-21)
§ 52.10 BILLING OF FEES; LATE CHARGES.
   (A)   The Stormwater Utility Management Program fee shall be billed
annually.
   (B)   The property owner(s) of record as indicated by the Charleston County
Assessor's tax rolls as of January 1 of the year of the billing shall be
responsible for the payment of the Stormwater Utility Management Program fee.
   (C)   For non-payment of all or any part of the stormwater fees, the
monetary penalty shall be the same penalty set forth in S.C. Code § 12-45-180.
If any stormwater fee shall remain unpaid for 60 days after the due date, the
town or its collection representative may issue a lien upon the parcel for the
stormwater fee, penalties and costs of collection and shall proceed to collect
in the same manner as prescribed by law for the collection of other fees and
taxes.
   (D)   Developed properties shall be subject to the imposition of the
Stormwater Utility Management Program fee upon approval by the town.
(Ord. 21059, passed 8-10-21)
§ 52.11 MUNICIPAL LIABILITY.
   Nothing in this chapter, and no action or failure to act under this chapter
shall or may be construed to:
   (A)   Impose any liability on the town, or its departments, agencies,
officers or employees for the recovery of damages; or
   (B)   Relieve any person engaged in a land-disturbing activity of duties,
obligations, responsibilities, or liabilities arising from or incident to
operations associated with such activity or imposed by the provisions of this
chapter or the laws and regulations pursuant to which it was adopted.
(Ord. 21059, passed 8-10-21)
§ 52.12 REQUESTS FOR RECONSIDERATION.
   (A)   A property owner may request a reconsideration of any determination or
interpretation by the Director of Engineering and Development Services or his/
her appointee in the operation of the Stormwater Utility Management Program
fee.
      (1)   Such request must be in writing, specifically explaining the
grounds for the request, and filed with the Director of Engineering and
Development Services or his/her appointee within 30 days of the annual billing
date.
      (2)   Payment of the assessment under protest shall be a condition
precedent relative to any request for reconsideration of any determination or
interpretation by the Director of Engineering and Development Services or his/
her appointee.
   (B)   The Director of Engineering and Development Services or his/her
appointee shall review the application and make a decision on the request
within 30 working days.
   (C)   The request shall be made upon such forms and be accompanied by such
information as the Director of Engineering and Development Services or his/her
appointee, by written policy, shall require.
   (D)   In cases where the applicant believes the fee to be inappropriate
based on the actual impervious area of the property in which the applicant has
interest, the applicant shall submit a site survey of the property. The survey
shall be prepared by a licensed land surveyor and shall contain the name and
license number of the surveyor and date when the field survey was conducted.
The survey shall also include, at a minimum:
      (1)   Property boundaries;
      (2)   Parking areas;
      (3)   Driveway(s);
      (4)   Building(s);
      (5)   Storm drainage facilities;
      (6)   Any other surface improvements; and
      (7)   Calculation of impervious areas.
(Ord. 21059, passed 8-10-21)
§ 52.13 APPEALS.
   (A)   Property owners aggrieved by a decision of the Director of Engineering
and Development Services or his/her appointee hereunder shall have the right to
appeal to the Public Services Committee within ten days of the date of the
decision.
   (B)   The appeal shall be in writing and shall set forth, in detail, the
grounds upon which relief is sought. The Public Services Committee shall hear
the appeal within 60 days of filing and render a decision within ten days after
the hearing.
   (C)   The Public Services Committee shall have full authority to affirm,
modify, or reverse a decision of the Director of Engineering and Development
Services or his/her appointee. In evaluating the appeal, the Public Services
Committee shall determine whether the decision of the Director of Engineering
and Development Services or his/her appointee was made in reasonable compliance
with the standards, policies and criteria of this chapter.
   (D)   Any person aggrieved by a final determination of the Public Services
Committee shall have the right to file an appeal with a court of competent
jurisdiction within 30 days of receiving notice of such determination.
(Ord. 21059, passed 8-10-21)
§ 52.14 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Director of Engineering and Development Services and/or such other
official(s) as the Town Administrator shall designate, shall designate the
enforcement officer(s) for the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 21059, passed 8-10-21)
CHAPTER 53: ENVIRONMENTALLY ACCEPTABLE PACKAGING AND PRODUCTS
Section
   
53.01   Definitions
   
53.02   Single-use plastic carryout bags
   
53.03   Polystyrene/plastic foam disposable food service ware
   
53.04   Disposable food service ware
   
53.05   Prohibited sales
   
53.06   Exemptions for recyclable or properly composted food service ware and
other polystyrene/plastic foam products
   
53.07   Requests for exemption
 
   
53.99   Enforcement and penalties
§ 53.01 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever used in this chapter the
following terms shall have the meanings set forth below:
   AFFORDABLE. Means that a compostable or recyclable product may cost up to
15% more than the purchase cost of the non-compostable or nonrecyclable
alternative(s) and not be regarded, on balance, as exorbitant, overpriced,
unreasonable or invaluable.
   ASTM STANDARD. Meeting the standards of the American Society for Testing and
Materials (ASTM) International Standards D6400 or D6868 for compostable
plastics, as those standards may be amended.
   BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT. Any commercial enterprise that provides carryout
bags to its customers through its employees or independent contractors
associated with the business. The term includes sole proprietorships, joint
ventures, partnerships, corporations, or any other legal entity whether for
profit or not for profit. This term is inclusive of any store or business which
sells or offers goods or merchandise, located or operating within the town,
including those referenced in FOOD OR GROCERY ESTABLISHMENT and FOOD PROVIDER.
   COMPOSTABLE. All the materials in the product or package, when composted in
an industrial or municipal compost operation, will break down, or otherwise
become part of, usable compost (e.g. soil-conditioning material, mulch) in a
safe and timely manner. Compostable food service ware must meet ASTM-Standards
for compostability and any bio-plastic or plastic-like product must be clearly
labeled, preferably with a colorsymbol, to allow proper identification such
that the collector and processor can easily distinguish the ASTM standard
compostable plastic from non-ASTM standard compostable plastic. Compostable
products are considered compostable under this section only if a business
establishment or food or grocery establishment using the products is composting
them with an industrial or municipal compost operation.
   DISPOSABLE FOOD SERVICE WARE. Interchangeable with TO GO packaging and FOOD
PACKAGING MATERIAL and includes, but is not limited to: all containers,
clamshells, bowls, plates, trays, cartons, cups, straws, stirrers, napkins and
other items designed for one-time use associated with prepared foods, including
without limitation, service ware for takeout foods and/or leftovers from
partially consumed meals prepared by food providers.
   EVENTS PROMOTER. An applicant for any event permit issued by the town or any
town employee(s) responsible for any town-organized event.
   FOOD OR GROCERY ESTABLISHMENT. All sales outlets, stores, shops, vehicles or
other places of business located within the town which operate to sell or
convey foods, or beverages, which foods or beverages are predominantly
contained, wrapped or held in or on packaging. FOOD ESTABLISHMENT shall
include, but not be limited to, any place where food is prepared, mixed,
cooked, baked, smoked, preserved, bottled, packaged, handled, stored,
manufactured and sold or offered for sale, including, but not limited to, any
fixed or mobile restaurant, drive-in, convenience store, coffee shop,
cafeteria, short-order cafe, delicatessen, luncheonette, grill, sandwich shop,
soda fountain, hotel, motel, movie house, theatre, bed and breakfast inn,
tavern, bar, cocktail lounge, nightclub, roadside stand, takeout prepared food
place, industrial feeding establishment, catering kitchen, mobile food
preparation unit, commissary, event, grocery store, public food market, produce
stand, food stand, or similar place in or at which food or drink is prepared
for sale, or for service, on the premises or elsewhere, and any other
establishment or operation where food is processed, prepared, stored, served,
sold, or provided for the public and any organization, group or individual
which provides food as part of its service.
   FOOD PROVIDER. Any vendor, business, organization, entity, group, or
individual, including food establishments, as defined herein, located in the
town that offers food or beverage to the public.
   PERSON. An individual, business, event promoter, trust, firm, joint stock
company, corporation, non-profit, including a government corporation,
partnership, or association.
   POLYSTERENE/PLASTIC FOAM. Blown expanded and extruded polystyrene (sometimes
called Styrofoam™) or other plastic foams which are processed by any number of
techniques including, but not limited to, fusion of monomer spheres (expanded
bead plastic), injection molding, foam molding, and extrusion-blown molding
(extruded foam plastic). Polystyrene and other plastic foam is generally used
to make cups, bowls, plates, trays, clamshell containers, meat trays, egg
cartons, coolers, ice chests, shipping boxes, packing peanuts, and beach or
pool toys. The term POLYSTYRENE also includes clear or solid polystyrene which
is known as ORIENTED POLYSTYRENE.
   POLYSTYRENE/PLASTIC FOAM PRODUCTS. Any item such as coolers, ice chests,
cups, bowls, plates, clamshells, shipping boxes, containers, cutlery, or any
other merchandise containing polystyrene/plastic foam that is not wholly
encapsulated or encased by a more durable material.
   PREPARED FOOD. Food or beverages, which are served, packaged, cooked,
chopped, sliced, mixed, brewed, frozen, squeezed or otherwise prepared within
the town. PREPARED FOOD does not include raw, butchered meats, fish and/or
poultry sold from a butcher case or similar food establishment.
   RECYCLABLE. Any material that is accepted by the town recycling program or
the Charleston County recycling program, including, but not limited to, paper,
glass, aluminum, cardboard and plastic bottles, jars and tubs. This also means
any approved alternative products which are accepted by the county recycling
centers.
   REUSABLE CARRYOUT BAG. A carryout bag that is specifically designed and
manufactured for multiple reuse, and meets the following criteria:
      (1)   Displays, in a highly visible manner on the bag exterior, language
describing the bag's ability to be reused and recycled;
      (2)   Has a handle which is stitched and not heat-fused;
      (3)   Is constructed out of any of the following materials:
         (a)   Cloth, other machine-washable fabric, or other durable
materials, whether woven or non-woven;
         (b)   Recyclable plastic, with a minimum thickness of 4 mils; and
         (c)   Has a minimum lifetime of 125 uses, which for purposes of this
section means the capability of carrying a minimum of 22 pounds 125 times over
a distance of at least 175 feet.
   SINGLE-USE PLASTIC CARRYOUT BAG. A bag provided by a business establishment
to a customer typically at the point of sale for the purpose of transporting
purchases, which is made predominantly of plastic derived from either petroleum
or a biologically-based source.
   TOWN OF MOUNT PLEASANT CONTRACTOR. Any person or entity that has a contract
with the town for work or improvement to be performed, for a franchise,
concession, for grant monies, goods and services, or supplies to be purchased
at the expense of the town, or to be paid out of monies deposited in the
treasury or out of trust monies under the control or collected by the town.
   TOWN OF MOUNT PLEASANT FACILITY.  Any building, structure or vehicle owned
and operated by the town, its agents, agencies, and departments.
(Ord. 18024, passed 4-16-18; Am. Ord. 19017, passed 4-9-19; Am. Ord. 24014,
passed 4-16-24)
§ 53.02 SINGLE-USE PLASTIC CARRYOUT BAGS.
   (A)   No business establishment or food or grocery establishment may provide
single-use plastic carryout bags at any town facility, town-sponsored event, or
any event held on town property.
   (B)   No business establishment or food or grocery establishment within the
town limits may provide single use plastic bags to its customers.
(Ord. 18024, passed 4-16-18)
§ 53.03 POLYSTYRENE/PLASTIC FOAM DISPOSABLE FOOD SERVICE WARE.
   (A)   Food providers within the town may not provide food in any disposable
food service ware that contains polystyrene/plastic foam.
   (B)   Disposable food service ware that contains polystyrene/plastic foam is
prohibited from use in all town facilities.
   (C)   Town contractors in the performance of town contracts and events
promoters may not provide food in disposable food service ware that contains
polystyrene/plastic foam.
(Ord. 18024, passed 4-16-18)
§ 53.04 DISPOSABLE FOOD SERVICE WARE.
   (A)   All food or grocery establishments and food providers within the town
utilizing disposable food service ware shall use recyclable or compostable
products, subject to the provisions of §§
53.06 and
53.07.
   (B)   All town facilities utilizing disposable food service ware shall use
products that are recyclable or compostable.
   (C)   Town contractors and events promoters utilizing disposable food
service ware shall use recyclable or compostable products while performing
under a town contract or permit.
(Ord. 18024, passed 4-16-18; Am. Ord. 18077, passed 11-13-18)
§ 53.05 PROHIBITED SALES.
   No business establishment or event promoter within the town may sell, rent,
or otherwise provide any polystyrene/plastic foam product which is not wholly
encapsulated or encased within a more durable material, except as exempted in
this chapter. This specifically includes, but is not limited to, cups, plates,
bowls, clamshells, bags, and other products intended primarily for food service
use, as well as coolers, containers, ice chests, shipping boxes, or packing
peanuts.
(Ord. 18024, passed 4-16-18)
§ 53.06 EXEMPTIONS FOR RECYCLABLE OR PROPERLY COMPOSTED FOOD SERVICE WARE AND
OTHER POLYSTYRENE/PLASTIC FOAM PRODUCTS.
   (A)   Products made from polystyrene/plastic foam which is wholly
encapsulated or encased by a more durable material are exempt from the
provisions of this chapter. Examples include surfboards, boats, life
preservers, and craft supplies which are wholly encapsulated or encased by a
more durable material, and durable coolers not principally composed of
polystyrene/plastic foam;
   (B)   Construction products made from polystyrene/plastic foam are exempted
from this chapter if the products are used in compliance with town code and
used in a manner preventing the polystyrene/plastic foam from being released
into the environment;
   (C)   Emergency, hospital, and medical supply and services procurement. In
an emergency situation and for the immediate preservation of the public peace,
health or safety, or when a disposable plastic straw is needed by customers due
to medical or physical conditions or disabilities and for whom flexible
compostable paper straws are unsuitable, town facilities, food vendors, town
franchises, contractors and vendors doing business with the town shall be
exempt from the provisions of this chapter;
   (D)   Laundry dry cleaning bags, door-hanger bags, newspaper bags, or
packages of multiple bags intended for use as garbage, pet waste, or yard
waste; although the town encourages the use of recyclable or compostable
products throughout;
   (E)   Bags provided by physicians, dentists, pharmacists or veterinarians to
contain prescription drugs or other medical necessities;
   (F)   Bags used by a customer inside a business establishment to:
      (1)   Contain bulk items, such as produce, nuts, grains, candy, or small
hardware items;
      (2)   Contain or wrap raw or frozen foods, any meat product, whether
seasoned or other processed, or any seafood product, whether or not
prepackaged;
      (3)   Contain or wrap flowers, potted plants or other items to prevent
moisture damage to other purchases; or
      (4)   Contain unwrapped prepared foods or bakery goods;
   (G)   Bags used by a non-profit corporation or other hunger relief charity
to distribute food, grocery products, clothing, or other household items;
   (H)   Bags of any type that the customer brings to the store for their own
use for carrying away from the store goods that are not placed in a bag
provided by the store;
   (I)   Meat trays, plastic lids to contain foods and liquids, and cutlery
(i.e.: forks, spoons, knives) are exempt from the provisions of this chapter;
   (J)   Any product purchased, prepared or packaged outside the town and sold
in or delivered into the town are exempt from the provisions of this chapter;
   (K)   Any packaging used by food or grocery establishments that is required
in order to comply with South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental
Control Retail Food Establishment Regulation 61-25, or a similar food safety
regulation, or with federal food safety laws or regulations; and
   (L)   Packaging used by food or grocery establishments that is predominantly
made of paper, including wax paper products, paper products that have a clear
plastic window, and paper products, such as paper cups and soup bowls, that are
lined in plastic and used to package ready-to-eat foods.
(Ord. 18024, passed 4-16-18; Am. Ord. 18077, passed 11-13-18; Am. Ord. 19017,
passed 4-9-19)
§ 53.07 REQUESTS FOR EXEMPTION.
   (A)   The Public Services Committee may exempt a food or grocery
establishment or food provider from the requirements set forth in this chapter
for up to a one-year period upon the food provider showing, in writing, that
this chapter would create an undue hardship or practical difficulty not
generally applicable to other persons in similar circumstances. The Public
Services Committee shall put the decision to grant or deny up to a one-year
exemption in writing, however the decision may be appealed to Town Council.
   (B)   Exemptions to allow for the sale or provision of polystyrene/plastic
foam products may be granted by the Public Services Committee if the food or
grocery establishment or food provider can demonstrate in writing a public
health and safety requirement or medical necessity to use the product. The
Public Services Committee shall put the decision to grant or deny the exemption
in writing and the decision may be appealed to Town Council.
   (C)   An exemption application shall include all information necessary for
the Public Services Committee to make a decision, including but not limited to
documentation showing factual support for the claimed exemption. The Public
Services Committee may require the applicant to provide additional information.
   (D)   The Public Services Committee may approve the exemption application in
whole or in part, with or without conditions.
(Ord. 18024, passed 4-16-18)
§ 53.99 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   The Police Department has primary responsibility for enforcement of
this chapter. The Police Department is authorized to take any and all other
actions reasonable and necessary to enforce this chapter, including, but not
limited to, investigating violations, issuing fines and entering the premises
of any business establishment during business hours.
   (B)   If a police officer determines that a violation of this chapter has
occurred, he/she will issue a written warning notice to the owner or operator
of the business establishment that a violation has occurred and the potential
penalties that will apply for future violations.
   (C)   Any business establishment that violates or fails to comply with any
of the provisions of this chapter after a written warning notice has been
issued for that violation shall be subject to a civil penalty that shall not
exceed $200 for a first violation; $350 for a second violation within any 12-
month period; and $500 for each additional violation within any 12- month
period. Every 30 days that a violation continues will constitute a separate
offense.
   (D)   In addition to the penalties set forth in this section, repeated
violations of this chapter by a person who owns, manages, operates, is a
business agent of, or otherwise controls a business establishment may result in
the suspension or revocation of the business license issued to the premises on
which the violations occurred. No town business license shall be issued or
renewed until all fines outstanding against the applicant for violations of
this chapter are paid in full.
   (E)   Violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance,
which may be abated by the town by restraining order, preliminary and permanent
injunction, or other means provided for by law, and the town may take action to
recover the costs of the nuisance abatement.
(Ord. 18024, passed 4-16-18)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC RULES
      
72.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
73.   BICYCLES
      
74.   REGULATIONS FOR THE RAVENEL/COOPER RIVER BRIDGE
      
75.   REGULATIONS FOR THE BEN SAWYER BRIDGE
      
76.   INTERSECTION SIGNALIZATION
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
70.01   Definitions
   
70.02   Compliance with police
   
70.03   Obedience to traffic-control devices
   
70.04   Public employees to obey traffic regulations
   
70.05   Pushcarts, bicycles, and animals
 
   
70.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Chapter applicable and uniform throughout state; local regulations, see S.C.
Code § 56-5-30
   Motor vehicle registration and licensing, see S.C. Code §§ 56-3-10 et seq.
   Powers of local authorities; obedience to traffic laws, see S.C. Code § 56-
5-710
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY. Any driveway or walkway designed or intended to be used by the
general public.
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Vehicles of the Fire Department (fire patrol),
police vehicles, and such ambulances or emergency vehicles of municipal
departments or public service corporations as are designated or authorized by
the State Highway Department or by the Chief of Police. (S.C. Code § 56-5-170)
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a roadway,
when, within 600 feet along such roadway, there are buildings in use for
business or industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, hotels, banks,
office buildings,  railroad stations, and public buildings which occupy at
least 300 feet of frontage on one side or 300 feet collectively on both sides
of the roadway.
(S.C. Code § 56-5-520)
   CROSSWALK.
      (1)   That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
street, measured from the curbs, or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of
the traversable roadway; or
      (2)   Any portion of a roadway, at an intersection or elsewhere,
distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the
surface.
(S.C. Code § 56-5-500)
   DRIVER. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
(S.C. Code § 56-5-400)
   INTERSECTION.
      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of two highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right
angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling on different highways
joining at any other angle may come in contact.
      (2)   When a highway includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, every
crossing of each roadway of such highway by an intersecting highway shall be
regarded as a separate intersection. In the event such intersecting highway
also includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, every crossing of two
roadways of such highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
   LANED HIGHWAYS. A highway, the roadway of which is divided into two or more
clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic. (S.C. Code § 56-5-470)
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled. (S.C. Code § 56-5-130)
   OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD. Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall
mean standard time or daylight saving time, as may be in current use in this
municipality.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, signals, markings, and devices
not inconsistent with this chapter or S.C. Code, Title 56, Chapter 5, placed or
erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the
purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.
(S.C. Code § 56-5-540)
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL. Any device, whether manually, electrically,
or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and
proceed.
(S.C. Code § 56-5-550)
   OPERATE. Run, drive, pull, draw, tow, or otherwise move on, along, or across
a highway any vehicle making use of a highway by means of a motor vehicle being
used thereon, or motor vehicle in charge of and under the direction of an
operator.
   OWNER. Every person who holds the legal title of a vehicle, or in the event
a vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease
thereof with the right of purchase on performance of the conditions stated in
the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the
conditional vendee or lessee, or a mortgagor of a vehicle is entitled to
possession, then such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor shall be deemed
the OWNER for the purpose of this title.
(S.C. Code § 56-5-410)
   PARK. When prohibited, the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading.
(S.C. Code § 56-5-610)
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
(S.C. Code § 56-5-390)
   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer, regular or special, of the Police Department
of this municipality, every member of the State Highway Patrol, and any other
officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for
violation of traffic regulations of this municipality. (S.C. Code § 56-5-420)
   PRIVATE ROAD or DRIVEWAY. Every way or place in private ownership and used
for vehicular and other travel by the owner and those having express or implied
permission from the owner, but not by other persons. (S.C. Code § 56-5-450)
   RAILROAD. A carrier of persons or property on cars. (S.C. Code § 56-5-270)
   RAILROAD TRAIN. A steam engine or electric or other motor, with or without
cars coupled thereto, operated on rails. (S.C. Code § 56-5-280)
   RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway not
comprising a BUSINESS DISTRICT when the property on such highway for a distance
of 300 feet or more is in the main improved with residences or residences and
buildings in use for business.
(S.C. Code § 56-5-530)
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.
(S.C. Code § 56-5-580)
   ROADWAY. That portion of a street improved, designed, or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel, exclusive of the shoulder or berm. Where a highway includes
two roadways, the term ROADWAY shall refer to any such roadway separately, but
not to all such roadways collectively. (S.C. Code § 56-5-460)
   SAFETY ZONE. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or
indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set
apart as a safety zone.
(S.C. Code § 56-5-510)
   SIDEWALK. That portion of a street between the curb lines or the lateral
lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines, intended for the use of
pedestrians. (S.C. Code § 56-5-480)
   STANDING. Any stopping of a vehicle, whether occupied or not.
   STOP. When required, a complete cessation of movement. (S.C. Code § 56-5-
590)
   STOP or STOPPING. When prohibited, any stopping of a vehicle or traffic,
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with the direction of a police officer or traffic-control sign or signal.
(S.C. Code § 56-5-600)
   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between property lines of every way or
place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular or other traffic. (S.C.
Code § 56-5-430)
   THROUGH HIGHWAY. Every highway or portion thereof, at the entrances to which
vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to stop before
entering or crossing the same, when stop signs are erected as provided by law
and the ordinances, rules, and regulations of this municipality. (S.C. Code §
56-5-440)
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, or single animals whether
being led or driven, or other thing, vehicles, bicycles, and other conveyances,
either singly or together, while using any street for purposes of travel.
(S.C. Code § 56-5-570)
   VEHICLE. Every device in, on, or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn on a highway, except devices moved by human power or
used exclusively on stationary rails or tracks. (S.C. Code § 56-5-120)
('81 Code, § 70.01)
§ 70.02 COMPLIANCE WITH POLICE.
   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
directive of a police officer.
('81 Code, § 70.02) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Obedience to police officers, see S.C. Code § 56-5-740
§ 70.03 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   All persons shall obey all traffic-control devices or signs, signals,
markings, and devices placed or erected by the municipality or the State
Highway Department, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically operated.
('81 Code, § 70.03) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.04 PUBLIC EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   The provisions of this title shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned
by or used in the service of the U.S. government or any state, county, or
municipality, and it shall be unlawful for any such driver to violate any of
the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted in this title or
by state statute.
('81 Code, § 70.04) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Application to persons working on highways, see S.C. Code § 56-5-800
§ 70.05 PUSHCARTS, BICYCLES, AND ANIMALS.
   Every person propelling any pushcart or riding a bicycle or an animal on a
roadway and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle shall be subject to
the provisions of this title applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except
those provisions of this title which by their very nature can have no
application.
('81 Code, § 70.05)
Cross-reference:
   Bicycles, see
Ch. 73
Statutory reference:
   Persons riding animals, driving animal-drawn vehicles, or pushing pushcarts,
see S.C. Code § 56-5-790
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no penalty is
otherwise provided, shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned for not
more than 30 days. However, no penalty shall exceed the penalty provided by
state law for similar offenses. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day that a violation occurs or continues.
('81 Code, § 70.99)
Statutory reference:
   Disposition of fines and forfeitures, see S.C. Code § 56-5-6200
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC RULES
Section
General Provisions
   
71.001   Equipment and condition of vehicles
   
71.002   Operation of emergency vehicles
   
71.003   Boarding or alighting from motor vehicles
   
71.004   Riding on portion of vehicle not designed for passengers
   
71.005   Obstruction to driver's view or driving mechanism
   
71.006   Horns restricted in quiet zones
   
71.007   Unnecessary use of horns, sirens, and loudspeakers
   
71.008   Racing engines
   
71.009   Clinging to moving vehicles
   
71.010   Towing coasters or sleds
   
71.011   Use of skates or toy vehicles in streets
   
71.012   Carrying passengers on bicycles or motorcycles
   
71.013   Hitchhiking
   
71.014   The passing of items to or from the occupant of a motor vehicle on a
roadway
Loads
   
71.020   Spilling loads on streets
   
71.021   Loads to be firmly attached
Accidents
   
71.030   Duty of driver in case of death or injury
   
71.031   Duty of driver involving damage to attended vehicles
   
71.032   Duty to give information and render aid
   
71.033   Striking unattended vehicle
   
71.034   Striking fixtures on or near a highway
   
71.035   Report of accidents
Operation of Vehicles
   
71.050   Reckless driving
   
71.051   Persons using drugs or alcoholic beverages
   
71.052   Operation prohibited when license suspended
   
71.053   Driving too fast for conditions
   
71.054   Speed limits to be observed
   
71.055   Passing
   
71.056   Overtaking on the left
   
71.057   Overtaking on the right
   
71.058   Limitation for overtaking on the left
   
71.059   Following too closely
   
71.060   Following fire apparatus
   
71.061   Driving over fire hose
   
71.062   U-turns
   
71.063   Backing of vehicles
   
71.064   Funerals and other processions
   
71.065   Meeting, overtaking, and passing school bus
   
71.066   Careless driving or riding
Turning and Starting Movements
   
71.080   Turning movements
   
71.081   Signals required
   
71.082   Hand and arm signals
   
71.083   Signals by hand, arm, or signal devices
Right-of-way
   
71.100   Approaching or entering intersection
   
71.101   Turning left at intersection
   
71.102   Entering through highway from stop intersection
   
71.103   Entering through highway from private road
   
71.104   Procedure on approach of authorized emergency vehicles
Cross-reference:
   Bicycles, see
Ch. 73
Statutory reference:
   Accidents and reports, see S.C. Code §§ 56-5-1210 through 56-5-1360
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 71.001 EQUIPMENT AND CONDITION OF VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or move, or for the owner to
cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved, on any street or highway, any
vehicle or combination of vehicles which is in such an unsafe condition as to
endanger any person or property or which does not contain those parts or is not
at all times equipped with lights, brakes, steering, and other equipment in
proper condition and adjustment as required in S.C. Code §§ 56-5-4450 through
56-5-5140.
('81 Code, § 70.06) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Unlawful to operate unsafe or improperly equipped vehicle, see S.C. Code §
56-5-4410
§ 71.002 OPERATION OF EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking, and
standing of vehicles shall apply to emergency vehicles, except, that a person
operating any such vehicle in an emergency, except when otherwise directed by a
police officer, may:
      (1)   Park or stand, notwithstanding the provisions of this title.
      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation.
      (3)   Exceed the prima facie speed limits, so long as doing so does not
endanger life or property.
      (4)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in
specified directions, so long as he or she does not endanger life or property.
   (B)   The provisions of division (A) above shall apply only when the driver
of any such vehicle while in motion, sounds an audible signal by bell, siren,
or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary and when the vehicle is
equipped with at least one lighted lamp displaying a red light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such
vehicle, except, that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police
vehicle need not be equipped with or display a red light visible from in front
of the vehicle.
   (C)   The provisions of divisions (A) and (B) above shall not relieve the
driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the
driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of his or her reckless
disregard of the safety of others.
('81 Code, § 70.07) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Operation of authorized emergency vehicles; signals; duty of driver, see
S.C. Code § 56-5-760
§ 71.003 BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM MOVING VEHICLES.
   No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in
motion.
('81 Code, § 70.08) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.004 RIDING ON PORTION OF VEHICLE NOT DESIGNED FOR PASSENGERS.
   No person shall ride on any vehicle on any portion thereof not designated or
intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an
employee engaged in the necessary discharge of duty, or to persons riding
within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise.
('81 Code, § 70.09) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.005 OBSTRUCTION TO DRIVER'S VIEW OR DRIVING MECHANISM.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there
are in the front seat such number of persons exceeding three, as to obstruct
the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle, or as to interfere
with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (B)   No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere
with the driver's view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with the driver's
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
('81 Code, § 70.10) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Operation of vehicle when driver's view or control over driving mechanism
interfered with, see S.C. Code § 56-5-3820
§ 71.006 HORNS RESTRICTED IN QUIET ZONES.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a zone of quiet, no person
operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other
warning device of such vehicle, except in an emergency.
('81 Code, § 70.11) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.007 UNNECESSARY USE OF HORNS, SIRENS, AND LOUDSPEAKERS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to unnecessarily blow any horn or
unnecessarily use any other sound signal.
   (B)   The use of any cutout exhaust whistle, loudspeaker, or siren by any
person in the operation of a motor vehicle in the municipality is prohibited,
except by the operator of an authorized emergency vehicle in an actual
emergency.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person in the operation of a motor
vehicle to cause or allow any loud, excessive, or unusual noise in the
operation or use of such motor vehicle on any of the streets of the
municipality.
('81 Code, § 70.12) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.008 RACING ENGINES.
   It shall be unlawful in the municipality for any person to race the engine
of any motor vehicle while such vehicle is not in motion, except when necessary
to do so in the course of repairing, adjusting, or testing the vehicle.
('81 Code, § 70.13) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.009 CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLES.
   Any person riding on any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates,
or any toy vehicle shall not attach the same or himself to any moving vehicle
on any roadway.
('81 Code, § 70.14) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Clinging to vehicles prohibited, see S.C. Code § 56-5-3450
§ 71.010 TOWING COASTERS OR SLEDS.
   No operator of any vehicle shall tow or draw any coaster, sled, person on
roller skates, toy vehicle, or other similar vehicle on a roadway.
('81 Code, § 70.15) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.011 USE OF SKATES OR TOY VEHICLES IN STREETS.
   No person on roller skates or riding in, or by means of, any coaster, toy
vehicle, or similar device shall go on any roadway, except while crossing a
street on a crosswalk and except on streets set aside as play streets.
('81 Code, § 70.16) Penalty, see §
70.99
Cross-reference:
   Roller skating and bicycle riding, see §
95.09
§ 71.012 CARRYING PASSENGERS ON BICYCLES OR MOTORCYCLES.
   The operator of a motorcycle or bicycle, when on a street, shall not carry
any other person on the handlebar, frame, or tank of any such vehicle, nor
shall any person so ride on any such vehicle.
('81 Code, § 70.17) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.013 HITCHHIKING.
   No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride from
the driver of any vehicle.
('81 Code, § 70.20) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Hitchhiking prohibited, see S.C. Code § 56-5-3180
§ 71.014 THE PASSING OF ITEMS TO OR FROM THE OCCUPANT OF A MOTOR VEHICLE ON A
ROADWAY.
   (A)   Intent of section. This section is intended to provide for the free
flow of motor vehicle traffic on roadways in the town. Mount Pleasant Town
Council finds that persons who distribute any item to, receive any item from or
exchange any item with the occupant of a motor vehicle upon a roadway present a
threat to the free and safe flow of motor vehicle traffic. By this section,
Mount Pleasant Town Council intends to promote the health, safety and welfare
of the citizens traveling by vehicle or on foot in the Town of Mount Pleasant.
   (B)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions
apply:
      ITEM. Any physical object.
      PASS/PASSING. Distributing any item to, receiving any item from, or
exchanging any item with the occupant of a motor vehicle that is located in a
lane of travel of the roadway.
      ROADWAY. All public roads open to motorized vehicles within the Town of
Mount Pleasant. This definition excludes private roads and private property.
This definition also excludes areas in which parking is permitted in the Town
of Mount Pleasant.
   (C)   Prohibition on roadways. It shall be unlawful to violate any of the
prohibitions set forth below in the Town of Mount Pleasant.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly distribute any item to, receive any item
from, or exchange any item with the occupant of any motor vehicle when the
vehicle is located in a lane of travel on the roadway.
      (2)   This section shall not apply to the distribution, receipt or
exchange of any item with the occupant of a motor vehicle on private property
or in a permitted parking area.
      (3)   This section shall not apply to any law enforcement officer acting
in the scope of his or her official duty.
      (4)   This section shall not apply to the distribution, receipt or
exchange of any item with the occupant of a motor vehicle located in the
roadway in order to assist the occupant after a motor vehicle accident, with a
disabled motor vehicle or where the occupant is experiencing a medical
emergency.
(Ord. 16008, passed 2-10-16)
LOADS
§ 71.020 SPILLING LOADS ON STREETS.
   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any street or highway unless such
vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load from
dropping, sifting, leaking, or otherwise escaping there from.
('81 Code, § 70.18) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Spilling loads on highway prohibited, see S.C. Code § 56-5-4100
§ 71.021 LOADS TO BE FIRMLY ATTACHED.
   No person shall operate on any street or highway any vehicle with any load
unless such load and any covering thereon is securely fastened so as to prevent
such covering or load from becoming loose, detached, or in any manner a hazard
to other users of the street or highway.
('81 Code, § 70.19) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Loads and covers shall be firmly attached, see S.C. Code § 56-5-4110
ACCIDENTS
§ 71.030 DUTY OF DRIVER IN CASE OF DEATH OR INJURY.
   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to, or
the death, of any person shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of
such accident or as close there to as possible, but shall then forthwith return
to, and in every event shall remain at, the scene of the accident until he or
she has fulfilled the requirements of §
71.032. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is
necessary.
('81 Code, § 70.30) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Duty of driver involved in accident resulting in death or personal injury,
see S.C. Code § 56-5-1210
§ 71.031 DUTY OF DRIVER INVOLVING DAMAGE TO ATTENDED VEHICLES.
   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage
to a vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall immediately stop
such vehicle at the scene of such accident or as close thereto as possible, but
shall forthwith return to, and in every event shall remain at, the scene of
such accident until he or she has fulfilled the requirements of §
71.033. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is
necessary.
('81 Code, § 70.31) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Duties of driver involved in accident resulting in damage to attended
vehicles, see S.C. Code § 56-5-1220
§ 71.032 DUTY TO GIVE INFORMATION AND RENDER AID.
   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to, or
death of, any person or damage to any vehicle which is driven or attended by
any person shall give his or her name, address, and the registration number of
the vehicle he or she is driving and shall, on request and if available,
exhibit his or her driver's license to the person struck or the driver or
occupant of or person attending any vehicle collided with, and shall render to
any person injured in such accident reasonable assistance, including the
carrying or making arrangements for the carrying of such person to a physician,
surgeon, or hospital for medical or surgical treatment, if it is apparent that
such treatment is necessary or if such carrying is requested by the injured
person.
('81 Code, § 70.32) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Duty to give information and render aid, see S.C. Code § 56-5-1230
§ 71.033 STRIKING UNATTENDED VEHICLE.
   The driver of any vehicle which collides with any vehicle which is
unattended shall immediately stop and shall then and there either locate and
notify the operator or owner of such vehicle of the name and address of the
driver and owner of the vehicle striking the unattended vehicle or shall leave
in a conspicuous place in the vehicle struck a written notice giving the name
and address of the driver and of the vehicle doing the striking and a statement
of the circumstances thereof.
('81 Code, § 70.33) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Duties of driver involved in accident involving unattended vehicle, see S.C.
Code § 56-5-1240
§ 71.034 STRIKING FIXTURES ON OR NEAR A HIGHWAY.
   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage
to fixtures legally on, or adjacent to, a highway shall take reasonable steps
to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of such property of such
fact and of his or her name and address and of the registration number of the
vehicle he or she is driving, and shall, on request and if available, exhibit
his or her driver's license, and shall make report of such accident when and as
required in S.C. Code § 56-5-1270.
('81 Code, § 70.34) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Duties of driver striking fixtures on or adjacent to highway, see S.C. Code
§ 56-5-1250
§ 71.035 REPORT OF ACCIDENTS.
   The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to, or
death of, any person shall immediately, by the quickest means of communication,
whether oral or written, give notice of such accident to the Police Department.
('81 Code, § 70.35) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Drivers, witnesses, and law enforcement officers shall make written reports
of certain accidents and investigations, see S.C. Code § 56-5-1270
   Immediate report of accidents resulting in personal injury or death, see
S.C. § 56-5-1260
OPERATION OF VEHICLES
§ 71.050 RECKLESS DRIVING.
   Any person who is driving any vehicle in such a manner as to indicate either
a willful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property is guilty
of reckless driving. In addition, any second or subsequent offense shall render
the offender liable to suspension of his or her driver's license, as provided
in S.C. Code § 56-5-2920.
('81 Code, § 71.01) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Reckless driving, see S.C. Code § 56-5-2920
§ 71.051 PERSONS USING DRUGS OR ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person who is a habitual user of narcotic
drugs, or any person who is under the influence of intoxicating liquors,
narcotic drugs, barbiturates, paraldehydes or drugs, herbs, or any other
substance of like character, whether synthetic or natural, to drive any vehicle
within the municipality.
('81 Code, § 71.02) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Implied consent to chemical test to determine alcoholic content of blood;
suspension of license for refusal to take test, see S.C. Code § 56-5-2950
§ 71.052 OPERATION PROHIBITED WHEN LICENSE SUSPENDED.
   No person whose driver's license has been cancelled, suspended, or revoked
by the State Highway Department shall operate any motor vehicle within the
municipality during the period of such cancellation, suspension, or revocation.
('81 Code, § 71.03) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.053 DRIVING TOO FAST FOR CONDITIONS.
   No person shall drive a motor vehicle on the streets or highways within the
city at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions
then prevailing and having regard to the actual and potential hazards then
existing. In every event speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to
avoid colliding with any person, vehicle, or other conveyance on, or entering,
the highway in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons
to use due care.
('81 Code, § 71.04) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   General rules as to maximum speed limits, see S.C. Code § 56-5-1520
§ 71.054 SPEED LIMITS TO BE OBSERVED.
   (A)   No person shall drive or operate a motor vehicle within the
municipality at a speed in excess of the posted speed limits.
   (B)   No person shall drive or operate a motor vehicle within the
municipality at a speed in excess of 25 m.p.h. on any town street where no
speed limit is posted, unless otherwise specified by state statute.
('81 Code, § 71.05) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Maximum speed limits, see S.C. Code § 56-5-1520
   Alteration of speed limits; signs, see S.C. Code §§ 56-5-1530 through 56-5-
1580
§ 71.055 PASSING.
   Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other
to the right.
('81 Code, § 71.06) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Passing vehicles proceeding in opposite directions, see S.C. Code § 56-5-
1830
§ 71.056 OVERTAKING ON THE LEFT.
   The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction, subject to those limitations, exceptions, and
special rules hereinafter stated:
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not
again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the
overtaken vehicle; and
   (B)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of the
vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
('81 Code, § 71.07) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Overtaking and passing vehicles proceeding in same direction, see S.C. Code
§ 56-5-1840
§ 71.057 OVERTAKING ON THE RIGHT.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass on the right of another
vehicle only under the following conditions:
      (1)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn.
      (2)   On a street or highway with unobstructed pavement not occupied by
parked vehicles and of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving
vehicles in each direction.
      (3)   On a one-way street or on any roadway on which traffic is
restricted to one direction of movement where the roadway is free from
obstructions and of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle on the
right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. In no event
shall such movement be made by driving off the pavement of main-traveled
portion of the roadway.
('81 Code, § 71.08) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Overtaking and passing on the right, see S.C. Code § 56-5-1850
§ 71.058 LIMITATION FOR OVERTAKING ON THE LEFT.
   No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the roadway in
overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless
such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a
sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be
completed, and without interfering, with the safe operation of any vehicle
approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. In every
event, the overtaking vehicle shall return to the right-hand side of the
roadway before coming within 100 feet of any vehicle approaching from the
opposite direction.
('81 Code, § 71.09) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Limitations on overtaking on the left, see S.C. Code § 56-5-1860
§ 71.059 FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY.
   The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely
than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such
vehicles and the traffic on and the condition of the highway.
('81 Code, § 71.10) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Following too closely prohibited, see S.C. Code § 56-5-1930
§ 71.060 FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive in front of, cross the
path directly in front of, or race with any fire truck or firemen's cars while
on the way to or from a fire.
   (B)   No driver of any vehicle, other than one on official business, shall
follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 500
feet, or drive such vehicle into or park such vehicle within the block where
fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
('81 Code, § 71.11) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Following or parking near fire apparatus prohibited, see S.C. Code § 56-5-
1960
§ 71.061 DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.
   No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a Fire Department
when laid down on any street or private driveway, to be used at any fire or
alarm of fire, without the consent of the Fire Department official in command.
('81 Code, § 71.12) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Crossing fire hose prohibited, see S.C. Code § 56-5-3850
§ 71.062 U-TURNS.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed
in the opposite direction on any street in the Business District of the
municipality, and shall not, on any other street, so turn a vehicle unless such
movement can be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic.
   (B)   This section shall not be construed to authorize any such U-turn at
any place in the municipality where such turn is prohibited.
('81 Code, § 71.13) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.063 BACKING OF VEHICLES.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not back it into an intersection or over a
crosswalk and shall not in any event or at any place back a vehicle unless such
movement can be made in safety.
('81 Code, § 71.14) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Limitation on backing, see S.C. Code § 56-5-3810
§ 71.064 FUNERALS AND OTHER PROCESSIONS.
   (A)   Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to
the right-hand edge of the roadway as is practical.
   (B)   Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall follow the vehicle
ahead as close as is practical and safe.
   (C)   No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a
funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion, except as
otherwise directed by police officers.
('81 Code, § 71.15) Penalty, see §
70.99
Cross-reference:
   Parades, demonstrations and picketing, see
Ch. 94
§ 71.065 MEETING, OVERTAKING, AND PASSING SCHOOL BUS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle on a street, on meeting or overtaking from
either direction any school bus which has stopped on the street for the purpose
of receiving or discharging any school children, shall stop the vehicle before
reaching the school bus and shall not proceed until such school bus resumes
motion or until signalled by the driver to proceed.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle on a street or highway with separate roadways
need not stop on meeting or passing a school bus which is on a different
roadway or when the school bus is stopped in a loading zone which is a part of,
or adjacent to, such street or highway and where pedestrians are not permitted
to cross the roadway.
('81 Code, § 71.16) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Meeting, overtaking, and passing school bus, see S.C. Code § 56-5-2770
§ 71.066 CARELESS DRIVING OR RIDING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or ride any vehicle without
care and caution and full regard for the safety of persons and property. Any
person failing so to do shall be guilty of careless driving or riding. The
operation of any vehicle when the same or any of its appliances is not in
proper or safe condition shall be prima facie evidence of careless driving or
riding.
('81 Code, § 71.17) Penalty, see §
70.99
TURNING AND STARTING MOVEMENTS
§ 71.080 TURNING MOVEMENTS.
   No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle is in
proper position on a roadway, or turn a vehicle to enter a private road or
roadway or otherwise turn a vehicle from a direct course, or move right or left
on a roadway unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety.
('81 Code, § 71.25) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Turning at intersection, see S.C. Code § 56-5-2120
   Turning movements, see S.C. Code § 56-5-2150
§ 71.081 SIGNALS REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall turn any vehicle without giving an appropriate signal
in the manner herein provided in the event any other traffic may be affected by
such movement. A signal of intention to turn right or left when required shall
be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the
vehicle before turning.
   (B)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the
driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give
such signal.
('81 Code, § 71.26) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Signals required for turning or stopping, see S.C. Code § 56-5-2160
§ 71.082 HAND AND ARM SIGNALS.
   All turning and stopping signals herein required, given by hand and arm,
shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner and
such signals shall indicate as follows:
   (A)   Left turn, hand and arm extended horizontally;
   (B)   Right turn, hand and arm extended upward; and
   (C)   Stop or decrease speed, hand and arm extended downward.
('81 Code, § 71.27) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Method of giving hand and arm signals, see S.C. Code § 56-5-2170
§ 71.083 SIGNALS BY HAND, ARM, OR SIGNAL DEVICES.
   Any stop or turn signal, when required herein, shall be given either by
means of the hand and arm or by signal lamps or a mechanical signal device, but
when a vehicle is so constructed or loaded that a hand and arm signal would not
be visible to both the front and rear of such vehicle, then such signals shall
be given by such lamps or signal device.
('81 Code, § 71.28) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Signals shall be given by hand and arm or signal devices, see S.C. Code §
56-5-2180
RIGHT-OF-WAY
§ 71.100 APPROACHING OR ENTERING INTERSECTION.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the
right-of-way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection from a different
highway. When two vehicles enter an intersection from different highways at
approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield
the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right.
   (B)   The right-of-way rules declared in this section are modified at
through highways and otherwise as stated in this chapter.
('81 Code, § 71.35) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Vehicles approaching or entering intersection, see S.C. Code § 56-5-2310
§ 71.101 TURNING LEFT AT INTERSECTION.
   The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left
shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite
direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute
an immediate hazard, but such driver, having so yielded and having given a
signal when and as required by this chapter, may make such left turn, and the
drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection from the opposite
direction shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle making the left turn.
('81 Code, § 71.36) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Vehicle turning left at intersection, see S.C. Code § 56-5-2320
§ 71.102 ENTERING THROUGH HIGHWAY FROM STOP INTERSECTION.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall stop as required by this chapter at the
entrance to a through highway and shall yield the right-of-way to other
vehicles which have entered the intersection from the through highway or which
are approaching so closely on such through highway as to constitute an
immediate hazard, but such driver, having so yielded, may proceed, and the
driver of all other vehicles approaching the intersection on such through
highway shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle so proceeding into or
across the through highway.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle shall likewise stop in obedience to a stop
sign as required herein at an intersection where a stop sign is erected at one
or more entrances there to although not a part of a through highway and shall
proceed cautiously, yielding to vehicles not so obliged to stop which are
within the intersection or approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate
hazard, but may then proceed.
('81 Code, § 71.37) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Vehicle entering through highway or stop intersection, see S.C. Code § 56-5-
2330
§ 71.103 ENTERING THROUGH HIGHWAY FROM PRIVATE ROAD.
   The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from a private
road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on
such highway.
('81 Code, § 71.38) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Vehicle entering highway from private road or driveway, see S.C. Code § 56-
5-2350
§ 71.104 PROCEDURE ON APPROACH OF AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   On the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle, when the
driver is giving audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle, or bell, the driver
of any other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive
to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the right-hand edge or
curb of the street or highway, clear of any intersection, and shall stop and
remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed,
except when directed by a police officer.
   (B)   This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons using the street or highway.
('81 Code, § 71.39) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Yielding right-of-way to authorized emergency vehicle, see S.C. Code § 56-5-
2360
CHAPTER 72: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
72.01   Compliance with signs and markings
   
72.02   Stopping, standing, or parking in specified places
   
72.03   Parking in travelled portion of street
   
72.04   Blocking boat landing area
   
72.05   Roadway left free for traffic
   
72.06   Parking in walkway areas
   
72.07   Parking near intersections
   
72.08   Unattended vehicles
   
72.09   Stop signs
   
72.10   Stopping in hazardous or congested places
   
72.11   Stopping school buses for passengers
   
72.12   Bus and taxicab stands
   
72.13   Washing, greasing, or repairing vehicles in roadway
   
72.14   Parking for display purposes
   
72.15   Use of vehicle for advertising purposes
   
72.16   Loading and unloading at business houses
   
72.17   Owner responsible for illegal parking
   
72.18   Removal of abandoned or illegally- stopped vehicles
   
72.19   Parking Enforcement Officer
§ 72.01 COMPLIANCE WITH SIGNS AND MARKINGS.
   When signs or markings prohibiting, limiting, or restricting stopping,
standing, or parking are erected or made on, or along, streets, no person shall
stop, stand, or park a vehicle in violation of any such sign or marking.
('81 Code, § 72.01) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.02 STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING IN SPECIFIED PLACES.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle, except to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police
officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following places:
      (1)   On a sidewalk.
      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway or so near thereto as to
interfere with the ingress or egress thereof.
      (3)   Within an intersection.
      (4)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
      (5)   On a crosswalk.
      (6)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection.
      (7)   Within 30 feet on the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign,
or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway.
      (8)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on a curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless
different length is indicated by signs or markings.
      (9)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
      (10) Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on
the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet
of such entrance.
      (11) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic.
      (12) On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street.
      (13) On any bridge or other elevated structure on a street or within a
street underpass.
      (14) At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
   (B)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his or her control
into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
('81 Code, § 72.02) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Stopping, standing, and parking prohibited in specified places; exceptions,
see S.C. Code § 56-5-2530
§ 72.03 PARKING IN TRAVELLED PORTION OF STREET.
   No person shall park or leave unattended any vehicle on the paved or main
travelled portion of any street or highway within the municipality.
('81 Code, § 72.03) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.04 BLOCKING BOAT LANDING AREA.
   It shall be unlawful to stand or park a vehicle in such position as to block
any approaches or areas adjacent to any boat landing, or so as to interfere
with or impede the launching, loading, or unloading of a boat at any boat
landing located in the municipality, or so as to interfere with the proper
functioning of any boat landing, and securing a boat of any size while in the
water so as to interfere with other boaters.
('81 Code, § 72.04) (Ord. passed 9-10-62) Penalty, see §
70.99
Cross-reference:
   Boat landings; loading and unloading, see §
130.03
§ 72.05 ROADWAY LEFT FREE FOR TRAFFIC.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand, or park any vehicle on a street, in such
a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of
the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic, except, that a
driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading or unloading of
passengers or when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic
signs or signals or a police officer.
   (B)   No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of
the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic.
('81 Code, § 72.05) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.06 PARKING IN WALKWAY AREAS.
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle on that portion of a street between
the curb lines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property
lines.
('81 Code, § 72.06) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.07 PARKING NEAR INTERSECTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any bus, truck, transport truck,
or any other vehicle equipped with a body with sides higher than five feet from
the ground or street, nearer to any corner or intersection than 25 feet. It
shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle within 25 feet of a corner
or intersection which will obstruct or interfere with the view of the
travelling public.
('81 Code, § 72.07) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.08 UNATTENDED VEHICLES.
   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand
unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, and
removing the key, and, when standing on any perceptible grade, without
effectively setting the brake thereon and turning the front wheels to the curb
or side of the street.
('81 Code, § 72.08) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Parking of unattended motor vehicle, see S.C. Code § 56-5-2570
§ 72.09 STOP SIGNS.
   Every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop before entering
the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, in the event there is
no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at a
point nearest the intersecting highway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting highway, before entering the
intersection, except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-
control signal.
('81 Code, § 72.09) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Place where drivers shall stop for stop signs, see S.C. Code § 56-5-2740
§ 72.10 STOPPING IN HAZARDOUS OR CONGESTED PLACES.
   When signs are erected at hazardous or congested places, no person shall
stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any such designated place.
('81 Code, § 72.10) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.11 STOPPING SCHOOL BUSES FOR PASSENGERS.
   Each school bus shall come to a complete stop before any passenger is
permitted to alight or enter.
('81 Code, § 72.11) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.12 BUS AND TAXICAB STANDS.
   The driver of a bus or taxicab shall not stand or park such bus or taxicab
on any street in any business district at any place other than at a bus stop or
taxicab stand, respectively, except, that this provision shall not prevent the
driver of any taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other
stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of, and while
actually engaged in, loading or unloading passengers. No person shall stop,
stand, or park a vehicle, other than a bus in a bus stop or other than a
taxicab in a taxicab stand, when any such stop or stand has been officially
designated and appropriately signed, except, that the driver of a passenger
vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of, and while actually
engaged in, loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not
interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone.
('81 Code, § 72.12) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.13 WASHING, GREASING, OR REPAIRING VEHICLES IN ROADWAY.
   No person shall park or stand a vehicle on any roadway for the principal
purpose of washing, greasing, or repairing such vehicle, except repairs,
necessitated by an emergency.
('81 Code, § 72.13) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.14 PARKING FOR DISPLAY PURPOSES.
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle on any roadway for the principal
purpose of displaying it for sale.
('81 Code, § 72.14) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.15 USE OF VEHICLE FOR ADVERTISING PURPOSES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle on any street or in
any parking space within the municipality for the primary purpose of
advertising.
('81 Code, § 72.15) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.16 LOADING AND UNLOADING AT BUSINESS HOUSES.
   All persons loading or unloading goods at any business house or
establishment in a business district having accessible back or side entrances
shall use such back or side entrances for the purpose of loading or unloading
goods, and in all cases where there exists an accessible back or side entrance
it shall be unlawful to load or unload goods across any sidewalk of the
principal business streets of the municipality, unless otherwise authorized by
a special permit issued in the discretion of the Chief of Police.
('81 Code, § 72.16) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.17 OWNER RESPONSIBLE FOR ILLEGAL PARKING.
   No person shall allow, permit, or suffer any vehicle registered in his or
her name to stand or park in any street in the city in violation of any of the
provisions of this code or other ordinances or regulations of the municipality
regulating the standing or parking of vehicles.
('81 Code, § 72.17) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.18 REMOVAL OF ABANDONED OR ILLEGALLY-STOPPED VEHICLES.
   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing on a street in
violation of any of the provisions of this code or any other ordinance or
traffic regulation, such officer is authorized to remove such vehicle or
require the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to move it to a
position off the paved or main traveled part of such street. Whenever any
police officer finds a vehicle apparently abandoned on a public street or finds
a vehicle unattended on any public street where such vehicle constitutes an
obstruction to traffic, such officer is authorized to provide for the removal
of such vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety, and the owner
of such vehicle shall pay all charges incidental to the removal and storage of
such vehicle prior to the surrender of the vehicle to the owner.
('81 Code, § 72.18)
§ 72.19 PARKING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   The Parking Enforcement Officer as designated by the Chief of Police, in
addition to any town police officer, shall administer and enforce the
provisions of this chapter and he or she shall have such powers and perform
such duties as may be provided for him or her in this chapter or as provided in
any other town or state ordinances/statutes.
('81 Code, § 31.75) (Ord. passed 12-8-92)
CHAPTER 73: BICYCLES
Section
General Provisions
   
73.01   Definitions
   
73.02   Application
Regulations Applicable to Bicyclists
   
73.15   Rights and duties of bicyclists
   
73.16   Limitations as to operation, riding position, and number of riders of
bicycles
   
73.17   Required equipment for bicycles
   
73.18   Bicyclists required to use hand and arm signals
   
73.19   Abandoned bicycles
   
73.20   Riding bicycles on sidewalks
Regulations Applicable to E-Bikes
   
73.30   Rights and duties of persons operating E-Bikes
   
73.31   Limitations as to operation, speed, riding position, and number of
riders of E-Bikes
   
73.32   Required equipment for E-Bikes
   
73.33   Operators of E-Bikes required to use hand and arm signals
   
73.34   Riding E-Bikes on sidewalks
   
73.35   Modification of E-Bikes equipment to increase horsepower or speed
Regulations Applicable to Mopeds
   
73.45   Rights and duties of persons operating mopeds
   
73.46   Licensing and registration requirement for mopeds
   
73.47   Limitations as to operation, speed, riding position, and number of
riders of mopeds
   
73.48   Required equipment for mopeds
   
73.49   Riding mopeds on sidewalks and public pathways
   
73.50   Modification of moped’s equipment to increase horsepower or speed
 
   
73.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 73.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BICYCLE. A bicycle is a device propelled solely by pedals, operated by one
or more persons, and having two or more wheels, except children's tricycles.
   ELECTRIC-ASSIST BICYCLES AND BICYCLES WITH HELPER MOTORS ("E-BIKES"). Low-
speed electrically assisted bicycles with two or three wheels, each having
fully operable pedals and an electric motor of no more than 750 watts, or one
horsepower, and a top motor-powered speed of less than 20 miles an hour when
operated by a rider weighing 170 pounds on a paved level surface, that meet the
requirements of the Federal Consumer Product Code provided in 16 C.F.R., Part
1512, and that operate in a manner such that the electric motor disengages or
ceases to function when their brakes are applied or the rider stops pedaling.
Manufacturers  and distributors of electric-assist bicycles shall apply a label
that is affixed permanently, in a prominent location, to each electric-assist
bicycle, indicating its wattage and maximum electrically assisted speed. The
owner or user of an electric-assist bicycle shall not remove or tamper with the
label. If a user tampers with or modifies an electric-assist bicycle, changing
the speed capability, he must replace the label indicating the vehicle's
wattage or horsepower. Electric-assist bicycles and bicycles with helper motors
are not mopeds.
   MOPED. A cycle, defined as a motor vehicle, with or without pedals, to
permit propulsion by human power, that travels on not more than three wheels in
contact with the ground whether powered by gasoline, electricity, alternative
fuel, or a hybrid combination thereof. Based on the engine or fuel source, the
moped must be equipped not to exceed the following limitations: a motor of 50
cubic centimeters; or designed to have an input exceeding 750 watts and no more
than 1,500 watts. If an internal combustion engine is used, the moped must have
a power drive system that functions directly or automatically without clutching
or shifting by the operator after the drive system is engaged.
(Ord. 23023, passed 9-15-23)
§ 73.02 APPLICATION.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all persons operating a
bicycle, E-Bike, or moped on streets and highways under the jurisdiction of the
town.
   (B)   This chapter does not apply to vehicles used by law enforcement in the
course and scope of their official duties.
(Ord. 23023, passed 9-15-23)
REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO BICYCLISTS
§ 73.15 RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF BICYCLISTS.
   Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the
rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a
vehicle by the laws of this state declaring rules of the road applicable to
vehicles or by the traffic regulations of the town applicable to the driver of
a vehicle, except as to special regulations in this subchapter and except as to
those provisions of laws and regulations which by their nature can have no
application.
(Ord. 23023, passed 9-15-23)
§ 73.16 LIMITATIONS AS TO OPERATION, RIDING POSITION, AND NUMBER OF RIDERS OF
BICYCLES.
   (A)   A bicyclist propelling a bicycle may not ride other than upon or
astride a permanent and regular seat attached to the bicycle.
   (B)   No bicycle may be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped.
   (C)   A person riding upon any bicycle may not attach it or them or himself
to a vehicle upon a roadway.
   (D)   A bicyclist operating a bicycle may not carry any package, bundle, or
article that prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the
handlebars.
(Ord. 23023, passed 9-15-23)
§ 73.17 REQUIRED EQUIPMENT FOR BICYCLES.
   (A)   A bicycle must be equipped with a brake that will enable the bicyclist
to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
   (B)   A bicycle, when in use at nighttime, must be equipped with a lamp on
the front which must emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 500
feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear that must be visible
from all distances from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when directly in front
of the lawful upper beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a
red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in
addition to the red reflector.
(Ord. 23023, passed 9-15-23)
§ 73.18 BICYCLISTS REQUIRED TO USE HAND AND ARM SIGNALS.
   (A)   A bicyclist shall indicate a right turn by extending the left arm
upward, by raising the left arm to the square, or by extending the right arm
horizontally to the right.
   (B)   A bicyclist shall indicate a left turn by extending the left arm
horizontally.
   (C)   A bicyclist shall indicate stopping or decreasing speed by extending
the left arm or the right arm downward.
   (D)   A bicyclist is not required to give signals provided for in this
section continuously if the hand or arm is needed to control the bicycle.
(Ord. 23023, passed 9-15-23)
§ 73.19 ABANDONED BICYCLES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon any bicycle on any
pub1ic right-of-way or on any public property within the town. A bicycle shall
be deemed abandoned if it:
      (1)   Is in such a state of disrepair as to be incapable of being
operated in its present condition; or
      (2)   Has not been moved or used in more than seven days and bears
physical indica of having been abandoned.
   (B)   Any bicycle deemed abandoned, pursuant to division (A) of this
section, may be removed and disposed of by discarding, donation, auction, or
any other manner deemed appropriate by the town.
(Ord. 23023, passed 9-15-23)
§ 73.20 RIDING BICYCLES ON SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   No person shall ride or operate a bicycle upon any sidewalk in the
town except:
      (1)   Children the age of 17 and under and any adults accompanying
children the age of seven and under may ride on any sidewalk;
      (2)   Where the sidewalk is designated by the Engineering and Development
Services Department as a shared use path measuring at least eight feet in
width;
      (3)   On sidewalks adjacent to roadways where no bicycle path has been
provided; or
      (4)   Where the adjacent highway has a posted speed limit of 30 miles per
hour or more, any person may ride a bicycle on the adjacent sidewalk except as
otherwise herein prohibited or if there is a dedicated bicycle path on the
adjacent highway.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, "bicycle path" means a portion of
the roadway or a paved lane separated from the roadway that has been designated
by striping, pavement markings, and signage for the preferential or exclusive
use of bicyclists.
   (C)   Any person permitted under this section to ride or operate a bicycle
on a sidewalk, bicycle path, or shared use path shall at all times ride or
operate the bicycle with due care and yield the right-of-way to pedestrians
using the sidewalk.
   (D)   No person shall ride or operate a bicycle on any sidewalk or shared
use path in the town at a speed in excess of 12 miles an hour.
   (E)   Where permitted in the above subsections, bicycles shall not be
operated in a manner which causes damage to public or private property.
   (F)   The provisions of this section shall not diminish, detract from, or
change the rights and duties of bicyclists under this chapter or state law.
(Ord. 23023, passed 9-15-23; Am. Ord. 25036, passed 8-18-25)
REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO E-BIKES
§ 73.30 RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF PERSONS OPERATING E-BIKES.
   Every person operating an E-Bike upon a roadway shall be granted all of the
rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a
vehicle by the laws of this state declaring rules of the road applicable to
vehicles or by the traffic regulations of the town applicable to the driver of
a vehicle, except as to special regulations in this subchapter and except as to
those provisions of laws and regulations which by their nature can have no
application.
(Ord. 23023, passed 9-15-23)
§ 73.31 LIMITATIONS AS TO OPERATION, SPEED, RIDING POSITION, AND NUMBER OF
RIDERS OF E-BIKES.
   (A)   No person shall operate an E-Bike at a speed in excess of 15 miles an
hour.
   (B)   An operator of an E-Bike shall operate the E-Bike with due care and
yield the right-of-way to pedestrians within public pathways and rights-of-way.
   (C)   No person shall ride upon an E-Bike other than upon a permanent and
regular seat attached to the E-Bike. Any person operating an E-Bike must keep
his or her feet firmly on the pedals or foot pegs while sitting on the seat.
   (D)   No E-Bike may be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped.
   (E)   No person shall operate an E-Bike while engaged in an activity that is
not necessary to the operation of the E-Bike which impairs, or would reasonable
be expected to impair, the ability of the person to safely operate the E-Bike.
(Ord. 23023, passed 9-15-23)
§ 73.32 REQUIRED EQUIPMENT FOR E-BIKES.
   (A)   No person under the age of 21 shall operate or ride an E-Bike unless
he or she wears a protective bicycle helmet.
   (B)   An E-Bike must be equipped with a brake that will enable the operator
to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
   (C)   An E-Bike, when in use at nighttime, must be equipped with a lamp on
the front which must emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 500
feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear that must be visible
from all distances from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when directly in front
of the lawful upper beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a
red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in
addition to the red reflector.
(Ord. 23023, passed 9-15-23)
§ 73.33 OPERATORS OF E-BIKES REQUIRED TO USE HAND AND ARM SIGNALS.
   (A)   An operator of an E-Bike shall indicate a right turn by extending the
left arm upward, by raising the left arm to the square, or by extending the
right arm horizontally to the right.
   (B)   An operator of an E-Bike shall indicate a left turn by extending the
left arm horizontally.
   (C)   An operator of an E-Bike shall indicate stopping or decreasing speed
by extending the left arm or the right arm downward.
   (D)   An operator of an E-Bike is not required to give signals provided for
in this section continuously if the hand or arm is needed to control the E-
Bike.
(Ord. 23023, passed 9-15-23)
§ 73.34 RIDING E-BIKES ON SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   No person shall ride or operate an E-Bike upon any sidewalk in the
town except:
      (1)   Children the age of 17 and under and any adults accompanying
children the age of seven and under may ride an E-Bike on any sidewalk;
      (2)   Where the sidewalk is designated by the Engineering and Development
Services Department as a shared use path measuring at least eight feet in
width;
      (3)   On sidewalks adjacent to roadways where no bicycle path has been
provided; or
      (4)   Where the adjacent highway has a posted speed limit of 30 miles per
hour or more, any person may ride an E-Bike on the adjacent sidewalk except as
otherwise herein prohibited or if there is a dedicated bicycle path on the
adjacent highway.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, "bicycle path" means a portion of
the roadway or a paved lane separated from the roadway that has been designated
by striping, pavement markings, and signage for the preferential or exclusive
use of bicyclists.
   (C)   Any person permitted under this section to ride or operate an E-Bike
on a sidewalk, bicycle path, or shared use path shall at all times ride or
operate the E-Bike with due care and yield the right-of-way to pedestrians
using the sidewalk.
   (D)   No person shall ride or operate an E-Bike on any sidewalk or shared
use path in the town at a speed in excess of 12 miles an hour.
   (E)   Where permitted in the above divisions, E-Bikes shall not be operated
in a manner which causes damage to public or private property.
   (F)   The provisions of this section shall not diminish, detract from, or
change the rights and duties of operators of E-Bikes under this chapter or
state law.
(Ord. 23023, passed 9-15-23; Am. Ord. 25036, passed 8-18-25)
§ 73.35 MODIFICATION OF E-BIKES EQUIPMENT TO INCREASE HORSEPOWER OR SPEED.
   Any E-Bike that exceeds 750 watts or one horsepower and produces speeds in
excess of 20 miles an hour shall be deemed a moped under this chapter and shall
be subject to all regulations applicable to mopeds.
(Ord. 23023, passed 9-15-23)
REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO MOPEDS
§ 73.45 RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF PERSONS OPERATING MOPEDS.
   Every person operating a moped upon a roadway shall be granted all of the
rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a
vehicle by the laws of this state declaring rules of the road applicable to
vehicles or by the traffic regulations of the town applicable to the driver of
a vehicle, except as to special regulations in this subchapter and except as to
those provisions of laws and regulations which by their nature can have no
application.
(Ord. 23023, passed 9-15-23)
§ 73.46 LICENSING AND REGISTRATION REQUIREMENT FOR MOPEDS.
   A person operating a moped on a public highway at all times must have in his
possession a valid moped operator's license or valid driver's license and moped
registration.
(Ord. 23023, passed 9-15-23)
§ 73.47 LIMITATIONS AS TO OPERATION, SPEED, RIDING POSITION, AND NUMBER OF
RIDERS OF MOPEDS.
   (A)   No person shall operate a moped at a speed in excess of 25 miles an
hour.
   (B)   No person shall ride upon a moped other than upon or astride a
permanent and regular seat attached to the moped. A passenger on a moped shall
not ride other than astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto. All
persons riding as a passenger must be able to keep his or her feet firmly on
the foot boards or foot pegs while sitting comfortably on the seat.
   (C)   No person shall operate a moped carrying more persons at one time than
the number for which it is designed and equipped.
   (D)   No person shall operate a moped while engaged in an activity that is
not necessary to the operation of the moped which impairs, or would reasonably
be expected to impair, the ability of the person to safely operate the moped.
(Ord. 23023, passed 9-15-23)
§ 73.48 REQUIRED EQUIPMENT FOR MOPEDS.
   (A)   No person shall operate a moped with the muffler removed or altered
such that the operation creates a loud and annoying noise.
   (B)   No person shall operate a moped without at least one rearview mirror.
   (C)   No person shall operate a moped without operable running lights and
brake lights which are operable when either brake is deployed.
   (D)   No person shall operate a moped unless it is equipped with a bell,
horn or other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of a
least 100 feet, except that a moped shall not be equipped with nor shall any
person use upon a moped any siren or whistle.
   (E)   No person under the age of 21 shall operate or ride a moped unless he
wears a protective helmet. Such helmet must be equipped with either a neck or
chin strap and be reflectorized on both sides thereof.
(Ord. 23023, passed 9-15-23)
§ 73.49 RIDING MOPEDS ON SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PATHWAYS.
   No person shall ride or operate a moped upon any sidewalk or public pathway
in the town.
(Ord. 23023, passed 9-15-23)
§ 73.50 MODIFICATION OF MOPED'S EQUIPMENT TO INCREASE HORSEPOWER OR SPEED.
   It is unlawful for a person to modify or change the equipment of a moped so
that the vehicle exceeds two brake horsepower and produces speeds in excess of
30 miles an hour on level ground.
(Ord. 23023, passed 9-15-23)
§ 73.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, on
conviction in the municipal court therefor, in addition to any other penalties
as mentioned in this section and applicable state law, be punished by the
payment of a fine not to exceed $500 or by imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 30 days. Any corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter, on conviction in the municipal court therefor, shall be subject to a
fine not to exceed $500, which may be recovered by an action for debt, and by
the suspension or revocation of any license mentioned in this chapter. However,
no penalty shall exceed the penalty provided by state law for similar offenses.
(Ord. 23023, passed 9-15-23; Am. Ord. 25036, passed 8-18-25)
CHAPTER 75: REGULATIONS FOR THE BEN SAWYER BRIDGE
Section
   
75.01   Purpose
   
75.02   Vehicular and pedestrian/bicycle traffic
   
75.03   Prohibited activity in the pedestrian/ bicycle walkway
   
75.04   General prohibited activity
 
   
75.99   Penalty
§ 75.01 PURPOSE.
   The Ben Sawyer Bridge is a large and elevated structure with high volume use
which demands close attention to safety and concern for others. As such, these
regulations are promulgated pursuant to the town’s police powers to ensure the
safety and well-being of all users.
(Ord. 05084, passed 11-9-05)
§ 75.02 VEHICULAR AND PEDESTRIAN/BICYCLE TRAFFIC.
   Only vehicular traffic is allowed in the traffic lanes of the Ben Sawyer
Bridge. All pedestrian and bicycle traffic must utilize the pedestrian/bicycle
walkway on the Ben Sawyer Bridge.
(Ord. 05084, passed 11-9-05) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.03 PROHIBITED ACTIVITY IN THE PEDESTRIAN/BICYCLE WALKWAY.
   (A)   The use of all motorized vehicles, skateboards, in-line skates, or any
like devices (except electric wheel chairs or other devices used by handicapped
persons or vehicles used for official business) is prohibited on the pedestrian
walkway of the Ben Sawyer Bridge.
   (B)   (1)   All town police officers having jurisdiction on the Ben Sawyer
Bridge have the authority to confiscate any motorized vehicle, skateboard, in-
line skates, or like devices used in violation of this chapter and deliver same
to the Chief of Police. Upon the first offense, the Chief may return the device
to the parents or legal guardian of such offender who is under the age of 17
years, in the event that a parent or guardian personally appears before the
Chief and requests the return of the item within 10 days after notice is mailed
to the parent or legal guardian that his or her child or ward has violated this
regulation. If such request is not made, the item will be destroyed or sold at
auction after 90 days from the date of mailing.
      (2)   On the second or subsequent offense within one year by the same
person, the Chief shall confiscate the item and order it to be destroyed or
sold at auction.
      (3)   Any person 17 years or older found to be acting in violation of
this chapter shall be charged pursuant to §
75.99.
   (C)   Any activity that impedes the pedestrian and bicycle traffic flow on
the Ben Sawyer pedestrian/bicycle walkway is prohibited.
(Ord. 05084, passed 11-9-05) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.04 GENERAL PROHIBITED ACTIVITY.
   (A)   For safety reasons, it is hereby prohibited for any person to
discharge fireworks, throw any objects, climb on the railings, fish, lock a
bike, or walk a pet (except for any animal used for assisting the handicapped
or official business) on any portion of the Ben Sawyer Bridge.
   (B)   Jumping, bungee jumping, base jumping, catapulting, or any like act
from the Ben Sawyer Bridge is hereby prohibited.
(Ord. 05084, passed 11-9-05) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.99 PENALTY.
   Any person guilty of violating any provision of this chapter, excluding
underage individuals charged pursuant to §
75.03, shall be subject to a fine up to $500, or imprisonment up to 30 days, or
both.
(Ord. 05084, passed 11-9-05)
CHAPTER 76: INTERSECTION SIGNALIZATION
Section
   
76.01   New and existing roadway intersections
   
76.02   Intersection improvements and street widening
   
76.03   Applicability to entities
§ 76.01 NEW AND EXISTING ROADWAY INTERSECTIONS.
   The construction of new roadway intersections and existing roadway
intersections on which traffic light signalization is installed initially or
replaced in whole shall utilize “mast arm” type supports.
(Ord. 06025, passed 5-10-06)
§ 76.02 INTERSECTION IMPROVEMENTS AND STREET WIDENING.
   The utilization of mast arm type supports shall also apply to the
replacement of existing street light signals on projects involving intersection
improvements or street widening.
(Ord. 06025, passed 5-10-06)
§ 76.03 APPLICABILITY TO ENTITIES.
   The utilization of mast arm type supports pursuant to the preceding
requirements shall apply to all projects, including those resulting from
private development and projects of public entities.
(Ord. 06025, passed 5-10-06)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   CEMETERIES
      
92.   FIRE PREVENTION
      
93.   NUISANCES
      
94.   PARADES, DEMONSTRATIONS, PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES AND PICKETING
      
95.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
96.   POLITICAL SIGNS
      
97.   MOUNT PLEASANT MEMORIAL WATERFRONT PARK SPECIAL EVENTS
      
98.   PREVENTION OF DISCRIMINATION IN THE RENTAL OR SALE OF HOUSING
      
99.   EQUAL ENJOYMENT AND PRIVILEGES TO PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS
      
100.   VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION SERVICES
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Purpose and scope
Care and Treatment of Animals
   
90.20   Animal care and mistreatment
   
90.21   Abandoning animals and keeping animals
   
90.22   Giving away animals for commercial purposes prohibited
   
90.23   Striking animals with motor vehicle
   
90.24   Poisoning animals
   
90.25   Handling poisonous reptiles prohibited
   
90.26   Wild animals
   
90.27   Keeping domestic fowl
   
90.28   Coops for confinement of fowl
   
90.29   Nuisance animals
   
90.30   Dangerous and vicious animals prohibited
   
90.31   Bird sanctuary
License
   
90.54   Collar; tag must be worn
Impoundment; Redemption Procedures
   
90.65   Time and manner of impoundment
   
90.66   Homeless dog or cat
   
90.67   Procedure upon complaint
   
90.68   Fees
   
90.69   Redemption of animal
   
90.70   Redemption by person other than owner
   
90.71   Disposition of unredeemed animals
   
90.72   Release of impounded animals; resisting Animal Control Officer
Administration and Enforcement
   
90.85   Animal Control Officer
   
90.86   Interference with Officer
   
90.87   Procedure for search warrant and seizure
   
90.88   Responding to an animal locked in a vehicle
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADEQUATE SHELTER. That shelter which will keep a non-aquatic animal dry, out
of the direct path of winds, out of direct sun, and at a temperature that is
healthful for the animal. The containment area for the animal shall be free of
accumulated waste and debris so that the animal shall be free to walk or lie
down without coming in contact with waste or debris; shall be free of
unsanitary conditions or is dangerous to the animal or to public health,
welfare or safety; and shall be free of ticks and fleas. A suitable method of
drainage shall be provided to rapidly eliminate any excess water or moisture.
Aquatic and semi-aquatic animals shall have an adequate amount of clean water
in which to move. For dogs outside and unattended as defined herein, adequate
shelter shall meet the following minimum standards:
      (1)   The shelter shall be a waterproof and windproof structure of
suitable size to accommodate the dog and allow retention of body heat. It shall
be made of durable material with a solid, waterproof floor raised at least
three inches from the ground.
      (2)   The structure must have a windbreak at the entrance. The structure
shall be provided with a sufficient quantity of suitable, clean bedding
material to provide insulation and protection against cold and dampness and
promote retention of body heat.
      (3)   All dogs must be afforded one or more separate areas of shade large
enough to accommodate the entire body of the dog at one time to ensure
protection from the direct rays of the sun. A doghouse is inadequate protection
from the sun.
   ANIMAL. Any nonhuman living creature whether wild or domesticated.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. A person or persons appointed by the Chief of Police
who shall have such powers and duties as are hereinafter set forth in this
chapter.
   ANIMAL NUISANCE. The actions of an animal constitute a nuisance when an
animal disturbs the rights of, threatens the safety of, or damages a member of
the general public, or interferes with the ordinary use and enjoyment of his or
her property. Specifically, an animal nuisance is created when an animal:
      (1)   Runs uncontrolled;
      (2)   Damages property other than that of the owner or harborer;
      (3)   Molests or disturbs persons or vehicles or other animals by
chasing, barking, or biting;
      (4)   Barks, whines, howls, honks, brays, cries, or makes other noises
excessively;
      (5)   Creates noxious or offensive odors;
      (6)   Defecates upon any public place or upon premises not owned or
controlled by the owner or harborer unless promptly removed (two minutes) by
the animal owner or harborer;
      (7)   Creates an insect breeding and/or attraction site due to an
accumulation of excretion; or
      (8)   Is maintained in an environment or unsanitary conditions.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. Any premises designated by the Chief of Police for the
purpose of impounding, caring for, or the destruction of animals held pursuant
to this chapter.
   BITE. To be seized with the teeth or jaws so that a person or animal has
been nipped, gripped, wounded, or pierced and saliva of the biting animal has
contacted the resulting break or abrasion of the skin.
   CAT. Any member of the feline family, six months or more in age.
   CONTROL or UNDER RESTRAINT. An animal shall be deemed under control or
restraint if it is on the premises of its owner or keeper or is accompanied by
its owner or keeper and under the physical control of such owner or keeper by
means of a leash not more than eight feet in length or other similar
restraining device, or under the active control of the owner or trainer while
hunting or being trained while on property of the owner or another’s property
with the property owner’s permission.
   DOG. Any member of the canine family, six months or more in age.
   EXTREME WEATHER. Any period in which a severe weather advisory or warning
has been issued for the area by the National Weather Service.
   FREE ROAMING CAT PROGRAM.  A program established and run by Humane Net, of
which the Charleston Animal Society is a member, for the purpose of reducing
free-roaming cat populations in a humane manner. Specifically, the intent of
this program is to return free-roaming cats to the area where taken in, if
possible, after being carefully evaluated by a veterinarian, vaccinated, micro-
chipped and spayed and/or neutered, pursuant to certain guidelines.
   HUMANE SOCIETY. State Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals.
   IMPOUND. To confine in a humane manner, including, but not limited to,
providing sufficient and nourishing food, warm and well-ventilated shelter, and
medical attention.
   OWNER or KEEPER. Any person who has a right of property in an animal; who
keeps or harbors an animal; who has an animal in his or her care or custody; or
who permits an animal to remain on or about any premises occupied by him or
her.
   RUNNING AT LARGE. Being off the premises of the owner or keeper and not
under the physical control of the owner or keeper by means of a leash or other
similar restraining device.
   STRAY ANIMAL. An animal running at large which has no identifiable owner.
   UNATTENDED. Outdoors and beyond the visual sight and physical presence of
the owner, handler, or caretaker for 15 minutes or more.
   VACCINATION. The administration of antirabic vaccine by a licensed
veterinarian at such intervals as required by state law.
   VICIOUS ANIMAL. As follows.
      (1)   An animal:
         (a)   With a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack
unprovoked, to cause injury to, or to otherwise endanger the safety of humans
or domestic pets; or
         (b)   Which attacks, bites or otherwise injures a human being or other
domestic animal without provocation; or
         (c)   Which is trained or used to fight or to attack humans.
      (2)   This definition shall not apply to a dog owned or used by a
governmental entity.
   WILD ANIMAL.
      (1)   Any poisonous reptile or any other dangerous or carnivorous wild
animal or reptile, any vicious or dangerous domesticated animal or any other
animal or reptile of wild, vicious, or dangerous propensities.
      (2)   The definition of a WILD ANIMAL shall not be construed to apply to
“exotic” birds or animals which are not dangerous to humans and which may
lawfully be purchased at pet stores or commercial locations except for those
animals specifically mentioned in this chapter.
('81 Code, § 90.01) (Ord. 93050, passed 10-12-93; Am. Ord. 08070, passed 12-9-
08; Am. Ord. 10004, passed 3-10-10; Am. Ord. 20007, passed 3-11-20)
§ 90.02 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the care and
control of animals in the town. The citizens of the town recognize as necessary
to require proper care and restraint of all animals in addition to proper
control of all animals, especially dogs and cats. The stated is imperative to
ensure that good order and harmony prevails in the community, and further that,
the safety, health, and general welfare of all is provided for and protected.
   (B)   Scope. This chapter shall apply to all persons, property, and animals
in the town as regulated herein.
('81 Code, § 90.02) (Ord. 93050, passed 10-12-93)
CARE AND TREATMENT OF ANIMALS
§ 90.20 ANIMAL CARE AND MISTREATMENT.
   (A)   No person shall mistreat an animal in any way. It is unlawful for any
person to inflict unnecessary or needless cruelty, torture, abuse or cruelly
beat, strike or abuse any animal, or by an act or omission or neglect cause or
inflict any unnecessary or unjustifiable pain, suffering, injury, or death to
any animal whether such animal belongs to such person or to another, except
that reasonable force may be employed to drive away vicious or trespassing
animals. Keeping an animal in an unhealthy environment or under unhealthy
conditions as deemed such by the Animal Control Officer shall constitute
mistreatment and unlawful hereunder. Any unwanted animals should be delivered
to the humane society for proper disposal.
   (B)   It shall also be unlawful for any person in charge of any animal to
fail, refuse or neglect to provide such animal with sufficient food, potable
water, shade or proper and healthy shelter and protection, veterinary care, or
to cruelly or unnecessarily expose any such animal in hot, stormy, cold, or
inclement weather, or to carry any such animal in or upon any vehicle in a
cruel or inhumane manner.
   (C)   No person shall restrain a dog by tethering the dog:
      (1)   Unattended between the hours of 10 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.;
      (2)   Unattended by a tether less than ten feet in length or less than
four times the length of the dog's body from tip of the nose to the base of the
tail, whichever is greater;
      (3)   To a pulley, running line or trolley system that is less than 15
feet in length and/or more than seven feet above ground;
      (4)   By a tether the length of which allows the dog to cross the
property line of the property on which it is tethered;
      (5)   Using a logging chain, tow chain, or other tether that weighs more
than one-eighth of the dog's body weight or which causes injury to the dog;
      (6)   By attaching a tether that does not have workable swivels on both
ends to prevent twisting and tangling;
      (7)   By attaching the tether to the dog by a collar that is of a
material not designed as a dog collar, that is ill-fitting, or by means of a
choke, pinch, or prong collar; or
      (8)   In an area likely to cause injury or pain to the dog because of
entanglement or because of surrounding structures.
   (D)   No person shall leave a dog outside unattended during extreme weather.
   (E)   No person shall keep animals in confinement that is too small either
for the animal's size or for the number of animals.
   (F)   No person shall leave or confine an animal in any unattended motor
vehicle under such conditions that would endanger the health or well-being of
the animal due to heat, cold, lack of adequate ventilation, lack of food and
water, or any other circumstance that could reasonably be expected to cause
suffering, disability, or death to the animal. Partially open windows are not
considered adequate ventilation.
('81 Code, § 90.06) (Ord. 93050, passed 10-12-93; Am. Ord. 20007, passed 3-11-
20) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.21 ABANDONING ANIMALS AND KEEPING ANIMALS.
   (A)   No owner or individual in custody of an animal shall abandon such
animal.
   (B)   All pens, yards, runs, or other structures wherein any animal is kept
shall be of such construction so as to be easily cleaned and kept in good
repair. Fences which are intended as enclosures for any animal shall be
securely constructed, shall be adequate for the purpose, kept in good repair,
and shall not be allowed to become unsightly.
('81 Code, § 90.07) (Ord. 93050, passed 10-12-93) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.22 GIVING AWAY ANIMALS FOR COMMERCIAL PURPOSES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall give away any live animal as a prize for, or as an
inducement to enter, any contest, game, or other competition or as an
inducement to enter a place of amusement.
('81 Code, § 90.08) (Ord. 93050, passed 10-12-93) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.23 STRIKING ANIMALS WITH MOTOR VEHICLE.
   Any person operating a motor vehicle, who strikes a domesticated animal
shall report such injury or death to the Town Police. However, due to the
possibility of injury from aiding injured animals, this provision shall in no
way be construed to require or encourage the physical touching of an injured
animal by a unqualified person who strikes a domesticated animal.
('81 Code, § 90.09) (Ord. 93050, passed 10-12-93) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.24 POISONING ANIMALS.
   No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with
food or not, so that the same shall be liable to be eaten by any animal,
provided that it shall not be unlawful for a person to expose on his or her own
property common rat or vermin poison for the express purpose of rat or vermin
control.
('81 Code, § 90.10) (Ord. 93050, passed 10-12-93) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.25 HANDLING POISONOUS REPTILES PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally handle any
reptile of a poisonous species or variety, whose venom has not been completely
removed by picking up or holding such reptile in his/her bare hands, or by
placing or holding such reptile against the exposed part of his/her, or
another's body, head, or any other exposed part of the human anatomy, or by
placing his/her own, or another's hand or any other part of the human anatomy
in any cage, box, or other device or container wherein such reptile is known or
suspected to be; and it shall likewise be unlawful for any owner, lessee,
bailor, bailee, possessor, trainer or keeper of any such poisonous reptile to
knowingly permit, allow, suggest, entice, invite, challenge, person to pick up
or handle any such poisonous reptile in any manner or way described and defined
hereinabove.
('81 Code, § 90.11) (Ord. 93050, passed 10-12-93) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.26 WILD ANIMALS.
   (A)   Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain, or
have in his or her possession or control within the town any poisonous reptile
or any other dangerous or carnivorous wild animal or reptile, any vicious or
dangerous domesticated animal or any other animal or reptile of wild, vicious,
or dangerous propensities.
   (B)   Classification. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain,
or have in his or her possession or control within the town any of the
following animals:
      (1)   All poisonous animals including rear- fang snakes.
      (2)   Apes. Chimpanzees; gibbons; gorillas; orangutans; and siamangs.
      (3)   Baboons.
      (4)   Bears.
      (5)   Bison.
      (6)   Cheetahs.
      (7)   Constrictor snakes, six feet in length or more.
      (8)   Coyotes.
      (9)   Crocodilians, 30 inches in length or more.
      (10)   Deer (includes all, for example, white- tailed deer, elk, antelope
and moose).
      (11)   Elephants.
      (12)   Gamecocks and other fighting birds.
      (13)   Hippopotami.
      (14)   Hyenas.
      (15)   Jaguars.
      (16)   Leopards.
      (17)   Lions.
      (18)   Lynxes.
      (19)   Monkeys, old world.
      (20)   Ostriches.
      (21)   Piranha fish.
      (22)   Pumas (also known as cougars, mountain lions and panthers).
      (23)   Raccoons.
      (24)   Rhinoceroses.
      (25)   Sharks.
      (26)   Snow leopards.
      (27)   Swine.
      (28)   Tigers.
      (29)   Wolves.
   (C)   Exceptions. The provisions of divisions (A) and (B) in this section
shall not apply to menageries, zoological gardens, circuses, and recognized,
accredited, and permitted public organizations or private nonprofit
organizations established for educational purposes, if:
      (1)   Their location conforms to the provisions of the zoning code of the
town.
      (2)   All animals and animal quarter are kept in a clean and sanitary
condition and so maintained as to eliminate objectionable odors.
      (3)   Animals are maintained in quarters so constructed as to prevent
their escape.
      (4)   No person lives or resides within 200 feet of the quarters in which
the animal are kept.
('81 Code, § 90.12) (Ord. 93050, passed 10-12-93) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.27 KEEPING DOMESTIC FOWL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or have in his or her possession
any chickens, turkeys, ducks, guineas, geese, pheasants, pigeons or other
domestic fowl that will because of noise, odors, or flies, or otherwise tend to
impair the health or disturb the peace quiet and comfort of nearby residents
occupants of places of business.
('81 Code, § 90.13) (Ord. 93050 passed 10-12-93) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.28 COOPS FOR CONFINEMENT OF FOWL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to confine fowl in coops or other
enclosures less than 18 inches in height. Such coops or other enclosures shall
not be so filled that fowl therein will not be able to move around freely
within the same. All coops or other enclosures used to confine fowl shall be
provided at all times with clean food and pure water placed in Containers
outside of the coop or other enclosure, protected from contamination, and
accessible to the fowl at all times. Coops or other enclosures used to confine
fowl shall be provided with clean litter and cross-ventilation at all times. No
fowl shall be left in any building unless provision is made for outside
ventilation.
('81 Code, § 90.14) (Ord. 93050, passed 10-12-93) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.29 NUISANCE ANIMALS.
   (A)   The actions of an animal constitute a nuisance when an animal disturbs
the rights of, threatens the safety of, or damages a member of the general
public, or interferes with the ordinary use and enjoyment of their property.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, possess, or maintain
an animal in such a manner so as to constitute a public nuisance. By way of
example and not of limitation, the following acts or actions by an owner or
possessor of an animal are declared to be a public nuisance and are therefore
unlawful:
      (1)   Allowing an animal to run without control or not under constraint
as defined herein.
      (2)   Allowing or permitting an animal to damage the property of anyone
other than its owner, including, but not limited to, turning over garbage
containers or damaging gardens or flowers.
      (3)   Maintaining an animal that habitually or repeatedly chases, snaps
at, bites, or attacks pedestrians, bicycles, or vehicles, or other animals, or
any animal whose behavior constitutes a reasonable risk of injuring a human or
other animal.
      (4)   Allowing or permitting an animal to bark, whine, howl, honk, bray,
cry, or make other noises in an excessive, continuous, untimely, or
unreasonable fashion, or to make other noise in such a manner so as to result
in a serious annoyance or interference with the reasonable use and enjoyment of
neighboring premises.
      (5)   Maintaining an animal who has noxious or offensive odors.
      (6)   Allowing or permitting an animal to defecate upon any public place
or upon any premises not owned or controlled by the owner or harborer unless
promptly removed (two minutes) by the animal owner or harborer.
      (7)   Maintaining an animal in an environment of unsanitary conditions
which results in offensive odors, filth, vermin, or disease, or is dangerous to
the animal or to the public health, safety, or welfare.
      (8)   Maintaining property in a manner that is offensive, annoying or
dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare of the community because of
the number, type, variety, density, or location of the animals on the property.
('81 Code, § 90.15) (Ord. 93050, passed 10-12-93) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.30 DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own or in any way maintain,
harbor or keep any animal which is dangerous as described in §
90.29 (B)(3) above, or that is vicious as defined in this chapter. This shall
not apply to any animal that attacks any person or animal unlawfully upon its
owner's or keeper's premises.
   (B)   Any person who owns an animal that has been declared dangerous or
vicious by the Animal Control Officer shall have the right to appeal this
decision to the Town Administrator and to request a hearing by submitting a
written request to the office of the Town Administrator within five working
days after the Animal Control Officer's determination that the animal is
dangerous or vicious. The Town Administrator or his/her designee shall conduct
a hearing to determine if the Animal Control Officer's determination that the
animal is dangerous or vicious is correct or incorrect. If the animal is judged
not to be dangerous or vicious, it shall be returned to the owner. If the Town
Administrator or his/her designee determines the animal to be dangerous or
vicious, then the animal shall be disposed of in a humane manner.
('81 Code, § 90.16) (Ord. 93050, passed 10-12-93) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.31 BIRD SANCTUARY.
   (A)   Area established. The entire area embraced within the corporate limits
of the municipality is designated as a bird sanctuary.
('81 Code, § 90.17)
   (B)   Molestation of birds; nuisance. It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt,
shoot or attempt to shoot, or molest in any manner any bird or wild fowl or to
rob bird nests or wild fowl nests, provided, that if starlings or similar birds
are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that they
constitute a nuisance or menace to health or property, in the opinion of the
proper health authorities, then in such event such health authorities shall
meet with representatives of the Audubon Society, Bird Club, Garden Club, or
Humane Society, or as many of those clubs as are found to exist in the
municipality, alter having given at least three days notice of the time and
place of such meeting to the representatives of those clubs. If as a result of
such meeting no satisfactory alternative is found to abate such nuisance, then
such birds may be destroyed in such number and in such manner as is deemed
advisable by the health authorities under the supervision of the Chief of
Police.
('81 Code, § 90.18)
(Ord. 93050, passed 10-12-93) Penalty, see §
10.99
LICENSE
§ 90.54 COLLAR; TAG MUST BE WORN.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or keep a dog or cat more
than six months of age on any premises within the town unless the dog or cat
wears a collar or harness securely attached to its body to which shall be
securely attached a tag issued for the dog or cat by a licensed veterinarian,
licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state, showing the dog or cat
has been vaccinated against rabies.
('81 Code, § 90.29) (Ord. 93050, passed 10-12-93; Am. Ord. 01031, passed 6-12-
01) Penalty, see §
10.99
IMPOUNDMENT; REDEMPTION PROCEDURES
§ 90.65 TIME AND MANNER OF IMPOUNDMENT.
   The Animal Control Officer shall seize all dogs and cats that may be found
running at large and impound them in an enclosure provided for that purpose.
Any person mad seize any dog or cat found on his/her premise and deliver it to
the Animal Control Officer to be impounded. Where a dog or cat is not vicious,
unruly, or bad tempered, but is harmless and is not annoying or threatening
toward persons or animals and has been inoculated with a proper and effective
vaccine against rabies and carries a license tag securely fastened to its
collar, such dog or cat may, in the discretion of the Animal Control Officer,
be exempted from the terms of this section. When a complaint is lodged that a
specific animal is a nuisance or is vicious, the provisions of this section
shall become mandatory.
('81 Code, § 90.30) (Ord. 93050, passed 10-12-93)
§ 90.66 HOMELESS DOG OR CAT.
   It shall be the duty of any resident within the town to cooperate with the
Town Animal Control Officer in the impounding of any homeless or unwanted dog
or cat which may adopt the premises of such person as a home.
('81 Code, § 90.31) (Ord. 93050, passed 10-12-93) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.67 PROCEDURE UPON COMPLAINT.
   When a complaint has been lodged against an animal that has committed a
nuisance act only, the owner of such animal shall be notified by courier at
once, if the owner can be identified. The owner shall correct the situation at
once, otherwise the animal shall be impounded.
('81 Code, § 90.32) (Ord. 93050, passed 10-12-93) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.68 FEES.
   Fees for impoundment and boarding of animals shall be as fixed from time to
time by the Town Administrator.
('81 Code, § 90.33) (Ord. 93050, passed 10-12-93)
§ 90.69 REDEMPTION OF ANIMAL.
   The owner of any impounded animal may redeem his/her animal upon
satisfactory proof of ownership, by paying the fees and fines for impoundment
and boarding to the office designated by the Town Administrator and must
provide proof of vaccination. Owner of any impounded dog or cat must obtain a
current town dog or cat license.
('81 Code, § 90.34) (Ord. 93050, passed 10-12-93) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.70 REDEMPTION BY PERSON OTHER THAN OWNER.
   If the owner of any animal impounded under this division shall fail to
redeem such animal within five days after such impoundment, any other person
may, upon complying with the provisions of this chapter, redeem such animal
from the pound and be the lawful owner of such animal thereafter.
('81 Code, § 90.35) (Ord. 93050, passed 10-12-93)
§ 90.71 DISPOSITION OF UNREDEEMED ANIMALS.
   (A)   The disposition of all animals impounded hereunder, which have not
been redeemed or purchased as authorized by this chapter within five working
days of such impoundment, excluding the day of intake, the day of disposition
and official holidays recognized by the town, shall be determined by the
Charleston Animal Society Shelter.
   (B)   The Shelter may, at its discretion, follow any reasonable and humane
course of action.
      (1)   Specifically, it may:
         (a)   Adopt, place for adoption, place with an interim foster home;
         (b)   Process pursuant to the Free Roaming Cat Program. The town
hereby adopts the existing Free Roaming Cat Program of Humane Net, of which the
Charleston Animal Society is a member, and the same shall be controlling over
all other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, if any;
         (c)   Medically treat and/or place with an appropriate facility or
agency equipped for the care of a particular animal; or
         (d)   Pursue any other alternative deemed appropriate under the
circumstances, including disposing of an animal in a humane manner.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the stated, no animal may be disposed of by selling
or giving such animal to any person or entity for the purpose of using the
animal for experimentation, for medical or other research, or for food or other
commercial processing,
('81 Code, § 90.36) (Ord. 93050, passed 10-12-93; Am. Ord. 10004, passed 3-10-
10)
§ 90.72 RELEASE OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS; RESISTING ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to release or take away without proper
authority any impounded animal or to resist the Animal Control Officers when
they are engaged in the impounding of an animal.
('81 Code, § 90.37) (Ord. 93050, passed 10-12-93)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 90.85 ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.
   There shall be one or more persons designated by the Chief of Police as
Animal Control Officer or Animal Control Officers in addition to any town
police officer whose duty it shall be to supervise and enforce the provisions
of this chapter and all other applicable laws concerning animals and he or she
shall have the power and full authority to accomplish the same. Nothing herein
shall abridge or limit the rights and duty of the local law enforcement
authorities to enforce the provision of this chapter or any other law
concerning animals to the degree which their training and expertise may allow
them to do.
('81 Code, § 90.03) (Ord. 93050, passed 10-12-93)
Cross-reference:
   For Municipal ordinance summons, see §
35.10
Statutory reference:
   S.C. Code 1976 as amended, Title 47
§ 90.86 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICER.
   No person shall interfere with, hinder, or molest the duly authorized Animal
Control Officer of the town in the performance of his or her duty, or any such
agents, or seek to release animals in the custody of the duly authorized Animal
Control Officer of the town or any agent of the town, except as provided in
this chapter.
('81 Code, § 90.04) (Ord. 93050, passed 10-12-93)
§ 90.87 PROCEDURE FOR SEARCH WARRANT AND SEIZURE.
   When complaint is made on oath or affirmation to any magistrate or municipal
court judge authorized to issue warrants in criminal cases that the complainant
believes or has probable cause to believe that this chapter in relation to
animals has been violated in any particular building, premises, or place, such
magistrate or municipal court judge, if satisfied that there is reasonable
cause for such belief, shall issue a search warrant authorizing any law
enforcement officer, accompanied by an Animal Control Officer, to search the
building or place, but no search shall be made after sundown unless specially
authorized by the magistrate or municipal court judge upon satisfactory cause.
('81 Code, § 90.05) (Ord. 93050, passed 10-12-93)
§ 90.88 RESPONDING TO AN ANIMAL LOCKED IN A VEHICLE.
   (A)   An animal control officer, other law enforcement officer, firefighter,
or other emergency responder may use reasonable force to open a vehicle to
rescue an animal. A rescued animal shall be remanded to the Animal Shelter or a
veterinarian for life-saving treatment. An authorized person who uses
reasonable force to enter a locked and unattended motor vehicle to remove a
confined animal is not liable for any damages in a civil action if all of the
following apply:
      (1)   The person has a good faith belief that the confined animal is in
imminent danger of suffering physical injury or death unless the animal is
removed from the motor vehicle;
      (2)   The person determines that the motor vehicle is locked or there is
no reasonable manner in which the person can remove the animal from the
vehicle;
      (3)   The person does not use more force than is necessary under the
circumstances to enter the motor vehicle and remove the animal from the
vehicle.
   (B)   A Good Samaritan may use reasonable force to open a vehicle to rescue
an animal. A Good Samaritan who uses reasonable force to enter a locked and
unattended motor vehicle to remove a confined animal is not liable for any
damages in a criminal or civil action if all of the following apply:
      (1)   The person has a good faith belief that the confined animal is in
imminent danger of suffering physical injury or death unless the animal is
removed from the motor vehicle;
      (2)   The person makes a reasonable attempt to locate the owner;
      (3)   The person contacts law enforcement/911 prior to entering the
vehicle;
      (4)   The person determines that the motor vehicle is locked or there is
no reasonable manner in which the person can remove the animal from the
vehicle;
      (5)   The person does not use more force than is necessary under the
circumstances to enter the motor vehicle and remove the animal from the
vehicle; and
      (6)   The person stays with the animal until law enforcement/first
responders arrive.
(Ord. 20007, passed 2-11-20)
CHAPTER 91: CEMETERIES
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Establishment of cemeteries
   
91.02   Burial and interment permits
   
91.03   Prohibited acts in cemeteries
   
91.04   Prohibited hours
   
91.05   Chief of Police to enforce
Ocean Grove Cemetery
   
91.20   Established and named
   
91.21   Purpose of cemetery
   
91.22   Fee for opening of new grave
   
91.23   Rules and regulations
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF CEMETERIES.
   No person, church, or organization shall establish any burial ground, vault
or cemetery within the municipality without being in compliance with the town
Zoning Code or as otherwise prescribed by Council or state statute.
('81 Code, § 91.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.02 BURIAL AND INTERMENT PERMITS.
   (A)   No person shall open any grave within the municipality which contains
the remains of a previous burial, for the purpose of a new interment, without a
written permit from the Board of Health.
   (B)   No person shall open any grave within the municipality, for the
purpose of removing the dead body therein, without a written permit from the
Board of Health.
   (C)   No person shall bury any dead human body in any burial ground,
cemetery or vault within the municipality without a written permit from the
Board of Health.
('81 Code, § 91.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.03 PROHIBITED ACTS IN CEMETERIES.
   (A)   No person shall, without proper authority so to do, disturb any grave
in any cemetery in the municipality, or pull up or remove anything placed on,
or at the site of, any grave for ornamentation or as a memorial.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, without proper authority so to
do, to abuse, mar, tamper with, or remove any grave, gravestone, monument, or
other structure or property, including trees and plants which are part of the
realty, within any cemetery in the municipality.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to disturb any funeral
procession or burial service in any cemetery within the municipality, or to
defile the sanctity or dignity of any cemetery by boisterous conduct or by the
use of obscene or profane language therein.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person, without proper authority so to
do, to remove any flowers from any cemetery within the municipality.
('81 Code, § 91.04) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.04 PROHIBITED HOURS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, without proper authority from the
person in charge of the cemetery, to enter or remain within any cemetery during
the hours such cemetery is by lawful authority closed to the public.
('81 Code, § 91.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.05 CHIEF OF POLICE TO ENFORCE.
   The Chief of Police is instructed under the direction of Council to see that
each and every provision of this chapter is fully carried out and enforced.
('81 Code, § 91.06)
OCEAN GROVE CEMETERY
§ 91.20 ESTABLISHED AND NAMED.
   That square of ground heretofore set out and measured by the Charleston and
Sullivan's Island Railroad Company, on the public commons of the municipality,
is confirmed as, and is again constituted, a public cemetery or burial place
for the use of the citizens and inhabitants of the municipality, and such
cemetery shall be known as Ocean Grove Cemetery.
('81 Code, § 91.15)
Statutory reference:
   Acceptance of trust for maintenance burial lots, graves, and tombs, see S.C.
Code §§ 5-39-410 through 5-39-430
   Acquisition and operation of cemeteries authorized, see S.C. Code § 5-39-10
   City empowered to contract for service, see S.C. Code, § 5-39-440
§ 91.21 PURPOSE OF CEMETERY.
   The purpose of Ocean Grove Cemetery is to provide a final resting ground for
human remains, and the sanctity and dignity of the cemetery shall be maintained
at all times. No building, structure, sign, light, or other thing which is not
appropriate for a cemetery shall be installed or maintained in Ocean Grove
Cemetery, and no conduct which is repugnant to the sanctity and dignity of the
cemetery shall be permitted.
('81 Code, § 91.16) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.22 FEE FOR OPENING OF NEW GRAVE.
   A fee of $250 shall be paid before any grave may be dug in Ocean Grove
Cemetery. No grave shall be established without payment of the aforesaid fee.
('81 Code, § 91.18) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.23 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Council may by resolution promulgate rules and regulations for the
government of Ocean Grove Cemetery which, when placed on file in the office of
the Clerk of Council, shall be complied with by all persons to whom they are
made applicable. Such rules and regulations may provide, among other things,
for the manner of construction and maintenance of monuments, mausoleums,
fences, walls, and other structures; the depth and grading of graves; the
regulation of burials; the use and maintenance of sidewalks, paths, lanes, and
roadways; the planting and care of ornamental trees, shrubs, flowers, and
foliage; the opening and closing hours; vehicular speed limits; the prohibition
of picnics and similar activities; the maintenance of maps of lots and grave
sites; record of burials and disinterments; the appointment of a caretaker or
superintendent and other cemetery personnel; the conveyance of lots, the
purchase price thereof, and the terms and conditions of sale; and such other
matters as may be considered desirable for the use, maintenance, sanctity, and
dignity of the cemetery.
('81 Code, § 91.19)
CHAPTER 92: FIRE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
92.01   South Carolina Fire Code adopted
   
92.02   South Carolina State Fire Marshal's Rules and Regulations adopted
Fire Districts
   
92.15   Reserved
   
92.16   Reserved
   
92.17   Building restrictions
   
92.18   Other specific requirements
Burning
   
92.30   Residential burning
   
92.31   Permit required
   
92.32   Specific requirements
   
92.33   Additional restrictions and exemptions
Cross-reference:
   Fire Department, see
Ch. 33
   Building code and regulations, see
Ch. 150
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.01 SOUTH CAROLINA FIRE CODE ADOPTED.
   The South Carolina Fire Code, is adopted by reference, as though set forth
herein.
('81 Code, § 93.01) (Ord. passed 10-10-77; Am. Ord. passed 2-9-87; Am. Ord.
01044, passed 8-14-01; Am. Ord. 16057, passed 8-10-16; Am. Ord. 20052, passed
9-11-20; Am. Ord. 22064, passed 12-15-22)
Editor's note:
   The material formerly found in '81 Code, Chapter 93: Fire Prevention, is now
located in this Chapter 92, except where such material was repealed or replaced
by new ordinances.
§ 92.02 SOUTH CAROLINA STATE FIRE MARSHAL'S RULES AND REGULATIONS ADOPTED.
   The South Carolina State Fire Marshal's Rules and Regulations are adopted by
reference, as though set forth verbatim herein.
(Ord. 01044, passed 8-14-01)
FIRE DISTRICTS
§ 92.15 RESERVED.
§ 92.16 RESERVED.
§ 92.17 BUILDING RESTRICTIONS.
   Type of construction permitted:
   Within the town, every building hereafter erected shall be either Type I,
II, III, or IV construction in accordance with applicable tables and
construction methods of the International Building Code and South Carolina Fire
Code.
('81 Code, § 150.1.2) (Ord. passed 3-14-89; Am. Ord. 01044, passed 8-14-01; Am.
Ord. 02004, passed 3-12-02; Am. Ord. 16057, passed 8-10-16)
§ 92.18 OTHER SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Every Group H occupancy shall be prohibited from location within the
Fire District.
   (B)   Every building shall be fire protected throughout as specified for the
various types of construction in Chapter 6, International Building Code.
('81 Code, § 150.01.3) (Ord. passed 3-14-89; Am. Ord. 01044, passed 8-14-01;
Am. Ord. 16057, passed 8-10-16)
BURNING
§ 92.30 RESIDENTIAL BURNING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to burn leaves, debris, trash, refuse, rubbish,
tree limbs, chips, shavings, building materials, or any other matter whatsoever
or to kindle or maintain a bonfire or rubbish fire outside of any house or
other structure of any kind located within the town, unless:
      (1)   Such burning is controlled by a competent individual;
      (2)   Is attended until extinguished;
      (3)   All burning accomplished within the confines of a non-combustible
container with screen cover which is subject to approval of the Fire Chief or
other authorized officer of the Town Fire Department; and
      (4)   An effective fire extinguishment method such as a Class ABC fire
extinguisher, garden hose, sand bucket, or water barrel is on-site and
available for immediate use.
   (B)   This section is not intended to restrict open burning related to human
warmth, fires used for recreational purposes, ceremonial observances, or with
the preparation of food for immediate consumption that are accomplished in a
safe manner.
   (C)   A fire contained within a barbeque or charcoal grill appliance, and
used for the sole purpose of cooking, is not considered burning.
('81 Code, § 93.10) (Ord. passed 3-9-93; Am. Ord. 17028, passed 6-13-17)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.31 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   All burning other than by individual residents on their own property
and in an approved incinerator shall require a burning permit issued by the
Fire Chief or his or her designee.
   (B)   Prior to issuance of a burning permit, the following shall be
submitted to the Fire Department for review and approval:
      (1)   Site plan of area to be cleared, showing all property lines,
adjacent roadway, occupied structures, and proposed location of burn piles.
      (2)   Contractor's official business name and business license number, if
applicable.
      (3)   Listing of day and night emergency telephone numbers.
      (4)   On site inspection by Fire Official who shall view the proposed
burn site and make such suggestions and requirements as necessary for a safe
operation.
   (C)   Permits shall be valid for a period of 30 calendar days from date of
issuance. Each permit shall be for one location on the same property. Each
permit shall be accompanied by a fee of $100 no matter of size of project or
number of piles to be burned.
('81 Code, § 93.11) (Ord. passed 3-9-93) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.32 SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS.
   There are certain specific requirements for burning in the town and a
violation of any requirement hereunder shall be grounds for revocation of
permit by the Fire Chief or his or her designee. Specific requirements for
burning are as follows:
   (A)   Burning. Burning is defined as the rapid, persistent, self-sustaining
process of rapid oxidation of a fuel being reduced by an oxidizing agent along
with the evolution of visual effects of heat, smoke, and/or light. Burning must
be supervised by a competent attendant with adequate means on site to control
and extinguish fires. COMPETENT ATTENDANT is defined as a person or persons
familiar with burning operations and capable of operating fire control
equipment. The competent attendant shall also have the capability on site of
alerting emergency services personnel in the event of a wild fire or emergency
and shall be required to remain on site during all periods of burning. ADEQUATE
MEANS OF FIRE CONTROL is defined as any one or all of the following items:
earth moving equipment, water tanks, tenders or manpower that can control and
extinguish fires. Such fire control equipment shall be of type and quantity as
required and approved in advance by the Fire Chief or his or her designee.
   (B)   The initial burning must be started only between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 3:00 p.m.; no combustible material may be added to the fire between 3:
00 p.m. of one day and 9:00 a.m. the following day. When fires are allowed to
burn throughout the night, the attendant and equipment as required pursuant to
the above shall remain in place and on site tending and caring for the fire.
   (C)   Burning to be done during favorable weather conditions.
   (D)   Materials to be burned shall be “natural vegetation and plant growth,”
including large diameter timbers and clean stumps. The materials shall not be
moved or relocated to another off property site for the purpose of burning
without written permission of the Fire Chief.
   (E)   All burning shall be sufficient distance but not less than 1,000 feet
from public roadways and all residential, commercial, and industrial sites not
a part of the contiguous property on which the burning is conducted. On
property that is contiguous, all burning shall be at least 1,000 feet from any
inhabited structure.
   (F)   No more than two piles, 30 feet long by 30 feet wide and no taller
than 12 feet or other equivalent may be burned within a six acre area at one
time.
   (G)   No heavy oils, asphaltic materials, items containing natural or
synthetic rubber or any material other than natural growth may be used to
ignite, kindle, start or maintain the fires.
   (H)   In the case of land clearing, all reasonable attempts should be made
to salvage timber and pulp wood.
('81 Code, § 93.11) (Ord. passed 3-9-93; Am. Ord. 00048, passed 9-12-00)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.33 ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS AND EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The Fire Department reserves the right to impose restrictions and
exemptions on burning in addition to those enumerated in §
92.32, whenever in the judgment of the Fire Department and with the agreement
of the local DHEC representative such is necessary to ensure safety.
   (B)   No person shall burn any treated or sawn lumber, building materials,
or any other item that has been identified by the Department of Health and
Environmental Control as being harmful to the environment.
   (C)   Any fire that creates a nuisance by means of flame, smoke, ash or
byproduct, wind conditions, dry weather conditions, or otherwise, or where any
fire effects the safety, health, or welfare of any member or members of the
general public, the fire shall be immediately extinguished. All such
determinations shall be made by the Fire Chief or his or her designee.
   (D)   Fires purposely set for agriculture control of disease, weeds, pests
and for other specific agriculture purposes in accordance with practices
acceptable to the Department of Health and Environmental Control and the Smoke
Management Guidelines of the South Carolina Forestry Commission are authorized
in advance of said activity being made to the Mount Pleasant Fire Chief, and
shall only pertain to designated agriculture or forest management areas of five
or more acres, and shall also require written approval by the Fire Chief. Prior
to any said approval the applicant must also provide proof of the following to
the Fire Chief: notification of said burning being made to the State Forestry
Commission along with the specific permit number obtained from said entity.
   (E)   Open burning of trees, bush, grass and other vegetable matter for game
management purposes in accordance with the practices acceptable to the
Department of Health and Environmental Control and the Smoke Management
Guidelines of the South Carolina Forestry Commission are authorized pursuant to
the terms herein. Said burning shall require a written request for
authorization in advance of said activity being made to the Mount Pleasant Fire
Chief, and shall only pertain to designated agriculture or forest management
areas of five or more acres, and shall also require written approval by the
Fire Chief. Prior to any said approval the applicant must also provide proof of
the following to the Fire Chief: notification of said burning being made to the
State Forestry Commission along with the specific permit number obtained from
said entity.
('81 Code, § 93.12) (Ord passed 3-9-93; Am. Ord. 98031, passed 6-22-98)
Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 93: NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
93.01   Correction of unsanitary conditions
   
93.02   Written notice to property owner
   
93.03   Occupancy prohibited unless conditions corrected
   
93.04   Reserved
   
93.05   Interference with inspection officers
   
93.06   Abatement of public health nuisances
   
93.07   Maintaining deleterious or hazardous conditions on premises
Wells and Cisterns
   
93.20   Use of water from contaminated wells and cisterns
   
93.21   Well and cistern water to be tested
   
93.22   Testing of water
   
93.23   Duty of users to display chemist's reports
   
93.24   Quarterly testing required
 
   
93.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Department of Health and Environmental Control shall supervise local Boards
of Health, see S.C. Code § 44-1-170
   State Board of Health and Environmental Control shall advise municipal and
county authorities, see S.C. Code § 44-1-90
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 93.01 CORRECTION OF UNSANITARY CONDITIONS.
   Whenever, in the opinion of the applicable Code Enforcement Official, any
apartment house, tenement, or other dwelling, whether occupied by one or more
families, is kept and maintained in an unsanitary condition, whether by lack of
sufficient toilet facilities, lack of proper or sufficient water supply, lack
of sufficient lighting and ventilation, overcrowding of tenants, or otherwise,
the applicable Code Enforce- ment Official shall have the power to require the
correction of such conditions as hereinafter provided.
('81 Code, § 95.01) (Am. Ord. 23016, passed 5-9-23)
§ 93.02 WRITTEN NOTICE TO PROPERTY OWNER.
   In any case of unsanitary conditions as referred to in §
93.01, the Code Enforcement Official shall give written notice to the owners of
the premises in question, or to any agent in charge thereof, specifying the
condition to be corrected, the steps to be taken for such correction, and the
time within which correction shall be made. Such notice shall be in writing
addressed to the owner of such premises or to any agent in charge thereof, and
the deposit of such notice in the post office addressed to such owner or agent
at his or her last known address, postage prepaid, shall be sufficient service
of such notice. In case the name or address of such owner or agent is unknown,
such notice may be served by posting it on the premises in question.
('81 Code, § 95.02) (Am. Ord. 23016, passed 5-9-23)
§ 93.03 OCCUPANCY PROHIBITED UNLESS CONDITIONS CORRECTED.
   On the service of the notice referred to in §
93.02 and within the time specified therein, the owner or agent of such
premises shall comply with the requirements of the Code Enforcement Official as
set forth in the notice. In the event that such owner or agent shall, after
notice as hereinabove provided, fail or refuse to comply with the requirements
of the Code Enforcement Official, such officer shall thereupon have power to
prohibit such occupancy until the requirements of the Code Enforcement Official
shall be complied with.
('81 Code, § 95.03) (Am. Ord. 23016, passed 5-9-23) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.04 RESERVED .
§ 93.05 INTERFERENCE WITH INSPECTION OFFICERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, in any manner, to hinder or obstruct
the Code Enforcement Official in the inspection of any premises within the
municipal limits, in the abatement or removal of any nuisance, or in the
discharge of any of the duties prescribed by the code, for the correction and
preservation of the sanitary conditions of the municipality, or any of the
duties vested in such officers by law.
('81 Code, § 95.05) (Am. Ord. 23016, passed 5-9-23) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.06 ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH NUISANCES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or neglect to abate any
nuisance or any matter or thing which, in the opinion of the Code Enforcement
Official, endangers the public health, after having been directed to do so by
any person acting under authority of state or town codes or regulations.
('81 Code, § 95.06) (Am. Ord. 23016, passed 5-9-23) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.07 MAINTAINING DELETERIOUS OR HAZARDOUS CONDITIONS ON PREMISES.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
   VACANT or IMPROVED LOT or ACREAGE. All of the street right-of-way up to the
start of the street pavement and all drainage or utility easements contiguous
to that lot or acreage except off-street drainage easements that are not piped.
('81 Code, §
94.02) (Ord. passed 4-7-80)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or to permit to be
maintained, any premises including vacant or occupied lots or lands, on which
grass, weeds, undergrowth, trash, garbage, offal, stagnant water, building
materials, glass, wood, damaged or deteriorated automotive vehicles, boats, or
planes, or other matter deleterious to good health and public sanitation, which
is or may become a nuisance causing injury to the health or welfare of
residents or the public in the vicinity or causing injury to neighboring
property.
('81 Code, § 94.03) (Am. Ord. 23016, passed 5-9-23)
Penalty, see §
93.99
Cross-reference:
   Land Use Coordinator to administer and enforce provisions, see § 31.091
WELLS AND CISTERNS
§ 93.20 USE OF WATER FROM CONTAMINATED WELLS AND CISTERNS.
   It shall be unlawful to use or permit to be used by any person any water
from any contaminated well or cistern within the municipality.
('81 Code, § 95.15) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.21 WELL AND CISTERN WATER TO BE TESTED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to use or permit to be used any water
from any well or cistern in the municipality unless such water has been tested
and found to be potable, as provided in this chapter.
('81 Code, § 95.16) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.22 TESTING OF WATER.
   Prior to the use of water from any well or cistern within the municipality,
the owner or occupant of the premises on which such well or cistern is located,
or someone contemplating the use of such water, shall furnish samples of water
taken from well or cistern to a chemist and bacteriologist specified by the
State Department of Health and Environmental Control, to be analyzed for both
chemical and bacteria contents, and a written report of the findings to be
provided to the person furnishing such samples. If the findings of such chemist
disclose that the water meets the chemical and bacteria criteria for potable
water, as established by the State Department of Health and Environmental
Control, use of water from such well or cistern shall be permitted.
('81 Code, § 95.17) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.23 DUTY OF USERS TO DISPLAY CHEMIST'S REPORTS.
   All persons using water from wells or cisterns within the municipality shall
be required to furnish on request to the Chief of Police a copy of the report
from the chemist specified by the State Department of Health and Environmental
Control showing the condition of the water so used.
('81 Code, § 95.18) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 93.24 QUARTERLY TESTING REQUIRED.
   All persons using water from wells or cisterns within the municipality shall
be required to have such analysis made of the water used by them once every
three months, between the first and fifteenth days of the months of January,
April, July, and October.
('81 Code, § 95.19) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no penalty is
otherwise provided, shall be subject to the penalty in §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   If any property owner fails to keep such property cleared, it
shall be considered a violation of §
93.07 and declared to be a misdemeanor under the laws of the state, and upon
conviction thereof, an offender shall be liable to a fine of not more than
$500, or imprisoned not exceeding 30 days, or both. However, no penalty shall
exceed the penalty provided by state law for similar offenses. Each day such
violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. When the provisions of
any other statute require more restrictive standards than are required by the
regulations of this chapter, the provisions of such statute shall govern.
('81 Code, § 94.05)
      (2)   Any property owner or lessee who fails to reimburse the
municipality within 30 days after the municipality has followed through with
division (B)(1), shall be subject to a fine of $500 or 30 days in jail for each
day the payment is in arrears, if found guilty of this misdemeanor in the
municipal court. However, no penalty shall exceed the penalty provided by state
law for similar offenses.
('81 Code, § 94.99(A)) (Ord. passed 4-7-80)
CHAPTER 94: PARADES, DEMONSTRATIONS, PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES AND PICKETING
Section
   
94.01   Definitions
   
94.02   Permit required
   
94.03   Exceptions
   
94.04   Application
   
94.05   Fees
   
94.06   Standards for insurance
   
94.07   Nondiscrimination
   
94.08   Notice of denial of application
   
94.09   Alternative permit
   
94.10   Appeal procedure
   
94.11   Notice to town and other officials
   
94.12   Contents of permit
   
94.13   Duties of permittee
   
94.14   Prohibitions
   
94.15   Public conduct during parades or public assemblies
   
94.16   Revocation of permit
 
   
94.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Streets and sidewalks, see
Ch. 95
Statutory reference:
   Powers of local authorities; regulating or prohibiting processions or
assemblages on the highways, see S.C. Code § 56-5-710 (3)
§ 94.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PARADE. Any march, procession or motorcade consisting of persons, animals or
vehicles, or a combination thereof, upon the streets within the town that
interferes with the normal flow or regulation of traffic upon the streets or
sidewalks.
   PARADE PERMIT or PUBLIC ASSEMBLY PERMIT. A permit as required by this
chapter.
   PUBLIC ASSEMBLY. Any meeting, demonstra- tion, picket line, rally or
gathering of more than 50 persons for a common purpose, as a result of prior
planning, that interferes with the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic.
   SIDEWALK. Any public area or way set aside or open to the general public for
purposes of pedestrian traffic.
   STREET. Any place or way set aside or open to the general public for
purposes of vehicular traffic, including any berm or shoulder parkway, right-
of-way, or median strip thereof, set aside for parking or for purposes of
vehicular traffic. For purposes of this chapter, the term street shall include
sidewalks.
(Ord. 02005, passed 3-12-02)
§ 94.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in or conduct any parade or public assembly unless a
permit is issued by the Town Administrator.
(Ord. 02005, passed 3-12-02) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.03 EXCEPTIONS.
   This chapter shall not apply to the following:
   (A)   Funeral processions;
   (B)   A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions; and
   (C)   Spontaneous events occasioned by news or affairs coming into public
knowledge within three days of such public assembly, provided that the
organizer thereof gives written notice to the town, at least 24 hours prior to
such parade or public assembly.
(Ord. 2005, passed 3-12-02)
§ 94.04 APPLICATION.
   (A)   A person seeking a parade or public assembly permit shall file and
sign an application with the Town Administrator, or his or her designee, on
forms provided by the Town Administrator.
   (B)   An application for a permit shall be filed with the Town Administrator
at least 10 and not more than 180 days before the parade or public assembly is
proposed to commence. The Town Administrator may waive the 10-day filing period
and accept an applica- tion filed within a shorter period if, after due
consider-ation of the date, time, place and nature of the parade or public
assembly, the anticipated number of partici-pants, and the town services
required in connection with the event, the Town Administrator determines that
the waiver will not present a hazard to public safety.
   (C)   The application for a parade or public assembly permit shall set forth
the following information:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to
conduct such parade or public assembly who shall be deemed to be in charge of
the parade or public assembly and responsible for compliance with the
provisions of this chapter;
      (2)   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the headquarters of
the organization for which the parade or public assembly is to be conducted, if
any, and the authorized and responsible heads of the organization;
      (3)   The requested date of the parade or public assembly;
      (4)   The route to be traveled, including the starting point and the
termination point;
      (5)   The approximate number of persons, animals and vehicles, the type
of animals, and a description of the vehicles that will constitute such parade
or public assembly;
      (6)   The hours when such parade or public assembly will start and
terminate;
      (7)   A statement as to whether the parade or public assembly will occupy
all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed;
      (8)   The location, by street, of any assembly areas for such parade or
public assembly;
      (9)   The time at which units of the parade or public assembly will begin
to assemble at any such area;
      (10)   The intervals of space to be maintained between units of such
parade or public assembly;
      (11)   If the parade or public assembly is designed to be held by, or on
behalf of, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit
shall file a letter from that person with the Town Administrator, authorizing
the applicant to apply for the permit on his or her behalf;
      (12)   The type of public assembly, including a description of activities
planned during the event;
      (13)   A description of any recording equip-ment, sound amplification
equipment, and a physical description of banners, signs, or other attention-
getting devices to be used in connection with the parade or public assembly,
and the maximum decibel level of any such sound amplification equipment;
      (14)   The approximate number of participants (spectators are by
definition not participants);
      (15)   A designation of any public facilities or equipment to be
utilized.
(Ord. 2005, passed 3-12-02) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.05 FEES.
   (A)   A non-refundable fee of $25, to cover administrative costs of
processing the permit, shall be paid to the town by the applicant when the
application is filed.
   (B)   If the application is for the use of any town property or if any town
services shall be required for the parade or public assembly, the applicant
shall pay, prior to the issuance of a permit, the charges for those services,
in accordance with a schedule of service costs approved by resolution of the
Town Council.
(Ord. 2005, passed 3-12-02)
§ 94.06 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE.
   (A)   The Town Administrator shall issue a permit when, from a consideration
of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be
obtained, he or she finds that:
      (1)   The conduct of the parade or public assembly will not require the
diversion of so great a number of town police officers to properly police the
line of movement, and the areas contiguous thereto, as to prevent normal police
protection of the town;
      (2)   The parade or public assembly is scheduled to move from its point
of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable
delays en route;
      (3)   There are sufficient parking places near the beginning/ending of
the parade or public assembly to accommodate the number of vehicles reasonably
expected;
      (4)   Such parade or public assembly is not for the primary purpose of
advertising any product, goods or event that is primarily for private profit,
and the parade itself is not primarily for profit. The prohibition against
advertising any product, goods or event shall not apply to signs identifying
organizations or sponsors furnishing or sponsoring exhibits or structures used
in the parade;
      (5)   No parade or public assembly permit application for the same time
and location has already been granted or has been received and will be granted;
and
      (6)   No parade or public assembly permit application for the same time
but different location has already been granted, or has been received and will
be granted; in either case, the police resources required for that prior parade
or public assembly would be so great that, in combination with the subsequent
proposed application, the resulting deployment of police services would have an
immediate and adverse effect upon the welfare and safety of persons and
property.
   (B)   No permit shall be granted that allows for the erection or placement
of any structure, whether permanent or temporary, on a town street, sidewalk or
right-of-way, unless advance approval for its erection or placement has been
obtained from the Town Council.
(Ord. 2005, passed 3-12-02)
§ 94.07 NONDISCRIMINATION.
   The Town Administrator shall uniformly consider each application upon its
merits, and shall not discriminate in granting or denying permits under this
chapter based upon political, religious, ethnic, race, disability, sexual
orientation or gender-related factors.
(Ord. 2005, passed 3-12-02)
§ 94.08 NOTICE OF DENIAL OF APPLICATION.
   The Town Administrator, or his or her designee, shall act promptly upon an
application for a parade or public assembly permit filed in a timely manner,
but in no event shall grant or deny a permit less than four days prior to the
event. If the Town Administrator disapproves the application, he or she shall
notify the applicant of the denial prior to the event, and shall state the
reasons for that denial.
(Ord. 2005, passed 3-12-02)
§ 94.09 ALTERNATIVE PERMIT.
   (A)   In denying an application for a parade or public assembly permit, the
Town Administrator may authorize the conduct of the parade or public assembly
at a date, time, location, or route different from that named by the applicant.
Within two days after notice of the action of the Town Administrator, an
applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall file a written notice of
acceptance with the Town Administrator.
   (B)   An alternate parade or public assembly permit shall conform to the
requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a parade or public assembly
permit issued under this chapter.
(Ord. 2005, passed 3-12-02)
§ 94.10 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Any applicant shall have the right to request reconsideration of a
denial of a parade or public assembly permit to the Town Administrator. Within
five days after receipt of the denial, the denied applicant shall make the
request by filing a written notice with the Town Administrator. The Town
Administrator shall promptly act upon the request within five days following
receipt of the notice of request.
   (B)   Any applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade or
public assembly permit to the Police, Judicial and Legal Committee. The denied
applicant shall make the appeal within five days after receipt of the denial by
filing a written notice with the Police, Judicial and Legal Committee, and a
copy of the notice with the Town Clerk. The Police, Judicial and Legal
Committee shall act upon the appeal at its next scheduled meeting or within 30
days following receipt of the notice of appeal.
   (C)   In the event that the Police, Judicial and Legal Committee rejects an
appeal, the applicant may file an immediate request for prompt judicial review
with a court of competent jurisdiction. In the event of any such review, the
town shall file its response to the complaint or appeal motion within 20 days
of service of same, and will join with the applicant in an application to the
court for an expedited hearing and decision of the appeal at the next available
term of court.
(Ord. 2005, passed 3-12-02)
§ 94.11 NOTICE TO TOWN AND OTHER OFFICIALS.
   Immediately upon the issuance of a parade or public assembly permit, the
Town Administrator shall send a copy thereof to the following:
   (A)   The Mayor and members of Town Council;
   (B)   The Chief of Police;
   (C)   The Town Attorney;
   (D)   The Fire Chief;
   (E)   The Director of the Department of Public Works.
(Ord. 2005, passed 3-12-02)
§ 94.12 CONTENTS OF PERMIT.
   Each parade or public assembly permit shall state the following information:
   (A)   Starting and approximate ending times;
   (B)   Maximum interval of space to be maintained between parade units;
   (C)   The portions of the streets that may be occupied by the parade or
public assembly;
   (D)   The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof; and
   (E)   Such other information as the Town Admini- strator shall find
necessary to the enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 2005, passed 3-12-02)
§ 94.13 DUTIES OF PERMITTEE.
   (A)   A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and
conditions, and with all appli- cable laws and ordinances.
   (B)   The parade or public assembly chairman, or other person heading such
activity, shall carry the parade or public assembly permit upon his or her
person during the conduct of the parade or public assembly.
(Ord. 2005, passed 3-12-02) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.14 PROHIBITIONS.
   The following prohibitions shall apply to all parades and public assemblies:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stage, present, or conduct any
parade or public assembly without first having obtained a permit as herein
provided;
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in a parade or
public assembly for which the person knows a permit has not been granted;
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of, or responsible for
the conduct of, a duly licensed parade or public assembly to knowingly fail to
comply with any condition of the permit;
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any parade or public
assembly activity that would constitute a substantial hazard to the public
safety or that would materially interfere with or endanger the public peace or
rights of residents to the quiet and peaceful enjoyment of their property.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or drive, or cause to be
ridden or driven, any animal or any animal-drawn vehicle upon any public
street, unless specifically authorized by the permit.
(Ord. 2005, passed 3-12-02) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.15 PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING PARADES OR PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES.
   (A)   No person shall hamper, obstruct, impede or interfere with any parade
or public assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used
in a parade or public assembly.
   (B)   Unless otherwise directed by a police officer directing traffic, no
driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a
parade or public assembly, when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are
conspicuously designated as a parade or public assembly.
   (C)   When reasonably necessary, the Chief of Police, or his or her
designee, shall have the authority to prohibit or restrict the parking of
vehicles along a street constituting a part of the route of a parade or public
assembly. The Chief of Police shall post signs to that effect, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation
thereof.
(Ord. 2005, passed 3-12-02) Penalty, see §
94.99
 § 94.16 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   The Town Administrator shall have the authority to revoke a parade or public
assembly permit immedi- ately upon violation of the conditions or standards for
issuance as set forth in this chapter, or when a public emergency arises where
the police resources required for that emergency are so great that deployment
of police services for the parade or public assembly would have an immediate
and adverse effect upon the welfare and safety of persons or property.
(Ord. 2005, passed 3-12-02)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating the provisions of any section of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or imprisonment for
not more than 30 days, or both.
(Ord. 2005, passed 3-12-02)
CHAPTER 95: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
   
95.01   Cleanliness of sidewalks
   
95.02   Responsibility of tenants as to maintenance
   
95.03   Notification of unclean or unsafe conditions
   
95.04   Planting of flowers and grass
   
95.05   Rendering street or sidewalk unsafe
   
95.06   Placing hazardous material prohibited
   
95.07   Obstructing streets, rights-of-way, and sidewalks
   
95.08   Fences
   
95.09   Roller skating and bicycle riding
Cross-reference:
   Parades, demonstrations, and the like, see
Ch. 94
   Street specifications, see
Ch. 158
   Subdivision regulations, see
Ch. 155
Statutory reference:
   Opening, closing, or altering streets, see S.C. Code, § 5-27-150
   Prisoners may be required to work on roads, see S.C. Code § 5-27-130
   Repair of streets, ways, and bridges, see S.C. Code, § 5-27-120
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 95.01 CLEANLINESS OF SIDEWALKS.
   It shall be the duty of the occupant of every building and the owner of
every unoccupied building or vacant lot abutting on a sidewalk in the
municipality to keep and maintain such sidewalk to the curb line thereof in a
clean and proper condition, and free from trash, rubbish, and unsightly grass
and weeds.
('81 Code, § 97.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.02 RESPONSIBILITY OF TENANTS AS TO MAINTENANCE.
   Wherever any building abutting on any sidewalk is divided into several
apartments, offices, or other division, and is occupied by more than one tenant
or occupant, the duty and responsibility for the maintenance of the sidewalk on
which such building abuts shall devolve upon each and every tenant occupying
the building on any part thereof jointly and severally.
('81 Code, § 97.02)
§ 95.03 NOTIFICATION OF UNCLEAN OR UNSAFE CONDITIONS.
   When any sidewalk or portion thereof shall appear unsightly by reason of
trash, rubbish, grass, or weeds being thereon, it shall be the duty of the Land
Codes Inspector to notify the occupant of the building or owner of an
unoccupied building or vacant lot abutting on such sidewalk or portion thereof,
or in case of a building divided into offices, apartments, or tenements, to
notify any one or more than one of the tenants or occupants of the building or
any part thereof of the condition of the sidewalk, and unless, within five days
of notification, the occupant or owner shall cause the trash, rubbish, or weeds
to be cut or the ice or snow to be removed and the sidewalk put in a clean and
proper condition, the occupant or owner shall be deemed guilty of a violation
of this section.
('81 Code, § 97.03) (Am. Ord. 23016, passed 5-9-23) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.04 PLANTING OF FLOWERS AND GRASS.
   The occupant of any building or portion thereof, or the owner of an
unoccupied building or vacant lot, which abuts on any sidewalk shall have the
right to put flowers or lawn grass in any unpaved portion of the sidewalk on
which the building or lot abuts, and it shall be unlawful for any person to
willfully or wantonly destroy or remove such flowers or lawn grass so planted,
provided, that such flowers or lawn grass shall not be so planted or maintained
as to interfere with or restrict the ordinary and customary use of the sidewalk
by pedestrians.
('81 Code, § 97.04) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.05 RENDERING STREET OR SIDEWALK UNSAFE.
   No person shall render traveling or the passage of vehicles or pedestrians
dangerous or difficult, or any street or sidewalk by meddling or interfering
with the street or sidewalk.
('81 Code, § 97.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.06 PLACING HAZARDOUS MATERIAL PROHIBITED.
   No person shall place, throw, or deposit on any street, sidewalk, or public
place any glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans, or any other substance likely to
injure any person, animal, or vehicle thereon.
('81 Code, § 97.06) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Putting foreign substances on highway, see S.C. Code, § 57-7-20
§ 95.07 OBSTRUCTING STREETS, RIGHTS-OF-WAY, AND SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   No person shall, without proper authority, place any obstruction in
the streets or sidewalks of the municipality. This shall include, but is not
limited to, the placement of bollards, rocks, landscaping, or other materials
on town property, or within a public right-of-way, which pose a risk to public
safety or is an obstruction to traffic or public access.
   (B)   Tree limbs over public streets should allow 15 feet of clearance
underneath to provide safe passage for vehicular traffic. Above sidewalks or
other multi-use paths, the clearance should be seven feet.
('81 Code, § 97.07) (Am. Ord. 23016, passed 5-9-23) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.08 FENCES.
   (A)   No person shall build any fence along the line of a street before
having the line of such street surveyed by a registered land surveyor or
without first having procured a permit from the Council.
   (B)   No person shall build any fence that encroaches on any street of the
municipality.
('81 Code, § 97.08) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.09 ROLLER SKATING AND BICYCLE RIDING.
   No person shall skate on the public streets or sidewalks nor ride bicycles
on the sidewalks except where permitted to do so by special notice erected by
authority of the municipality.
('81 Code, § 97.09) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 96: POLITICAL SIGNS
Section
   
96.01   Findings of fact
   
96.02   Political signs in public rights of way
§ 96.01 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   S.C. Code § 57-25-10 makes it unlawful for a person to display, place
or affix a sign within the rights-of-way of state highways.
   (B)   In recent years the number of political signs illegally placed within
the public rights-of-way prior to primary and general elections has increased
dramatically. Often those who place such signs in the rights-of-way do not
regularly maintain them in good conditions, or remove them promptly after an
election.
   (C)   Often the signs are placed in locations that block the vision of
motorists and pedestrians. They not only present a clear and present danger to
members of the public, but also impinge on public resources ant the time of
town employees who must remove signs when dangerous conditions exist.
   (D)   While the South Carolina Department of Traffic and Transportation
concedes it is unlawful to erect such signs, it has made the determination that
its resources are limited and the pressing nature of other maintenance
responsibilities dictate that it require removal of such signs only when they
constitute a danger to the traveling public.
   (E)   The existence of such signs create litter, create visibility polluting
blight, may be detrimental to a healthy tourism economy and are a nuisance.
(Ord. 99060, passed 1-11-00)
§ 96.02 POLITICAL SIGNS IN PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY.
   It shall be unlawful to place, or allow to be placed, a sign promoting a
political candidate or party within a state maintained street, highway or
right-of- way in the corporate limits of the town, or within any right-of-way
in the corporate limits of the town that is maintained by the town.
(Ord. 99060, passed 1-11-00)
CHAPTER 97: MOUNT PLEASANT MEMORIAL WATERFRONT PARK SPECIAL EVENTS
Section
   
97.01   Introduction
   
97.02   Rules and regulations
   
97.03   Fees and permits
Cross-reference:
   Prohibited activity at town-owned parks, see
Ch. 141
   Special event permits, see
Ch. 116
§ 97.01 INTRODUCTION.
   (A)   The Memorial Waterfront Park has been called Mount Peasant's crown
jewel and the town welcomes the residents and visitors who enjoy its amenities.
Many individuals, corporations and charitable groups see the park as a perfect
setting for events.
   (B)   The term EVENT HOST is defined as the individual(s) and/or group(s)
seeking to host a function or event at the Memorial Waterfront Park. An event
host that wants to plan an event in the Park that does not involve the Cooper
River Room, the Sweetgrass Cultural Arts Pavilion, or the Mount Pleasant Pier
should fill out the appropriate special event permit application, determine the
fees that will pertain to their event, then submit their application and fee
payment to the Office of Community Development and Tourism, 100 Ann Edwards
Lane, Mount Pleasant, SC 29464, within the deadlines published on the event
permit applications. Applications submitted outside the established deadlines
may be considered at the discretion of town staff.
   (C)   Failure to abide by the rules and regulations set forth in §
97.02 may result in denial of future applications, staff and supply charges for
remedial work resulting from the event, and/or additional security deposit
requirements for any future event organized by the same event host.
   (D)   Before completing an event permit application, the event host should
review
Chapter 141 of this municipal code and then confirm date availability by
contacting the Town Special Events Planner at eventpermits@tompsc.com or (843)
884-8517.
   (E)   For information about events in the Cooper River Room or Sweetgrass
Cultural Arts Pavilion, event hosts should visit www.CooperRiverRoom.com. For
information about the Mount Pleasant Pier, event hosts should visit
www.ccprc.com.
(Ord. 12077, passed 11-13-12; Am. Ord. 150205, passed 4-14-15)
§ 97.02 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   The Memorial Waterfront Park (hereinafter “MWP”) is a public
community park. At no time may a special event restrict the general public from
using its amenities without express written approval of the town.
      (2)   The town reserves the right to deny any permit at its sole
discretion.
      (3)   The town reserves the right to augment fees or require security
deposits on a case-by-case basis.
      (4)   Refunds will be given at the sole discretion of the town.
      (5)   The town will do everything possible to accommodate special events
affected by inclement weather.
      (6)   Special restrictions apply to food preparation in the park. If
onsite food preparation is part of a special event, this information must be
detailed in the permit application.
      (7)   Proper trash disposal is the responsibility of the event host.
There is a large dumpster onsite that may be used, but the event host must
provide its own trash receptacles/bags for large groups when the onsite cans
will not be sufficient. All litter, including zip ties, strings, and the like,
must be picked up and disposed of by the event host. Dumping liquids (cooking
water, grease, and the like) near the marsh or stormwater drains is a
punishable offense prohibited by state law; proper authorities will be notified
and event host will be held responsible. No liquids are to be disposed of
anywhere on the park grounds. These requirements pertain to all events hosted
anywhere within the park, including the Cooper River Room and Sweetgrass
Cultural Arts Pavilion. Event hosts failing to comply may be charged a cleaning
fee or other appropriate fine.
      (8)   The Police Department reviews all permit applications and
determines the number of off-duty officers, if any, required for each event.
         (a)   If necessary, an operations plan will be developed and police
will determine traffic control requirements.
         (b)   If an approved permit indicates that officers are required, the
event host must contact the Police Department at (843) 884-4176 or
eventofficers@tompsc.com to coordinate with the MPPD Grants Administrator who
will schedule off-duty officers and generate invoices to be paid by the event
host. Officers are to be paid immediately upon conclusion of the event by the
event host, unlessother arrangements have been approved in advance by MPPD,
      (9)   The town reserves the right to amend any portion of these
guidelines if deemed appropriate. This includes and is not limited to site map
alterations, restricting some activities with consideration of inclement
weather, and suggesting alternate dates or rescheduling events with
consideration of conflicting pre-scheduled activities within the park.
   (B)   Alcohol.
      (1)   No alcohol is allowed on the MWP grounds without facility rental,
unless an exception to this rule is granted in writing by the Town
Administrator or his or her designee.
      (2)   Event hosts should contact the Charleston Area Convention &
Visitors Bureau at (843) 852-2965 for information about facility rental.
      (3)   Alcohol purchased in the pier plaza must be consumed on the pier or
pier plaza.
   (C)   Fees, insurance, other permits.
      (1)   Fees. Down payments are required to ensure date reservations. User
fees have been established to cover administrative, operational, and ancillary
event maintenance costs.
      (2)   Other permits. The event host is solely responsible for obtaining
all other necessary permits and licenses (retail tax licenses, food service
permits, town business licenses, or any other necessary permits).
      (3)   General liability insurance.
         (a)   The town reserves the right to require a certificate of
insurance for events if deemed appropriate.
         (b)   If a certificate of insurance is required, the event host must
submit the certificate within the deadlines established herein, providing proof
of a commercial general liability insurance policy or its equivalent, written
on an occurrence basis for bodily injury, personal injury, property damage and
product liability, with a minimum of $1,000,000 per occurrence, naming the town
as additional insured. This type of insurance policy may be acquired from most
private insurance carriers. The description on the certificate must include the
event name, date, time and location (Memorial Waterfront Park, 99 Harry Hallman
Jr. Blvd., Mount Pleasant, SC 29464). The certificate holder shall be
identified as follows: Town of Mount Pleasant, 100 Ann Edwards Lane, Mount
Pleasant, SC 29464. No department or staff names shall be included.
         (c)   A permit will be denied or revoked if the town has not received
the required insurance certificate(s) prior to the special event.
         (d)   The event host is responsible at all times for the behavior of
all involved and will be held financially liable for any damage to the
facility.
   (D)   Setup and infrastructure.
      (1)   The town does not provide amenities such as sound and lighting
systems, stages, generators, tents, tables, chairs or other support materials
and services.
      (2)   Any equipment utilized by a group must be packed up and removed
from the premises immediately following the event, unless express written
consent has been provided by the town.
      (3)   No stakes are allowed on the MWP grounds without express written
consent by the town. All tents, canopies, inflatables, and other similar
structures must be secured using weights. Failure to abide by this rule will
result in the denial of future event permit applications, and the event host
will be held financially responsible for any damage resulting from equipment
setup.
      (4)   No vehicles are allowed to be driven onto the Great Lawn area
between the Visitor's Center and the War Memorial, with the exception of
vehicles owned by the town or authorized by town staff for town-sponsored
events.
      (5)   Sidewalks must remain clear of event elements. The event host must
maintain the integrity of the landscape beds.
      (6)   No banners, signage or other event elements are to be secured to or
affixed on trees, light poles, or other park features. Small push-in-ground
stake signs are permitted only if included on an approved permit.
   (E)   Electricity and water. There are no public power or water sources
available at the MWP without facility rental. It is the event planner's
responsibility to provide ample generators to supply all power needs required
by the event.
   (F)   Restrooms.
      (1)   When deemed necessary by town staff, all events are required to
contract a cleaning service approved by the town to maintain the restrooms
during event hours, and to ensure that restrooms are left in pre-event
condition upon event conclusion. Event host will be charged a cleaning fee for
restrooms requiring post-event cleaning.
      (2)   While the MWP has restroom facilities, these may not be adequate
for some events. The town reserves the right to mandate the number and location
of portable restrooms within the event. Five percent of all portable restrooms
must be ADA-approved. Portable restrooms will be at the expense of the event
host.
(Ord. 12077, passed 11-13-12; Am. Ord. 150205, passed 4-14-15)
§ 97.03 FEES AND PERMITS.
   (A)   User fees.
      (1)   Event fees are based upon attendance expectations. The event host
should review the following descriptions to determine the appropriate fee and
permit application for the type of event the event host is interested in
hosting at the MWP.
      (2)   The user fees listed are based upon common events held at the MWP.
If an event goes outside the normal scope of activity because of extensive
infrastructure or other reasons, the town reserves the right to augment fees or
to deny the permit, based on the MWP’s inability to support the event without
requiring significant maintenance or potential repair. After reviewing the
application, the town will advise if the final rental rate will be augmented.
   (B)   Reservation payments.
      (1)   Applications are not considered without the fee payment.
      (2)   User fees are outlined below.
      (3)   Reservations are not confirmed until the application is approved by
the Town Administrator or his or her designee.
      (4)   Fee payment will be refunded if the permit application is denied.
   (C)   Small group events.
      (1)   Typically groups of less than 25 do not require an event permit.
      (2)   The event host should apply for a small group permit if:
         (a)   The event is a group gathering, such as a family picnic,
birthday party or other special event, with an expected attendance of between
25 and 249 people; or
         (b)   The group is less than 25, but the event host is bringing event
support gear, i.e., tents and/or any support equipment requiring town
supervision (questions should be directed to eventpermits@tompsc.com).
      (3)   Due a minimum of 30 days in advance:
         (a)   A completed MWP small group event permit application;
         (b)   Fee payment: $200 per day non-refundable fee.
      (4)   Wedding ceremonies held in the park without a facility rental are
limited to no more than 40 people, including bride and groom, and no equipment
setup is allowed, such as tents, tables, archways, musicians, and the like.
Minimal chairs for elderly or handicapped guests may be approved at the
discretion of town staff.
   (D)   Large group events.
      (1)   The event host should apply for a large group permit if:
         (a)   The event is a group gathering with an expected attendance of
between 250 and 499 people; or
         (b)   The group is less than 250 people, but the event host is
bringing extensive event support gear, i.e., more than five tents, food
vendors, generators, and/or any support equipment requiring town supervision
(questions should be directed to eventpermits@tompsc.com).
      (2)   Due a minimum of 30 days in advance:
         (a)   A completed MWP large group event permit application;
         (b)   Fee payment: $400 per day non-refundable fee.
   (E)   Major events.
      (1)   Events with an expected attendance of 500 or more people are not
permitted at Memorial Waterfront Park.
      (2)   Please note that large-scale or multiple-day productions may
require supplemental deposits, fees and/or permits. If applicable, town staff
will notify event hosts in advance of such requirements.
   (F)   If a planned event falls outside of the scope of the descriptions
contained herein, the event host should contact the Special Events Planner at
eventpermits@tompsc.com or (843) 884-8517.
(Ord. 12077, passed 11-13-12; Am. Ord. 150205, passed 4-14-15)
CHAPTER 98: PREVENTION OF DISCRIMINATION IN THE RENTAL OR SALE OF HOUSING
Section
   
98.01   Declaration of policy
   
98.02   Definitions
   
98.03   Purposes of chapter
   
98.04   Unlawful housing practices
   
98.05   Exemptions from chapter
   
98.06   Enforcement
   
98.07   Establishment of procedures for conciliation
   
98.08   Investigations; powers; records
   
98.09   Conspiracy to violate chapter unlawful
§ 98.01 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   It shall be the policy of the town to eliminate discrimination in housing
based on race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, age,
disability, familial status or national origin.
(Ord. 18044, passed 10-9-18)
§ 98.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARD. That body of citizens duly appointed by the Town Council to hear,
make determinations and issue findings in all cases of discriminatory practices
in housing, if necessary.
   DISCRIMINATION. Any direct or indirect act or practice of exclusion,
distinction, restriction, segregation, limitation, refusal, denial, or any
other act or practice of differentiation or preference in the treatment of a
person or persons because of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation,
gender identity, age, disability, familial status or national origin, or the
aiding, abetting, inciting, coercing or compelling thereof.
   FAMILIAL STATUS.
      (1)   Includes one or more individuals (who have not attained the age of
18 years) being domiciled with:
         (a)   A parent or another person having legal custody of such
individual or individuals; or
         (b)   The designee of such parent or other person having such custody,
with the written permission of such parent or other person.
      (2)   The protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of
familial status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process
of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of 18
years.
   GENDER IDENTITY. A person’s gender-related identity, appearance or behavior,
whether or not that gender-related identity, appearance or behavior is
different from that traditionally associated with the person’s designated sex
at birth.
   HOUSING, HOUSING ACCOMMODATIONS or DWELLING. Any building, mobile home or
trailer, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed or
intended for occupancy as a residence by one or more families, and any vacant
land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location
thereon of any such building, mobile home or trailer, structure, or portion
thereof or any real property, as defined herein, used or intended to be used
for any of the purposes set forth in this definition.
   LENDING INSTITUTION or FINANCIAL INSTITUTION. Any person, as defined herein,
engaged in the business of lending money or guaranteeing loans.
   OWNER. Includes a lessee, sublessee, co-tenant, assignee, managing agent, or
other person having the right of ownership or possession, or the right to sell,
rent or lease any housing accommodation.
   PERSON. One or more individuals, governments, governmental agencies,
governmental departments, governmental programs, political subdivisions, labor
unions, firms, associations, joint ventures, partnerships, estates, trusts,
fiduciaries, corporations, and all other groups or combinations.
   REAL ESTATE BROKER or REAL ESTATE SALESMAN. Includes any individual, who for
a fee, commission, salary or for other valuable consideration, who with the
intention or expectation of receiving or collecting same, lists, sells,
purchases, rents or leases any housing accommodations, including options
thereupon or who negotiates or attempts to negotiate such activities; or who
advertises or holds himself out as engaged in such activities; or who
negotiates or attempts to negotiate a loan, secured by a mortgage or other
encumbrance, upon transfer of any housing accommodation, or who is engaged in
the business of charging an advance fee or contracting for collection of a fee
in connection with a contract whereby he or she undertakes to promote the sale,
purchase, rental or lease of any housing accommodation through its listing in a
publication issued primarily for such purpose; or an individual employed by or
acting on behalf of any of these.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes buildings, structures, or portions thereof which is
occupied as, or designated or intended for occupancy, as a residence by one or
more families, lands, mobile homes, tenements, leaseholds, cooperatives and
condominiums or any interest in the above.
   SEXUAL ORIENTATION. A person’s real or perceived heterosexuality,
homosexuality or bisexuality, or gender identity or expression.
   TO RENT. Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise grant for a
consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant.
(Ord. 18044, passed 10-9-18)
§ 98.03 PURPOSES OF CHAPTER.
   The general purposes of this chapter are:
   (A)   To provide for execution within the Town of the policies embodied in
Title VIII of the Federal Civil Rights Act of 1968 as amended.
   (B)   To safeguard all individuals within the town from discrimination in
housing opportunities because of race, color, religion, sex, sexual
orientation, gender identity, age, disability, familial status or national
origin, thereby to protect their interest in personal dignity and freedom from
humiliation; to secure the town against domestic strife and unrest which would
menace its democratic institutions; to preserve the public health and general
welfare; and to further the interests, rights, and privileges of individuals
within the town.
(Ord. 18044, passed 10-9-18)
§ 98.04 UNLAWFUL HOUSING PRACTICES.
   It shall be an unlawful practice for a real estate owner or operator, a real
estate broker, a real estate salesman, a financial institution, an employee of
any of these, or any other person to:
   (A)   Refuse to sell, purchase, rent or lease, or otherwise deny to or
withhold any housing accommodation from a person, or to evict a person because
of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, age,
disability, familial status or national origin; or
   (B)   To discriminate against a person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of the sale, purchase, rental or lease of any housing accommodation,
or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith; or
   (C)   To refuse to receive or transmit a bona fide offer to sell, purchase,
rent or lease any housing accommodation from or to a person because of race,
color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identify, age, disability,
familial status or national origin; or
   (D)   To evict or refuse to negotiate for the sale, purchase, rental or
lease of any housing accommodation to a person because of race, color,
religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, age, disability, familial
status or national origin; or
   (E)   To represent to a person that any housing accommodation is not
available for inspection, sale, purchase, rental or lease when in fact it is so
available, or to refuse to permit a person to inspect any housing
accommodation, because of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation,
gender identity, age, disability, familial status or national origin when such
dwelling is in fact available to persons who are financially qualified; or
   (F)   To make, publish, print, circulate, post or mail, or cause to be made,
published, printed, circulated, posted or mailed, any notice, statement or
advertisement, or to announce a policy, or to sign or to use a form of
application for the sale, purchase, rental, lease or financing of any housing
accommodation, or to make a record of inquiry in connection with the
prospective sale, purchase, rental, lease or financing of any housing
accommodation, which indicates any discrimination or any intent to
discriminate; or
   (G)   To offer, solicit, accept or use a listing of any housing
accommodation for sale, purchase, rental or leasing, knowing that a person may
be subjected to discrimination in connection with such sale, purchase, rental
or lease, or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection
therewith; or
   (H)   To induce or discourage, or to attempt to induce or discourage:
      (1)   The sale,
      (2)   The purchase,
      (3)   The rental,
      (4)   The lease, or
      (5)   The listing for divisions (A), (B), (C) or (D) above, of any
housing accommodations in an area, by means of:
         (a)   Causing panic,
         (b)   Inciting unrest, or
         (c)   Creating or playing upon fear, by representing that the presence
or anticipated presence in that area of persons of any particular race, color,
religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, age, disability, familial
status or national origin, will or may result in:
            1.   The lowering of property values in the area;
            2.   The increase in criminal or antisocial behavior in the area;
            3.   A decline in the quality of the school serving the area; or
   (I)   For any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or
other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in
whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans, to deny a loan
or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor the purpose of
purchasing, construction, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling, or to
discriminate against him or her in the fixing of the amount, interest rate,
duration, or other terms or conditions of such loans or other financial
assistance, because of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender
identity, age, disability, familial status or national origin of such person or
of any person associated with him or her in connection with such loan or other
financial assistance or the purposes of such loan or other financial
assistance, or of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants, or
occupants of the dwelling or dwelling in relation to which such loan or other
financial assistance is to be made or given; or
   (J)   To deny any person, who is otherwise professionally qualified by state
law, access to, or membership or participation in, any multiple listing
service, real estate brokers’ organization, or other service, organization or
facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to
discriminate against him or her in the terms or conditions of such access,
membership or participation, on account of race, color, religion, sex, sexual
orientation, gender identity, age, disability, familial status or national
origin.
(Ord. 18044, passed 10-9-18)
§ 98.05 EXEMPTIONS FROM CHAPTER.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply:
   (A)   To the rental of housing accommodations in a building which contains
housing accommodations for not more than four families living independently of
each other, if the owner or member of his or her family resides in one of the
housing accommodations;
   (B)   To the rental of one room or one rooming unit in a housing
accommodation by an individual if he or she or a member of his or her family
resides therein;
   (C)   To a religious organization, association, or society, or any non-
profit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in
conjunction with a religious organization, association or society, from
limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates
for other than commercial purpose to persons of the same religion or from
giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such a religion is
restricted on account of race, color, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity
or national origin.
(Ord. 18044, passed 10-9-18)
§ 98.06 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The town may bring a civil action to enjoin an illegal act under this
chapter.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to a maximum fine of not more than $500, plus all other state assessments,
court charges and fees.
   (C)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day that a
violation occurs or continues.
   (D)   There is no private right of action that is created by this section or
money damages available to any person based on this section.
(Ord. 18044, passed 10-9-18)
§ 98.07 ESTABLISHMENT OF PROCEDURES FOR CONCILIATION.
   The Mayor may establish procedures for investigation of complaints and
conciliation of apparent violations of this chapter.
(Ord. 18044, passed 10-9-18)
§ 98.08 INVESTIGATIONS; POWERS; RECORDS.
   (A)   In connection with an investigation of a complaint filed under this
chapter, the enforcing officer(s) at any reasonable time may request voluntary
access to premises, records and documents relevant to the complaints and may
request the right to examine, photograph, and copy evidence.
   (B)   Every person subject to this chapter shall make, keep and preserve
records relevant to the determination of whether unlawful practices have been
or are being committed, such records maintained and preserved in a manner and
to the extent required under the Civil Rights Act of 1968 and any regulations
promulgated thereunder.
(Ord. 18044, passed 10-9-18)
§ 98.09 CONSPIRACY TO VIOLATE CHAPTER UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be an unlawful practice for a person, or for two or more persons to
conspire:
   (A)   To retaliate or discriminate in any manner against a person because he
or she has opposed a practice declared unlawful by this chapter, or because he
or she has made a charge, filed a complaint, testified, assisted or
participated in any manner in any investigation, or proceeding, or hearing
under this chapter; or
   (B)   To aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce a person to engage in any of
the acts or practices declared unlawful by this chapter; or
   (C)   To obstruct or prevent a person from complying with the provisions of
this chapter or any order issued thereunder; or
   (D)   To resist, prevent, impede, or interfere with the enforcing agent(s),
housing board, or any of its members or representatives in the lawful
performance of duty under this chapter.
(Ord. 18044, passed 10-9-18)
CHAPTER 99: EQUAL ENJOYMENT AND PRIVILEGES TO PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS
Section
   
99.01   Policy declaration
   
99.02   Definitions
   
99.03   Exemption from public accommodation provisions
   
99.04   Purpose of law; construction; effect
   
99.05   Prohibition of discrimination
   
99.06   Penalties; exclusive remedies
§ 99.01 POLICY DECLARATION.
   It is the policy of the Town of Mount Pleasant, South Carolina, that no
person shall be discriminated against in the full and equal enjoyment of the
goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages and accommodations of any
place of public accommodation on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, age,
national origin, familial status, disability, sexual orientation or gender
identity.
(Ord. 18045, passed 10-9-18)
§ 99.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DISABILITY. A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or
more of the major life activities of the individual, a record of such an
impairment or being regarded as having such an impairment.
   DISCRIMINATION. Any direct or indirect act or practice of exclusion,
distinction, restriction, segregation, limitation, refusal, denial, or any
other act or practice of differentiation or preference in the treatment of a
person or persons because of race, color, religion, national origin, age, sex,
familial status, disability, sexual orientation or gender identify in the
aiding, abetting, inciting, coercing or compelling thereof.
   GENDER IDENTITY. A person’s gender-related identity, appearance or behavior,
whether or not that gender-related identity, appearance or behavior is
different from that traditionally associated with the person’s designated sex
at birth.
   PERSON. Any individual or corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, any other group acting as a unit.
   PLACE OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION. Any place which serves the public and
requires a license or permit issued by the State of South Carolina, its
agencies or the Town of Mount Pleasant to operate, including, but not limited
to:
      (1)   Any inn, hotel, motel, or other establishment which provides
lodging to transient guests, other than an establishment located within a
building which contains not more than three bed and breakfast units and which
is actually occupied by the proprietor of such establishment as his or her
residence;
      (2)   Any restaurant, cafeteria, lunchroom, lunch counter, soda fountain,
or other facility principally engaged in selling food for consumption on the
premises, including, but not limited to, any such facility located on the
premises of any retail establishment, or any gasoline station;
      (3)   Any hospital, clinic, or other medical facility which provides
overnight accommodations;
      (4)   Any retail or wholesale establishment;
      (5)   Any motion picture house, theater, concert hall, billiard parlor,
saloon, barroom, golf course, sports arena, stadium, or other place of
amusement, exhibition, recreation, or entertainment; and
      (6)   Any establishment which is physically located within the premises
of any establishment otherwise covered by this definition, or within the
premises of which is physically located any such covered establishment, and
which holds itself out as serving patrons of such covered establishment.
   SEXUAL ORIENTATION. A person’s real or perceived heterosexuality,
homosexuality or bisexuality.
(Ord. 18045, passed 10-9-18)
§ 99.03 EXEMPTION FROM PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION PROVISIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to a private club or other
establishment not in fact open to the general public, unless the establishment
is being used by a third party.
(Ord. 18045, passed 10-9-18)
§ 99.04 PURPOSE OF LAW; CONSTRUCTION; EFFECT.
   The general purpose of this chapter is to safeguard all individuals within
the town from discrimination in the equal enjoyment and privileges to public
accommodations because of race, color, religion, age, national origin, sex,
familial status, disability, sexual orientation or gender identity; thereby to
protect their interest in personal dignity and freedom from humiliation; to
secure the town against domestic strife and unrest which would menace its
democratic institutions; to preserve the public health and general welfare; and
to further the interests, rights, and privileges of individuals within the
town.
(Ord. 18045, passed 10-9-18)
§ 99.05 PROHIBITION OF DISCRIMINATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person serving the public as defined in §
99.02 to discriminate because of race, color, religion, age. national origin,
sex, familial status, disability, sexual orientation or gender identity.
(Ord. 18045, passed 10-9-18)
§ 99.06 PENALTIES; EXCLUSIVE REMEDY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to a maximum fine of not more than $500, plus all other state assessments,
court charges and fees.
   (B)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day that a
violation occurs or continues.
   (C)   There is no private right of action that is created by this section or
money damages available to any person based on this section.
(Ord. 18045, passed 10-9-18)
CHAPTER 100: VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION SERVICES
Section
   
100.01   Definitions
   
100.02   Immobilization and booting requirements and restrictions; duties and
obligations
   
100.03   Maximum fee for release of boot or other immobilization device; late
fee
   
100.04   Severability
 
   
100.99   Penalty
§ 100.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply.
   BOOT OPERATOR. Any person or business entity, including employees or agents
thereof, that are engaged in the practice of immobilizing vehicles through the
use of mechanical devices.
   BOOTING. The placement of a mechanical wheel locking clamp or any other
immobilization device of any type or description on a motor vehicle.
   BOOTING FEE. The fee charged as a result of the placement of a boot or
immobilization device and includes the release of such boot or immobilization
device.
   COMMERCIAL PARKING LOT OR PARKING LOT. Any portion of privately owned
property where the primary use is for office, retail, wholesale, restaurant,
education or service for hire uses and where parking is available for property
owners, occupants or their patrons, clients or customers. The term also applies
to private parking lots for which hourly or other periodic charges are made for
the right to park on the premises, regardless of whether there are structures
on the property. The term does not include property having primarily a
residential use, with the exception of multiple dwelling units.
   IMMOBILIZATION DEVICE OR BOOT. Any device that immobilizes a parked motor
vehicle or otherwise prohibits the motor vehicle's usual manner of movement or
operation. The term includes, without limitation, any device, mechanism or
contraption that is affixed to: (1) the tire, wheel or any other exterior part
of a vehicle so as to make the vehicle inoperable; or (2) the front windshield
or a window of a vehicle so as to obstruct the driver's view (this does not
include the warning decal required by §
100.02). Unless otherwise specified, the terms IMMOBILIZATION DEVICE or BOOT
shall include a self-release vehicle immobilization device that immobilizes a
parked motor vehicle or otherwise prohibits the motor vehicle's usual manner of
movement or operation, and which may be released upon payment of the fee
without assistance of an operator.
   MOTOR VEHICLE OR VEHICLE. Any motorized vehicle which is capable of moving
on the public ways of the town, including trailers pulled by a motor vehicle.
   PARKING LOT OPERATOR. Any person or business entity, including employees and
agents of either, operating a commercial parking lot. The operator may also be
the property owner or boot operator.
   PROPERTY OWNER. The person or business entity which owns or leases private
property, which is used, in whole or in part, as a commercial parking lot.
(Ord. 24030, passed 9-13-24)
§ 100.02 IMMOBILIZATION AND BOOTING REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS; DUTIES AND
OBLIGATIONS.
   The following are applicable to commercial parking lots.
   (A)   No booting or immobilization shall occur in a commercial parking lot
without the following signage in place:
      (1)   Signs of at least four square feet in size and positioned no less
than four feet and no more than six feet above site grade which contain a clear
warning that state: (1) violators' vehicles will be booted, at the vehicle
owner's expense; (2) the name and telephone number of the boot operator; (3)
that the maximum price for release of the vehicle is $125 per day; and (4) that
the booting operator must arrive to release the vehicle within 30 minutes of
requesting for release of the vehicle if the request is between the hours of 7:
00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., and one hour of requesting for release of the vehicle if
the request is between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or there can be no
charge for the release of the vehicle.
      (2)   The signs described in this section shall be located at each
designated entrance to a parking lot. Each sign shall be clearly visible to any
driver of a motor vehicle approaching any point of ingress to the property.
Where there is no designated entrance, the signs shall be erected so as to be
clearly visible from each and every parking space. The signs shall not be
situated in a way that interferes with critical sightlines or otherwise
compromise the safety of motorists and the town reserves the right to require
repositioning of signs in the interest of public safety and welfare. Any
additional signage positioned on the lot shall not contain information that is
inconsistent with the sign(s) described in this section. Information on other
signage within the parking lot that is inconsistent with the signs described in
this chapter shall be removed or replaced within 15 days of notice from the
town.
      (3)   All signage required under this section must be approved by the
town's Planning, Land Use, and Neighborhoods Department.
      (4)   To the extent that the requirements of this section are
inconsistent with the signage requirements in the town's Zoning Code, the
requirements in this section shall prevail.
   (B)   If the boot operator or parking lot operator has the contact
information for the vehicle owner, then the boot operator shall notify the
vehicle owner prior to the installation of a boot or immobilization device and
allow the vehicle owner 15 minutes to remove their vehicle from the parking
lot.
   (C)   Only one boot or immobilization device may be placed on a vehicle.
   (D)   Immediately upon installing a boot or immobilization device, the boot
operator shall affix a blaze orange warning decal at least 47 square inches in
size prominently in the center of the driver's side window or on the front
windshield directly in front of the vehicle steering wheel. The warning decal
shall be affixed in such a manner as to withstand the elements but not in such
a manner as to leave permanent marks or residue on the vehicle. The warning
decal shall clearly and legibly inform the operator of the vehicle that an
immobilization device has been installed on the vehicle and that attempting to
move the vehicle will cause serious damage to the vehicle. This decal shall
display the name and address of the boot operator as well as the telephone
number at which the boot operator will be available 24 hours a day for the
purpose of accepting payment and removal of the boot and/or warning decal. Upon
payment of the booting fee, the boot operator shall remove the decal and shall
have in its possession the appropriate materials needed to remove all parts of
the decal, adhesive material, and any residue.
   (E)   A boot operator shall maintain 24-hour telephones as well as boot and
warning decal removal services.
   (F)   A boot operator may only impose a booting fee if all requirements of
this chapter have been met.
   (G)   For self-release immobilization devices, the drop-off location must be
clearly marked and located at a conspicuous location within the parking lot
where the booting or immobilization occurred. Boot operator shall not be
entitled to retain a security deposit or a holding fee if the drop-off location
is not clearly marked in a conspicuous location within the parking lot or is
broken, full, or otherwise inaccessible.
   (H)   If the boot or immobilization device is self-releasing, the boot
operator shall release the boot or provide release instructions within 30
minutes of receiving a call, text or other electronic communication requesting
release of the vehicle if the request is between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:
00 p.m., and one hour of calling for release of the vehicle if the request is
between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. If the boot operator fails to
release the boot or to provide release instructions within the time specified
herein, there shall be no booting fee or any other charge.
   (I)   If the boot or immobilization device is not self-releasing, the boot
operator must be able take payment in person and must arrive at the parking lot
within 30 minutes of receiving a call, text or other electronic communication
requesting release of the vehicle if the request is between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 7:00 p.m., and one hour of calling for release of the vehicle if the
request is between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Upon payment, the boot
operator must immediately release the boot or immobilization device and remove
the warning decal, adhesive material and any residue. If the boot operator
fails to arrive within the time specified herein, there shall be no booting fee
or any other charge and the immobilization device shall be removed immediately.
   (J)   If the vehicle owner or vehicle operator of a motor vehicle parked
without authorization in a commercial parking lot attempts to retrieve the
vehicle before a boot or other immobilization device is completely installed,
there shall be no booting fee and the vehicle owner or vehicle operator shall
be allowed to remove the vehicle without further delay and without being
assessed a fee or charge of any kind.
   (K)   A company used to immobilize cars in commercial parking lots must have
a town business license.
(Ord. 24030, passed 9-13-24)
§ 100.03 MAXIMUM FEE FOR RELEASE OF BOOT OR OTHER IMMOBILIZATION DEVICE; LATE
FEE.
   (A)   The maximum daily fee that may be charged to release a boot or other
immobilization device placed on a vehicle in a commercial parking lot shall be
$125 inclusive of any and all fees, charges, assessments, deposits and/or
temporary holding fees. If a booted vehicle is not removed from the parking lot
within 24 hours after booting or immobilization, the boot operator may charge
an additional $125 every 24 hours thereafter.
   (B)   Every boot operator doing business in the municipal limits of the city
shall accept major credit cards in addition to cash. There shall be no
additional fee charged for the use of credit cards.
(Ord. 24030, passed 9-13-24)
§ 100.04 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, word or any other part
of this chapter shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by a court of
competent authority, then the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected
and shall remain in full force and effect.
(Ord. 24030, passed 9-13-24)
§ 100.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   A boot operator or property owner who violates any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction in the municipal court therefor, be subject to a
fine not to exceed $500 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days.
   (B)   In addition to other penalties, any person violating this chapter
shall be subject to suspension or revocation of their business license by the
business license official who shall also have all authority granted under §
110.15.
(Ord. 24030, passed 9-13-24)
TITLE XI:  BUSINESS LICENSES
   Chapter
      
110.   BUSINESS LICENSES
      
111.   ALARM SYSTEMS
      
112.   TOWING OR WRECKER SERVICES
      
113.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
114.   ACCOMMODATIONS FEE
      
115.   HOSPITALITY TAX
      
116.   SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS
      
117.   ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES PROGRAM
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL LICENSING
Section
   
110.01   License required
   
110.02   Definitions
   
110.03   Purpose and duration
   
110.04   Business license tax; refund
   
110.05   Registration required
   
110.06   Deductions, exemptions and charitable organizations
   
110.07   False application unlawful
   
110.08   Display and transfer
   
110.09   Administration of chapter
   
110.10   Inspection and audits
   
110.11   Assessments; payment under protest; appeal
   
110.12   Delinquent license taxes; partial payment
   
110.13   Notices
   
110.14   Denial of license
   
110.15   Suspension or revocation of license
   
110.16   Administrative appeal process
   
110.17   Consent, franchise or license required for use of streets
   
110.18   Confidentiality
   
110.19   Violations
   
110.20   Separability
   
110.21   Classification and rates
   
Appendix A:   Business license rate schedule
   
Appendix B:   Business license class schedule by NAICS Code
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Every person engaged or intending to engage in any business, occupation,
calling, profession, or activity engaged in with the object of gain, benefit,
or advantage, in whole or in part, within the limits of the Town of Mount
Pleasant, South Carolina ("town"), is required to pay an annual license tax for
the privilege of doing business, and obtain a business license as herein
provided.
(Ord. 21064, passed 9-14-21)
§ 110.02 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meaning ascribed herein. Defined terms are not capitalized when used
in this chapter unless the context otherwise requires.
   BUSINESS. Any business, occupation, calling, profession, or activity engaged
in with the object of gain, benefit, or advantage, either directly or
indirectly.
   BUSINESS LICENSE. A license issued to a business by the town for the
privilege of doing business in the Town of Mount Pleasant, South Carolina.
   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION. An organization that is determined by the Internal
Revenue Service (IRS) to be exempt from Federal income taxes under 26 U.S.C.
Section 501(c)(3), (4), (6), (7), (8), (10) or (19).
   CHARITABLE PURPOSE. A benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, or eleemosynary
purpose that does not result in personal gain to a sponsor, organizer, officer,
director, trustee or person with ultimate control of the organization.
   CLASSIFICATION. That division of businesses by the North American Industry
Classification System (NAICS) subject to the same license rate as determined by
a calculated index of ability to pay based on national averages, benefits,
equalization of tax burden, relationships of services, or other basis deemed
appropriate by Town Council.
   DOMICILE. A principal place from which the trade or business of a licensee
is conducted, directed, or managed. For purposes of this chapter, a business
may be deemed to have more than one domicile.
   GROSS INCOME. The gross receipts or gross revenue of a business, received or
accrued, for one calendar or fiscal year collected or to be collected from
business done within the town. If the business has a domicile within the town,
business done within the town shall include all gross receipts or revenue
received or accrued by such business. If the business does not have a domicile
within the town, business done within the town shall include only gross
receipts or revenue received or accrued within the town. In all cases, if the
business pays a business license tax to another county or municipality, then
the business's gross income for the purpose of computing the tax within the
town may be reduced by the amount of revenues or receipts taxed in the other
county or municipality and fully reported to the town. GROSS INCOME for
business license tax purposes shall not include taxes collected for a
governmental entity, escrow funds, or funds that are the property of a third
party. The value of bartered goods or trade-in merchandise shall be included in
gross income. The gross receipts or gross revenues for business license
purposes may be verified by inspection of returns and reports filed with the
Internal Revenue Service (IRS), the South Carolina Department of Revenue
(SCDOR), the South Carolina Department of Insurance (SCDOI), or other
government agencies. In calculating gross income for certain businesses, the
following rules shall apply:
      (1)   Gross income for agents shall be calculated on gross commissions
received or retained, unless otherwise specified. If commissions are divided
with other brokers or agents, then only the amount retained by the broker or
agent is considered GROSS INCOME.
      (2)   Except as specifically required by S.C. Code § 38-7-20, GROSS
INCOME for insurance companies shall be calculated on gross premiums written.
      (3)   GROSS INCOME for manufacturers of goods or materials with a
location in the town shall be calculated on the lesser of: (i) gross revenues
or receipts received or accrued from business done at the location; (ii) the
amount of income allocated and apportioned to that location by the business for
purposes of the business's state income tax return; or (iii) the amount of
expenses attributable to the location as a cost center of the business.
Businesses reporting gross income under this provision shall have the burden to
establish the amount and method of calculation by satisfactory records and
proof. Manufacturers include those businesses reporting a manufacturing
principal business activity code on their federal income tax returns.
   GROSS PREMIUMS. For insurance companies, GROSS PREMIUMS written for policies
for property or a risk located within the town. In addition, GROSS PREMIUMS
shall include premiums written for policies that are sold, solicited,
negotiated, taken, transmitted, received, delivered, applied for, produced or
serviced by (1) the insurance company's office; (2) the insurance company's
employee conducting business within the municipality; or (3) the office of the
insurance company's licensed or appointed producer (agent) conducting business
within the municipality, regardless of where the property or risk is located,
provided no tax has been paid to another municipality in which the property or
risk is located based on the same premium.
      (1)   As to fire insurance, GROSS PREMIUMS: (a) collected in the
municipality; and/or (b) realized from risks located within the limits of the
municipality.
      (2)   As to bail bonds, GROSS PREMIUMS shall exclude any amounts retained
by a licensed bail bondsman as defined in S.C. Code Title 38, Chapter 53 for
authorized commissions, fees, and expenses.
      (3)   GROSS PREMIUMS shall include all business conducted in the prior
calendar year. GROSS PREMIUMS shall include new and renewal business without
deductions for any dividend, credit, returned premiums, or deposits.
      (4)   Solicitation for insurance, receiving or transmitting an
application or policy, examination of a risk, collection or transmitting of a
premium, adjusting a claim, delivering a benefit, or doing any act in
connection with a policy or claim shall constitute conducting business within
the municipality, regardless of whether or not an office is maintained in the
municipality.
   LICENSE OFFICIAL. The officer, employee, or agent designated by the town as
having primary responsibility for business licensing within the town.
Notwithstanding the designation of a primary license official, the town may
designate one or more alternate license officials to administer particular
types of business licenses, including without limitation for business licenses
issued to businesses subject to business license taxes under Article 20,
Chapter 9, Title 58, and Chapters 7 and 45, Title 38, of the South Carolina
Code.
   MUNICIPALITY or TOWN. The Town of Mount Pleasant, South Carolina.
   NAICS. The North American Industry Classification System for the United
States published under the auspices of the Federal Office of Management and
Budget.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, limited liability partnership
(LLP), limited liability company (LLC), cooperative non-profit membership,
corporation, joint venture, association, estate, trust, business trust,
receiver, syndicate, holding company, or other group or combination acting as a
unit, in the singular or plural, and the agent or employee having charge or
control of a business in the absence of the principal.
   REAL ESTATE ACTIVITY. Subject to a business license means the following:
      (1)   Owner leasing of commercial property with the business license tax
based on gross receipts, including rents plus any other charges which
constitute income.
      (2)   Owner leasing of residential dwelling unit or portion thereof for
less than 30 consecutive days with the business license tax based on gross
receipts, including rents plus any other charges which constitute income.
      (3)   Owner leasing of three or more residential dwelling units or
portion thereof for 30 or more consecutive days with the business license tax
based on gross receipts, including rents plus any other charges which
constitute income.
      (4)   Selling and managing property on behalf of others with the business
license tax based on gross commissions.
      (5)   Owner sale of commercial real estate with the business license tax
based on gross sales price.
      (6)   Owner sale of residential real estate with the business license tax
based on gross sales price if three or more lots or units; existing and
subsequently created plats and related documents will be considered.
   RESTAURANT. A business engaged in providing food services to patrons who
order and are served while seated. These establishments may provide this type
of food service to patrons in combination with selling beer, wine and other
alcoholic beverages, provided that the gross income from sales of beer, wine
and other alcoholic beverages does not exceed 35% of the establishment's total
gross income.
(Ord. 21064, passed 9-14-21; Am. Ord. 23036, passed 12-12-23)
§ 110.03 PURPOSE AND DURATION.
   The business license levied by this chapter is for the purpose of providing
such regulation as may be required by the businesses subject thereto and for
the purpose of raising revenue for the general fund through a privilege tax.
Except as set forth below for business licenses issued to contractors with
respect to specific construction projects, each yearly license shall be issued
for the 12-month period of May 1 to April 30. A business license issued for a
construction contract may, at the request of the business, be stated to expire
at the completion of the construction project; provided, any such business
license may require that the business file, by each April 30 during the
continuation of the construction project, a statement of compliance, including
but not limited to a revised estimate of the value of the contract. If any
revised estimate of the final value of such project exceeds the amount for
which the business license was issued, the licensee shall be required to pay a
license fee at the then-prevailing rate on the excess amount. The provisions of
this chapter and the rates herein shall remain in effect from year to year as
amended by Town Council.
(Ord. 21064, passed 9-14-21)
§ 110.04 BUSINESS LICENSE TAX; REFUND.
   (A)   The required business license tax shall be paid for each business
subject hereto according to the applicable rate classification on or before the
due date of the 30th day of April in each year, except for those businesses in
Rate Class 8 for which a different due date is specified. Delinquent renewal
penalties will accrue after May 31 as detailed in §
110.12.
   (B)   A separate license shall be required for each place of business and
for each classification or business conducted at one place. If gross income
cannot be separated for classifications at one location, the business license
tax shall be computed on the combined gross income for the classification
requiring the highest rate. The business license tax must be computed based on
the business's gross income for the calendar year preceding the due date, for
the business's 12-month fiscal year preceding the due date, or on a 12-month
projected income based on the monthly average for a business in operation for
less than one year. The business license tax for a new business must be
computed on the estimated probable gross income for the balance of the license
year. A business license related to construction contract projects may be
issued on a per-project basis, at the option of the business. No refund shall
be made for a business that is discontinued.
   (C)   A business that submits a payment greater than the amount owed may
request a refund. To be considered, a refund request must be submitted in
writing to the town before the June 1 immediately following the April 30 on
which the payment was due and must be supported by adequate documentation
supporting the refund request. The town shall approve or deny the refund
request, and if approved shall issue the refund to the business within 30 days
after receipt of the request.
(Ord. 21064, passed 9-14-21)
§ 110.05 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   The owner, agent, or legal representative of every business subject to
this chapter, whether listed in the classification index or not, shall register
the business and make application for a business license on or before the due
date of each year; provided, a new business shall be required to have a
business license prior to operation within the town.
   (B)   Application shall be on a form provided by the License Official, or
the standard business license application as established and provided by the
Director of the Revenue and Fiscal Affairs Office may be accepted. The form
shall include all information about the applicant, the licensee, and the
business deemed appropriate to carry out the purpose of this chapter by the
License Official. Applicants may be required to submit copies of portions of
state and federal income tax returns reflecting gross receipts and gross
revenue figures.
   (C)   The applicant shall certify under oath that the information given in
the application is true, that the gross income is accurately reported, or
estimated for a new business, without any unauthorized deductions, and that all
assessments, personal property taxes on business property, and other monies due
and payable to the town have been paid.
   (D)   The town shall allow application, reporting, calculation, and payment
of business license taxes through the business license page of the town's
website, or through the tax portal hosted and managed by the South Carolina
Revenue and Fiscal Affairs Office, subject to the availability and capability
thereof. Any limitations in portal availability or capability do not relieve
the applicant or licensee from existing business license or business license
tax obligations.
(Ord. 21064, passed 9-14-21)
§ 110.06 DEDUCTIONS, EXEMPTIONS AND CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS.
   (A)   No deductions from gross income shall be made except income earned
outside of the town on which a license tax is paid by the business to some
other municipality or county and fully reported to the town; taxes collected
for a governmental entity; or income which cannot be included for computation
of the tax pursuant to state or federal law. Properly apportioned income from
business in interstate commerce shall be included in the calculation of gross
income and is not exempted. The applicant shall have the burden to establish
the right to exempt income by satisfactory records and proof.
   (B)   No person shall be exempt from the requirements of the chapter by
reason of the lack of an established place of business within the town, unless
exempted by state or federal law. The License Official shall determine the
appropriate classification for each business in accordance with the latest
issue of the NAICS. No person shall be exempt from this chapter by reason of
the payment of any other tax or fee, unless exempted by state law, and no
person shall be relieved of the liability for the payment of any other tax or
fee by reason of the application of this chapter.
   (C)   A charitable organization shall be exempt from the business license
tax on its gross income unless it is deemed a business subject to a business
license tax on all or part of its gross income as provided in this section. A
charitable organization, or any affiliate of a charitable organization, that
reports income from for-profit activities or unrelated business income for
federal income tax purposes to the Internal Revenue Service shall be deemed a
business subject to a business license tax on the part of its gross income from
such for-profit activities or unrelated business income.
   (D)   A charitable organization shall be deemed a business subject to a
business license tax on its total gross income if (1) any net proceeds of
operation, after necessary expenses of operation, inure to the benefit of any
individual or any entity that is not itself a charitable organization as
defined in this chapter; or (2) any net proceeds of operation, after necessary
expenses of operation, are used for a purpose other than a charitable purpose
as defined in this chapter. Excess benefits or compensation in any form beyond
fair market value to a sponsor, organizer, officer, director, trustee, or
person with ultimate control of the organization shall not be deemed a
necessary expense of operation.
   (E)   Real estate rental of less than three residential dwelling units or
portion thereof for 30 or more consecutive days and subdivision or development
for sale of less than three residential lots are not deemed to constitute doing
business and shall be exempt from business license taxes. Existing and
subsequently created plats and related documents will be considered.
   (F)   Businesses leasing commercial property to the same business entity may
exempt only those lease gross receipts from business license taxes. However, if
the business also leases commercial property to another business, then the
business is required to obtain a license based on the gross receipts received
from these other businesses.
   (G)   Sale of products of a farm or orchard actually produced by the seller
shall be exempt from business license taxes.
   (H)   Any existing business on a newly annexed property into the Town of
Mount Pleasant shall be exempt from license taxes hereunder for the license
year in which the property is annexed, in addition to the subsequent full
license year.
   (I)   Wholesalers are exempt from business license taxes unless they
maintain warehouses or distribution establishments within the town. A wholesale
transaction involves a sale to an individual who will resell the goods and
includes delivery of the
goods to the reseller. It does not include a sale of goods to a user or
consumer.
(Ord. 21064, passed 9-14-21)
§ 110.07 FALSE APPLICATION UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person subject to the provisions of this
chapter to make a false application for a business license or to give or file,
or direct the giving or filing of, any false information with respect to the
license or tax required by this chapter.
(Ord. 21064, passed 9-14-21)
§ 110.08 DISPLAY AND TRANSFER.
   (A)   All persons shall display the license issued to them on the original
form provided by the License Official in a conspicuous place in the business
establishment at the address shown on the license. A peddler, transient or non-
resident shall carry the license upon his person or in a vehicle used in the
business readily available for inspection by any authorized agent of the town.
   (B)   A change of address must be reported to the License Official within
ten days after removal of the business to a new location and the license will
be valid at the new address upon written notification of the License Official
and compliance with zoning and building codes. Failure to obtain the approval
of the License Official for a change of address shall invalidate the license
and subject the business to prosecution for doing business without a license.
   (C)   A business license may be transferable. In the event of a sale or
transfer of a business, the purchaser or new owner(s) may apply to the License
Official for a credit for taxes previously paid toward the new license taxes.
Upon determination by the License Official that the new business is the same as
the previously licensed business, and the seller and the purchaser agree to the
transfer, the License Official shall deduct from the taxes due a prorated
credit for license taxes paid. The applicant (purchaser) for such credit shall
pay an administrative tax of $50, notwithstanding such credits, such
application shall be made within the same license year of the transfer or sale.
   (D)   The transfer of any partial ownership shall be reported to the License
Official within the same license year. The administrative tax shall not be
applicable to a partial ownership transfer.
(Ord. 21064, passed 9-14-21)
§ 110.09 ADMINISTRATION OF CHAPTER.
   (A)   The License Official shall administer the provisions of this chapter,
collect license taxes, issue licenses, make or initiate investigations and
audits to ensure compliance, initiate denial or suspension and revocation
procedures, report violations to the Town Attorney, assist in prosecution of
violators, produce forms, undertake reasonable procedures relating to the
administration of this chapter, and perform such other duties as may be duly
assigned.
   (B)   The License Official may require evidence of compliance with
applicable fire, safety, building, zoning, health and other applicable state
and local laws and regulations prior to issuing a business license.
(Ord. 21064, passed 9-14-21)
§ 110.10 INSPECTION AND AUDITS.
   (A)   For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, the
License Official or other authorized agent of the town is empowered to enter
upon the premises of any person subject to this chapter to make inspections and
to examine and audit books and records. It shall be unlawful for any such
person to fail or refuse to make available the necessary books and records. In
the event an audit or inspection reveals that the business has filed false
information, the costs of the audit shall be added to the correct business
license tax and late penalties in addition to other penalties provided herein.
Each day of failure to pay the proper amount of business license tax shall
constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   The License Official shall have the authority to make inspections and
conduct audits of businesses to ensure compliance with the chapter. Audits are
limited to the current and prior two periods. Financial information obtained by
inspections and audits shall not be deemed public records, and the License
Official shall not release the amount of business license taxes paid or the
reported gross income of any person by name without written permission of the
business, except as authorized by this chapter, state or federal law, or proper
judicial order. Statistics compiled by classifications are public records.
(Ord. 21064, passed 9-14-21)
§ 110.11 ASSESSMENTS; PAYMENT UNDER PROTEST; APPEAL.
   (A)   Assessments, payments under protest, and appeals of assessment shall
be allowed and conducted by the town pursuant to the provisions of S.C. Code §
6-1-410, as amended. In preparing an assessment, the License Official may
examine such records of the business or any other available records as may be
appropriate and conduct such investigations and statistical surveys as the
License Official may deem appropriate to assess a business license tax and
penalties as provided herein.
   (B)   The town shall establish uniform local regulations consistent with
S.C. Code § 6-1-410 for hearing an application for adjustment of assessment and
issuing a notice of final assessment.
(Ord. 21064, passed 9-14-21)
§ 110.12 DELINQUENT LICENSE TAXES; PARTIAL PAYMENT.
   (A)   For nonpayment of all or any part of the correct license tax, the
License Official may levy and collect a late penalty of 5% of the unpaid tax
for each month or portion thereof after the due date until paid. The maximum
penalty is 30% per year.
   (B)   Partial payment may be accepted by the License Official to toll
imposition of penalties on the portion paid; provided, however, no business
license shall be issued or renewed until the full amount of the tax due, with
penalties, has been paid.
(Ord. 21064, passed 9-14-21)
§ 110.13 NOTICES.
   The License Official may, but shall not be required to, mail written notices
that license taxes are due, but if notices are not mailed there shall be
published a notice of the due date in a newspaper of general circulation within
the town three times prior to the due date in each year. Failure to receive
notice shall not constitute a defense to prosecution for failure to pay the tax
due or grounds for waiver of penalties.
(Ord. 21064, passed 9-14-21)
§ 110.14 DENIAL OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The License Official may deny a license to an applicant when the
License Official determines:
      (1)   The application is incomplete or contains a misrepresentation,
false or misleading statement, or evasion or suppression of a material fact;
      (2)   The activity for which a license is sought is unlawful or
constitutes a public nuisance per se or per accidens;
      (3)   The business is delinquent in the payment to the town of any tax,
fee or penalty.
      (4)   The fact that the license has been suspended or revoked the
previous year may be grounds for denial.
   (B)   A decision of the License Official shall be subject to the appeal as
herein provided. Denial shall be written with reasons stated.
(Ord. 21064, passed 9-14-21)
§ 110.15 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The License Official may suspend or revoke a license when the License
Official determines:
      (1)   A business has been mistakenly or improperly issued or issued
contrary to law; or
      (2)   A business has breached any condition upon which the license was
issued or has failed to comply with the provision of this chapter; or
      (3)   A business has obtained a license through a fraud,
misrepresentation, a false or misleading statement, evasion or suppression of a
material fact in the license application; or
      (4)   A business has been convicted of an offense under a law or
ordinance regulating business, a crime involving moral turpitude, or an
unlawful sale of merchandise or prohibited goods; or
      (5)   A licensee has engaged in an unlawful activity or nuisance related
to the business.
   (B)   The License Official shall give written notice to the licensee or the
person in control of the business within the town by personal service or
certified mail that the license is suspended or revoked pending a hearing
before the Town Administrator for the purpose of determining whether the
license should be suspended or revoked.
   (C)   The notice shall state the appellant rights of the licensee or person
in control of the business as specified in §
110.16, Administrative Appeal Process. The notice shall also contain a brief
statement of the reasons for suspension and proposed revocation and a copy of
the applicable provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 21064, passed 9-14-21)
§ 110.16 ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL PROCESS.
   (A)   Except with respect to appeals of assessments under §
110.11 hereof, which are governed by S.C. Code § 6-1-410, any person may file
an administrative appeal with the Town Administrator regarding the decisions on
issues including, but not limited to, the following: classification, denial, or
revocation of a business license, and any other issues contained within the
Business Licenses Ordinance by filing a written notice of appeal. All notices
of appeal shall include a full explanation of the reasons for the appeal,
specifying the grounds thereof, and contain any documentation that the
appellant desires to be considered. Payment under protest shall be a condition
precedent to file an administrative appeal.
   (B)   Within 30 business days following the receipt of the written notice of
appeal, the Town Administrator will review the appellant's written report,
supporting documentation and departmental staff reports. The 30-day review
period may be extended by the Town Administrator if additional information is
needed from the appellant in order to render a decision. Upon completion of the
administrative review, the Town Administrator will provide a written response
to the appellant constituting a final administrative determination.
   (C)   No person shall be subject to prosecution for doing business without a
license until the expiration of ten business days after notice of denial or
revocation is deemed received and no appeal is taken to a circuit court which
is not appealed or until after final judgment of a circuit court upholding
denial or revocation.
(Ord. 21064, passed 9-14-21)
§ 110.17 CONSENT, FRANCHISE OR LICENSE REQUIRED FOR USE OF STREETS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install, maintain,
or operate in, on, above or under any street or public place under control of
the town any line, pipe, cable, pole, structure, or facility for utilities,
communications, cablevision or other purposes without a consent agreement or
franchise agreement issued by the Town Council by ordinance which prescribes
the term, fees and conditions for use. Small wireless facilities are exempt
from this provision and all restrictions or requirements shall be dictated by
the provisions in
Chapter 156.
   (B)   The annual fee for use of streets or public places authorized by a
consent agreement or franchise agreement shall be set by the ordinance
approving the agreement and shall be consistent with limits set by state law.
Existing franchise agreements shall continue in effect until expiration dates
in the agreements. Franchise and consent fees shall not be in lieu of or be
credited against business license taxes unless specifically provided by the
franchise or consent agreement.
(Ord. 21064, passed 9-14-21)
§ 110.18 CONFIDENTIALITY.
   Except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by
law, no official or employee of the town may divulge or make known in any
maimer the amount of income or any financial particulars set forth or disclosed
in any report or return required under this chapter. Nothing in this section
shall be construed to prohibit the publication of statistics so classified as
to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns. Any license
data may be shared with other public officials or employees in the performance
of their duties, whether or not those duties relate to enforcement of this
chapter.
(Ord. 21064, passed 9-14-21)
§ 110.19 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of an offense and shall be subject to a fine of up to $500 or
imprisonment for not more than 30 days or both, upon conviction. Each day of
violation shall be considered a separate offense. Punishment for violation
shall not relieve the offender of liability for delinquent taxes, penalties,
and costs provided for in this chapter.
   (B)   The License Official or any law enforcement officer may issue an
ordinance summons for violation of this chapter pursuant to the Town Code.
(Ord. 21064, passed 9-14-21)
§ 110.20 SEPARABILITY.
   A determination that any portion of this chapter is invalid or unenforceable
shall not affect the remaining portions. To the extent of any conflict between
the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of the South Carolina
Business License Tax Standardization Act, as codified at S.C. Code §§ 6-1-400
et seq., the Standardization Act shall control.
(Ord. 21064, passed 9-14-21)
§ 110.21 CLASSIFICATION AND RATES.
   (A)   The business license tax for each class of businesses subject to this
chapter shall be computed in accordance with the current business license rate
schedule, designated as
Appendix A to this chapter, which may be amended from time to time by Town
Council.
   (B)   The current business license class schedule is attached hereto as
Appendix B. Hereafter, no later than December 31 of each odd year, the town
shall adopt, by ordinance, the latest standardized business license class
schedule as recommended by the Municipal Association of South Carolina and
adopted by the Director of the South Carolina Revenue and Fiscal Affairs
Office. Upon adoption by the town, the revised business license class schedule
shall then be appended to this chapter as a replacement
Appendix B.
   (C)   The classifications included in each rate class are listed with NAICS
codes, by sector, sub-sector, group, or industry. The business license class
schedule
Appendix B) is a tool for classification and not a limitation on businesses
subject to a business license tax. The classification in the most recent
version of the business license class schedule adopted by the Council that most
specifically identifies the subject business shall be applied to the business.
The License Official shall have the authority to make the determination of the
classification most specifically applicable to a subject business.
(Ord. 21064, passed 9-14-21)
APPENDIX A: BUSINESS LICENSE RATE SCHEDULE.  
Rate Class Income: $0 - $2,000 Base Rate Income over $2,000
                                         Rate per $1,000 or fraction thereof
Rate Class Income: $0 - $2,000 Base Rate Income over $2,000
                                         Rate per $1,000 or fraction thereof
1          $40.00                        $1.54
2          $45.00                        $1.79
3          $50.00                        $2.04
4          $55.00                        $2.29
5          $60.00                        $2.54
6          $65.00                        $2.79
7          $70.00                        $3.04
8          See individual businesses in Class 8
9          See individual businesses in Class 9
 
NON-RESIDENT RATES: Unless otherwise specifically provided, all taxes and rates
shall be doubled for nonresidents and itinerants having no fixed principal
place of business within the municipality.
DECLINING RATES: Declining rates apply in all Classes for gross income in
excess of $1,000,000, unless otherwise specifically provided for in this
appendix.
 
Gross Income    Percent of Class Rate for each additional $1,000
$0 - $3 million 100%
Over $3 million 70%
 
CLASS 8 RATES
   Each NAICS number designates a separate subclassification. The businesses in
this section are treated as separate and individual subclasses due to
provisions of state law, regulatory requirements, service burdens, tax
equalization considerations, and other factors that are deemed sufficient to
require individually determined rates. Non-resident rates do not apply except
where indicated.
8.1   NAICS 230000 - Contractors, Construction, All Types [Non-resident rates
apply].
   Resident rates, for contractors having a permanent place of business within
the municipality:
      Minimum on first $2,000   $50.00 Plus
      Each additional $1,000   $2.11
   Non-resident rates apply to contractors that do not have a permanent place
of business within the municipality. A trailer at the construction site or
structure in which the contractor temporarily resides is not a permanent place
of business under this chapter.
   No contractor shall be issued a business license until all state and
municipal qualification examination and trade license requirements have been
met. Each contractor shall post a sign in plain view on each job identifying
the contractor with the job.
   Sub-contractors shall be licensed on the same basis as general or prime
contractors for the same job. No deductions shall be made by a general or prime
contractor for value of work performed by a sub-contractor.
   No contractor shall be issued a business license until all performance and
indemnity bonds required by the Building Code have been filed and approved.
Zoning permits must be obtained when required by the Zoning Ordinance.
   Each prime contractor shall file with the License Official a list of sub-
contractors furnishing labor or materials for each project.
   For licenses issued on a per-job basis, the total tax for the full amount of
the contract shall be paid prior to commencement of work and shall entitle the
contractor to complete the job without regard to the normal license expiration
date. An amended report shall be filed for each new job and the appropriate
additional license fee per $1,000 of the contract amount shall be paid prior to
commencement of new work. Only one base tax shall be paid in a license year.
Licensees holding a per-job license shall file, by each April 30 during the
continuation of the construction project, a statement of compliance, including
but not limited to a revised estimate of the value of the contract. If any
revised estimate of the final value of such project exceeds the amount for
which the business license was issued, the licensee shall be required to pay a
license fee at the then-prevailing rate on the excess amount.
8.2   NAICS 482 - Railroad Transportation (See S.C. Code § 12-23-210).
8.3   NAICS 517111, 517112, 517122 - Telecommunication Companies.
   With respect to "retail telecommunications services," as defined in S. C.
Code § 58-9-2200, the town participates in the South Carolina Local Revenue
Services collections program, a division of the Municipal Association of South
Carolina. The town has approved participation in the collections program by
separate ordinance (Ord. 23025, adopted September 12, 2023). The rates, terms,
conditions, dates, penalties, appeals process, and other details of the
business license applicable to retail telecommunications services are set forth
in Ord. 23025.
   The business license tax year for retail telecommunications services shall
begin on January 1 of each year. The business license tax for retail
telecommunications services shall be due on January 1 of each year and payable
by January 31 of that year, without penalty. The delinquent penalty shall be
5.0% of the tax due for each month, or portion thereof, after the due date
until paid.
   In conformity with S.C. Code § 58-9-2220, the business license tax for
retail telecommunications services shall apply to the gross income derived from
the sale of retail telecommunications services for the preceding calendar or
fiscal year which either originate or terminate in the town and which are
charged to a service address within the municipality regardless of where these
amounts are billed or paid and on which a business license tax has not been
paid to another municipality. The measurement of the amounts derived from the
retail sale of mobile telecommunications services shall include only revenues
from the fixed monthly recurring charge of customers whose service address is
within the boundaries of the town. For a business in operation for less than
one year, the amount of business license tax shall be computed on a 12-month
projected income.
   Nothing in Ord. 23025 shall be interpreted to interfere with continuing
obligations of any franchise agreement or contractual agreement. All fees
collected under such a franchise or contractual agreement shall be in lieu of
fees or taxes which might otherwise be authorized by ordinance.
   No exemption for interstate commerce. Properly apportioned gross income from
interstate commerce shall be included in the gross income for business license
taxes applicable to communications companies.
8.4   NAICS 5241, 5242 - Insurance Carriers.
   Independent agents, brokers, and their employees are subject to a business
license tax based on their natural class. With respect to insurers subject to
license fees and taxes under Chapter 7 of Title 38 and to brokers under Chapter
45 of Title 38, the town participates in the South Carolina Local Revenue
Services collections program, a division of the Municipal Association of South
Carolina. The town has approved participation in the collections program by
separate ordinance (Ord. 23025, adopted September 12, 2023). The rates, terms,
conditions, dates, penalties, appeals process, and other details of the
business license applicable to insurers and brokers are set forth in Ord.
23025.
   The business license tax for insurance companies under S.C. Code Title 38,
Chapter 7 shall be established at the rates set forth below. Declining rates
shall not apply.
 
NAICS Code
524113 - Life, Health, and Accident 2.0% of gross premiums
524126 - Fire and Casualty          2.0% of gross premiums
524127 - Title Insurance            2.0% of gross premiums
 
   License taxes for insurance companies shall be payable on or before May 31
in each year without penalty. The penalty for delinquent payments shall be 5.0%
of the tax due per month, or portion thereof, after the due date until paid.
   Business license tax applicable to brokers. S.C. Code Title 38, Chapter 45,
Insurance Brokers and Surplus Lines Insurance, establishes a blended premium
tax rate applicable to brokers of 6.0%, comprising a 4.0% state premium tax and
a 2.0% municipal premium tax, each to be collected by the South Carolina
Department of Insurance. Pursuant to S.C. Code §§ 38-45-10 and 38-45-60 of the
Brokers Act, the Municipal Association of South Carolina is designated the
town's municipal agent for purposes of administration of the municipal broker's
premium tax.
   No exemption for interstate commerce. Properly apportioned gross income from
interstate commerce shall be included in the gross income for business license
taxes applicable to insurance companies and insurance brokers.
8.51   NAICS 713120 - Amusement Machines, coin operated (except gambling).
   Music machines, juke boxes, kiddy rides, video games, pin tables with
levers, and other amusement machines with or without free play feature licensed
by SC Department of Revenue pursuant to S.C. Code § 12-21-2720(A)(1) and (A)(2)
[Type I and Type II].
   For operation of all machines (not on gross income), pursuant to S.C. Code §
12-21-2746:
      Per Machine   $12.50 Plus
      Business license   $12.50
   Distributors that sell or lease machines and are not licensed by the state
as an operator pursuant to S.C. Code § 12-21-2728 are not subject to Subclass
8.51.
8.52   NAICS 713290 - Amusement Machines, coin operated, non-payout.
   Amusement machines of the non-payout type or in-line pin game licensed by SC
Department of Revenue pursuant to S.C. Code § 12-21-2720(A)(3) [Type III].
   For operation of all machines (not on gross income), pursuant to S.C. Code
§12-21-2720(B):
      Per Machine      $180.00 Plus
      Business license   $12.50
   Distributors that sell or lease machines and are not licensed by the state
as an operator pursuant to S.C. Code § 12-21-2728 are not subject to Subclass
8.52.
8.6   NAICS Code Varies - Billiard or Pool Tables.
   A business that offers the use of billiard or pool tables shall be subject
to business license taxation under its natural class for all gross income of
the business excluding the gross income attributable to the billiard or pool
tables. In addition. the billiard or pool tables shall require their own
separate business licenses pursuant to S.C. Code § 12-21-2746 and shall be
subject to a license tax of $5.00 per table measuring less than 3-1/2 feet wide
and 7 feet long, and $12.50 per table longer than that.
CLASS 9 RATES
   In accordance with state law, Section 6-l-400(G)(2) of the Standardization
Act, the town also may provide for reasonable subclassifications for rates,
described by an NAICS sector, subsector, or industry, that are based on
particularized considerations as needed for economic stimulus or for the
enhanced or disproportionate demands on municipal services or infrastructure.
Non-resident rates do not apply except where indicated.
9.1   NAICS 4411, 4412 - Automotive, Motor Vehicles, Boats, Golf Carts, Farm
Machinery or Retail.
   One sales lot not more than 400 feet from the main showroom may be operated
under this license provided that proceeds from sales at the lot are included in
gross receipts at the main office when both are operated under the same name
and ownership.
   Gross receipts for this classification shall include value of trade-ins.
Dealer transfers or internal repairs on resale items shall not be included in
gross income.
   Minimum on first $2,000   $20.00    Plus
   Per $1,000, or fraction, over $2,000   $0.98
9.3   NAICS 711190 - Carnivals and Circuses.
      Minimum on first $2,000   $100.00 Plus
      Per $1,000, or fraction, over $2,000   $3.03
9.4   NAICS 722410 - Prinking Places, bars, lounges, cabarets
   Alcoholic beverages consumed on premises. This industry includes
establishments which derive more than 35% of the gross income from the sale of
beer, wine, or other alcoholic beverages.
      Minimum on first $2,000         $200.00 Plus
      Per $1,000, or fraction, over $2,000   $3.03
* Subsections 9.5, 9.7, 9.8 considered for disproportionate demands on town
services
9.5   NAICS 623311, 623312 - Assisted Living Facilities [Non-resident rates
apply]
   Minimum on first $2,000   $82.50 Plus
   Per $1,000, or fraction, over $2,000   $3.54
9.7   NAICS 621111 - Doctor's Offices [Non-resident rates apply]
   Minimum on first $2,000   $55.00 Plus
   Per $1,000, or fraction, over $2,000   $2.36
9.8   NAICS 621493, 621498, 622110, 622210, 622310 - Medical Offices, Hospitals
[Non-resident rates apply]
   Minimum on first $2,000   $55.00 Plus
   Per $1,000, or fraction, over $2,000   $2.36
* Subsections 9.91 - 9.92 considered for economic stimulus
9.91   NAICS 541511 - 541513, 541519 - Computer Program or Software
Development, Custom
      Minimum on first $2,000   $10.00 Plus
 
Amount of Income          Tax Calculator
$2,000 to $1 million      $0.50 per thousand
$1 million to $2 million  $0.10 per thousand
$2 million to $10 million $0.05 per thousand
over $10 million          $0.025 per thousand
 
      These classifications are not subject to the Declining Rates Table, but
are subject to the above rate calculation schedule.
9.92   NAICS 513210 - Computer Software Publishers, Computer Software
Reproducing
      Minimum on first $2,000   $10.00 PLUS
 
Amount of Income          Tax Calculator
$2,000 to $1 million      $0.50 per thousand
$1 million to $2 million  $0.10 per thousand
$2 million to $10 million $0.05 per thousand
over $10 million          $0.025 per thousand
 
      These classifications are not subject to the Declining Rates Table, but
are subject to the above rate calculation schedule.
(Ord. 21064, passed 9-14-21; Am. Ord. 23036, passed 12-12-23)
APPENDIX B: BUSINESS LICENSE CLASS SCHEDULE BY NAICS CODE
NAICS Sector/Subsector Industry Sector Class
NAICS Sector/Subsector          Industry Sector                        Class
11                              Agriculture, forestry, hunting and     1.00
                                fishing
21                              Mining                                 2.00
31, 32, 33                      Manufacturing                          3.00
42                              Wholesale trade                        1.00
44, 45                          Retail trade                           1.00
48, 49                          Transportation and warehousing         1.00
51                              Information                            4.00
52                              Finance and insurance                  7.00
53                              Real estate and rental and leasing     7.00
54                              Professional, scientific, and          5.00
                                technical services
55                              Management of companies                7.00
56                              Administrative and support and waste   3.00
                                management and remediation services
61                              Educational services                   3.00
62                              Health care and social assistance      4.00
71                              Arts, entertainment, and recreation    3.00
721                             Accommodation                          1.00
722                             Food services and drinking places      2.00
81                              Other services                         4.00
Class 8
23                              Construction                           8.10
482                             Rail transportation                    8.20
517111                          Wired telecommunications carriers      8.30
517112                          Wireless telecommunications carriers   8.30
                                (except satellite)
517122                          Agents for wireless telecommunications 8.30
                                services
5241                            Insurance carriers                     8.40
5242                            Insurance brokers for non-admitted     8.40
                                insurance carriers
713120                          Amusement parks and arcades            8.51
713290                          Nonpayout amusement machines           8.52
713990                          All other amusement and recreational   8.60
                                industries (pool tables)
Class 9
4411, 4412                      Auto/boat/motorcycle/golf cart sales   9.10
454390                          Regular direct sellers                 9.20
454390                          Seasonal direct sellers (6 days a      9.30
                                year)
711190                          Carnivals and circus                   9.30
722410                          Bars (drinking places)                 9.40
623311, 623312                  Assisted living facilities             9.50
621492                          Dialysis clinics                       9.60
621111                          Doctor offices                         9.70
621493, 621498, 622110, 622210, Medical offices, surgical centers,     9.80
622310                          hospitals
5541511-541513, 541519          Computer systems design and related    9.91
                                services
513210                          Computer software publishers           9.92
 
Note: 2023 Class Schedule is based on a three-year average (2017 - 2019) of IRS
statistical data.
(Ord. 21064, passed 9-14-21; Am. Ord. 23036, passed 12-12-23)
CHAPTER 111: ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
General Provisions
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   Alarm business
   
111.03   Alarm agent
   
111.04   Auto alarms exempted
Alarm System Requirements
   
111.20   Repair and maintenance; available personnel
   
111.21   Responding to alarms; surveillance personnel
   
111.22   Reset and cut-off systems; tone and conversion requirements
   
111.23   Automatic dialing and the like prohibited
Penalties and Exemption
   
111.30   Excessive false alarms; penalties
   
111.31   Governmental exemption
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALARM BUSINESS. The business or occupation by any individual, partnership,
corporation, or other entity of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing,
repairing, altering, replacing, moving, or installing any alarm system or
causing to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced,
moved, or installed any alarm system in or on any building, structure, or
facility or dwelling.
   ALARM SYSTEM. Any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical, arranged
or designed to signal the occurrence of an illegal entry, fire, need for
medical assistance, or other activity or hazard requiring urgent attention
within a building, home, structure, or facility and to which the Town Police
Department or Town Fire Department is expected to respond, including all
automatic dialing systems.
   ALARM USER. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or organization of any kind in control of any building, structure, or
facility where an alarm system is maintained.
   AUTOMATIC DIALING SYSTEMS. Any alarm system or device which automatically
sends over regular telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a
prerecorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of the
emergency situation that the alarm system or device is designed to detect.
   COMMUNICATIONS DIRECTOR. The Chief of Police of the Town.
   DEPARTMENT. The Town Police/Fire Communications Center.
   FALSE ALARM. An unwanted alarm system activation in which a sensor properly
responds to a stimulus, but the stimulus is not an unlawful intruder, robber,
fire, fire by-product or medical emergency. Acts of God, electrical power
outages and telephone line disorders are excluded from this definition.
   LOCAL ALARMS. Those alarms which activate an audible signal within the
proximity of the premises only.
(`81 Code, § 100.01) (Ord. passed 12-17-91; Am. Ord. passed 7-14-92; Am. Ord.
96033, passed 6-18-96; Am. Ord. 97082, passed 1-13-98)
§ 111.02 ALARM BUSINESS.
   No person or entity shall engage in, conduct, or carry on an alarm business
within the town without complying with all applicable state and town laws,
including the provisions of this chapter.
(`81 Code, § 100.02) (Ord. passed 12-17-91; Am. Ord. passed 7-14-92; Am. Ord.
96033, passed 6-18-96; Am. Ord. 97082, passed 1-13-98; Am. Ord. 02058, passed
12-10-02) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.03 ALARM AGENT.
   No person or entity shall operate as an alarm agent within the town without
complying with all applicable state and town laws.
(`81 Code, § 100.03) (Ord. passed 12-17-91; Am. Ord. passed 7-14-92; Am. Ord.
97082, passed 1-13-98) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.04 AUTO ALARMS EXEMPTED.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to audible alarms affixed to
automobiles.
(`81 Code, § 100.04) (Ord. passed 12-17-91; Am. Ord. passed 7-14-92; Am. Ord.
97082, passed 1-13-98)
ALARM SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS
§ 111.20 REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE; AVAILABLE PERSONNEL.
   (A)   The alarm user shall at all times maintain the alarm system in a
continuous state of good repair and maintenance acceptable to the
Communications Director.
(`81 Code, § 100.06(c))
   (B)   All alarm businesses shall have qualified repair and maintenance
personnel available for call by the Department 24 hours a day, every day of the
year. All alarm businesses shall have personnel available to respond at the
request of the Department to any alarm location within 30 minutes of
notification.
(`81 Code, § 100.06(d)) (Ord. passed 12-17-91; Am. Ord. passed 3-10-92; Am.
Ord. passed 7-14-92; Am. Ord. 96033, passed 6-18-96; Am. Ord. 97082, passed 1-
13-98) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.21 RESPONDING TO ALARMS; SURVEILLANCE PERSONNEL.
   In the event an alarm system cannot be deactivated in a timely manner, such
alarm business/user shall be required to provide personnel for surveillance to
the business until such time as the alarm is deactivated (audible alarm) and/or
business is safely secured. In addition, users shall be required to provide the
Department with a list of specific personnel available to respond to alarms.
(`81 Code, § 100.06(e)) (Ord. passed 12-17-91; Am. Ord. passed 3-10-92; Am.
Ord. passed 7-14-92; Am. Ord. 97082, passed 1-13-98) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.22 RESET AND CUT-OFF SYSTEMS; TONE AND CONVERSION REQUIREMENTS.
   All new alarm systems, excluding fire alarms, will be required to have reset
capabilities and will reset within 15 minutes. An alarm system cut-off shall be
installed to override all malfunctioning reset systems. All audible alarms may
not emit a sound similar to an emergency vehicle. The users of existing alarm
systems will have one year from the adoption of this chapter to convert to such
systems to comply with the provisions herein.
(`81 Code, § 100.06(g)) (Ord. passed 12-17-91; Am. Ord. passed 3-10-92; Am.
Ord. passed 7- 14-92; Am. Ord. 97082, passed 1-13-98; Am. Ord. 02058, passed
12-10-02) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.23 AUTOMATIC DIALING AND THE LIKE PROHIBITED.
   The Town Police/Fire Communications Center shall not maintain or monitor a
security system alarm control board, nor shall there be any direct link of fire
alarm systems to emergency equipment or communication equipment owned or leased
and operated by the town, which shall include an automatic dialing system.
(Ord. 96033, passed 6-18-96; Am. Ord. 97082, passed 1-13-98; Am. Ord. 02058,
passed 12-10-02) Penalty, §
10.99
PENALTIES AND EXEMPTION
§ 111.30 EXCESSIVE FALSE ALARMS; PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any user of an alarm system which has more than ten false alarms
within a calendar year shall be subject to the penalties specified in §
10.99 of the Mount Pleasant Code of Ordinances.
   (B)   The Communications Director shall notify the alarm user of such fact
and direct that the user submit a report to the Communications Director on
forms provided within 15 days of the date on the notice describing actions
taken or to be taken to determine and eliminate the cause of the excessive
false alarms.
   (C)   If the alarm user submits a report as directed, the Communications
Director shall determine if the action taken or to be taken will substantially
reduce the likelihood of false alarms and notify the alarm user in writing.
   (D)   If no report is submitted, or if the Communications Director
determines that the action taken or to be taken will not substantially reduce
the likelihood of excessive false alarms, the Communications Director shall
cause a citation to be issued to the alarm user for violating the provisions of
this chapter.
(Ord. 97082, passed 1-13-98; Am. Ord. 02058, passed 12-10-02)
2003 S-14
§ 111.31 GOVERNMENTAL EXEMPTION.
   The United States Government, the state, counties, municipal corporations,
departments thereof and other governmental entitles are exempt from this
chapter.
(`81 Code, § 100.11) (Ord. passed 12-17-91; Am. Ord. passed 7-14-92; Am. Ord.
97082, passed 1-13-98; Am. Ord. 02058, passed 12-10-02)
CHAPTER 112: TOWING OR WRECKER SERVICES
Section
General Provisions
   
112.01   Purpose
   
112.02   Towing and wrecker services; unauthorized response prohibited
   
112.03   Solicitation of business by service or town employee prohibited
   
112.04   Authority of Police to impound
   
112.05   Establishment of rotation system
   
112.06   Participation in rotation system; application
   
112.07   Appeal process
Rotation System Rules and Regulations
   
112.20   Application of subchapter
   
112.21   Compliance
   
112.22   Business and location/distance requirements
   
112.23   Duration of agreement
   
112.24   Wreckers available 24 hours
   
112.25   Vehicle and equipment requirements
   
112.26   Operators and drivers
   
112.27   Storage facilities
   
112.28   Towing procedures; contractor's responsibilities
   
112.29   Responsibility for personal property
   
112.30   Removal or suspension from rotation system
   
112.31   Impoundment and redemption procedures
   
112.32   Written reports required
   
112.33   Schedule of charges; payment procedures; fees
   
112.34   Sale or transfer of towing service
   
112.35   Contractor liability; insurance requirement
   
112.36   Town indemnification
   
112.37   Police to administer
   
112.38   Authority to adopt additional rules
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 112.01 PURPOSE.
   The town recognizes the importance and necessity of having rules and
regulations established for the towing of vehicles in general within the town
and to also establish uniform procedures for towing when such services are
required by the Town Police Department or for town-owned or leased vehicles.
Safety, convenience and efficiency and the general welfare of its police
officers and citizens, in addition to any persons temporarily in the town
seeking towing or wrecker services, is of utmost importance.
('81 Code, § 74.01) (Ord. 93039, passed 8-10-93; Am. Ord. 00049, passed 12-12-
00; Am. Ord. 18069, passed 10-9-18)
§ 112.02 TOWING AND WRECKER SERVICES; UNAUTHORIZED RESPONSE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or agent of any towing or wrecker service
to go to any place within the town where an accident has occurred unless called
by the owner of the vehicle involved, or the owner's authorized representative,
or an authorized representative of the town.
('81 Code, § 74.02) (Ord. 93039, passed 8-10-93; Am. Ord. 18069, passed 10-9-
18) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.03 SOLICITATION OF BUSINESS BY SERVICE OR TOWN EMPLOYEE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or agent of any towing or wrecker
service to drive along or park on any streets, bridges, or highways within the
town for the sole purpose of soliciting towing or wrecker services. ('81 Code,
§ 74.03)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any Town employee to solicit business for any
towing or wrecker service. ('81 Code, § 74.04)
(Ord. 93039, passed 8-10-93; Am. Ord. 18069, passed 10-9-18) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.04 AUTHORITY OF POLICE TO IMPOUND.
   Whenever a police officer finds a motor vehicle or other vehicle, that has
been abandoned upon the public streets or ways of the town, or upon town
property, or has been parked in violation of a town ordinance or state law, or
the vehicle has been, or is being used in the commission of a crime, such
officer may have the vehicle removed by a wrecker to the storage lot or garage
operated by such wrecker. Vehicles removed under the above conditions shall be
held until claimed by the legal owner or otherwise disposed of as provided by
law.
('81 Code, § 74.05) (Ord. 93039, passed 8-10-93; Am. Ord. 18069, passed 10-9-
18)
§ 112.05 ESTABLISHMENT OF ROTATION SYSTEM.
   The Town Police Department shall establish a rotation system for towing
services to include the removal of vehicles and storage space for the vehicles
whenever such services are dispatched or required by the Town Police
Department, or in the case of town-owned or leased vehicles, dispatched by
either the Town Police Department or other authorized representative of the
town. Safety, convenience, efficiency and the general welfare of police
officers, citizens and any other persons seeking towing or wrecker services are
of utmost importance to the town. Thus, the establishment and operation of this
rotation system must reflect and incorporate the same.
('81 Code, § 74.06) (Ord. 93039, passed 8-10-93; Am. Ord. 00049, passed 12-12-
00; Am. Ord. 16009, passed 2-10-16; Am. Ord. 18069, passed 10-9-18)
§ 112.06 PARTICIPATION IN ROTATION SYSTEM.
   To be included in the Town Police Department towing rotation system, a
towing contractor shall complete an application/agreement for the same on a
form suitable to and provided by the Town Police Department. In the
application/agreement the towing contractor must agree to all of the terms and
conditions listed therein or added thereto at a later date in addition to all
of the terms of this chapter and must be able to demonstrate his or her ability
to satisfy the same. All towing contractors who wish to be on the rotation
system must submit an application annually to the Town Police Department by no
later than October 1. The Town Police Department shall have until November 1 in
which to determine if the towing contractor complies with all of the referenced
requests prior to placing applicants on and publishing the rotation system. The
Town Police Department is also granted full authority to set out any terms and
conditions in the application/agreement as deemed appropriate and to amend the
same in the future as deemed appropriate.
('81 Code, § 74.07) (Ord. 93039, passed 8-10-93; Am. Ord. 18069, passed 10-9-
18)
§ 112.07 APPEAL PROCESS.
   Any actions/decisions by the Town Police Department shall be subject to
review by and appeal to the Town Police, Judicial, and Legal Committee. Any
appeal should be filed in writing within ten days of notice of the action/
decision in question to the Town's Legal Department at 100 Ann Edwards Lane,
Mt. Pleasant, SC 29464.
('81 Code, § 74.09) (Ord. 93039, passed 8-10-93; Am. Ord. 18069, passed 10-9-
18)
ROTATION SYSTEM RULES
AND REGULATIONS
§ 112.20 RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR TOWING APPLICATION/AGREEMENT.
   In order to be included in the town towing rotation system, the following
rules and regulations, as set forth in §§
112.20 through
112.38, are required.
('81 Code, § 74.08) (Ord. 93039, passed 8-10-93; Am. Ord. 18069, passed 10-9-
18)
§ 112.21 COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   The service must comply with all sections of this chapter, all rules
listed in the application/ agreement and any other additional rules the Town
Police Department deems appropriate.
   (B)   All towing and wrecker services must conform to, and comply with, all
town ordinances, rules, and policies pertaining to such services.
   (C)   All towing and wrecker services participating in the rotation system
are subject to inspection. A wrecker service that fails to pass inspection and
qualification as prescribed by regulation will be notified of the deficiencies.
When the wrecker service corrects the deficiencies, it may request a new
inspection. A wrecker service will have 30 days from the date of the notice to
correct any deficiencies. Failure to correct the deficiencies will result in
the wrecker service being removed from the rotation for 30 days or until the
deficiencies are corrected.
('81 Code, § 74.08 d., h.) (Ord. 93039, passed 8-10-93; Am. Ord. 00049, passed
12-12-00; Am. Ord. 18069, passed 10-9-18) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.22 BUSINESS AND LOCATION/ DISTANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The towing contractor must be properly licensed to conduct business in
the town.
   (B)   The place of business, operation of the towing or wrecker service, and
the storage facility along with all lifting equipment and capabilities must be
located at one location and within four miles of corporate limits of the town.
   (C)   Towing contractors in the Town Police Department rotation system shall
not conduct a wrecker service from their residences or from any residential
area.
   (D)   The towing contractor's phone number, after-hours phone number and
physical location must be listed on a valid and operational website or easily
accessible through an internet search. Office staff must be present and
available during normal business hours throughout the work week (M-F), except
for approved town holidays.
('81 Code, § 74.08 j., b., c., k., l.) (Ord. 93039, passed 8-10-93; Am. Ord.
00049, passed 12-12-00; Am. Ord. 18069, passed 10-9-18) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.23 DURATION OF AGREEMENT.
   The towing application/agreement with each towing or wrecker service will be
for one calendar year beginning November 1 of each year and will be applicable
on a rotating basis.
('81 Code, § 74.08 e.) (Ord. 93039, passed 8-10-93; Am. Ord. 18069, passed 10-
9-18)
§ 112.24 WRECKER AVAILABLE 24 HOURS.
   All towing or wrecker services must have at least two operational wreckers,
available at all times, 24 hours a day, seven days a week, holidays included. A
wrecker must be properly registered to only one wrecker service at the time of
application. A wrecker may only be used by one wrecker service on the town's
rotational system for the duration of the agreement. Any changes to wrecker
assignments during the agreement period must first be approved by the Town
Police Department.
('81 Code, § 74.08a.) (Ord. 93039, passed 8-10-93; Am. Ord. 18069, passed 10-9-
18) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.25 VEHICLE AND EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The towing contractor must have a wrecker of sufficient size and
strength to handle the job. The police department will have the right to call a
wrecker service that, in its opinion, fails to meet this qualification for a
specific job. Under these conditions, the wrecker service not called will
remain on the top of the rotation list. The towing contractor's fleet of trucks
must consist of wreckers equipped with the following:
      (1)   Tow truck shall have a minimum manufacture capacity of 10,000 GVW.
      (2)   Power winch with pulling capacity of not less than four tons.
      (3)   Minimum of 100 feet of cable necessary for the job.
      (4)   A manufactured wheel-lift with a retracting lifting capacity of not
less than 3,500 pounds as rated by the manufacturer with safety chains.
      (5)   Dual rear wheels.
      (6)   Amber flashing lights visible in all directions for a distance of
500 feet in normal sunlight.
      (7)   Signage which is permanently affixed on the driver and passenger
doors which indicates the company name, address, and telephone number. The
letters of the sign must be no less than two inches high, plainly visible, and
a color which contrasts to that of the wrecker.
   (B)   The towing vehicle fleet must be in good repair.
   (C)   All towing operators must be able to communicate effectively by
cellphone throughout the entire corporate limits. Wreckers will not be operated
as emergency vehicles.
('81 Code, § 74.08 m., n., o.) (Ord. 93039, passed 8-10-93; Am. Ord. 00049,
passed 12-12-00; Am. Ord. 18069, passed 10-9-18) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.26 OPERATORS AND DRIVERS.
   (A)   The towing contractor shall have the sole responsibility for properly
vetting, hiring and training of all tow truck operators/drivers. Each driver
must hold valid South Carolina driver's license and be insurable. The towing
contractor shall provide to the Town Police Department the full name, date of
birth, and driver's license number of each employed driver at the time of
application or upon hiring of a new driver within ten days of employment.
   (B)   The towing contractor shall not allow any of its operators/drivers to
conduct business on behalf of the town's rotational system if they have been
convicted of any felonies and/or serious misdemeanors within a ten-year period
that include, but are not limited to, driving under the influence, theft, or
assault.
   (C)   The towing contractor shall be responsible to make sure that all
drivers are insurable so the towing contractor's insurance companies may not
deny any insurance coverage due to the employment of anything but the most
highly competent vehicle drivers who shall remain neat, clean, courteous, and
sober while operating towing vehicles or responding to towing calls. The towing
contractor agrees to be responsible for all drivers and take all steps
necessary to ensure their compliance with this chapter.
   (D)   The Town Police Department reserves the right to limit or restrict
certain operators/drivers, representing any towing contractor from responding
to calls within the town based on his or her driving record, criminal history,
or performance with the town.
   (E)   A driver/operator may only be employed with and operate for one towing
contractor on the town's rotational system at any given time.
('81 Code, § 74.08 x., y., z., aa.) (Ord. 93039, passed 8-10-93; Am. Ord.
18069, passed 10-9-18) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.27 STORAGE FACILITIES.
   (A)   The towing contractor must maintain storage facilities for towed
vehicles at his/her own business facility. The storage facility must have
signage on the exterior of the business that clearly indicates to the general
public the company name and 24-hour telephone number. The towing contractor
must have an appropriate staff to be responsive to the police and any
individual involved with towing or wrecker services.
   (B)   The towing contractor must have a minimum 20 vehicle storage area. If
towing contractors on the town's rotational system choose to share storage
facilities, they must have the appropriate storage capacity to meet the minimum
vehicle storage requirement for each towing contractor utilizing the facility.
The storage compound must be appropriately secured to ensure the protection of
personal property and to prevent further damage to the vehicle. Outside storage
facilities must be sufficiently lighted with lockable fences which encompass
the entire storage lot and be of an adequate size to discourage theft of
vehicles and property stored within. If the storage compound is located in the
town, then the storage facility must comply with all zoning ordinances,
including providing sufficient buffers and/or screening of the storage area.
   (C)   All equipment and storage facilities may be inspected by the Town
Police Department at any time without notice. The town reserves the right to
reject the use of any storage facilities or equipment after inspection by the
Town Police Department.
('81 Code, § 74.08 q., r., s., bb.) (Ord. 93039, passed 8-10-93; Am. Ord.
00049, passed 12-12-00; Am. Ord. 03007, passed 3-11-03; Am. Ord. 18069, passed
10-9-18) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.28 TOWING PROCEDURES; CONTRACTOR'S RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   The towing or wrecker service shall be responsible for all damage on
all vehicles unless such damage is noted by the police officer before the
vehicle is removed from the scene. The towing or wrecker service towing for the
town will be responsible for pointing out damage on the vehicle to the officer
before leaving the scene. The service shall not be responsible for lost or
stolen articles unless they are negligent or fail to comply with the storage
requirements as set forth in this chapter.
   (B)   The Town Police Department reserves the right to cancel a request for
towing service from the towing contractor at any time, including and up to the
time of hookup. When canceled by the Town Police Department, the towing
contractor will be placed back at the top of the call out list.
   (C)   The towing contractor, when towing vehicles from the scene of an
accident, will be responsible for removing all broken debris, glass, fluids,
and other matter from the swale, street, and right-of-way as a result of the
accident. Proper and full clean-up by the towing contractor is essential for
safety reasons and to remain on the rotation system. Failure to comply with
this provision will result in the towing contractor being removed from the
rotation for a period of up to 30 days.
   (D)   The town reserves the right in each case requiring a heavy-duty
wrecker to call any towing service not in the rotation system if any towing
service in the system does not have such capability.
('81 Code, § 74.08 f., v., w., ww.) (Ord. 93039, passed 8-10-93; Am. Ord.
00049, passed 12-12-00; Am. Ord. 18069, passed 10-9-18)
§ 112.29 RESPONSIBILITY FOR PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   The towing contractor will have his/her employee, representative, or
agent inventory jointly, with a police officer or owner or possessor of the
vehicle, all personal property in the vehicle which they are directed to tow.
Such inventory shall be made in triplicate and shall be maintained by the
towing contractor as a permanent record; one copy will be given to the owner or
operator of the vehicle being towed, if known, or securely attached to the
vehicle; one copy will be retained by the Town Police Department. The towing
contractor shall be solely liable and responsible to the owner or person of
legal entity entitled to lawful possession for all personal property in any
vehicle towed under this chapter.
   (B)   The towing contractor shall be responsible for the safe keeping of,
and shall be accountable to, the owner of the vehicle for all personal
property, vehicle accessories, and vehicles stored within the storage
facilities of the contractor. The towing contractors shall make sure that they
have adequate insurance coverage for any loss of property from their storage
compounds.
   (C)   Personal property contained in vehicles which is removed and stored by
the contractor shall not be disposed of by the contractor to defray any charges
for towing or the storage of vehicles and such property must be returned to the
owner or to the person legally entitled to lawful possession of the vehicle
upon request and without regard to any fees owned by such person or legal
entity.
('81 Code, § 74.08 jj., kk., ll.) (Ord. 93039, passed 8-10-93; Am. Ord. 18069,
passed 10-9-18) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.30 REMOVAL OR SUSPENSION FROM ROTATION SYSTEM.
   (A)   Complaints for damage or loss will be noted by the Police Department
and a lack of action to settle any justifiable complaint or a number of
complaints will be just cause for removal from the towing/wrecker list.
   (B)   Any towing companies monitoring police calls will not respond to an
accident scene unless called by the Town Police Department dispatcher or by the
owner of the vehicle involved or the owner's authorized representative. See §
112.01. Any towing company who does so and receives a tow will lose the next
two turns on rotation or can be removed from the rotation system at the option
of the town.
   (C)   The towing contractor is expected to respond to all calls within 30
minutes from the time that the towing contractor was called by the Town Police
Department dispatcher during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. and within 45
minutes during the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. Any wrecker canceled, due
to failure to respond in the allowed time, shall lose their turn on the
rotation and the next wrecker on the rotation will be called to respond.
   (D)   Any complaint received by the town concerning violations of this
chapter by the towing contractor, such as excess charges, poor business
practices, damage to vehicles, and so forth, will be investigated. Failure of
the towing contractor to correct the problem will be considered a material
breach of this chapter and cause for the towing contractor's suspension, upon
written notice to the towing contractor, from the rotation system for a period
up to six months. After any suspension from the rotation system, the towing
contractor may apply for reinstatement under a probationary period of six
months Three suspensions from the rotation list in a five-year period will
result in a permanent removal from the list.
('81 Code, § 74.08 g., p., u., rr.) (Ord. 93039, passed 8-10-93; Am. Ord.
18069, passed 10-9-18) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.31 IMPOUNDMENT AND REDEMPTION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The towing contractor will not release any vehicle which has been
marked "hold" by the Town Police Department without written authorization to do
so by the Town Police Department. If a vehicle has been placed on hold and has
remained in storage for longer than three days, the towing contractor must
immediately notify the official representative of the Police Department. During
this hold, the vehicle must appear on the monthly written report until it is
released.
   (B)   The towing contractor will release any vehicle which is not to be held
or which has been authorized to be released when proof of ownership by a tow
sheet, title, or registration when it is accompanied by proper identification
which has been presented to the towing contractor.
   (C)   Any vehicle which is not claimed by the legal owner within three days
shall be reported, in writing, to the Town Police Department, and must be
included in the monthly written report until it is released.
   (D)   Storage fees will be paid at a rate for each 24-hour period or
fraction thereof at the rate provided in this chapter. When a vehicle is
released to its owner, an itemized statement of all charges made for the towing
and/or impounding of the vehicle will be provided to the owner. No stored or
impounded vehicle shall be released until proper evidence of ownership is
exhibited, and all towing and storage charges have been paid. Storage fees will
stop accruing once all charges have been paid in full and the vehicle has been
removed from the storage facility. An owner may be subject to additional
storage fees if the vehicle is not removed from the storage facility within 24
hours of payment. The towing and storage charges shall be collected by the
towing company.
   (E)   All owners of vehicles, which were towed, or which are located in the
impound area, must be able to redeem said vehicle from the towing contractor
during every business day from 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. When the storage site is
closed, the telephone numbers of the towing contractor or his or her employees
must be posted so that they can be reached at all times. Upon receipt of a
telephone request to open the site to redeem a vehicle which is not on "hold"
by the Town Police Department, the vehicle must be released within twelve hours
after the request.
('81 Code, § 74.08 cc., dd., ee., ff., gg.) (Ord. 93039, passed 8-10-93; Am.
Ord. 18069, passed 10-9-18) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.32 WRITTEN REPORTS REQUIRED.
   (A)   In addition, the impound report described in division (B), the towing
contractor must provide the Town Police Department monthly reports, within ten
days of the end of each month, or on demand. This report should include a
complete and detailed listing of vehicles which have been impounded and remain
on their tow lot the past thirty 30 days (or longer if so deemed necessary by
the Town Police Department). Any additional information required on such
reports shall be determined by the Town Police Department.
   (B)   The towing contractor, immediately upon removal or impounding of any
vehicle, shall prepare a written report of the services rendered which will
include the following:
      (1)   Report No. _________Vehicle Towing Service (Contract).
      (2)   Vehicle information.
         (a)   Make and model of vehicle.
         (b)   License number.
         (c)   Vehicle identification number (VIN).
         (d)   Number of tires (including spare).
         (e)   Tools and other separate articles of personal property.
         (f)   General description of the vehicle as to the condition, damaged
parts (identified in detail), and such other information as may be necessary to
adequately describe the vehicle. Such report shall be signed by the contractor
and delivered immediately to the Town Police Department.
('81 Code, § 74.08 hh., mm.) (Ord. 93039, passed 8-10-93; Am. Ord. 18069,
passed 10-9-18) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.33 SCHEDULE OF CHARGES; PAYMENT PROCEDURES; FEES.
   (A)   The towing company shall permanently post a schedule of charges
approved by the town for the rotation system in each storage compound. The
towing contractor may label this price schedule "Noncommercial Town of Mount
Pleasant Rates" to differentiate these charges from the charges which the
towing contractor may make in his or her commercial towing business unrelated
to the rotation system for the town.
   (B)   The charges to be made to the owner of the vehicle will be determined
at the time of towing for all vehicles. The tow truck driver or other
representative of the towing contractor will complete a towing ticket in
triplicate, listing the specific charge, the time and date of removal, and the
location of removal. The ticket will also have printed on it the general
schedule of charges and the location of the towing contractor's storage
compound. One copy of the ticket will be retained by the contractor; one copy
will be delivered to the Town Police Department to be attached to the Police
Department copy of the inventory of the vehicle made pursuant to these
specifications; one copy will be given to the owner or operator of the vehicle,
if known, or securely attached to the vehicle. Contractors shall accept valid
credit cards and debit cards as methods of payment.
   (C)   The town will not be responsible for the payment or collection of any
charge for services rendered unless such service is applicable to town-owned or
town-leased equipment. All services rendered to non-town-owned or leased
vehicles shall be charged to the owner of the towed vehicle or other lawful
claimant of possession. Charges related to town-owned or leased vehicles will
be forwarded monthly to the town for payment. The invoices which list these
charges to the town will identify the vehicle towed, the vehicle's town
identification number, the location from which towed, the applicable rates, and
the time and date of the service. No charge will be made for emergency minor
repair or service to a police or fire vehicle, such as tire changes, battery
boosts or similar service. When such emergency service is rendered to a police
or fire vehicle, the towing contractor will not lose his or her turn on the
rotation list.
   (D)   The fees to be charged for services rendered under this chapter shall
be as follows:
      (1)    Basic towing: $200.
      (2)   Night tow: $200.
      (3)   Wrecked vehicle: $200.
      (4)   *Recovery: $55 per hour (when actual recovery begins).
      (5)   Outside storage: $35 per day.
      (6)   Gate fee: $25 (may be charged anytime other than normal business
hours).
      (7)   Drop fee: $100.
*Recovery is work on the part of the wrecker company above and beyond the
normal hook up and tow. For example, retrieving an overturned vehicle from a
ditch is recovery. The wrecker company should make the Police Department aware
of its involvement with recovery work, along with the commencement and
completion time of the same.
('81 Code, § 74.08 nn., oo., pp., vv.) (Ord. 93039, passed 8-10-93; Am. Ord.
00049, passed 12-12-00; Am. Ord. 06078, passed 12-12-06; Am. Ord. 10003, passed
3-10-10; Am. Ord. 13081, passed 1-16-14; Am. Ord. 18069, passed 10-9-18; Am.
Ord. 21058, passed 8-10-21)
§ 112.34 SALE OR TRANSFER OF TOWING SERVICE.
   Should the towing contractor sell, relinquish, convey, or transfer any
interest in the towing contractor's company, corporation, firm, partnership, or
association providing services to the town, then the town will have two
options:
   (A)   To remove the towing contractor from the rotation system;
   (B)   To subject any new ownership, partnership, corporation, individuals,
or any other entities obtaining partial or controlling interest in the towing
contractor's company to the same scrutiny, evaluation, terms, conditions,
covenants, rules, regulations, laws, understandings, and agreements, as
provided herein.
('81 Code, § 74.08 qq.) (Ord. 93039, passed 8-10-93; Am. Ord. 18069, passed 10-
9-18)
§ 112.35 CONTRACTOR LIABILITY; INSURANCE REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   By participating in the towing rotation for the town, the towing
contractor warrants that he or she will be responsible for any damage done to
any vehicles towed by the negligence, carelessness, or recklessness of any
driver, employee, agent, or representative of the towing contractor.
('81 Code, § 74.08 t.) (Ord. 93039, passed 8-10-93) Penalty, see §
10.99
   (B)   The towing contractor shall maintain liability insurance (a
certificate of insurance to be provided to the town at the time of application)
in an amount of no less than $1,000,000 liability limits coverage per incident
and $500,000 property damage liability per incident.
   (C)   The towing contractor shall maintain cargo insurance (a certificate of
insurance to be provided to the town at the time of application) that covers
vehicles, cargo, and other property in or on the vehicle during transit in an
amount of not less than $75,000 per incident.
   (D)   (1)   The towing contractor shall maintain garage keeper's liability
insurance covering a customer's vehicle in an amount not less than $100,000.
      (2)   The town may request and/or require additional contractual
comprehensive property damage, collision, personal injury or additional
liability coverage at the full discretion of the town at any time.
('81 Code, § 74.08 ii.) (Ord. 93039, passed 8-10-93; Am. Ord. 18069, passed 10-
9-18) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.36 TOWN INDEMNIFICATION.
   (A)   The towing contractor covenants and agrees to indemnify and hold
harmless the town from any and all claims, suits, actions, damages, and causes
of action which might arise during the term of the rotation system for any
personal injury, loss of life, and property damage or any damage whatsoever
sustained in the performance of any wrecker services resulting from the
contract, and to defend any action or proceeding brought thereon and from and
against any orders, judgments, and decrees as may be entered therein.
   (B)   The towing contract agrees and warrants to the town, holding the town
harmless for any acts of the towing contractor, or contractor's employees which
in any way damages any persons or property due to the prescriptive negligence
of the towing contractor, and holds the town harmless for any acts so
perpetrated by the towing contractor, his or her agents, or representatives.
('81 Code, § 74.08 ss. and tt.) (Ord. 93039, passed 8-10-93; Am. Ord. 18069,
passed 10-9-18)
§ 112.37 POLICE TO ADMINISTER.
   The Police Department for the town is duly ordained as the agent for the
town to ensure that all towing companies who remain on the towing rotation
system adhere to the terms and conditions contained herein.
('81 Code, § 74.08 uu.) (Ord. 93039, passed 8-10-93; Am. Ord. 18069, passed 10-
9-18)
§ 112.38 AUTHORITY TO ADOPT ADDITIONAL RULES.
   The town shall have the authority to adopt from time to time additional
rules and regulations.
('81 Code, § 74.08 i.) (Ord. 93039, passed 8-10-93; Am. Ord. 18069, passed 10-
9-18) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 113: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions
   
113.01   Liquor sales
   
113.02   Restriction on time of sale and possession of beer, ale, porter and/or
wine and the operation of entities relative thereto
   
113.03   Drinking in public places
   
113.04   Drunkenness in public
Juveniles and Alcohol
   
113.20   Definitions
   
113.21   Purpose; scope
   
113.22   Possession or consumption of alcohol by under-age persons prohibited
   
113.23   Exemptions
   
113.24   Enforcement
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 113.01 LIQUOR SALES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell any alcoholic liquors other than
beer and wines now allowed by the laws of the state in the municipality, save
and except in accordance with, and in conformity to, the existing state and
federal laws providing the method and procedure for the sale of alcoholic
liquors.
('81 Code, § 135.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Alcohol and alcoholic beverages, see S.C. Code, Title 61
§ 113.02 RESTRICTION ON TIME OF SALE AND POSSESSION OF BEER, ALE, PORTER AND/OR
WINE AND THE OPERATION OF ENTITIES RELATIVE THERETO.
   (A)   Between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday
on the premises of any private or nonprofit club, any store, beer parlor, or
other place or entity of business or establishment, authorized by law to sell
beer, ale, porter and/or wine for the on-premises consumption thereof, it shall
be unlawful for:
      (1)   An owner, employee, or person in charge thereof to sell for
consumption on-premises, offer for sale, give away, barter, exchange, or in any
manner dispense or permit the consumption of, any beer, ale, porter and/or wine
on-premises;
      (2)   Any person to drink, or possess in an open container, any beer,
ale, porter and/or wine on premises of the entity where purchased; or
      (3)   To be open or operate any such club, store, beer parlor or other
place or entity of business or establishment, authorized by law to sell beer,
ale, porter and/or wine for on-premises consumption.
   (B)   The above provisions shall not prohibit during the aforesaid hours the
sale or possession in sealed containers of beer, ale, porter and/or wine for
consumption off the premises.
('81 Code, § 135.03) (Ord. passed 5-9-77; Am. Ord. 03001, passed 2-11-03)
§ 113.03 DRINKING IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   No person shall drink any alcoholic beverage on the streets, parks, or
public places in the municipality not licensed for on-premises consumption of
alcoholic beverages.
('81 Code, § 135.04) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.04 DRUNKENNESS IN PUBLIC.
   No person shall be drunk or intoxicated in any street, public house, place
of amusement, or worship or any public place in the municipality.
('81 Code, § 135.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
JUVENILES AND ALCOHOL
§ 113.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Any alcoholic, spirituous, and malt liquors, beer, ale,
porter, wine and liquors whatsoever which can be used as a beverage and which,
when drunk to excess, will produce intoxication.
   BEER, ALE, PORTER AND WINE. These terms are defined as stated in S.C. Code §
61-40-10 and as amended from time to time.
   JUVENILE/MINOR. A person under the age of 21 years.
   PLACE. Any specific designated area indoors or outdoors, including but not
limited to homes, hotels, halls, auditoriums, parks, vacant lots, garages and
the like.
   RELIGIOUS CEREMONY OR PURPOSE. Customary activity pursuant to and authorized
by a recognized and established church of denomination.
   RESIDENCE. A place where one actually lives or has his or her home.
   SOCIAL GATHERING. A party or get-together of persons for any reason,
including but not limited to enjoyment, companionship, or hospitality.
('81 Code, § 139.01) (Ord. 93018, passed 5-11-93; Am. Ord. 03001, passed 2-11-
03)
§ 113.21 PURPOSE; SCOPE.
   (A)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to ensure that public
safety and the general welfare of the community and all its citizens shall not
be abridged by those who, within their residences or at any place in the town,
either ignore, encourage, or do not take any action to prevent the illegal
possession and/or consumption of alcohol by persons under age (minors). The
citizens of the town recognize that underage alcohol possession and consumption
constitutes lawlessness and delinquency and represents a danger to the safety
and welfare of themselves and their families and the entire community.
   (B)   Scope. This chapter applies to all persons and property as regulated
herein.
('81 Code, § 139.02 a. and b.) (Ord. 93018, passed 5-11-93)
§ 113.22 POSSESSION OR CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL BY UNDER-AGE PERSONS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall permit, allow, or host a social gathering at his or her
residence or any place in the town where any person under the age of 21 years
is present and an alcoholic beverage is in the possession of, or is being
consumed by, any person under the age of 21 years. A parent/guardian shall be
liable for the gatherings in his/her home if the parent/guardian has knowledge
of the same.
('81 Code, § 139.03) (Ord. 93018, passed 5-11-93) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.23 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Juvenile alone with parent. No provision of this chapter shall apply
to a parent or guardian over the age of 21 giving an alcoholic beverage to his/
her children or wards under the age 21 in their home, so long as such beverage
was purchased and transferred legally.
   (B)   Spouse to spouse. No provision of this chapter shall apply to a spouse
over the age of 21 giving an alcoholic beverage to his/her spouse under the age
of 21 in their home, so long as such beverage was purchased and transferred
legally.
   (C)   Religious ceremony or purpose. No provision of this chapter shall
apply to a person giving an alcoholic beverage to another person under the age
of 21 in conjunction with a religious ceremony or purpose, so long as such
beverage was purchased and transferred legally.
('81 Code, § 139.05) (Ord. 93018, passed 5-11-93)
§ 113.24 ENFORCEMENT.
   This subchapter shall be enforced by the Police Department of the town.
('81 Code, § 139.07 a.) (Ord. 93018, passed 5-11-93)
CHAPTER 114: ACCOMMODATIONS FEE
Section
   
114.01   Purpose and authority
   
114.02   Definitions
   
114.03   Fee imposed
   
114.04   Payment of fees
   
114.05   Municipal Accommodations Fee Special Revenue Fund
   
114.06   Distribution of funds
   
114.07   Inspections, audits and administration
 
   
114.98   Violations
   
114.99   Penalty
§ 114.01 PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.
   Article VIII of the state constitution and S.C. Code § 5-7-30, authorize the
town to impose fees for certain municipal functions. Town Council is mindful of
legislation introduced in the state General Assembly, the effect of which could
limit the ability of the town to impose fees such as that provided for herein.
The Council is also mindful of the fact that state law currently permits fees
such as that provided for herein to be imposed. The Council has determined that
imposition of the fee provided for herein is consistent with its longstanding
attempt to provide property tax relief to town residents. Accordingly, this
chapter is adopted under the authority and power granted the town under S.C.
Code § 5-7-10 et seq., Article VIII of the South Carolina Constitution and
other applicable laws for the purposes set forth herein.
(Ord. 96014, passed 3-12-96)
§ 114.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCOMMODATION. Any room (excluding meeting and conference rooms), campground
spaces, recreational vehicle spaces, lodgings or sleeping accommodations
furnished to transients by any hotel, motel, inn, condominium, bed and
breakfast, residence, or any other place in which rooms, lodgings, or sleeping
accommodations are furnished for consideration within the town. The gross
proceeds received from the lease or rental of sleeping accommodations supplied
to the same person or persons for a period of more than 30 continuous days are
not considered proceeds from transients.
(Ord. 96014, passed 3-12-96)
§ 114.03 FEE IMPOSED.
   A uniform fee equal to 1% is hereby imposed on the gross proceeds derived
from the rental of any accommodation with the town.
(Ord. 96014, passed 3-12-96)
§ 114.04 PAYMENT OF FEES.
   (A)   Payment of the municipal accommodations fee established herein shall
be the liability of the user of the accommodations. The fee shall be paid at
the time of delivery of the accommodations to which the fee applies, and shall
be collected by the provider of the accommodations. Charleston County shall
promulgate a form of return which shall be utilized by the provider of the
accommodations to calculate the amount of municipal accommodation fees
collected and due. This form shall contain a sworn declaration as to the
correctness thereof by the provider of accommodations.
   (B)   The provider of accommodations shall remit the form, a copy of the
state sales tax computation form, any other documents required by the county,
and the municipal accommodations fee to the county, at 2 Courthouse Square,
Room 105, Charleston, SC 29401, due on the 20th of each month.
(Ord. 96014, passed 3-12-96; Am. Ord. 96023, passed 5-14-96) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.05 MUNICIPAL ACCOMMODATIONS FEE SPECIAL REVENUE FUND.
   An interest-bearing, segregated and restricted account to be known as the
Accommodations Fee Special Revenue Fund is hereby established. All revenues
received from the municipal accommodations fee shall be deposited into this
fund. The principal and any accrued interest in this fund shall be expended
only as permitted by this chapter.
(Ord. 96014, passed 3-12-96)
§ 114.06 DISTRIBUTION OF FUNDS.
   All funds placed in the Municipal Accommodations Fee Special Revenue Fund,
including accrued interest, shall be used for the purposes as set forth in S.C.
§ 6-1-530, as the same may from time to time be amended.
(Ord. 96014, passed 3-12-96; Am. Ord. 18033, passed 5-9-18)
§ 114.07 INSPECTIONS, AUDITS AND ADMINISTRATION.
   For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, the Director of
Business License or other authorized agent of the town is empowered to enter
upon the premises of any person or entity subject to this chapter and to make
inspections, and examine and audit books and records. It shall be unlawful for
any person or entity to fail or refuse to make available the necessary books
and records during normal business hours upon 24 hours written notice. In the
event an audit reveals that false information has been filed by the remitter,
the cost of the audit shall be added to the correct amount of fees determined
to be due. The Director of Business License may make systematic inspections of
all accommodations within the town to ensure compliance with this chapter.
Records of inspections shall not be deemed public records.
(Ord. 96014, passed 3-12-96) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.98 VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be a violation of this chapter to:
   (A)   Fail to collect the municipal accommodations fee in connection with
the rental of any accommodations to transients;
   (B)   Fail to remit to the town the municipal accommodations fee collected
pursuant to this chapter on a monthly basis;
   (C)   Knowingly provide false information on the form of return submitted to
the town;
   (D)   Fail to provide books and records to the town for the purpose of an
audit upon 24 hours written notice.
(Ord. 96014, passed 3-12-96) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   The penalty for violation of this chapter shall be 5% per month, charged on
the original amount of the municipal accommodations fee due, up to a maximum of
100%. Additionally, violators may be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to
a $500 fine and/or imprisonment for up to 30 days for violation of this
chapter.
(Ord. 96014, passed 3-12-96)
CHAPTER 115: HOSPITALITY TAX
Section
   
115.01   Findings
   
115.02   Municipal Hospitality tax
   
115.03   Payment of Municipal Hospitality Tax
   
115.04   Account and distribution of funds
   
115.05   Inspections, audits and administration
   
115.06   Violations
   
115.07   Severability
   
Appendix A:   Applicability of tax
§ 115.01 PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.
   Town Council makes the following specific findings:
   (A)   Tourism is a major industry in the town , the growth and development
of which the town has encouraged and supported in order to enhance its economic
development and tax base and to provide a stable economy for its citizens. The
town has supported this major industry by budgeting town funds, the single
largest component of which is ad valorem property taxes, to meet costs
necessary to provide services and facilities that are required for the well
being, security, comfort and convenience of visitors.
   (B)   The cost of providing the special services and facilities required by
the tourism industry should be apportioned more equitably between the town's
taxpayers and those who visit the town and enjoy the special benefits the town
provides them. It is necessary for the promotion of the common interests of the
residents of the town, as well as those who are visitors to the town, to
provide a method for paying certain costs by a means other than the levy of ad
valorem property taxes.
   (C)   It is, and has been, the policy of Town Council to decrease the burden
of ad valorem property taxes on its citizens by assessing charges to those who
impact, but also enjoy the benefits of, town services and facilities. It is
only reasonable and appropriate that those who visit the town and who utilize
and are advantaged by town facilities and services contribute a portion of the
costs required to provide the same.
   (D)   (1)   Article VIII of the state constitution, which became effective
March 7, 1973, has been interpreted by the State Supreme Court for over 20
years. Commenting on why the voters of the state approved Home Rule, Justice
Littlejohn in Knight v. Salisbury, stated in 1974:
         These changes were prompted by the feeling that Columbia should not be
the seat of county government, and that the General Assembly should devote its
full attention to problems at the state level. It was against this background
that Article VIII was written. It is clearly intended that home rule be given
to the counties and that county government should function in the county seats
rather than at the State Capitol. If the counties are to remain units of
government, the power to function must exist at the county level. Quite
obviously, the framers of Article VIII had this in mind.
      (2)   This understanding of the voter's support for Home Rule has
dominated the court's reasoning in upholding, accommodations fees imposed by
Charleston County and Hilton Head and a hospitality fee imposed by the City of
Charleston. The State Supreme Court has consistently upheld the ability of
local government to impose fees specifically designed to meet the special needs
of such governments.
   (E)   Article VIII of the state constitution and S.C. § 5-7-30 authorize the
town to impose fees for certain municipal functions. This tax is enacted
pursuant to S.C. §§ 6-1-700 through 6-1-770.
   (F)   The Council has determined that the imposition of the tax provided for
herein is consistent with its longstanding attempt to provide property tax
relief to town residents.
(Ord. 01039, passed 7-10-01)
§ 115.02 MUNICIPAL HOSPITALITY TAX.
   A uniform tax equal to 2% is hereby imposed on the gross proceeds derived
from the sale of prepared meals, food, and beverages sold in establishments, or
sales of prepared meals, food and beverages sold in establishments licensed for
on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages, beer or wine, and is imposed on
every person engaged in the business of furnishing food and beverage services,
whether dine in or take out, within the town. Further clarification of such
activities is demonstrated in Appendix A of this chapter. However, Appendix A
is not intended to be all inclusive. The local hospitality tax shall be imposed
on all food and beverages prepared or modified by restaurants, convenience
stores, fast food outlets, grocery stores, or other establishments within the
town.
(Ord. 01039, passed 7-10-01)
§ 115.03 PAYMENT OF MUNICIPAL HOSPITALITY TAX.
   The tax imposed by this chapter shall be collected from any patron when he
tenders payment for his meal, food, or beverage and shall be held in trust for
the benefit of the town until the same is paid to the county as herein after
provided. Every establishment subject to this hospitality tax shall, on the
date or within the time period hereinafter prescribed, make a return to the
county on forms provided by the office delineating gross proceeds of sales of
prepared meals, food, and beverages for the previous month, and the amount of
the tax due by virtue of this chapter. At the time the return is filed, the
full amount of any tax due hereunder shall be remitted. Taxes and required
reports shall be submitted to the county by the twentieth day of the month and
shall cover sales of the previous month. Any taxes not timely remitted shall be
subject to a penalty of 25%. The failure to collect from patrons shall not
relieve any establishment subject to this chapter from making the required
remittance.
(Ord. 01039, passed 7-10-01)
§ 115.04 ACCOUNT AND DISTRIBUTION OF FUNDS.
   A special account is to be established, to be known as the hospitality tax
account, into which all monies remitted to the town under this chapter shall be
deposited. Any and all funds in the hospitality tax account, including any
interest as may accrue thereon, shall be used for the purposes as set forth in
S.C. § 6-1-730, as the same may from time to time be amended.
(Ord. 01039, passed 7-10-01)
§ 115.05 INSPECTIONS, AUDITS AND ADMINISTRATION.
   For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, the Business
License Official or other authorized agent of the town is empowered to enter
upon the premises of any person or entity subject to this chapter and to make
inspections, and examine and audit books and records. It shall be unlawful for
any person or entity to fail or refuse to make available the necessary books
and records during normal business hours upon 24 hours written notice. In the
event an audit reveals that false information has been filed by the remitter,
the cost of the audit shall be added to the correct amount of fees determined
to be due. The Business License Official may make systematic inspections of all
establishments within the town to ensure compliance with this chapter. Records
of inspections shall not be deemed public records. The Business License
Official shall administer the provisions of this chapter and make reasonable
regulations relating to its administration.
(Ord. 01039, passed 7-10-01)
§ 115.06 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be a violation of this chapter to:
      (1)   Fail to collect the Municipal Hospitality Tax in connection with
the sale of meals, food, and beverages;
      (2)   Fail to remit to the county or other designee taxes collected
pursuant to this chapter on a monthly basis;
      (3)   Provide false information on the form of return submitted to the
county or other designee;
      (4)   Fail to provide books and records to the town or other authorized
agent for the purpose of an audit upon 24 hours written notice; or
      (5)   Fail to comply with any other specific provision/requirement of
this chapter.
   (B)   The failure of an establishment subject to this chapter to remit to
the county the taxes required hereunder, as and when due, shall constitute a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more that $500 or imprisonment for up
to 30 days, or both. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any misrepresentation of
the information required by returns as set forth in this chapter or the failure
to collect or timely remit to the county the taxes imposed by this chapter may
result in the suspension and/or revocation of the business license of the
offending establishment, as may be determined, after a hearing by the Finance
Committee. Appeals shall be governed by the requirements of the town’s business
license requirements.
(Ord. 01039, passed 7-10-01)
§ 115.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, phrase, sentence or portion of this chapter is for any
reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction,
such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision,
and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions
hereof.
(Ord. 01039, passed 7-10-01)
APPENDIX A: APPLICABILITY OF TAX
Section
   
1.   Applicability of 2% hospitality tax
1.   APPLICABILITY OF 2% HOSPITALITY TAX.
Clarification for Restaurants, Convenience Stores, Grocery Stores & Other
Establishments be it eat in or take out which prepare food or drinks on site.
According to the Hospitality Tax Ordinance, a 2% tax "shall be imposed for all
food and beverages prepared or modified by restaurants, convenience stores,
fast food outlets, grocery stores, or other establishments within the Town of
Mount Pleasant." This includes:
      1.)   Food which is made, prepared or cooked at your store
      2.)   Made, prepared or cooked within The Town of Mount Pleasant and sold
in your store.
      3.)   Made, prepared or cooked outside of the Town of Mount Pleasant but
re-packaged or served by your store.
      4.)   Drinks which are served, i.e. Fountain, coffee makers, or other
dispensed or mixed drinks.
Below are some examples of typical items prepared or modified by types of
businesses and affected by the 2% Hospitality Tax. Please note that this list
is not inclusive but is simply to help you determine which items in your
business are affected by the Hospitality Tax.
       -Doughnuts, pastries, cookies and candies made at your store or within
the Town.
       -Deli meats and cheeses sliced and packaged in your store for individual
or catered sales
        -Served drinks like fountain drinks, coffee or cappuccino
       -Soup or salad bar sales
       -Sandwiches, pizza, or hot dogs prepared, heated or packaged at your
store or within the Town
       -Vegetable or meat trays prepared or packaged at your store or within
the Town
       -Popcorn which is popped at your store
       -Pretzels which are baked or heated at your store
       -Canned or bottled drinks
Items (sold for consumption later) which are not affected by the Hospitality
Tax include:
       -Cans, boxes or jar of food which is pre-packaged
       -Bags of chips, pretzels, nuts, candy or other pre-packaged food items,
unless served as part of a meal
       -Salads which are prepared outside of the Town and are not modified in
any way at your store
       -Bakery items, which are prepared outside the Town and are not, modified
in any way at your store.
State chartered eleemosynary organizations holding IRS Tax Exempt Status are
not defined as establishments hereunder.
All school, day care, hospital, and nursing home cafeterias and concessions and
the like are not defined as establishments hereunder.
(Ord. 01039, passed 7-10-01)
CHAPTER 116: SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS
Section
   
116.01   Purpose
   
116.02   Application
   
116.03   Minor-impact special event permit
   
116.04   Major-impact special event permit
   
116.05   Fees
   
116.06   Exemptions
   
116.07   Appeals
Cross-reference:
   Mount Pleasant Memorial Waterfront Park special events, see
Ch. 97
§ 116.01 PURPOSE.
   The town recognizes the importance and necessity of regulating special
events for various reasons: traffic control, avoiding a nuisance to others,
controlling the effect on the surrounding area, and the like.
(Ord. 06069, passed 2-13-07; Am. Ord. 15026, passed 4-14-15)
§ 116.02 APPLICATION.
   (A)   This chapter shall apply to all special events in the town involving
an outdoor activity on commercial, institutional or governmental property and
includes residential properties in the case of film and television productions.
      (1)   All such activities must be of a temporary nature and cannot become
permanent.
      (2)   All such events and activities shall be allowed only upon approval,
as required, and the issuance of a special event permit.
      (3)   Failure to comply with the requirements set forth in this chapter,
or with the conditions mandated on an approved permit, may result in denial of
future permit applications, staff and supply charges for remedial work
resulting from an event organizer’s negligence, and/or additional security
deposit and documentation requirements for any future event organized by the
same event organizer.
   (B)   Note that normally any special event permit involving loudspeakers or
amplified music systems will not be allowed after 7:00 p.m. on Sunday through
Thursday, and after 9:00 p.m. on Friday and Saturday.
   (C)   Town staff may at their discretion consider an application that does
not comply with deadlines published within the application’s event categories,
and if it is considered, all other requirements of the permit application and
ordinance shall apply. Applicants in this circumstance will be informed of the
decision as expeditiously as possible.
   (D)   This chapter shall not apply to temporary use permits pursuant to
Chapter 156, and parades, demonstrations, public assemblies and picketing
pursuant to
Chapter 94.
(Ord. 06069, passed 2-13-07; Am. Ord. 15026, passed 4-14-15; Am. Ord. 21031,
passed 5-11-21)Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 116.03 MINOR-IMPACT SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT.
   (A)   A special event likely to have a minor impact upon the town and its
environs shall be allowed, following approval by the Town Administrator or his
or her designee.
   (B)   Examples of special events considered to have a minor impact are as
follows: grand openings, commercial outside promotional activities, block
parties, craft fairs, photo shoots, and activities with loudspeakers or
amplified music systems. Restaurants and bars operating or allowing the
operation of amplified music systems during the normal course of business is
not considered a minor-impact special event.
   (C)   The following requirements shall apply to such special events:
      (1)   There shall be no more than eight special event permits granted per
calendar year, saving and excepting commercial film/photography productions
with minimal impact to surrounding residents/businesses, or activities with
loudspeakers or amplified music systems pursuant to division (C)(3).
      (2)   No business, organization, person or entity shall be allowed a
permit for longer than 32 days per calendar year, saving and excepting
commercial film/photography productions with minimal impact to surrounding
residents/businesses, or activities with loudspeakers or amplified music
systems. For example, one permit may be granted for the full 32 days, or four
permits granted for eight days each, or eight permits granted for four days
each.
      (3)   Activities with loudspeakers or amplified music systems shall be
subject to the following:
         (a)   No more than four special event permits shall be granted per
calendar year to each business or property location.
         (b)   Each permit shall be granted for one day only.
      (4)   Business grand openings with a ribbon cutting ceremony shall be
granted permission to hang a temporary banner for no longer than 30 days.
(Ord. 06069, passed 2-13-07; Am. Ord. 15026, passed 4-14-15; Am. Ord. 21031,
passed 5-11-21; Am. Ord. 21076, passed 12-15-21) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 116.04 MAJOR-IMPACT SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT.
   (A)   Special events likely to have a major impact upon the town and its
environs shall be allowed, following approval by the Town Administrator or his
or her designee. Examples of such events are as follows: events with an
expected attendance of 500 or more people, festivals, carnivals, parades,
television and film productions.
   (B)   The following requirements shall apply to such special events:
      (1)   The Town Administrator, or his or her designee, may grant a special
permit, if the proposed use would not cause traffic congestion and would not
create a nuisance to surrounding areas.
      (2)   The Town Administrator, or his or her designee, shall have the
authority to establish conditions and timeframes as deemed appropriate.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the requirements stated above, the Town Administrator
may defer the approval of a special event permit application to the Town
Council.
      (1)   In such a situation, the Town Council shall have the authority to
establish conditions and timeframes as it deems appropriate.
      (2)   The decision of Town Council is final.
   (D)   Additional requirements and guidelines pertaining to television and
film production are outlined within the town's filming policy, as may be
updated from time to time.
(Ord. 06069, passed 2-13-07; Am. Ord. 15026, passed 4-14-15; Am. Ord. 21031,
passed 5-11-21) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 116.05 FEES.
   The following fees shall apply to the special event permit requirements:
   (A)   Festival: $100 (one day) or $150 (two days).
   (B)   Parade/procession: $150.
   (C)   Race/bike /walk: $100.
   (D)   Outdoor commercial activities: $50.
   (E)   Commercial film/photography: $50.
   (F)   Non-residential private property: $0.
   (G)   Business grand opening with ribbon cutting ceremony: $0.
   (H)   See §
97.03 for Memorial Waterfront Park special event permit and fee regulations.
   (I)   Television and film productions:
      (1)   Low Impact filming: $100 per permit
      (2)   High Impact filming: $250 per permit
      (3)   Base camp special event permit if different from the filming
location: $50
      (4)   Use of town property (subject to availability and conditions):
         (a)   Low Impact, including use of town property for a base camp (park
or facility must remain open to the public. have a small cast and crew, and a
short timeframe for filming): $100 per day
         (b)   High Impact: $500 per day
      (5)   Additional information regarding TV and film production fees are
contained in the town's filming policy and shall apply.
(Ord. 15026, passed 4-14-15; Am. Ord. 21031, passed 5-11-21) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 116.06 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following exemptions shall apply to the special event permit
requirements:
   (A)   Schools, churches, and governmental entities engaged in special events
utilizing their own property.
   (B)   A sporting event for regular league play and exhibition games or other
event occurring at a Recreation Department facility, provided that the event is
being coordinated with the Recreation Department.
   (C)   An outdoor conference, corporate event, social or entertainment event,
or similar gathering, that is occurring on property owned and operated by a
special event venue provider, where the property is purpose-built for hosting
such events, provided that the event will not create a nuisance to neighboring
residents and/or businesses, and does not require the support of town staff or
resources.
   (D)   News/press coverage, bonafide students engaged in school projects. and
production companies, businesses or organizations with a cast and crew totaling
three persons or less.
(Ord. 15026, passed 4-14-15; Am. Ord. 21031, passed 5-11-21)
§ 116.07 APPEALS.
   Any business, organization, person or entity that feels it has been
improperly denied a special event permit pursuant to this chapter may appeal
the decision to the Police, Judicial and Legal Committee pursuant to the
following requirements:
   (A)   Specific grounds for the appeal must be stated in writing within five
working days of receipt of the decision.
   (B)   An appeal hearing shall be held by the Police, Judicial and Legal
Committee at its next regularly scheduled meeting, after receipt of a written
request for the same, and a decision shall be rendered at the conclusion of
that hearing.
   (C)   The decision of the Police, Judicial and Legal Committee is final.
(Ord. 06069, passed 2-13-07; Am. Ord. 15026, passed 4-14-15)
CHAPTER 117: ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES PROGRAM
Section
   
117.01   Purpose
   
117.02   Findings
   
117.03   Economic development incentives
   
117.04   Application
   
117.05   Approval procedure and conditions
   
117.06   Approval criteria
   
117.07   Business license fee and tax provisions
   
117.08   Funding contingency
§ 117.01 PURPOSE.
   The town Economic Development Strategy aims to sustain and strengthen the
economic vitality of the town by encouraging the location and/or expansion of
business and industrial enterprises that significantly add to the tax base,
provide high-paying and quality jobs, stimulate new economic development or
redevelopment in the town, and are sensitive to and compatible with town
development strategy.
(Ord. 11018, passed 4-12-11; Am. Ord. 22048, passed 8-12-22)
§ 117.02 FINDINGS.
   In furtherance of the stated purpose, Town Council finds and declares the
following:
   (A)   A vigorous and diverse tax base is essential to sustain a meaningful
quality of life as a healthy economy not only enhances the tax base, but also
increases employment opportunities and housing choices within the town. With
this in mind, the town works to create a sustainable local economy that
encourages economic vitality, promotes fiscal integrity, and increases the
local standard of living while preserving and enhancing the quality of life in
Mount Pleasant.
   (B)   Businesses that derive a significant portion of revenues from areas
outside of our region, by their nature, are of particular value to the town
because such businesses typically require significant capital investment,
provide a substantial number of quality, high-paying jobs, provide the
opportunity for new economic development or redevelopment by increasing the
customer base for existing businesses, and have minimal impacts on the
environment or services of the town. Consequently, the location of such
businesses in the town, and any subsequent expansion of them, should be
encouraged.
   (C)   It is in the best interests of the town to create an Economic
Development Incentives Program in furtherance of the public welfare, to enhance
the vitality and diversity of the economy of the town, to assist in the
implementation of the town's Economic Development Strategic Plan, and to
encourage the location and/or expansion of business and industrial enterprises
that bring substantial private investment, quality jobs and the potential for a
spin-off effect to stimulate existing business and the development of new
businesses. The town is specifically interested in businesses that are located
within the Key Development Zones (Patriots Point, Wando Welch/Long Point Road,
Johnnie Dodds Boulevard, and Carolina Park) and align with the Target Clusters
identified in the Economic Development Strategic Plan: Information Technology &
Services, Life Sciences, Architecture & Engineering, Marketing, Design &
Publishing, and Financial Investments.
(Ord. 11018, passed 4-12-11; Am. Ord. 22048, passed 8-12-22)
§ 117.03 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES. 
   (A)   The Economic Development Incentives Program is intended to provide
incentives to induce the location and/or expansion of businesses in the town
which substantially add to the tax base, create high- paying jobs and are
compatible with the natural environment of the town.
   (B)   Available incentives for qualifying businesses include:
      (1)   Development impact fee reimbursement grant;
      (2)   Building permit fee reimbursement grant;
      (3)   Plan review fee reimbursement grant;
      (4)   Business license fee and tax reimbursement grant subject to the
provisions and conditions in §
117.07;
      (5)   Staff-level design review approval for properties zoned Economic
Development (ED) and projects approved for an Economic Development Incentive
Award; and
      (6)   Expedited review and approval process.
(Ord. 22048, passed 8-12-22)
§ 117.04 APPLICATION.
   To qualify for economic development incentives, application shall be made to
the Town Administrator, or his or her designee, in a written format provided by
the town. The application shall, at minimum: identify the incentive(s) sought;
describe the nature of the business and the project for which an incentive is
sought; include a description of the site, its size and its potential for
expansion; describe the anticipated capital investment broken down between
site, facility and equipment, and the time frame of the investment; identify
the existing number of jobs and the anticipated number and type of new jobs to
be created throughout the grant period; provide the average salary ranges of
jobs; provide the anticipated annual town tax revenues to be generated over a
five-year or two-year period depending on the incentives sought; identify
whether the business is located in a Key Development Zone and whether it
complies with the identified Target Clusters; and such other information as may
reasonably be requested by the Town Administrator to assist in the evaluation
of the application.
(Ord. 11018, passed 4-12-11; Am. Ord. 22048, passed 8-12-22)
§ 117.05 APPROVAL PROCEDURE AND CONDITIONS.
   The Town Administrator, or his or her designee, shall review the application
and, should the application be complete, forward the same with recommendations
to Town Council. Town Council shall review the application in accordance with
the criteria provided in §
117.06. Approval, rejection or conditional approval of an application shall be
at the sole discretion of Town Council. Any conditions imposed by Town Council
shall be reduced to writing and acknowledged in writing by the applicant as
conditions precedent to any incentive. No incentive grant shall be payable
prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. If the business project is
to be phased, the incentive grant shall likewise be phased and payable in
amounts proportional to the applicable phase of the project as certificates of
occupancy are issued for the applicable phase. In the event a certificate of
occupancy is not required, no incentive grant shall be payable until the
applicant’s business license fees have been paid in full.
(Ord. 11018, passed 4-12-11; Am. Ord. 22048, passed 8-12-22)
§ 117.06 APPROVAL CRITERIA.
   Town Council shall consider the following criteria.
   (A)   Primary criteria. Applicants shall achieve the following criteria.
      (1)   Whether the applicant derives significant income from outside
greater Charleston, Berkeley, Dorchester area; and
      (2)   Whether the applicant's business is compatible with the Target
Clusters as defined in the Town's Economic Development Strategy.
   (B)   Additional criteria. Applicants shall achieve at least four of the
following criteria:
      (1)   Whether the project is located within a Key Development Zone;
      (2)   The degree to which the applicant may serve as a catalyst for other
economic development or redevelopment activity in the town;
      (3)   The increase in tax revenues, including real, personal, sales and
business license taxes, that may result from the business;
      (4)   The number and type of in-town jobs the business creates. A minimum
of five high- paying new jobs must be created and sustained. A high-paying
position is defined as a newly created, full-time employee position where the
aggregate average annual gross wage of the employment position, not including
health care or other paid or unpaid benefits, is at least 110% of the average
wage of the county in which an equivalent employment position exists
(Charleston County);
      (5)   Housing/relocations and/or transportation stipends provided to
staff;
      (6)   The anticipated capital investment of the business and over what
period of time;
      (7)   Creation of career pipeline opportunities to recruit local students
into jobs within the organization; and
      (8)   Town Council at its own discretion may consider additional
criteria.
(Ord. 11018, passed 4-12-11; Am. Ord. 22048, passed 8-12-22)
§ 117.07 BUSINESS LICENSE FEE AND TAX PROVISIONS.
   Business license fee and tax reimbursement grants are subject to the
following conditions and provisions:
   (A)   Eligibility period.
      (1)   Businesses located within a Key Development Area and in alignment
with the Target Clusters are eligible for reimbursement grants for a period not
to exceed five years in accordance with the schedule provided in division (C)
(1) herein;
      (2)   Businesses in alignment with the Target Clusters, but not located
in a Key Development Zone, are eligible for reimbursement grants for a period
not to exceed two years in accordance with the schedule provided in division
(C)(2) herein.
   (B)   The incentive schedule in division (C) are subject to the following
limitations and restrictions:
      (1)   Incentives shall correspond with anticipated tax revenues as
provided by applicant and as required by §
117.04;
      (2)   Applicants meeting at least 90% of anticipated tax revenues may be
reimbursed the full amount of the business license tax due;
      (3)   Applicants meeting 75% - 89.999% of anticipated tax revenues may be
reimbursed at 75% of the business license tax due; and
      (4)   Applicants failing to meet at least 75% of anticipated tax revenues
may not be reimbursed for the year but are eligible to resume the reimbursement
schedule the following year.
   (C)   Reimbursement schedule.
      (1)   Businesses located within a Key Development Area and in alignment
with the Target Clusters are eligible for reimbursement grants for a period not
to exceed five years:
         (a)   Year 1 and 2: up to 100% Reimbursement of Business License
Taxes.
         (b)   Year 3: up to 75% Reimbursement of Business License Taxes.
         (c)   Year 4: up to 50% Reimbursement of Business License Taxes.
         (d)   Year 5: up to 25% Reimbursement of Business License Taxes.
      (2)   Businesses in alignment with the Target Clusters but not located in
a Key Development Zone are eligible for reimbursement grants for a period not
to exceed two years:
         (a)   Year 1: Up to 100% Reimbursement of Business License Taxes.
         (b)   Year 2: Up to 50% Reimbursement of Business License Taxes.
   (D)   Additional limitations and restrictions. Reimbursements will be issued
following successful completion of identified annual criteria and upon approval
by town staff following a written request. The reimbursements will be issued
after June 1 and before June 30 of each year for the company's business license
period.
(Ord. 22048, passed 8-12-22)
§ 117.08 FUNDING CONTINGENCY. 
   The Economic Development Incentives Program is contingent upon funding by
Town Council, as it deems appropriate and in its sole discretion. Funds
allocated by Town Council for the Economic Development Incentives Program shall
be identified in the town’s budget. To the extent that funds other than town
funds are allocated to the Program, such funds shall be expended in accordance
with any and all state, federal or other regulation that may apply.
(Ord. 11018, passed 4-12-11; Am. Ord. 22048, passed 8-12-22)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
      
132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY
      
133.   OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS
      
134.   OFFENSES AGAINST JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION
      
135.   DRUG OFFENSES
      
136.   LITTERING
      
137.   GASOLINE AND/OR DIESEL FUEL DRIVE OFFS
      
138.   SMOKING AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS
      
139.   RESERVED
      
140.   WATERCRAFT AND FLOATING STRUCTURES
      
141.   PROHIBITED ACTIVITY AT TOWN-OWNED PARKS
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
130.01   Advertisements and signs
   
130.02   Gambling
   
130.03   Boat landings; loading and unloading
   
130.04   Sullivan's Island causeway barrier
   
130.05   Gaming vessels
   
130.06   Gambling devices on vessels prohibited
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 ADVERTISEMENTS AND SIGNS.
   No person shall erect, construct, affix, or paint any sign or advertisement
on any of the streets or other public property within the municipality unless
it be first approved by the Council or its appropriate committee.
('81 Code, § 135.01) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 GAMBLING.
   It shall be unlawful to play at cards or gamble in any of the streets or
vacant lots within the municipality.
(' 81 Code, § 135.06) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Gambling and lotteries, see S. C. Code §§ 16-19-10 through 16-19-160
§ 130.03 BOAT LANDINGS; LOADING AND UNLOADING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to block any approach or area adjacent
to any boat landing, or to interfere with or impede the launching or loading of
boats at any boat landing located in the municipality.
('81 Code, § 135.07) (Ord. passed 9-10-62) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.04 SULLIVAN'S ISLAND CAUSEWAY BARRIER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to proceed past the barrier on the old
Sullivan's Island causeway after sundown and before sunrise the next morning.
('81 Code, § 135.08) (Ord. passed 9-10-62) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.05 GAMING VESSELS.
   No person or entity shall open, keep, maintain, dock, moor, anchor or
operate any gaming vessel within the corporate limits of the town, or suffer
any gaming vessel to operate from any marina, terminal or maritime facility
within the corporate limits of the city for the purpose of embarking or
disembarking persons whose intent is to participate in games of chance beyond
the jurisdictional limits of the State of South Carolina.
(Ord. 99003, passed 2-9-99) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.06 GAMBLING DEVICES ON VESSELS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Definitions.
      (1)   The term GAMBLING DEVICE means:
         (a)   Any so-called "slot machine" or any other machine or mechanical
device an essential part of which is a drum or reel with insignia thereon, and
which when operated may deliver, as the result of the application of an element
of chance, any money or property; or by the operation of which a person may
become entitled to receive, as the result of the application of an element of
chance, any money or property; or
         (b)   Any other machine or mechanical device (including, but not
limited to, roulette wheels and similar devices) designed and manufactured
primarily for use in connection with gambling; and
            1.   Which when operated may deliver, as the result of the
application of an element of chance, any money or property; or
            2.   By the operation of which a person may become entitled to
receive, as the result of the application of an element of chance, any money or
property; or
         (c)   Any subassembly or essential part intended to be used in
connection with any such machine or mechanical device, but which is not
attached to any such machine or mechanical device as a constituent part.
      (2)   The terms DAY CRUISE and/or CRUISE TO NOWHERE mean a voyage or
segment of a voyage, respectively:
         (a)   That begins and ends within the waters of the municipal
boundaries of the town, or begins in the town and ends in another destination
within the state, or begins in another destination within the state and ends
within the waters of the municipal boundaries of the town; and
         (b)   During which the vessel does not make an intervening stop; and
         (c)   During which passengers are entitled to operate gambling
devices; and
         (d)   That does not provide overnight accommodations for their cruise
passengers and that is not primarily engaged in carrying passengers between
ports in the U.S. or foreign countries.
   (B)   Prohibition. It shall be unlawful to manufacture, recondition, repair,
sell, transport, possess, or use any gambling device on a vessel within the
waters of the municipal boundaries of the town operated for the purpose of
conducting a day cruise.
   (C)   Intent. By enacting this ordinance, the town exercises its authority
delegated to it pursuant to the South Carolina Code Annotated 1976 § 5-7-30
(the Home Rule Act) and its authority to legislate to preserve the health,
safety, welfare and comfort of its citizens. Further, by enacting this
ordinance, the town intends to opt out of the provisions of 15 U.S.C. § 1175(b)
(1)(A) (the Johnson Act).
(Ord. 99003, passed 2-9-99) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this title for which no penalty is
otherwise provided, shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned for not
more than 30 days. However, no penalty shall exceed the penalty provided by
state law for similar offenses. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day that a violation occurs or continues.
('81 Code, § 130.99)
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
   
131.01   Grass and trees in public places
   
131.02   Malicious mischief
   
131.03   Petit larceny
   
131.04   Shoplifting
   
131.05   Tampering with personal property
   
131.06   Personal property loaned to municipality
   
131.07   Damage to and trespass on real estate
Cross-reference:
   For Littering, see
Ch. 136
§ 131.01 GRASS AND TREES IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully break down, destroy,
injure, mutilate, or remove any tree, or any of the boxes or other structures
which enclose a tree, or to walk on or injure any grass plot, in any park,
street, lane, alley, or open court within the municipality. It shall be lawful
to cut away the limbs or branches of any tree for the purpose of erecting posts
or suspending wires for electric lights, telegraph or telephone, or fire alarm
service when a permit in writing to do so has been procured from the Department
of Streets and Sanitation.
('81 Code, § 130.01) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.02 MALICIOUS MISCHIEF.
   No person shall willfully and maliciously cut, shoot, wound, mutilate,
deface, or otherwise injure or destroy any kind, class, article, or description
of real or personal property of another when the injury to or loss of the
property affected by any such act does not exceed $50 in value.
('81 Code, § 130.02) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Malicious injury to real property, see S.C. Code § 16-11-520
§ 131.03 PETIT LARCENY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to steal, take, or carry away any goods,
choses in action, bank bills or currency, bills receivable, chattels, or other
articles of personal property or any fixture or part or product of the soil
which was severed from the soil by unlawful act, when the value thereof does
not exceed $200.
('81 Code, § 130.03) (Ord. 11-7-83) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Petit larceny, see S.C. Code § 16-13-30
§ 131.04 SHOPLIFTING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Take, carry away, transfer from one person to another or from one
area of a store to another, or other retail mercantile establishment to another
area, or cause to be carried away or transferred any merchandise displayed,
held, stored, offered for sale by any store or other retail mercantile
establishment with the intention of depriving the merchant of the possession,
use, or benefit of such merchandise without paying the full retail value;
      (2)   Alters, transfers, or removes any label, price tag marking,
indication of value or any other markings which aid in determining value
affixed to any merchandise displayed, held, stored, or offered for sale in a
store or other retail mercantile establishment and attempts to purchase such
merchandise personally or in consort with another at less than the full retail
value with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of
such merchandise;
      (3)   Transfers any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for
sale by any store or other retail mercantile establishment from the container
with intent to deprive the merchant of the full retail value;
   (B)   All of the removals, takings, transfers as stated in division (A) must
have a dollar value of less than $50.
('81 Code, § 137.01) (Ord. passed 5-5-86) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Shoplifting, see S.C. Code § 16-13-110
§ 131.05 TAMPERING WITH PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   No person shall, without proper authority, carelessly or willfully tamper
with, damage, deface, remove, molest, render inoperative, or otherwise
interfere with any apparatus, equipment, tools, books, records, furniture, or
other personal property belonging to or leased to the municipality or any
agency thereof.
('81 Code, § 130.04) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.06 PERSONAL PROPERTY LOANED TO MUNICIPALITY.
   No person shall, without proper authority, carelessly or willfully destroy,
injure, remove, molest, or interfere with any property of any kind, owned or
controlled by any private business or civic or other like society, placed by
the municipality, or with its consent, in the streets or public places of the
municipality for the use, benefit, assistance, or advantage of the municipality
or its citizens.
('81 Code, § 130.05) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.07 DAMAGE TO AND TRESPASS ON REAL ESTATE.
   (A)   No person shall, without proper authority, carelessly or willfully
tamper with, damage, deface, molest, or otherwise interfere with any real
property belonging to, or leased to, the municipality or any agency thereof.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly trespass on any real property belonging to,
or leased to, the municipality or any agency thereof.
('81 Code, § 130.06) Penalty, see §
130.99
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY
Section
General Provisions
   
132.01   Assault; assault and battery
   
132.02   Disorderly conduct
   
132.03   Noise
   
132.04   Disturbing schools prohibited
Weapons Control
   
132.20   Concealed weapons
   
132.21   Discharge of firearms
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 132.01 ASSAULT; ASSAULT AND BATTERY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit assault or assault and battery
on any person within the municipality.
('81 Code, § 131.01) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.02 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   Any person who shall do or engage in any of the following shall be guilty of
disorderly conduct, which is prohibited:
   (A)   Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward
another whereby any person is placed in fear of safety for life, limb, or
health.
   (B)   Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward
another whereby property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed
or damaged.
   (C)   Any person who shall endanger lawful pursuits of another by acts of
violence, angry threats, or abusive conduct.
   (D)   Any person who shall cause, provoke, or engage in any fight, brawl, or
riotous conduct so as to endanger life, limb, health, or property of another.
   (E)   Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others for
the purpose of causing, provoking, or engaging in any fight or brawl.
   (F)   Any person who shall be found jostling or roughly crowding or pushing
any person in any public place.
   (G)   Any person who shall congregate with others or in crowds for unlawful
purposes, as defined by federal or state law, this code, or other ordinances.
   (H)   Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others for
the purpose or with the intent to engage in gaming.
   (I)   Any person who shall frequent any public place with intent to obtain
money from other persons by illegal and fraudulent schemes, tricks, artifices,
or devices.
   (J)   Any person who assembles for the purpose of engaging in any fraudulent
scheme, device, or trick to obtain any valuable thing in any place, or from any
person, in the municipality, or who shall aid or abet therein.
   (K)   Any male person who shall accost or attempt to force his company on
any female person or attempts to pick up any female person.
   (L)   Any person who frequents any place where gaming or the illegal sale or
possession of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs is practiced,
allowed, or tolerated.
   (M)   Any person who shall use fighting words directed towards any other
person who becomes outraged and thus creates turmoil.
   (N)   Any person who shall assemble or congregate with others for the
purposes of trouncing on another.
   (O)   Any person who shall by acts of violence interfere with another's
pursuit of a lawful occupation.
   (P)   Any person who shall congregate with another or others in or on any
public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and
refuses to clear such public way when ordered by the police or other lawful
authority.
   (Q)   Any person who, without legal cause or good excuse, enters into the
dwelling house, place of business, or on the premises of another person after
having been warned within six months preceding not to do so or any person who,
having entered into the dwelling house, place of business, or on the premises
of another person without having been warned within six months not to do so,
fails and refuses, without cause or good excuse, to leave immediately upon
being ordered or requested to do so by the person in possession or his or her
agent or representative shall, on conviction, be punished as provided in §
130.99.
('81 Code, § 131.02) (Ord. passed 11-7-83) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Disturbance of religious worship, see S.C. Code § 16-17-520
   Public disorderly conduct, see S.C. Code § 16-17-530
§ 132.03 NOISE.
   (A)   Definitions. In addition to the common meaning of words, the following
definitions shall be used in interpreting this section.
      “A” WEIGHTED SCALE. The sound pressure level, in decibels, as measured
with the sound level meter using the "A" weighted network (scale). The standard
unit notation is "dB(A)."
      AMPLIFIED SOUND. Sound augmented by any electronic means that increases
the sound level or volume.
      ANSI. American National Standards Institute or its successor bodies.
      “C” WEIGHTED SCALE. The sound pressure level, in decibels, as measured
with the sound level meter using the “C” weighted network (scale). The standard
unit notation is “dB(C).”
      COMPLAINANT. Any owner, lessee, manager or person with a legal interest
in real property within the corporate limits of the town who reports to the
Police Department or other town authority being disturbed by sound heard at
their residence or place of business, and not originating therefrom.
      CONSTRUCTION. On-site erection, fabrication, installation, alteration,
demolition or removal of any structure, facility or addition thereto, including
all related activities, including, but not restricted to, clearing of land,
earth moving, blasting, and landscaping.
      dB(A). Sound level in decibels, determined by the “A” weighted scale of a
standard sound level meter having characteristics defined by the American
National Standards Institute, Publication ANSI, S 1.4-1971, or its successor
publication(s).
      dB(C). Sound level in decibels, determined by the “C” weighted scale of a
standard sound level  meter having characteristics defined by the American
National Standards Institute, Publication ANSI, S 1.4-1971, or its successor
publication(s).
      DECIBEL (dB). A unit of level that denotes the ratio between two
quantities that are proportional to power; the number of decibels corresponding
to the ratio of two amounts of power is ten times the logarithm to the base ten
of this ratio.
      EXCESSIVE NOISE. Any unnecessary or unusually loud sound or any sound
that disrupts the peace and quiet of any neighborhood, and that does annoy,
disturb, injure, or endanger the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of
reasonable persons of ordinary sensibilities.
      EMERGENCY WORK. Work made necessary to restore property to a safe
condition, work required to protect, provide, or prevent persons or property
from danger or potential danger, or work by a private or public utility when
restoring utility service.
      PERSON. Any individual, corporation, partnership, firm, association,
trust, estate, public or private institution, group, or agency.
      PLAINLY AUDIBLE. Able to be clearly heard by a person of normal
sensibilities using only unaided auditory senses. PLAINLY AUDIBLE shall refer
to a sound heard at a volume level above that of normal conversation, and shall
not include sounds that are just barely audible. With respect to music and
amplified sounds, the detection of rhythmic, base-reverberating-type sound,
beat or cadence shall be deemed PLAINLY AUDIBLE.
      RECEIVING PROPERTY. Any residence or place of business on which uninvited
noise is plainly audible.
      SOUND LEVEL. In decibels, a weighted sound pressure level determined by
the use of a sound level meter whose characteristics and frequency weightings
are specified in ANSI standards.
      SOUND LEVEL METER. An instrument, including a microphone, an amplifier,
an output meter, and an “A” frequency weighting network for the measurement of
sound levels that conforms to American National Standards Institute (ANSI)
Standard S 1.4-1971 “Specifications for Sound Level Meters,” or the latest
revision.
      SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL. In decibels, 20 times the logarithm to base ten of
the ratio of the magnitude of a particular sound pressure to the standard
reference pressure. The standard reference pressure is 0.0002 microbars.
      SOUND SOURCE. Any person, animal, device, operation, process, activity,
or phenomenon that emits or causes sound.
      UNINVITED NOISE.  Noise not originating from the receiving property.
   (B)   Noise measurement. Noise measurements shall be employed by the Police
Department or other designated town authority in the following manner.
      (1)   Noise measurements shall be made using a sound level meter taken
from the property line of the complainant's property. If measurement is not
possible from the properly line from the complainant's property, noise
measurements may be taken at the nearest boundary line of the public right-of-
way.
      (2)   No individual other than the operator(s) shall be within ten feet
of the sound level meter during the sample period.
      (3)   Sound measurements shall be conducted at that time of day or night
when the suspect noise is emitting sound.
      (4)   The sound level meter shall be employed in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions.
      (5)   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere, through the use
of sound or otherwise, with the taking of sound level measurements.
   (C)   Maximum decibel levels.
      (1)   Unless otherwise specifically indicated, it shall be unlawful for
any person to cause or allow the emission of sound from any source or sources
that, when measured pursuant to division (B) above, to exceeds 60 dB(A) or 60
dB(C) during daytime hours and 55 dB(A) or 55 dB(C) during evening hours.
DAYTIME HOURS shall be defined as 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. on Sundays through
Thursdays, and 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. on Fridays, Saturdays, and federal and
state holidays. EVENING HOURS shall be defined as 9:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. on
Sundays through Thursdays, and 10:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. on Fridays, Saturdays,
and federal and state holidays.
      (2)   The maximum allowable decibel levels as provided in this section
shall be based upon a reasonable average of sustained noise as determined by
the sound meter operator. The sound meter operator may cease taking readings as
soon as the readings already taken show a violation of this section.
      (3)   For the purposes of this section, any commercial properties
adjacent to or sharing a boundary with residential properties shall take all
reasonable measures to ensure that any equipment used on the commercial
property is operated in accordance with manufacturer's specifications and is
equipped with all standard noise-reducing equipment in proper operating
condition.
   (D)   Excessive noise prohibited.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally produce,
intentionally cause to be produced, or intentionally participate in the
producing any excessive noise within the municipal limits.
      (2)   In determining whether a sound is excessive noise for purposes of
this section, factors that may be considered include, but are not limited to:
         (a)   The volume of the noise;
         (b)   The intensity of the noise;
         (c)   Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual;
         (d)   Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural;
         (e)   The volume and intensity of the background noise, if any;
         (f)   The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities;
         (g)   The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise
emanates;
         (h)   The time of the day or night the noise occurs;
         (i)   The duration of the noise; and
         (j)   Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant.
      (3)   The determination of whether a noise or sound is excessive noise
shall be made without considering the content of any message conveyed by the
noise or sound.
   (E)   Specific prohibitions. The following acts are specifically prohibited:
      (1)   Horns and signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling
device on any motor vehicle or any street or public place, except as a danger
warning.
      (2)   Radios, televisions, musical instruments, and similar devices. The
operating or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, musical instrument
or similar device that produces or reproduces sound in a manner as to be
plainly audible from inside any residence or place of business other than the
sound source.
      (3)   Building noise. Building operations between the hours of 9:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. the following day is prohibited. Any noise generated from
building operations, at any time, that is plainly audible from inside of a
residence or place of business of a receiving property shall constitute a
violation of this section.
      (4)   Amplified sound. Amplified sound that is plainly audible from
inside of a residence or place of business of a receiving property and not
originating from the receiving property.
      (5)   Mufflers. Sound emitting from a motor vehicle's muffler in
violation of S.C. Code § 56-5-5020.
   (F)   No employee liability. No employee of any place of business acting
within the scope of his or her employ shall be liable for a violation of this
section, unless an employee is also an owner of the business.
   (G)   Exceptions. This section shall not apply to the following sources:
      (1)   Emergency warning devices on police, fire, ambulances, or other
emergency vehicles;
      (2)   Horns and other warning devices used in a bona fide attempt to
avoid imminent injury to human life or property;
      (3)   Any amplified sound or other noise that is within an enclosed
building and not audible from outside of that building;
      (4)   Sounds and activity normally associated with uses and/or special
events, parades, or public demonstrations, for which a temporary permit has
been issued pursuant to
Chapters 94,
116, or
156 of this code;
      (5)   Emergency work;
      (6)   Construction and repair of public roadways, public works projects,
and other projects as permitted by the town;
      (7)   Lawn care equipment and agricultural field equipment used during
business hours (7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.), provided that all equipment is
operated in accordance with manufacturer's specifications and is equipped with
all standard noise-reducing equipment in proper operating condition.
      (8)   Garage machinery during business hours (7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.),
provided that all machinery is operated in accordance with manufacturer's
specifications and is equipped with all standard noise-reducing equipment in
proper operating condition.
      (9)   Emission from any lawful sound source on public rights-of-way;
      (10)   Noise generated by any aircraft or generated in connection with
the operation of any airport;
      (11)   The proper testing of emergency signaling systems, such as a fire
alarm, not exceeding 15 minutes.
   (H)   Violations. Any person who violates any provision of this section
shall be fined not more than $500 and/or imprisoned for not more than 30 days.
However, no penalty shall exceed the penalty provided by state law for similar
offenses. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day that a
violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 22049, passed 3-14-23)
§ 132.04 DISTURBING SCHOOLS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall willfully or unnecessarily at any time on any day:
      (1)   Interfere with or disturb in any way or in any place the students
or teachers of any childcare facility, school or college.
      (2)   Loiter about such childcare facility, school or college premises;
or
      (3)   Act in an obnoxious manner thereon.
   (B)   No person shall at any time on any day:
      (1)   Enter upon childcare facility, school or college premises, or
      (2)   Loiter around the premises, except on business, without the
permission of the principal or person in charge.
   (C)   For purposes of this section, the term "childcare facility" means a
facility, by whatever name known, that is maintained for the whole or part of a
day for the care of children who are 18 years of age or younger, whether the
facility is operated with or without compensation for such care and with or
without stated educational purposes. This term includes, but is not limited to,
facilities commonly known as day care centers, school-age childcare centers,
before and after school programs, nursery schools, preschools, day camps. and
summer camps.
(Ord. 98053, passed 12-8-98; Am. Ord. 21024, passed 4-13-21) Penalty, see §
130.99
WEAPONS CONTROL
§ 132.20 CONCEALED WEAPONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry concealed, on his or her
person, within the municipality, except on his or her own premises, any razor,
knuckles, dirk, slingshot, or any other weapon or instrument commonly used for
the infliction of personal injury other than firearms, provided, that this
section shall not apply to law enforcement officers in the discharge of their
duties as such officers.
('81 Code, § 134.01) (Am. Ord. 10060, passed 11-9-10) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Assault with concealed weapon, see S.C. Code § 16-3-610
   Firearm provisions, see S.C. Code §§ 16-23-410 through 16-23-470
§ 132.21 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful within the municipality, subject to the
exceptions stated in division (B) below, to discharge firearms, air rifles, and
other weapons or instruments which discharge projectiles.
   (B)   (1)   This section shall not apply to:
         (a)   Law enforcement officials and military personnel in the
performance of their duties;
         (b)   A person operating a shooting range or range as the terms
“person”, “shooting range” and “range” are defined in S.C. Code § 31-18-20, as
amended;
         (c)   The use of blank ammunition at athletic events, military
funerals, and other functions at which the use of blank ammunition is
appropriate;
         (d)   The use of ball ammunition or arrows on authorized target ranges
when such activity is conducted under competent supervision.
   (B)   (2)   The discharge of firearms shall be allowed on areas of
undeveloped land of 300 acres or more in size, either as a single parcel or
multiple contiguous parcels, regardless of ownership, for the purposes of
target shooting or legitimate hunting activities which comply with state and
federal regulations.
('81 Code, § 134.02) (Ord. 97024, passed 4-8-97; Am. Ord. 13012, passed 3-12-
13) Penalty, see §
130.99
CHAPTER 133: OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS
Section
   
133.01   Bawdy houses
   
133.02   Indecent words or pictures
§ 133.01 BAWDY HOUSES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain, or assist in keeping
or maintaining within the municipality any house or place of ill fame,
prostitution, or any disorderly house or place wherein persons of disreputable
repute and of dishonest and immoral conversation frequent or come together for
lewd, obscene, or indecent purpose, and no person shall reside in, or be an
inmate of, any such house or place.
('81 Code, § 132.01) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Lewdness, assignation, and prostitution, see S.C. Code § 16-15-90
§ 133.02 INDECENT WORDS OR PICTURES.
   No person shall write any indecent, obscene, scurrilous, or profane words or
make indecent, obscene, scurrilous, or profane pictures, marks, or figures on
any wall, fence, house, sidewalk, or structure.
('81 Code, § 132.02) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Obscenity, see S.C. Code §§ 16-15-305 through 16-15-445
CHAPTER 134: OFFENSES AGAINST JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION
Section
   
134.01   False alarms; interference with fire alarm system
   
134.02   Interference with officers and employees
   
134.03   Impersonation
   
134.04   Courtesy due to and from officers and employees
§ 134.01 FALSE ALARMS; INTERFERENCE WITH FIRE ALARM SYSTEM.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to give or cause to be
given any false alarm of fire by means of the fire alarm system or otherwise,
or to interfere with the fire alarm system of the municipality for the purpose
of giving any false alarm or for hindering those in authority from giving any
regular alarm of fire. The alarm may be sounded by any citizen for the purpose
of reporting a fire.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to give or cause to be
given any false alarm of the need for police protection or assistance.
('81 Code, § 133.01) Penalty, see §
130.99
Cross-reference:
   Alarm Systems, see
Ch. 111
   Fire Prevention, see
Ch. 92
§ 134.02 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   No person shall carelessly or willfully interfere with, resist,
hinder, or obstruct any officer or employee of the municipality who is engaged
in, en route to, or returning from, the performance of official duty, whether
such interference, resistance, hindrance, or obstruction be by threat, assault,
or otherwise.
('81 Code, § 133.02)
   (B)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the hindrance,
obstruction, resistance, or interference alleged consisted of speech only.
Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Hindering officers and rescuing prisoners, see S.C. Code § 16-5-50
§ 134.03 IMPERSONATION.
   No person shall falsely represent himself to be an officer or employee of
the municipality, or without proper authority wear or display any uniform,
insignia, or credential which identifies any officer or employee, nor shall any
person without proper authority assume to act as an officer or employee of the
municipality, whether to gain access to premises, obtain information,
perpetrate a fraud, or for any other purpose, provided, that nothing in this
section shall be construed to prevent a private citizen from making a lawful
citizen's arrest for felony or breach of the peace committed within his or her
presence.
('81 Code, § 133.03) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 134.04 COURTESY DUE TO AND FROM OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   Municipal officers and employees shall be courteous in their official
transactions with the public, and they shall conduct themselves in the
performance of official duties so as not to knowingly deprive any person, at
the time and under the circumstances then and there existing, of any lawful
right or benefit to which such person may be entitled. Any person who feels
aggrieved by the conduct of any officer or employee in violation of this
division is invited to bring the matter to the attention of such officer's or
employee's department head or to the Mayor, without prejudice to any other
recourse to which such aggrieved person may be entitled.
   (B)   Members of the public, in turn, should be courteous in their
transactions with officers and employees, and it shall be unlawful for any
person knowingly to taunt, deride, jeer, or otherwise ridicule or debase,
whether by act, word, or gesture, any officer or employee at any time or place
while such officer or employee is lawfully engaged in the performance of any
official duty.
('81 Code, § 133.04) Penalty, see §
130.99
CHAPTER 135: DRUG OFFENSES
Section
General Provisions
   
135.01   Unlawful possession of marijuana
Prohibiting the Sale of Drug-Related Paraphernalia
   
135.10   Purpose
   
135.11   Definition
   
135.12   Conditions for examination and investigation
   
135.13   Possession of drug paraphernalia
   
135.14   Manufacture or delivery of drug paraphernalia
   
135.15   Delivery of drug paraphernalia to a minor
   
135.16   Advertisement of drug paraphernalia
   
135.17   Civil forfeiture
   
135.18   Seizure
   
135.19   Interference with enforcement
 
   
135.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 135.01 UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF MARIJUANA.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or have under his or her
control one ounce or less of marijuana, which means:
   (A)   All species or variety of the marijuana plant and all parts thereof
whether growing or not;
   (B)   The seeds of the marijuana plant;
   (C)   The resin extracted from any part of the marijuana plant;
   (D)   Every compound, manufacture, sale, derivative, mixture, or preparation
of the marijuana plant, marijuana seeds or marijuana resin.
('81 Code, § 138.01) (Ord. passed 5-5-86) Penalty, see §
135.99
Statutory reference:
   Simple possession of marijuana, see S.C. Code, § 44-53-370(d)(3)
PROHIBITING THE SALE OF DRUG-RELATED PARAPHERNALIA
§ 135.10 PURPOSE.
   A drug law is adopted in the town to deal with problems created by the sale
of drugs and there is a need for a drug regulation function to insure the
health, safety, general welfare, and morals of residents of the town; because
of a move by state governments to deal with drug traffic by enforcing
sufficient laws in dealing with such matters which have a deleterious effect on
the values within the town; the following conditions shall apply to the sale of
drug and related paraphernalia as defined in §
135.11.
('81 Code, § 136.01) (Ord. passed 2-8-82)
§ 135.11 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. All equipment, products and materials of any kind which
are used, intended for use, or designed for use, in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging,
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this
chapter. It includes, but is not limited to:
   (A)   Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing, or harvesting of any species of plant which
is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived;
   (B)   Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled
substance.
   (C)   Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in
increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance.
   (D)   Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in
identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity of
controlled substances;
   (E)   Scales or balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in
weighing or measuring controlled substances;
   (F)   Dilutents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose, and lactose, used, intended for use, or designed for use in
cutting controlled substances;
   (G)   Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for use
in removing twigs and seeds from, in otherwise cleaning or refining marijuana;
   (H)   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons, and mixing devices used, intended
for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances;
   (I)   Capsules, balloons, envelopes, and other containers used, intended for
use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances;
   (J)   Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for
use in storing or concealing controlled substances;
   (K)   Hypodermic syringes, needles, and other objects used, intended for
use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into
the human body;
   (L)   Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil
into the human body, such as:
      (1)   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic ceramic pipes with or
without, screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls;
      (2)   Water pipes;
      (3)   Carburetion tubes and devices;
      (4)   Smoking and carburetion masks;
      (5)   Roach clips. Objects used to hold burning material, such as a
marijuana cigarette, that has become too short to be held in the hand;
      (6)   Miniature cocaine spoons, and cocaine vials;
      (7)   Chamber pipes;
      (8)   Carburetor pipes;
      (9)   Electric pipes;
      (10)   Air-driven pipes;
      (11)   Chillums;
      (12)   Bongs;
      (13)   Ice pipes or chillers;
('81 Code, § 136.02) (Ord. passed 2-8-82) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.12 CONDITIONS FOR EXAMINATION AND INVESTIGATION.
   Whereas, in determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or
other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant
factors, the following:
   (A)   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use;
   (B)   Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of the
object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled substance;
   (C)   The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation
of this chapter;
   (D)   The proximity of the object to controlled substances;
   (E)   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object;
   (F)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of
anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he or she knows,
or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation
of this chapter; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the
object, as to a direct violation of this chapter shall not prevent a finding
that the object is intended for use, or designed for use, as drug
paraphernalia;
   (G)   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its
use;
   (H)   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict
its use;
   (I)   National and local advertising concerning its use;
   (J)   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
   (K)   Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate
supplier of like or related items to the community, such as licensed
distributor or dealer of tobacco products;
   (L)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object
(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise;
   (M)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community;
   (N)   Expert testimony concerning its use.
('81 Code, § 136.03) (Ord. passed 2-8-82)
§ 135.13 POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug
paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into
the human body a controlled substance in violation of this chapter.
('81 Code, § 136.04) (Ord. passed 2-8-82) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.14 MANUFACTURE OR DELIVERY OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver, or
manufacture with intent to deliver, drug paraphernalia, knowing, or under
circumstances where one reasonable shall know, that it will be used to plant,
propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce,
process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject,
ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled
substance in violation of this chapter.
('81 Code, § 136.05) (Ord. passed 2-8-82) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.15 DELIVERY OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA TO A MINOR.
   Any person 18 years of age or over who violates the above section by
delivering drug paraphernalia to a person under 18 years of age who is at least
three years his or her junior is guilty of a special offense and upon
conviction may be punished as provided in §
135.99.
('81 Code, § 136.06) (Ord. passed 2-8-82) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.16 ADVERTISEMENT OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill,
or other publication any advertisement, knowing, or under circumstances where
one reasonably should know, that the purpose of this advertisement, in whole or
in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug
paraphernalia.
('81 Code, § 136.07) (Ord. passed 2-8-82) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.17 CIVIL FORFEITURE.
   Any of the items of personal property listed in §
135.11 hereof and which is legally confiscated by the town will be forfeited.
Any such property will be secured by the town's Police Department for a period
of ten days and thereafter the town will either destroy the property or
advertise notice of public sale of such property and sell such thereof as may
be used for legitimate purposes.
('81 Code, § 136.08) (Ord. passed 2-8-82)
§ 135.18 SEIZURE.
   Property subject to be forfeited under this chapter may be seized by the
Town Police Department upon process issued by the Town Recorder. Seizure
without process may be made if the seizure is incident to an arrest or a search
under a search warrant.
('81 Code, § 136.09) (Ord. passed 2-8-82)
§ 135.19 INTERFERENCE WITH ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, individually or as the representative
of any person, firm, or corporation, to interfere in any way with the
enforcement of any of the terms or provisions of this
subchapter.
('81 Code, § 136.10) (Ord. passed 2-8-82)
§ 135.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
penalty is otherwise provided shall be subject to the penalty in §
130.99
   (B)   Whoever violates §§
135.13 through
135.16 of this chapter is guilty of a crime and upon conviction may be
imprisoned for not more than 30 days, fined not more than $500, or both.
However, no penalty shall exceed the penalty provided by state law for similar
offenses.
('81 Code, §§ 136.04 through 136.07) (Ord. passed 2-8-82)
CHAPTER 136: LITTERING
Section
General Provisions
   
136.01   Short title
   
136.02   Definitions
Littering Regulations
   
136.20   Litter in public places
   
136.21   Placement of litter in receptacles so as to prevent scattering
   
136.22   Sweeping litter into gutters prohibited
   
136.23   Merchant's duty to keep sidewalks free of litter
   
136.24   Litter thrown by persons in vehicle
   
136.25   Truck loads causing litter
   
136.26   Litter in parks, lakes and fountains
   
136.27   Dropping litter from aircraft
   
136.28   Posting notices prohibited
   
136.29   Litter on occupied private property; owner to maintain premises
   
136.30   Litter on vacant lots
   
136.31   Responsibility of advertisers to prevent litter
Commercial and Noncommercial Handbills
   
136.40   Throwing or distributing handbills in public place
   
136.41   Placing handbills on vehicles
   
136.42   Depositing handbills on uninhabited or vacant premises
   
136.43   Prohibiting distribution of handbills where properly posted
   
136.44   Distributing handbills at inhabited private premises; exemption
Administration and Enforcement
   
136.55   Notice to clear litter from private property
   
136.56   Noncompliance; removal procedures
   
136.57   Owner charged for removal
   
136.58   Nonpayment constitutes lien on property
 
   
136.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 136.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and maybe cited as the “Town Anti-Litter
Ordinance.”
('81 Code, § 94A.01) (Ord. passed 7-12-88)
§ 136.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE. A litter storage and collection receptacle as
required and authorized in the town's refuse collection chapter.
   COMMERCIAL HANDBILL. Any printed or written matter, any sample or device,
dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed or
otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature, including
but not limited to, matter contained in plastic bafs or containing plastic
material:
      (1)   Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity, or
things; or
      (2)   Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; or
      (3)   Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is
charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms of this clause
shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection taken for the
purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, when either of the same is held,
given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information which
is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public
peace, safety, and good order; provided, that nothing contained in this clause
shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving, or taking place of any
meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, without a
license, where such license is or may be required by any law of this state, or
under any ordinance of this town; or
      (4)   Which, containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is
predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or
circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of any
person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
   GARBAGE. Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.
   LITTER.  GARBAGE, REFUSE, RUBBISH as defined herein and all other waste
material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a
danger to public health, safety and welfare.
   NEWSPAPER. Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law,
any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of the United States
in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and
recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and, in
addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine
regularly published with not less than four issues per year, and sold to the
public.
   NON-COMMERCIAL HANDBILL. Any printed or written matter, any sample, or
device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper,
booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any
matter of literature, including, but not limited to, matter contained in
plastic bags or containing plastic material, not included in the aforesaid
definitions of a COMMERCIAL HANDBILL or NEWSPAPER.
   PARK. A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center, or any
other public area in the town, owned or used by the town and devoted to active
or passive recreation.
   PRIVATE PREMISES. Any dwelling, house, building, or other structure,
designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and
shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule, or
mailbox belonging to, or appurtenant to, such dwelling, house, building, or
other structure.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys, or other
public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds, and
buildings.
   REFUSE. All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body
wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles, and solid market and industrial wastes.
   RUBBISH. Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin
cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, and similar
materials.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is, or
may be, transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively
upon stationary rails or tracks.
('81 Code, § 94A.02) (Ord. passed 7-12-88; Am. Ord. 22068, passed 1-10-23)
LITTERING REGULATIONS
§ 136.20 LITTER IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   No person shall throw or deposit litter in, or upon, any street, sidewalk,
or other public place within the town except in public receptacles or in
authorized private receptacles for collection.
('81 Code, § 94A.03) (Ord. passed 7-12-88) Penalty, see §
136.99
§ 136.21 PLACEMENT OF LITTER IN RECEPTACLES SO AS TO PREVENT SCATTERING.
   Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or
deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place or
upon private property.
('81 Code, § 94A.04) (Ord. passed 7-12-88)
§ 136.22 SWEEPING LITTER INTO GUTTERS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public
place within the town the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or
from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying
property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter.
('81 Code, § 94A.05) (Ord. passed 7-12-88) Penalty, see §
136.99
§ 136.23 MERCHANT'S DUTY TO KEEP SIDEWALKS FREE OF LITTER.
   No person owning a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any
gutter, street, or other public place within the town the accumulation of
litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or
driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business within the town shall
keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises free of litter.
('81 Code, § 94A.06) (Ord. passed 7-12-88) Penalty, see §
136.99
§ 136.24 LITTER THROWN BY PERSONS IN VEHICLE.
   No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or other public place within the town, or upon private
property.
('81 Code, § 94A.07) (Ord. passed 7-12-88) Penalty, see §
136.99
§ 136.25 TRUCK LOADS CAUSING LITTER.
   No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the town
unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load,
contents, or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley, or
other public place. Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck
within the town, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any
street, alley, or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter, or
foreign matter of any kind.
('81 Code, § 94A.08) (Ord. passed 7-12-88) Penalty, see §
136.99
§ 136.26 LITTER IN PARKS, LAKES AND FOUNTAINS.
   (A)   No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the town
except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the
park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not
provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person
responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided
herein.
('81 Code, § 94A.09)
   (B)   No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake,
stream, bay, or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the town.
('81 Code, § 94A.10)
(Ord. passed 7-12-88) Penalty, see §
136.99
§ 136.27 DROPPING LITTER FROM AIRCRAFT.
   No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop, or deposit within the town
any litter, handbill, or any other object.
('81 Code, § 94A.16) (Ord. passed 7-12-88) Penalty, see §
136.99
§ 136.28 POSTING NOTICES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall post or affix, or cause to be posted or affixed, any notice,
poster, or other paper or device, calculated to attract the attention of the
public, to any lamp post, public utility pole or shade tree, or upon any public
structure or building, except as may be authorized or required by law.
('81 Code, § 94A.17) (Ord. passed 7-12-88) Penalty, see §
136.99
§ 136.29 LITTER ON OCCUPIED PRIVATE PROPERTY; OWNER TO MAINTAIN PREMISES.
   (A)   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private
property within the town, whether owned by such person or not, except that the
owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private
receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from
being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, or other
public place or upon private property. ('81 Code, § 94A.18)
   (B)   The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all
times maintain the premises free of litter. Provided, however, that this
section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private
receptacles for collection.
('81 Code, § 94A.19)
(Ord. passed 7-12-88) Penalty, see §
136.99
§ 136.30 LITTER ON VACANT LOTS.
   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the town whether owned by such person or not.
('81 Code, § 94A.20) (Ord. passed 7-12-88) Penalty, see §
136.99
§ 136.31 RESPONSIBILITY OF ADVERTISERS TO PREVENT LITTER.
   Every person distributing commercial advertising and information material
shall be responsible for keeping such materials from littering public or
private property.
(Ord. 22067, passed 1-10-23)
COMMERCIAL AND NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILLS
§ 136.40 THROWING OR DISTRIBUTING HANDBILLS IN PUBLIC PLACE.
   No person shall throw or deposit, or cause to be thrown or deposited, any
commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other
public place within the town. Nor shall any person hand out or distribute or
sell any commercial handbill in any public place. Provided, however, that it
shall not be unlawful on any sidewalk, street, or other public place within the
town for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver
thereof, any noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it.
('81 Code, § 94A.11) (Ord. passed 7-12-88) Penalty, see §
136.99
§ 136.41 PLACING HANDBILLS ON VEHICLES.
   No person shall throw or deposit, or cause to be thrown or deposited, any
commercial or non- commercial handbill in or upon any vehicle. Provided,
however, that it shall not be unlawful in any public place for a person to hand
out or distribute without charge to the receiver thereof, a non-commercial
handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept it.
('81 Code, § 94A.11) (Ord. passed 7-12-88) Penalty, see §
136.99
§ 136.42 DEPOSITING HANDBILLS ON UNINHABITED OR VACANT PREMISES.
   No person shall throw or deposit, or cause to be thrown or deposited, any
commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are
temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant.
('81 Code, § 94A.13) (Ord. passed 7-12-88) Penalty, see §
136.99
§ 136.43 PROHIBITING DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS WHERE PROPERLY POSTED.
   No person shall throw, deposit, or distribute, or cause to be thrown,
deposited or distributed, any commercial or noncommercial handbill upon any
private premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is
placed on the premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof, a
sign bearing the words: “No Trespassing,” “No Peddlers or Agents,” “No
Advertisement,” or any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the
occupants of the premises do not desire to be molested or have their right of
privacy disturbed, or to have any such handbills left upon such premises.
('81 Code, § 94A.14) (Ord. passed 7-12-88) Penalty, see §
136.99
§ 136.44 DISTRIBUTING HANDBILLS AT INHABITED PRIVATE PREMISES; EXEMPTION.
   (A)   No person shall throw, deposit, or distribute, or cause to be thrown,
deposited, or distributed, any commercial or noncommercial handbill in, or
upon, private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting
any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant, or other person then present
in or upon such premises. Provided, however, that in the case of inhabited
private premises which are not posted, as provided in this chapter, such
person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place
or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises, if
such handbill is so placed on the front entry door of the premises and affixed
in a manner as to prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such
premises or sidewalks, streets, or other public places, and such handbills
shall not be affixed in any manner which causes any damage to the premises.
Unless otherwise requested by the occupant of the premises, the depositing of
handbills in accordance with this section shall not be before 9:00 a.m. and
after 6:00 p.m. during Eastern Standard Time and after 7:00 p.m. during
Daylight Savings Time.
   (B)   Exemption for mail and newspapers. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the USPS, nor to newspapers (as
defined herein) except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in
such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements
upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place or upon private property.
('81 Code, § 94A.15) (Ord. passed 7-12-88; Am. Ord. 23039, passed 1-11-24)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 136.55 NOTICE TO CLEAR LITTER FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   The Chief of Police is authorized and empowered to notify the owner of any
open or vacant private property within the town or the agent of such owner to
properly dispose of litter located on such owner's property which is dangerous
to public health, safety, or welfare. Such notice shall be addressed by
registered mail, addressed to the owner at his or her last known address.
('81 Code, § 94A.21(A)) (Ord. passed 7-12-88)
§ 136.56 NONCOMPLIANCE; REMOVAL PROCEDURES.
   Upon failure, neglect, or refusal of any owner or agent so notified, to
properly dispose of litter dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare
within 14 days after receipt of written notice provided for in §
136.55 above, or within 14 days after the date of such notice in the event the
same is returned to Chief of Police because of the inability to make delivery
thereof, provided the same was properly addressed to the last known address of
such owner or agent, the Chief of Police is authorized and empowered to pay for
the disposing of such litter or to order its disposal by the town.
('81 Code, § 94A.21(B)) (Ord. passed 7-12-88)
§ 136.57 OWNER CHARGED FOR REMOVAL.
   When the town has effected the removal of such dangerous litter or has paid
for its removal, the actual cost thereof, plus accrued interest at the rate of
6% per annum from the date of the completion of the work, if not paid by the
owner prior thereto, shall be charged to the owner, shall constitute a lien
against the owner's property, and shall be enforced in accordance with §
136.58.
('81 Code, § 94A.21(C)) (Ord. passed 7-12-88; Am. Ord. 23016, passed 5-9-23)
§ 136.58 NONPAYMENT CONSTITUTES LIEN ON PROPERTY.
   Where the full amount due the town is not paid by such owner within 30 days
after the disposal of such litter, as provided for in §§
136.55 and
136.56 above, then, and in that case, the Chief of Police shall cause to be
recorded in the Clerk of Court's Office for the county a sworn statement
showing the cost and expense incurred for the work, the date the work was done,
and the location of the property on which the work was done. The recordation of
such sworn statement shall constitute a lien and privilege on the property, and
shall remain in full force and effect for the amount due in principal and
interest, plus costs of court, if any, for collection, until final payment has
been made. The costs and expenses shall be collected in the manner fixed by law
for the collection of taxes and, further, shall be subjected to a delinquent
penalty of 5% in the event same is not paid in full on or before the date of
the tax bill upon which the charges appears become delinquent. Sworn statements
recorded in accordance with the provisions hereof shall be prima facie evidence
that all legal formalities have been complied with and that the work was done
properly and satisfactorily, and shall be full notice to every person concerned
that the amount of the statement, plus interest, constitutes a charge against
the property designated or described in the statement and that the same is due
and collectible by law.
('81 Code, § 94A.21(D)) (Ord. passed 7-12-88)
§ 136.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   In addition to any other applicable penalties allowable under this
chapter, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in
an amount not exceeding $500, or imprisoned in the county jail for a period not
exceeding 30 days, or both fined and imprisoned. However, no penalty shall
exceed the penalty provided by state law for similar offenses. Each day such
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
   (B)   If a person violates this chapter with the intent to intimidate or
threaten an owner, resident, or invitee of such property because of the actual
or perceived race, color, creed, religion, ancestry, gender, sexual
orientation, gender identity, physical or mental disability, or national origin
of any person and such litter or handbill contains a credible threat, the
person shall be guilty of a separate misdemeanor offense and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding $500 or imprisonment for a
period of not more than 30 days, or both. For the purposes of this section,
CREDIBLE THREAT means a verbal or nonverbal threat that places the person who
is the target of the threat in reasonable fear for his or her safety or the
safety of his or her family members or individuals closely associated with the
person, and which is made with the apparent ability to carry out the threat to
cause such harm. It is not necessary to prove that the person making the threat
had the intent to actually carry out the threat.
('81 Code, § 94A.22) (Ord. passed 7-12-88; Am. Ord. 23016, passed 5-9-23; Am.
Ord. 23039, passed 1-11-24)
CHAPTER 137: GASOLINE AND/OR DIESEL FUEL DRIVE OFFS
Section
   
137.01   Findings
   
137.02   Authority
   
137.03   Jurisdiction
   
137.04   Payment in advance required for gasoline and/or diesel fuel sold
 
   
137.99   Penalty
§ 137.01 FINDINGS.
   The Town Council makes the following findings:
   (A)   A number of motorists in the town are driving into business
establishments with gasoline and/or diesel fuel pumps, filling their vehicles
and/or containers with gasoline or diesel fuel, and thereafter immediately
driving off without paying for same.
   (B)   For the year 2002, town crime statistics evidence approximately 155
larcenies as a result of gas/diesel fuel drive offs without paying.
   (C)   The stated level of crime results in significant man-hours/time
extended by Town Police Officers, along with the administrative backup
associated therewith.
   (D)   The stated man-hours/time by the town's Police Department detracts
from proactive policing opportunities in regard to other community matters and
more serious crimes.
   (E)   The stated level of crime adversely impacts the town's uniform crime
reporting statistics, along with the negative fallout therefrom.
   (F)   The stated level of crime results in significant costs to, and monies
being paid by, the town and its citizens/taxpayers.
   (G)   The stated level of crime with gas/diesel fuel drive offs without
paying seriously and significantly adversely impacts the revenues of local
business owners who own and operate business establishments involving the sale
of gasoline and/or diesel fuel.
   (H)   The stated matters are of serious concern and should now be addressed
and eliminated, if possible.
   (I)   This type of crime with its many adverse impacts can be addressed and,
in fact, eliminated through the adoption of a zero tolerance policy.
   (J)   A zero tolerance policy in regard to this problem could be
accomplished through the adoption of a payment in advance requirement for
gasoline and diesel fuel sold throughout the town.
   (K)   Such a zero tolerance policy is imperative and in the best interests
of the town and its citizens and, as such, the same is adopted along with this
chapter.
(Ord. 03078, passed 1-13-04)
§ 137.02 AUTHORITY.
   The provisions of these regulations, in their interpretation and
application, are requirements adopted for the promotion of the public safety
and welfare, and general convenience, pursuant to the police powers of
municipalities granted by state legislation, including the State Home Rule Act,
construed in accordance with the provisions of the South Carolina State
Constitution and the South Carolina Code of Laws.
(Ord. 03078, passed 1-13-04)
§ 137.03 JURISDICTION.
   The regulations set forth herein shall apply to all business establishments
with gasoline and/or diesel fuel pumps located thereon, engaged in the selling
of gasoline and/or diesel fuel, and located in the corporate limits of the
town.
(Ord. 03078, passed 1-13-04)
§ 137.04 PAYMENT IN ADVANCE REQUIRED FOR GASOLINE AND/OR DIESEL FUEL SOLD.
   (A)   All business establishments with gasoline and/or diesel fuel pumps
located thereon must require full payment in advance for any quantity of
gasoline or diesel fuel sold at any time.
   (B)   This requires the business establishment and its representatives to
receive payment in full prior to activating the gasoline or diesel fuel pumping
device.
   (C)   Payment includes purchase by any legal means: cash, credit card, debit
card, checks or otherwise.
(Ord. 03078, passed 1-13-04) Penalty, see §
137.99
§ 137.99 PENALTY.
   Any person or business establishment who violates any provision of this
chapter shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500 for each offense.
(Ord. 03078, passed 1-13-04)
CHAPTER 138: SMOKING AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS
Section
   
138.01   Findings
   
138.02   Intent
   
138.03   Definitions
   
138.04   Prohibition of smoking in the workplace
   
138.05   Smoking restrictions inapplicable
   
138.06   Exceptions
   
138.07   Posting of signs
   
138.08   Jurisdiction, enforcement and penalties
   
138.09   Non-retaliation
   
138.10   Conflict with other laws, ordinances or regulations
   
138.11   Waivers
 
   
138.99   Penalty
§ 138.01 FINDINGS.
   Town Council makes the following findings relative to the adoption of this
chapter:
   (A)   The town is an incorporated municipality, and as such, possesses all
powers granted to municipalities by the Constitution and the laws of the State
of South Carolina, including the powers enumerated in S.C. Code § 5-7-30
relating to regulating streets, markets, and public health; and
   (B)   Numerous studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major contributor
to indoor air pollution, and that breathing secondhand smoke (also known as
environmental tobacco smoke) is a cause of disease in healthy nonsmokers,
including heart disease, stroke, respiratory disease, and lung cancer.
      (1)   The National Cancer Institute has determined that secondhand smoke
is responsible for the early deaths of up to 65,000 Americans annually.
      (2)   The Surgeon General has declared that:
         (a)   Secondhand smoke causes disease and premature death in
nonsmokers exposed to smoke;
         (b)   Children exposed to secondhand smoke have an increased risk for
sudden death syndrome, acute respiratory infections, ear problems, and more
severe asthma;
         (c)   Adults exposed to secondhand smoke have a higher risk of
coronary heart disease and lung cancer;
         (d)   There is no safe level of exposure to secondhand smoke; and
         (e)   Separating smoking and nonsmoking sections of indoor areas does
not sufficiently remove the threats of secondhand smoke in enclosed areas; and
   (C)   A significant amount of secondhand smoke exposure occurs in the
workplace. Studies have shown that employees who work in smoke-filled
businesses suffer a 25-50% higher risk of heart attack and higher rates of
death from cardiovascular disease and cancer, as well as increased acute
respiratory disease and measurable decrease in lung function; and
   (D)   Studies have also shown that smoke-filled workplaces result in higher
worker absenteeism due to respiratory disease, lower productivity, higher
cleaning and maintenance costs, increased health insurance rates, and increased
liability claims for diseases related to exposure to secondhand smoke; and
   (E)   There are laws, ordinances and regulations in place that protect
workers from other environmental hazards, including Class A carcinogens,
asbestos, arsenic and benzene, but none which regulate exposure to
environmental tobacco smoke; and
   (F)   Prohibiting smoking in the workplace increases public awareness of the
negative health effects of smoking, reduces the social acceptability of
smoking, and reduces harm to children and other nonsmokers; and
   (G)   The South Carolina General Assembly, in S.C. Code §§ 44-95-10 et seq.
(the “Clean Indoor Air Act of 1990"), imposed certain limitations on smoking.
      (1)   For example, it limited smoking in government buildings (the
definition of which includes city-owned buildings), except where the owner of
such building shall designate smoking areas.
      (2)   Town Council has now determined that additional regulation of
smoking in areas beyond those addressed in the Clean Indoor Air Act of 1990 is
appropriate, in furtherance of its duty to protect the health of its citizens
and employees in the workplace, and therefore enacts this chapter.
(Ord. 07007, passed 6-12-07)
§ 138.02 INTENT.
   Town Council finds that it is in the best interest of the people of this
town to protect nonsmokers from involuntary exposure to environmental tobacco
smoke in the workplace. Therefore, Town Council declares that the purpose of
this act is to preserve and improve the health, comfort and environment of the
people of this town by limiting exposure to tobacco smoke in the workplace.
(Ord. 07007, passed 6-12-07)
§ 138.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS AGENT. An individual who has been designated by the owner or
operator of any  establishment to be the manager or otherwise in charge of the
establishment.
   BUSINESS LICENSE OFFICIAL. The Town of Mount Pleasant Business License
Official.
   CODE ENFORCER. The designated Code Enforcer employee(s) of the Town of Mount
Pleasant.
   ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE. An electronic and/or battery operated device, the
use of which may resemble smoking, which can be used to deliver an inhaled dose
of nicotine or other substances, and includes any such device, whether
manufactured, distributed, marketed or sold as an electronic cigarette, an
electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic
hookah, or any other product name or descriptor; however, it does not include
any product specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug
Administration for the use of the mitigation, treatment or prevention of
disease.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person who performs services for an employer in return for
wages, profit or other valuable consideration.
   EMPLOYER. Any person, partnership, association, corporation, trust, school,
college, university or other educational institution, nonprofit entity or other
organization, including any public or private employer that employs one or more
persons.
   ENCLOSED. A space bounded by walls (with or without windows) continuous from
floor to ceiling and enclosed by doors, including but not limited to, offices,
rooms, foyers, waiting areas and halls.
   ENVIRONMENTAL TOBACCO SMOKE (ETS) or SECONDHAND SMOKE. The complex mixture
formed from the escaping smoke of a burning tobacco product (termed as “side
stream smoke”) and smoke exhaled by the smoker. Exposure to ETS is also
frequently referred to as “passive smoking,” “secondhand smoking” or
“involuntary smoking.”
   FIRE DEPARTMENT. The Town of Mount Pleasant Fire Department.
   POLICE DEPARTMENT. The Town of Mount Pleasant Police Department.
   PUBLIC BUILDING. Any building owned, operated or leased by the town.
   RETAIL TOBACCO STORE. Any establishment that is not required to possess a
retail food permit whose primary purpose is to sell or offer for sale to
consumers, but not for resale, tobacco products and paraphernalia, in which the
sale of alcohol constitutes no more than 10% of gross revenue, and to which the
entry of persons under the age of 18 is prohibited at all times.
   SMOKING. The inhaling, exhaling, burning, lighting or carrying of a lighted
cigarette, cigar, pipe, or similar device or any other lighted tobacco product.
SMOKING also includes the use of any electronic smoking device or the use of
any oral smoking device that generates smoke or which creates vapor, in any
manner or in any form. It shall be a violation of this chapter to use an
electronic smoking device in any place within the town where smoking of tobacco
products is prohibited by law.
   SMOKING MATERIALS includes cigars, cigarettes and all other manner of
smoking devices intended to be used for the purpose of inhaling, burning,
carrying or exhaling lighted tobacco products.
   WORK SPACE or WORK SPACES. Any enclosed area occupied by an employee during
the course of his or her employment, including but not limited to: offices,
customer service areas, common areas, hallways, waiting areas, restrooms,
lounges and eating areas.
   WORKPLACE. Any enclosed indoor area, structure, building, facility or any
portion thereof at which one or more employee(s) perform services for their
employer, including but not limited to: retail food stores, retail stores,
restaurants, cabarets, cafes, public or private clubs, pool halls and bowling
alleys.
(Ord. 07007, passed 6-12-07; Am. Ord. 08071, passed 12-9-08; Am. Ord. 09035,
passed 7-14-09; Am. Ord. 14090, passed 1-13-15; Am. Ord. 18017, passed 3-14-18)
§ 138.04 PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN THE WORKPLACE.
   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the employer to provide a smoke-free
environment for all employees working in an enclosed workplace. Each employer
shall adopt, distribute and implement a written policy prohibiting smoking in
the workplace in accordance with this section.
   (B)   Smoking shall be prohibited in all work spaces in a workplace. This
includes all common work areas, auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting
room, private offices, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employee
lounges, staircases, restrooms and all other enclosed areas in the workplace.
   (C)   The written smoking policy shall be adopted and distributed to all
employees within four weeks of the effective date of this section, or within
four weeks of the commencement of business operations. A copy of the policy
shall be conspicuously posted in all facilities or areas of the workplace.
(Ord. 07007, passed 6-12-07) Penalty, see §
138.99
§ 138.05 SMOKING RESTRICTIONS INAPPLICABLE.
   In providing for the inapplicability of this chapter to the following
divisions (A) through (G), it is specifically recognized that such locations
are addressed in the Clean Indoor Air Act, enacted by the General Assembly of
South Carolina and codified in S.C. Code §§ 44-95-10 et seq. Therefore, this
chapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   Public schools and preschools, including libraries, where routine or
regular kindergarten, elementary, or secondary educational classes are held;
   (B)   All other indoor facilities providing children's services to the
extent that smoking is prohibited in the facility by federal law and all other
child day care facilities, as defined in S.C. Code § 20-7-2700, which are
listed pursuant to Sub-article 11, Article 13, Chapter 7, of Title 20 of the
South Carolina Code;
   (C)   Health care facilities as defined in S.C. Code § 44-7-130;
   (D)   Government buildings as defined in S.C. Code § 44-95-20(4), except to
the extent regulation by the town is authorized therein;
   (E)   Elevators;
   (F)   Public transportation vehicles, except for taxicabs;
   (G)   Arenas and auditoriums of public theaters or public performing art
centers.
(Ord. 07007, passed 6-12-07)
§ 138.06 EXCEPTIONS.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of §
138.04 herein, smoking may be permitted in the following places and/or
circumstances:
   (A)   Private residences;
   (B)   Hotel, motel, inn, bed and breakfast and lodging home rooms that are
rented to guests, designated as “smoking room” ("rooms"); provided that the
total percentage of such rooms does not exceed 25% in such establishment. A
room so designated shall have signs posted indicating that smoking is allowed
therein;
   (C)   Performers upon a stage, provided that the smoking is part of the
theatrical production being performed;
   (D)   Religious ceremonies where smoking is part of the ritual;
   (E)   Medical research facilities; and
   (F)   Retail tobacco stores.
(Ord. 07007, passed 6-12-07; Am. Ord. 09035, passed 7-14-09)
§ 138.07 POSTING OF SIGNS.
   The owner, manager or person in control of an establishment or area in which
smoking is prohibited pursuant to this section shall post a conspicuous sign at
the main entrance to the establishment or area. The sign shall contain the
words “No Smoking” and the universal symbol for no smoking.
(Ord. 07007, passed 6-12-07) Penalty, see §
138.99
§ 138.08 JURISDICTION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Jurisdiction. The Business License Official shall collect the
penalties due hereunder for any infraction(s) of the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   Enforcement. The Police Department, Fire Department and Code Enforcer
of the town shall have the power to enforce the provisions of this chapter by
using an infraction notice.
   (C)   Penalties for infractions.
      (1)   A person, employee or employer who smokes in an area where smoking
is prohibited by the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an
infraction, punishable by a fine of $25.
      (2)   A person, employee or employer who owns, manages, operates, or
otherwise controls a workplace or work space, and who fails to comply with the
provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a
fine of $25.
      (3)   In addition to the fines established hereunder, repeated violations
of this chapter by a person, employee or employer who owns, manages, operates,
or otherwise controls a workplace or work space, or the failure of a person,
employee or employer who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a
workplace or work space to timely pay the penalty for an infraction, may result
in the suspension or revocation of any occupancy permit or business license
issued to the person, employee or employer for the premises on which the
infraction occurred.
      (4)   Any infraction under this chapter is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance, which may be abated by the town by a restraining order, preliminary
and permanent injunction, or other means provided for by law, and the town may
take action to recover the costs of the nuisance abatement.
      (5)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day that an
infraction occurs or continues.
      (6)   In addition to or lieu of assessing a civil penalty, the Town may
institute an action in the Court of Common Pleas for Charleston County for an
injunction to require compliance with this chapter or pursue any other remedy,
as may be permitted by law.
   (D)   Any person, employee or employer cited for an infraction of this
chapter may, within five days of the date of the infraction notice, file an
administrative appeal with the Town Administrator, or his or her designee.
      (1)   Within 30 days of receiving an appeal, the Town Administrator, or
his or her designee, shall
conduct a hearing to determine if an infraction occurred. The rules of evidence
shall not apply.
      (2)   Any person, employee or employer aggrieved by a determination of
the Town Administrator, or his or her designee, may, within 30 days of receipt
of the decision, appeal to the Circuit Court for Charleston County.
      (3)   Failure to timely file an administrative appeal or appeal to the
circuit court shall be deemed a waiver of the right to appeal.
      (4)   The filing of an administrative appeal or an appeal to the circuit
court shall not act as a stay of the town's rights to institute civil
proceedings to compel compliance with this chapter, or to institute proceedings
to suspend or revoke a certificate of occupancy or business license.
   (E)   A business license shall not be renewed if there are delinquent
penalties owed by an employer pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 07007, passed 6-12-07; Am. Ord. 08071, passed 12-9-08)
§ 138.09 NON-RETALIATION.
   No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, refuse to serve or in
any manner retaliate or take any adverse personnel action against any employee,
applicant, customer or person because such employee, applicant, customer or
person takes any action in furtherance of the enforcement of this chapter, or
exercises any right conferred by this chapter.
(Ord. 07007, passed 6-12-07) Penalty, see §
138.99
§ 138.10 CONFLICT WITH OTHER LAWS, ORDINANCES OR REGULATIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to amend or repeal any applicable
fire, health or other law, ordinance or regulation so as to permit smoking in
areas where it is prohibited by such applicable fire, health or other law,
ordinance or regulation.
(Ord. 07007, passed 6-12-07)
§ 138.11 WAIVERS.
   (A)   Any employer, owner, manager or other person having control of a
workplace subject to this chapter may apply to the Town Administrator, or his
or her designee, for a waiver of any provision of this regulation, for a period
not to exceed 90 days.
   (B)   All waivers shall be submitted to the Town Administrator, or his or
her designee, on an application form provided by such Administrator.
   (C)   The decision to grant such a waiver shall be at the sole discretion of
the Town Administrator, or his or her designee, based upon his or her
determination that the following have been demonstrated: reasonable efforts
have been made to comply with this regulation, and additional time will likely
bring about compliance.
   (D)   No employer, owner, manager or other person having control of a
workplace shall be granted more than one waiver.
(Ord. 07007, passed 6-12-07; Am. Ord. 07073, passed 11-13-07)
§ 138.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to a maximum fine of not more than $100, plus all other state assessments,
court charges and fees.
   (B)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day that a
violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 07007, passed 6-12-07)
CHAPTER 139: RESERVED
CHAPTER 140: WATERCRAFT AND FLOATING STRUCTURES  
Section
   
140.01   Short title
   
140.02   Authority
   
140.03   Definitions
   
140.04   Declaration of policy
   
140.05   Scope
   
140.06   Administration
   
140.07   Unlawful to abandon
   
140.08   Watercraft titles
   
140.09   Exceptions to titling
   
140.10   Evidence of ownership
   
140.11   Seizure of certain watercraft; notice of seizure and time for removal;
forfeiture and disposal
   
140.12   Removal
   
140.13   Policies and procedures
   
140.14   Responsibility for costs; lien
   
140.15   Limitation of liability
   
140.16   Mooring permit required
   
140.17   Duty of owners and the like to keep watercraft and floating structures
clean and clear of navigable waters
§ 140.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the Watercraft and Floating Structures
Ordinance of the town.
(Ord. 08068, passed 2-10-09; Am. Ord. 24013, passed 4-10-24)
§ 140.02 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety and
welfare and general convenience, pursuant to the police powers of
municipalities generated by state legislation, including the State Home Rule
Act, construed in accordance with the provisions of the South Carolina State
Constitution and the South Carolina Code of Laws, and pursuant to the authority
conferred by Title 50 of the South Carolina Code of Laws, specifically S.C.
Code § 50-21-30(C)(1).
(Ord. 08068, passed 2-10-09; Am. Ord. 24013, passed 4-10-24)
§ 140.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDON or ABANDONED. Any watercraft that has been moored, stranded,
wrecked, sinking or sunk, and has been left unattended for longer than 45 days.
A watercraft is not abandoned if it is legally moored or is on private
property.
   BOAT. A vessel.
   DEPARTMENT. The South Carolina Department of Natural Resources.
   FLOATING STRUCTURE. A man-made object other than a watercraft that is
capable of flotation and that is not authorized by a permit issued by an agency
of the state.
   LEGALLY MOORED. Any watercraft or floating structure that is not abandoned
and has been moored pursuant to this chapter.
   MARINA.  A facility that provides mooring or dry storage for watercraft.
   OUTBOARD MOTOR. A combustion engine or electric propulsion system that is
used to propel a watercraft, and is detachable from the watercraft as a unit.
No outboard motor of less than five horsepower or its equivalent is required to
be titled under this chapter.
   OWNER. A person, other than a lienholder, who claims lawful possession of a
vessel or outboard motor by virtue of legal title or equitable interest in it
that entitles him or her to possession.
   PERSON. An individual, a partnership, a firm, a corporation, an association
or other legal entity.
   TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE OF NUMBER. A temporary registration assigned to a
vessel to allow operation for a limited purpose.
   TOWN. The Town of Mount Pleasant, South Carolina.
   UNATTENDED. As it pertains to watercraft, means there are no observable
change in circumstances or evidence of being looked after or maintained in any
way, and no substantial change in location.
   USE. Operate, navigate or employ.
   VESSEL. Every description of watercraft, other than a seaplane regulated by
the federal government, used or capable of being used as a means of
transportation on water.
   WATERS OF THE TOWN. Waters within the territorial limits of the town, but
not on private lakes or ponds.
   WATERS OF THE STATE. Waters within the territorial limits of the state, but
not private lakes or ponds.
   WATERCRAFT. Anything used or capable of being used as a means of
transportation on the water, but does not include: a seaplane regulated by the
federal government; water skis, aquaplanes, surfboards, windsurfers, tubes,
rafts and similar devices; or anything that does not meet construction or
operational requirements of the state or federal government for watercraft.
(Ord. 08068, passed 2-10-09; Am. Ord. 24013, passed 4-10-24)
§ 140.04 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   It is the policy of the town to promote safety for persons and property in
and connected with the use, operation and enjoyment of vessels on the public
land and waters of the town and the state that are located within the
jurisdictional limits of the Town of Mount Pleasant.
(Ord. 08068, passed 2-10-09)
§ 140.05 SCOPE.
   The provisions of this chapter and other applicable laws of this state,
including but not necessarily limited to, Title 50 of the South Carolina Code
of Laws, shall govern all activity and matters related to abandoned watercraft
on the public land and waters of the town and the state that are located within
the jurisdictional limits of the Town of Mount Pleasant.
(Ord. 08068, passed 2-10-09)
§ 140.06 ADMINISTRATION.
   The administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall
be vested in the Police Department. Police officers are empowered to issue a
summons for appearance in court, or to make arrest for violations of this
chapter or any applicable rules and regulations prescribed under Title 50 of
the South Carolina Code of Laws.
(Ord. 08068, passed 2-10-09)
§ 140.07 UNLAWFUL TO ABANDON.
   (A)   It is unlawful to abandon a watercraft, floating structure or outboard
motor on the public land or waters of this state or the town, or on private
property without permission of the property owner. This section does not apply
to persons who abandon a watercraft in an emergency for the safety of the
person onboard. However, after the emergency is over, the owner and operator of
the abandoned watercraft shall make a bona fide attempt to recover the
watercraft.
   (B)   If a watercraft or floating structure is found to be in violation of
this chapter and the permit holder or owner fails to respond within 45 days,
this shall constitute abandonment.
   (C)   A person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, must be fined not less than $1,000 nor more
than $5,000, or imprisoned up to 30 days, or both. In addition, the owner must
remove the abandoned watercraft, floating structure or outboard motor within 14
days of conviction. The Town Municipal Court is vested with jurisdiction for
cases arising under this section.
   (D)   An abandoned watercraft, floating structure or outboard motor must be
removed at the risk and expense of its owner.
(Ord. 08068, passed 2-10-09; Am. Ord. 24013, passed 4-10-24)
§ 140.08 WATERCRAFT TITLES.
   Any watercraft or outboard motor, or both, held or principally used in this
state must be titled by the Department. An owner of a watercraft or outboard
motor titled in this state must notify the Department within 30 days if
ownership is transferred to another person or entity, or transferred out of
state or otherwise disposed.
(Ord. 08068, passed 2-10-09)
§ 140.09 EXCEPTIONS TO TITLING.
   Watercraft documented by the United States Coast Guard, or its predecessor
or successor agency, and water skis, aquaplanes, surfboards, windsurfers and
similar devices, and those watercraft propelled exclusively by human power are
not required to be titled.
(Ord. 08068, passed 2-10-09)
§ 140.10 EVIDENCE OF OWNERSHIP.
   (A)   A certificate of title to a watercraft or outboard motor is prima
facie evidence of ownership of a watercraft or outboard motor. All watercraft
and outboard motors subject to the titling requirements of this chapter must be
titled.
   (B)   No person may acquire a watercraft or outboard motor, subject to the
titling requirements of this chapter and Title 50 of the South Carolina Code of
Laws, without obtaining a certificate of title or, in the case of a new
watercraft or outboard motor, a manufacturer's or importer's statement of
origin reflecting the person acquiring the watercraft or outboard motor as the
original purchaser, as provided in this chapter and/or Title 50 of the South
Carolina Code of Laws. In the case of watercraft or outboard motors from other
jurisdictions that do not require titling, a bill of sale and proof of
registration may be substituted for the title.
   (C)   No person may dispose of a watercraft or outboard motor subject to the
titling provisions of this chapter and Title 50 of the South Carolina Code of
Laws, without transferring to the person acquiring the watercraft or outboard
motor a certificate of title reflecting the transfer of the watercraft or
outboard motor. In the case of new watercraft, a manufacturer's statement of
origin must be delivered to the purchaser. In the case of watercraft or
outboard motors from other states or foreign jurisdictions that do not title
such watercraft or outboard motors, a bill of sale and proof of registration
may be substituted.
(Ord. 08068, passed 2-10-09)
§ 140.11 SEIZURE OF CERTAIN WATERCRAFT; NOTICE OF SEIZURE AND TIME FOR REMOVAL;
FORFEITURE AND DISPOSAL.
   (A)   An illegally moored or anchored watercraft or floating structure, a
stolen or abandoned, junked, adrift, destroyed or salvaged watercraft, floating
structure or outboard motor, a watercraft, floating structure or outboard motor
for which the true owner is not determined, or a watercraft, floating structure
or outboard motor on which the manufacturer's or assigned serial number has
been destroyed, removed, covered, altered or defaced may be seized.
   (B)   Upon seizure of the watercraft, floating structure or outboard motor,
the town shall notify a person claiming an interest in it, and the person has
the right to prove his or her interest before the circuit court in the county
where the property was seized. If no action is filed within 60 days of
notification, the town may retain the property for official use or transfer it
to another public entity for official use, sell it at public auction, or, if
the watercraft, floating structure or outboard motor is determined to be
unsafe, destroy it. The proceeds from such sales must be used by the town for
administration of this chapter.
   (C)   When the town determines the owner of a seized watercraft, floating
structure or outboard motor and related marine equipment, it shall notify the
owner by certified mail of the procedure, the location, and the fact that he or
she has not less than 30 days from the date of the certified letter to remove
the equipment from the specific location designated by the town. If a security
interest has been perfected, the town must notify the lienholder by certified
mail, allowing 30 days to respond. Failure to respond within 30 days, or to
remove the watercraft, floating structure or outboard motor by the date
designated, forfeits the equipment to the town, to be used or disposed of
according to law.
(Ord. 08068, passed 2-10-09; Am. Ord. 24013, passed 4-10-24)
§ 140.12 REMOVAL.
   The town may elect to have an illegally moored or anchored watercraft or
floating structure, a stolen or abandoned, junked, adrift, destroyed, salvaged
or seized watercraft, floating structure or outboard motor remain in its found
location until such time as the owner of same is located, the watercraft,
floating structure or outboard motor is sold, or all courses of law herein are
fulfilled.
(Ord. 08068, passed 2-10-09; Am. Ord. 24013, passed 4-10-24)
§ 140.13 POLICIES AND PROCEDURES.
   In order to implement the provisions of this chapter, the Police Department
is authorized to establish written policies and procedures consistent with the
provisions herein and Title 50 of the South Carolina Code of Laws.
(Ord. 08068, passed 2-10-09)
§ 140.14 RESPONSIBILITY FOR COSTS; LIEN.
   (A)   The owner of a vessel or floating structure removed, under, this
section shall be responsible to the town for:
      (1)   Removal costs;
      (2)   Cleanup and disposal costs;
      (3)   Storage costs; and
      (4)   Reasonable costs and fees incurred by the town by enforcing this
section.
   (B)   Costs and fees for which an owner is responsible under this section
shall be a lien on the vessel or floating structure held by the town until such
costs are paid in full by the owner of the vessel or floating structure.
(Ord. 20071, passed 1-12-21; Am. Ord. 24013, passed 4-10-24)
§ 140.15 LIMITATION OF LIABILITY.
   The town shall not be liable to the owner of an abandoned vessel or floating
structure for any damages incurred during its removal, storage or as a result
of actions taken to eliminate risks to public health or safety caused by the
condition of the vessel or floating structure, in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 20071, passed 1-12-21; Am. Ord. 24013, passed 4-10-24)
§ 140.16 MOORING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any watercraft or floating structure that remains moored, anchored, or
otherwise located in any one five-mile radius on the waters of the town for
more than 14 consecutive days must obtain a permit from the Police Department.
   (B)   Pursuant to S.C. Code § 50-21-30(C)(2), notwithstanding S.C. Code § 5-
7-140(B), the town’s corporate limits where bordering on the high-watermark of
a navigable body of water, other than the Atlantic Ocean, are extended to the
center of the channel of the navigable body of water for the sole purpose of
enforcing this section.
   (C)   A person applying for a permit must provide the following information:
      (1)   Proof of ownership;
      (2)   Proof of current insurance;
      (3)   Proof of state registration or federal documentation;
      (4)   Name, address, and telephone number of the owner or permit holder
of the mooring buoy;
      (5)   Name, address, and telephone number of a local contact who can
respond to and has authority to take action on a vessel within 24 hours if
contacted by the town or other governmental agency;
      (6)   Description of mooring or anchoring techniques, and explanation of
its adequacy for location;
      (7)   Attestation that the vessel is neither derelict or abandoned;
      (8)   GPS location of the mooring site;
      (9)   An emergency plan detailing the plan to safely secure the vessel
during a named storm, hurricane, or other inclement weather condition;
      (10)   Attestation of whether or not the vessel will be slept on, and, if
slept on, a plan detailing regular weekly pump-outs and provisions for the
storage and disposal of any garbage or other waste.
   (D)   The cost of the permit shall not be more than $15.
   (E)   The person applying for the permit is legally responsible for
violations of this section.
   (F)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to watercraft or
floating structures that are:
      (1)   Moored to a dock or marina berth with permission from the dock or
berth owner;
      (2)   Moored to a mooring buoy that is permitted by the Department of
Health and Environmental Control with permission from the buoy owner; or
      (3)   Moored to a mooring buoy with permission from the buoy owner,
provided that the buoy is in the location as it existed on public waters on
June 30, 2021.
   (G)   Permitted watercraft and floating structures:
      (1)   May only be moored or anchored in the area provided on the permit;
      (2)   May not be anchored or moored within 500 yards of a boat landing,
community dock, public bridge, or marina, except with express written
permission of the owner of the boat landing, community dock, or marina;
      (3)   May not be moored or anchored or able to swing within 100 feet of
any other legally anchored or moored watercraft or floating structures or
permitted mooring, dock or marina without written permission of the owner;
      (4)   Must display current state, federal, or foreign registration, and
must provide official documentation of registration and ownership if requested
by a town police officer;
      (5)   Must be kept free of litter, debris, barnacles, algae, and other
unsightly growth. This requirement applies not only to removal of loose litter,
but to materials that already are, or become, trapped or pinned against
watercraft and floating structures.
      (6)   Must not be unsightly, derelict, abandoned, neglected, or
substantially dismantled, or improperly maintained, or be unable to be used for
navigation as intended;
      (7)   Must not be listing, aground, sinking, breaking its mooring or
anchor, dragging its mooring or anchor, or at risk of any of these, or is
otherwise unsuccessfully, improperly, or unsafely moored or anchored;
      (8)   Must have a contact listed on the permit able to respond to the
watercraft or floating structure within 24 hours of a police officer or other
government agency contacting or attempting to make contact;
      (9)   Must be equipped with a holding tank if slept on, and the owner
must provide the police officer with proof of regular weekly pump-outs upon
request;
      (10)   Must have provisions for the storage and disposal of any garbage
or other waste which is generated or accumulates;
      (11)   Must display proper anchor lights and must comply with federal and
state safety equipment requirements;
      (12)   Must be properly secured during hurricanes and storms to prevent
damage to others’ property;
      (13)   Must remain in the area provided on the permit unless the permit
holder notifies the Police Department, and the relocation is approved by the
town and amended on the permit;
      (14)   Must have liability insurance in the amount of $300,000 and
provide proof if requested by a town police officer.
   (H)   Permits may be denied for violation or non-compliance with the
provisions of this chapter or other federal, state, county or town laws
governing or related to the watercraft or floating structure. If a permit is
denied a person may reapply for a permit once they are in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and other federal, state, county and town laws
governing or related to the watercraft or floating structure.
   (I)   Permits must be renewed every 60 days and permit holders must notify
the Police Department within 24 hours of any changes to the information
provided in the permit application.
   (J)   Illegal mooring and anchoring.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any watercraft or floating structure to
remain moored, anchored, or otherwise located in any one five-mile radius on
the waters of the town for more than 14 consecutive days without first
obtaining a permit from the town’s Police Department as set forth in this
section herein.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful to attach a watercraft or floating structure
to a mooring ball, dock, or other floating structure without the express
permission of the owner.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful to attach a watercraft or floating structure
to a mooring ball, dock, or other floating structure marked for law enforcement
purposes or other use by the town.
      (4)   A person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, may be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding
$500 or serve a term not exceeding 30 days in jail or both. Each day a
violation of this section thereof shall continue shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ord. 24013, passed 4-10-24)
§ 140.17 DUTY OF OWNERS AND THE LIKE TO KEEP WATERCRAFT AND FLOATING STRUCTURES
CLEAN AND CLEAR OF NAVIGABLE WATERS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the owner, agent, occupant, or lessee of any
watercraft or floating structure to keep the watercraft or floating structure
free of litter, debris, barnacles, algae, and other unsightly growth, including
litter or debris that becomes trapped or pinned against any part of the
watercraft or floating structure.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to cause or allow any litter from a watercraft or
floating structure to enter into the waters or lands of the town.
   (C)   If an owner, agent, occupant, or lessee of any watercraft or floating
structure fails to remove litter, debris, barnacles, algae, or other unsightly
growth, including litter or debris that becomes trapped or pinned against any
part of the watercraft or floating structure, the Police Department shall serve
written notice upon the owner, agent occupant, and/or lessee to correct the
violation within five days.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful to attach a watercraft or floating structure to a
mooring ball, dock, or other floating structure which blocks or impedes other
watercraft or floating structures from navigating waters of the town.
   (E)   A person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, may be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding
$500 or serve a term not exceeding 30 days in jail or both. Each day a
violation of this section thereof shall continue shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ord. 24013, passed 4-10-24)
CHAPTER 141: PROHIBITED ACTIVITY AT TOWN-OWNED PARKS
Section
   
141.01   Purpose
   
141.02   Hours
   
141.03   Prohibited activity
 
   
141.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   General regulations for Mount Pleasant Memorial Waterfront Park special
events, see
Ch. 97
   Special events, see
Ch. 116
§ 141.01 PURPOSE.
   The town takes pride in its many designated park areas, including Mount
Pleasant Memorial Waterfront Park (MWP), Shem Creek Park (SCP) and others, A
high volume of tourists and local use demands close attention to safety and
concern for others. As such, this chapter is promulgated pursuant to the town’s
police powers to ensure the safety and well-being of all users of town-owned
parks.
(Ord. 09034, passed 7-14-09: Am. Ord. 15027, passed 4-14-15)
§ 141.02 HOURS.
   (A)   The MWP shall be closed between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.,
unless there is a special function or otherwise changed by the town.
   (B)   The SCP shall be closed between the hours of 12:00 a.m. (midnight) and
5:00 a.m. Boats shall not be moored at the pier when the park is closed, unless
specific permission has been granted in writing by the Town Administrator or
his or her designee.
(Ord. 09034, passed 7-14-09: Am. Ord. 15027, passed 4-14-15)
§ 141.03 PROHIBITED ACTIVITY.
   (A)   Fireworks and weapons.
      (1)   No person shall possess, discharge, or set off any fireworks,
weapons as defined in §
132.20 of
Chapter 132 of this code, or other explosive devices at town-owned parks,
unless the same is allowed pursuant to a town-approved or sponsored event.
Firearms are specifically not included under the term weapons for purposes of
this division.*
      (2)   No person shall discharge or set off any firearm, unless the same
is allowed pursuant to a town-approved special event.*
      (3)   This section does not apply to law enforcement officers in the
discharge of their duties as law enforcement officers.
      (4)   *Note that the South Carolina Code of Laws regulates the transfer,
ownership, possession, carrying and transportation of firearms.
   (B)   Solicitation.  No person shall solicit contri- butions at town-owned
parks without the express, written approval of the Town Administrator or his or
her designee.
   (C)   Audio devices. No person shall play an audio device, such as a
television set, radio, record or tape player or any like item, at such a volume
as to disturb any person at a town-owned park, unless part of an approved
special event pursuant to
Chapter 97.
   (D)   Storage. No person shall store any goods, material, vehicle, or other
property at town-owned parks without the consent of the town.
   (E)   Bands, concerts. No band or group of musicians shall perform in or
upon town-owned parks, unless part of a town-sponsored event or an approved
special event pursuant to
Chapter 97, or if part or all of a particular facility at the MWP is rented and
live music is allowed pursuant to the rental agreement. No person shall
electronically amplify the sound of musical instruments at town-owned parks
without an approved special event permit pursuant to
Chapter 97.
   (F)   Treasure hunting. Metal detecting and/or digging at town-owned parks
is prohibited.
   (G)   Alcoholic beverages.  No person shall possess in an open container or
consume any beer, wine, or alcoholic beverage at town-owned parks, except as
follows:
      (1)   Part or all of a particular facility at the MWP is rented and
alcoholic beverages are allowed pursuant to the rental agreement.
      (2)   A town-sponsored event that allows alcoholic beverages. An example
would be the Blessing of the Fleet & Seafood Festival.
      (3)   A scheduled event at the MWP for which admission is charged and
alcoholic beverages are allowed. An example would be dances on the pier.
      (4)   Alcoholic beverages purchased in the pier plaza may only be
consumed on the pier or pier plaza.
   (H)   Animals.  All animals will be on a leash at town-owned parks.
   (I)   Feeding birds.  It shall be unlawful to feed birds (seagulls, pigeons
and the like) at town-owned parks.
   (J)   Biking and the like.  The use of bicycles, roller skates, skateboards
at town-owned parks is permitted only upon the roadways, bikeways or other
designated areas.
   (K)   Golf.  No person shall play or practice golf at town-owned parks.
   (L)   Litter. No person shall discard any litter or trash at town-owned
parks, except in designated receptacles.
   (M)   Public nudity. It shall be unlawful for any person to appear or travel
on any beach, waterway, street, parking lot or public access way in a state of
nudity. A person shall be found IN A STATE OF NUDITY when his or her clothing,
or absence of clothing, uncovers or exposes to public view his or her genitals,
pubic area, buttocks, or the nipple or any portion of the areola of the human
female breast.
   (N)   Limitations on public disrobing.  No person shall disrobe, undress,
dress or change his or her clothes in public view on either public or private
property, such that he or she may be found to be in a state of public nudity.
   (O)   Cooking.  No person shall utilize grills or other cooking equipment at
town-owned parks, unless part of a town-sponsored event or an approved special
event pursuant to
Chapter 97, or if part or all of a particular facility at the MWP is rented and
cooking is allowed pursuant to the rental agreement.
   (P)   Flying objects. No person shall operate a drone or any other remotely
controlled flying object; fly a kite; or release helium balloons, flying
lanterns or any other flying object at the MWP.
   (Q)   Camping.  No person shall camp or spend the night at any town-owned
park.
   (R)   Swimming. No person shall swim or wade from the shoreline, in water
features not specifically designed for such use, including the War Memorial
fountain at the MWP, or from the pier or dock structures at any town-owned
park.
   (S)   Motorized vehicles. No motorized vehicles are to be driven on the
piers, docks or sidewalks of any town-owned park, with the exception of
vehicles owned or authorized by the town or other park staff, or as part of an
event permit approved by the Town Administrator or his or her designee.
   (T)   Exercise groups. Exercise groups must be unobtrusive and
inconspicuous, and must not:
      (1)   Impede public use of the park.
      (2)   Use sidewalks as running tracks.
      (3)   Use audio devices, signage or other equipment.
   (U)   Conducting business.  Pursuant §
110.22(B), conducting business on public property is not permitted. Exceptions
at town parks are allowed only when business is being conducted during a town-
sponsored event or an approved special event pursuant to
Chapter 97, or if part or all of a particular facility at the MWP is rented and
conducting business is allowed pursuant to the rental agreement.
(Ord. 09034, passed 7-14-09; Am. Ord. 11014, passed 3-8-11; Am. Ord. 15027,
passed 4-14-15) Penalty, see §
141.99
§ 141.99 PENALTY.
   Any person guilty of violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine of up to $500, or imprisonment for
up to 30 days, or both.
(Ord. 09034, passed 7-14-09; Am. Ord. 15027, passed 4-14-15)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.   VESTED RIGHTS
      
152.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
      
153.   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND WATER QUALITY REGULATIONS
      
154.   DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
      
155.   LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
      
156.   ZONING CODE
      
157.   DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT CODE
      
158.   EXCAVATION AND CONSTRUCTION ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
150.001   Codes adopted by reference
   
150.002   Fee schedules
   
150.003   Construction Board of Adjustments
Additional Plumbing Regulations
   
150.019   Tap-in inspections
Tree Preservation Program
   
150.025   Permit required
   
150.026   Purpose and intent
   
150.027   Administration
   
150.028   Standards
   
150.029   Submittal requirements
   
150.030   Procedures
Unsafe Buildings or Structures
   
150.050   Public Safety and Housing Officer; duties
   
150.051   Appeals
   
150.052   Estimate of annual expenses
   
150.053   Powers conferred by other laws
   
150.054   Violations
Oversized Loads and Moving of Structures
   
150.070   Moving/relocation permit
   
150.071   State law compliance
   
150.072   Liability insurance
   
150.073   Hold harmless
   
150.074   Site cleaning/grading bond required
   
150.075   Code review
   
150.076   Public safety requirements
Administration and Enforcement
   
150.095   Building Official
   
150.096   Department personnel
   
150.097   Powers and duties of Building Official
   
150.098   Conflicts of interest
   
150.099   Review of proposed development
   
150.100   Occupying building prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy
prohibited
   
150.110   Certificate of occupancy relative to impact fees
   
150.200   Contractors decal program
 
   
150.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A: Moving permit application form
Statutory reference:
   Dwelling unfit for human habitation, see S.C. Code §§ 31-15-10 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.001 CODES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The South Carolina Building Codes Council amends and adopts building codes
for all of South Carolina. It is mandatory that all jurisdictions in South
Carolina adopt the amended codes. The administrative chapter one of each code
is not mandated but permissive. The administrative chapters offer comprehensive
code administration that is closely tied to the actual code language. The
following codes are adopted by reference as though they were set forth herein.
The most current version of the state adopted code including the administrative
chapter one shall apply except any section referencing the Board of Appeals or
Means of Appeal will be excluded. The Energy Code applies as specified by the
year below.
   (A)   International Building Code, as amended by the South Carolina Building
Codes Council.
   (B)   International Plumbing Code, as amended by the South Carolina Building
Codes Council.
   (C)   International Mechanical Code, as amended by the South Carolina
Building Codes Council.
   (D)   South Carolina Fire Code, as amended by the South Carolina Building
Codes Council.
   (E)   International Fuel Gas Code, as amended by the South Carolina Building
Codes Council.
   (F)   National Electrical Code, as amended by the South Carolina Building
Codes Council.
   (G)   International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings, as
amended by the South Carolina Building Codes Council.
   (H)   Flood damage prevention regulations, as set forth in
Chapter 152 of this Code of Ordinances.
   (I)   International Energy Conservation Code, 2009 Edition, with current and
subsequent amendments made by the South Carolina Building Codes Council, and
kept on file in the office of the Building Official.
   (J)   International Property Maintenance Code, as permitted by the South
Carolina Building Codes Council.
   (K)   International Existing Building Code, as amended by the South Carolina
Building Codes Council.
(Ord. 99072, passed 1-11-00; Am. Ord. 01023, passed 5-8-01; Am. Ord. 02027,
passed 6-11-02; Am. Ord. 03018, passed 5-13-03; Am. Ord. 04064, passed 12-14-
04; Am. Ord. 05038, passed 6-14-05; Am. Ord. 07040, passed 6-19-07; Am. Ord.
08030, passed 6-11-08; Am. Ord. 08048, passed 9-10-08; Am. Ord. 09057, passed
8-12-09; Am. Ord. 11046, passed 7-12-11; Am. Ord. 12081, passed 12-11-12; Am.
Ord. 13028, passed 6-11-13; Am. Ord. 16095, passed 11-8-16; Am. Ord. 19081,
passed 12-11-2019; Am. Ord. 22064, passed 12-15-22)
§ 150.002 FEE SCHEDULES.
   Building valuation and fees.
   (A)   Valuation for new construction. Building valuation for new
construction will be determined by the Building Official, based on the most
current Building Valuation Tables, as published by International Code Council
(ICC) or contract amount, whichever is higher. Upon determination of valuation,
the Building Official will set the amount of the permit fee pursuant to the
latest Department of Engineering and Development Services fee schedule. All
building permits are value-based permits.
   (B)   Where valuation (material and labor) does not exceed $1,000. No permit
is required, unless an inspection is required.
   (C)   Work started without permit. Where work for which a permit is required
by the code is started or proceeded with prior to obtaining the permit, per the
latest Department of Engineering and Development Services fee schedule, but the
payment shall not relieve any persons from fully complying with the
requirements of the code in the execution of the work, nor from any other
penalties prescribed herein.
   (D)   Plan review fee.
      (1)   As determined by the Building Official, when the valuation of the
proposed construction exceeds $1,000 and a structural review is required, a
plan review fee shall be paid to the Building Official before a review will be
started, except as otherwise provided herein. The plan review fee shall be per
the latest Department of Engineering and Development Services fee schedule. The
fee shall be paid at the time of plan submittal for review. This fee is non-
refundable if the plan review has started.
      (2)   In the event that a third-party review has been approved by the
Building Official in accordance with internal policy, the plan review fee shall
be reduced to 10% of the fee calculated as described above. As determined by
the Building Official, the plan review fee may be applied to re-submittals and
revisions to previously reviewed plans.
      (3)   The initial review and one minor re-review (as determined by the
reviewer) is included. If a full re-submission or substantial changes have been
made, there may be additional charges each time after per the latest fee
schedule.
   (E)   Fees are not refundable unless an error from a town employee.
(Ord. 99072, passed 1-11-00; Am. Ord. 00038, passed 7-11-00; Am. Ord. 00071,
passed 1-9-01; Am. Ord. 03051, passed 9-9-03; Am. Ord. 07063, passed 10-9-07;
Am. Ord. 11046, passed 7-12-11; Am. Ord. 14025, passed 4-8-14; Am. Ord. 16083,
passed 10-11-16; Am. Ord. 17017, passed 5-9-17; Am. Ord. 24018, passed 5-16-24)
§ 150.003 CONSTRUCTION BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS.
   (A)   Appointment. There is established in the town a board to be called the
Board of Adjustments and Appeals, which shall consist of five members. Such
Board shall be composed of one architect, one general contractor or engineer,
and three members at large from the building industry. This Board shall be
appointed by Town Council.
   (B)   Term of office. The term of office for all seats on the Board shall be
four years. All terms hereunder shall, however, continue until a successor is
appointed by the Mayor and approved by Town Council. The Mayor and Council
shall act promptly after the expiration of a term to make appointments as soon
as may reasonably be accomplished. Board members may be appointed to succeed
themselves, for a maximum total of two successive full terms. Any service on
the Board prior to this amendment shall be included in determining eligibility
for future service. None of the members shall hold any other public office or
position in the municipality or county while serving on this Board.
   (C)   Vacancy and removal. A vacancy in a term of office shall occur
whenever it is found that a member has resigned or is unable to serve for
whatever reason, or is removed in accordance with the provisions of this
section. Neglect of duty, no longer being a resident of the town, or misconduct
in office shall constitute just cause. Each member is required to attend 75% of
called meetings per year on a rolling-year basis which shall be measured on the
first of every month for the preceding year. Each member shall be afforded one
excused absence which shall not be counted towards the attendance requirement.
Excused and unexcused absences are to be determined by the Chairperson or, in
his or her absence, the acting Chairperson, and are to be stated on the record
at each meeting. Excused absences are generally defined as medical or family
emergencies or unavoidable business or personal conflicts. Each member is
responsible for notifying the Chairperson or the appropriate staff at least two
full working days prior to the meeting, if he or she will not be in attendance.
The member shall also state a reason for the anticipated absence. Emergency
situations that arise within this 48-hour period can be considered excused by
the Chairperson. If removal due to attendance is necessary, the Town
Administrator shall then remove that member from the Board prior to the next
scheduled meeting and notify Town Council. If removal for cause appears
imminent, the Chairperson shall contact the member and ascertain whether
removal should be considered by the Mayor and Town Council. The Chairperson
shall then make a recommendation to Council, prior to Council action on the
matter. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term as
soon as may reasonably be accomplished by the Mayor and Town Council in the
same manner as the initial appointment. Service pursuant to an appointment in
this regard shall constitute one full term.
   (D)   Organization. The Board shall elect by secret ballot and majority vote
a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson from among its members at the January
meeting of each year. The term of office of the Chairperson and Vice-
Chairperson shall be one year. If a vacancy occurs in an office prior to the
expiration of the full term, another election to fill the remainder of the term
of office shall be conducted at the first meeting thereafter. The election
procedures stated hereinabove shall be followed in filling an unexpired term of
office. The Board shall appoint a secretary who may be an officer or employee
of the governing authority. The Board shall adopt rules for the transaction of
business.
   (E)   Meetings and quorum. Three members of the Board shall constitute a
quorum for conducting business. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call
of the Chairperson and at such other times as the Board may determine. The
Chairperson or, in his or her absence, the acting Chairperson, may administer
oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. Decisions shall be
made by a majority vote, but no fewer than three affirmative votes shall be
required to modify a decision of the Building Official or to vary any provision
of the adopted technical building, fire, or flood codes. The Board shall keep
minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question,
or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records
of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be
immediately filed in the office of the Board, or if there is no such office, in
an appointed office of the town. The minutes and records shall be a public
record. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public and members of
the Board shall regularly attend meetings and public hearings of the Board and
shall serve without compensation, except for reimbursement for authorized
expenses attendant to the performance of their duties.
   (F)   Duties and powers. To hear and decide appeals of decisions and
interpretations of the Building Official and to consider variances of the
technical building, fire, or flood codes.
(Am. Ord. 00039, passed 7-11-00; Am. Ord. 11046, passed 7-12-11, Am. Ord.
18035, passed 6-14-18)
ADDITIONAL PLUMBING REGULATIONS
§ 150.019 TAP-IN INSPECTIONS.
   Sewer line lateral inspections and water line lateral inspections are made
by the Mount Pleasant Waterworks.
(Ord. 99072, passed 1-11-00; Am. Ord. 11046, passed 7-12-11)
SINGLE-FAMILY STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT AND TREE PRESERVATION PROGRAM
§ 150.025 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Contractors and residents who plan to proceed with clearing and grading
activities that disturb or alter land on a single-family parcel must have a
stormwater management and tree preservation permit prior to the release of any
building permit. Such permit will be issued only after a suitable plan is
approved and installed in accordance with such plan.
(Ord. 18103, passed 1-8-19)
150.026 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   The intent of this permit is to minimize tree and stormwater impacts
due to construction on single-family lots. These requirements ensure the
protection of neighboring properties from unmanaged stormwater and construction
site sediment while minimizing impacts to existing trees and buffers.
   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of each property owner to undertake
land development activity in a way that does not diffuse or cast concentrated
runoff in a direction that will cause adverse impacts onto lower elevated
property and to alter land in such a way that will not displace, deflect,
obstruct or impede stormwater from higher elevated property.
   (C)   The owner or representative shall use good construction methods by
implementing all means necessary to remain in compliance. The town review
procedure is not to be used for design purposes, but to ensure the applicant is
fully aware of their responsibility to make use of proper stormwater management
techniques and the latest best management practices prior to undertaking land
development activity. However, additional improvements may be required
throughout the implementation process if deemed necessary following field
inspection.
(Ord. 18103, passed 1-8-19)
150.027 ADMINISTRATION.
    The Engineering and Development Services shall administer this subchapter
through plan reviews and enforcement of standards that are practical and
reasonable for achieving the objectives of the town. It shall not be
administered in such a way to hinder or infringe on the development property
rights of citizens, but to ensure site improvements proceed in a manner that
protects surrounding property from flood damage and prevents the unnecessary
removal of buffers and trees. Therefore, this subchapter allows each property
owner the ability to responsibly remove trees, alter land, and expand
development on their property while effectively managing all stormwater runoff
discharging from the project boundaries. The applicant shall demonstrate
compliance by submission of a stormwater management plan and tree survey
depicting existing and proposed site improvements. It shall conform to the
natural water course of the surrounding area or with the proposed final grades
of the larger common plan for the subdivision, if applicable. Issuance of a
site improvement permit does not constitute a building permit, nor does it
authorize vertical construction. It shall only authorize stormwater related
site improvements. The permit may be administered independently or concurrently
with a building permit submittal.
(Ord. 18103, passed 1-8-19; Am. Ord. 21037, passed 5-11-21)
§ 150.028 STANDARDS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to undertake activity resulting in discharge
flowrates that exceed the capacity of the receiving drainage system, or to
impede the natural flow traversing the land to where the action causes water
levels to increase on property.
   (B)   A site improvement permit is required before land clearing or land
disturbance on any residential property. Authorization of this permit shall
confirm the applicant’s plan is in compliance with the minimum standards and is
authorized to commence proposed site improvements.
   (C)   All work shall comply with the applicable ordinance regulation in
Chapter
155 and
156 as it relates to the following:
      (1)   Tree protection zones and buffers shall be protected from grading
or clearing activity, other than hand-clearing.
      (2)   Site improvements plans shall be legible and clearly demonstrate
the applicant has used good judgment and is proposing adequate provisions to
implement safeguards to avoid negatively impacting surrounding property.
      (3)   Erosion control devices and existing storm drainage infrastructure
shall be routinely inspected by the applicant to ensure it remains in proper
working order.
      (4)   As-built surveys may be required when deemed necessary by the Town
Plans Examiner. In such cases, final grade elevations are to be provided for
swales, embankments, dry ponds, pipes, surface improvements such as driveways,
and fill.
   (D)   Buffers encroachments shall be pre-approved by Zoning Administrator or
his or her designee.
   (E)   Building permits shall not be released until an acceptable site
inspection has been completed by the Land Development Code Inspector.
   (F)   Site improvement permits shall remain valid for 24 months from the
date of approval. Approval date is the date the final field inspection is
completed and approved.
   (G)   Any work-related activity undertaken by a licensed contractor must be
permitted under this subchapter.
   (H)   The permit application found online at the official town website must
be properly completed and submitted.
   (I)   A copy of the site improvement permit is to be placed on-site and
easily retrieved by an inspector at all times.
(Ord. 18103, passed 1-8-19) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.029 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The application provided on the official town website will be
submitted to the town along with a scaled plan depicting details of existing
and proposed activity.
   (B)   The following will be required. Further information may be requested
at the discretion of the Town Plans Examiner.
      (1)   Stormwater management/tree preservation application.
      (2)   Certificate of compliance.
      (3)   NPDES fee, §
153.100.
      (4)   One site plan to include the following at an appropriate scale:
         (a)   Existing grade single-point elevations, and single-point
proposed elevations; topographic contours at one-foot intervals shall be
acceptable.
         (b)   Building footprint.
         (c)   Drainage arrows demonstrating intended flow direction, indicate
swale low points and high points.
         (d)   Indicate points of concentrated stormwater discharge, such as
roof gutter downspouts. These points of discharge shall not be closer than ten
feet from any common property line.
         (e)   Significant tree survey with protection zones. Trees greater
than or equal to 16 inches DBH (as defined in
Chapter 156 ).
         (f)   Special buffers, where applicable, as defined in
Chapter 156 .
         (g)   Building setbacks. Refer to
Chapter 156 .
         (h)   Impervious surface setback and OCRM DHEC critical line buffer,
where applicable.
         (i)   Existing structures including pools, patios, driveways,
sidewalks, significant landscape features.
         (j)   All easements, and utility structures.
(Ord. 18103, passed 1-8-19) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.030 PROCEDURES.
   (A)    Contractor shall submit the application by uploading the single-
family site improvement permit application with a plan to the Town Engineering
and Development Services. See submittal requirements under §
150.029.
   (B)   Town staff shall conduct an internal review and site investigation.
Following approval of the plan, the permit will be released. Following, the
installation of protective provisions such as tree barricades, silt fence, and
other applicable best management practices are to be installed.
   (C)   Contractor is authorized to commence site improvements once protective
measures are in place and a pre-building permit inspection is scheduled.
   (D)   Town staff shall conduct an onsite site improvement inspection.
Applicant shall be notified and have the opportunity to be present.
   (E)   Once site improvement inspection is approved, contractor shall be
eligible for release of building permit.
(Ord. 18103, passed 1-8-19; Am. Ord. 21037, passed 5-11-21)  Penalty, see §
150.999
UNSAFE BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES
§ 150.050 PUBLIC SAFETY AND HOUSING OFFICER.
   (A)   A Public Safety and Housing Officer is created and shall be an ex
officio duty of the Building Official, except in situations related to the
duties of the Fire Code Official, when he or she will assume the role.
(‘81 Code, § 150.53) (Ord. passed 6-24-74; Am. Ord. 23016, passed 5-9-23)
   (B)   The Public Safety and Housing Officer or his or her appointed designee
shall administer and enforce the provisions of this subchapter and he or she
shall have such powers and perform such duties as may be provided for him or
her in this subchapter or as provided in any other town or state ordinances/
statutes.
('81 Code, § 31.71) (Am. Ord. passed 12-8-92)
   (C)   The Public Safety and Housing Officer is authorized to exercise such
powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the
purposes and provisions of this subchapter, including the following powers in
addition to others hereinbefore and hereinafter granted:
      (1)   To investigate the dwelling conditions in the municipality in order
to determine which dwellings therein are unfit for human habitation;
      (2)   To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses, and receive
evidence;
      (3)   To enter on premises for the purpose of making examinations,
provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least
possible inconvenience to the persons in possession;
      (4)   To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and
employees as he or she deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this
chapter; and
      (5)   To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under this
chapter to such officers and agents as he or she may designate.
('81 Code, § 150.69) (Ord. passed 6-24-74; Am. Ord. 11046, passed 7-12-11)
Cross-reference:
   For municipal ordinance summons, see §
35.10
§ 150.051 APPEALS.
   (A)   Whenever it is claimed that the true intent and meaning of this
subchapter, or any of the regulations thereunder, have been misconstrued or
wrongly interpreted, the owner or the duly authorized agent may appeal from the
decision of the Public Safety and Housing Officer to the Council. Notice of
appeal shall be in writing and filed within 30 days after the Public Safety and
Housing Officer renders his or her decision.
   (B)   Whenever, in the opinion of the Public Safety and Housing Officer, a
building or structure is unsafe or dangerous, he or she may in his order limit
the time for appeal to a period less than 30 days but not less than seven days.
   (C)   Appeals hereunder shall be on forms provided by the Public Safety and
Housing Officer.
   (D)   The Construction Board of Adjustment, when so appealed to and after a
hearing, may vary the application of any provision of this code in any
particular case whenever the literal enforcement thereof would do manifest
injustice or would be contrary to the public interest. In the event the Board
should modify the decision of the Public Safety and Housing Officer, it shall
specify the particulars wherein such decision has been modified. Whenever the
Board shall reverse the decision of the Public Safety and Housing Officer, its
decision need not specify any particulars.
   (E) Every decision of the Construction Board of Adjustment on any appeal
from any decision of the Public Safety and Housing Officer shall be final,
subjecy to only the right of any party aggrieved by such decision of the Board
to appeal to, or seek certiorari from, the court of common pleas for the county
or the county court. The term PARTY AGGRIEVED shall include the Public Safety
and Housing Officer as well as the owner, agent, or occupant of the affected
premises.
(‘81 Code, §150.68) (Ord. passed 6-24-74; Am. Ord. 11046, passed 7-12-11; Am.
Ord. 23016, passed 5-9-23)
§ 150.052 ESTIMATE OF ANNUAL EXPENSES.
   The Council shall prepare an estimate of the annual expenses or costs to
provide the equipment, personnel, and supplies necessary for periodic
examinations and investigations of the dwellings in the municipality for the
purpose of determining the fitness of such dwellings for human habitation, and
for the enforcement and administration of its ordinances. The Council is
authorized to make such appropriations from its revenues as it may deem
necessary for this purpose and may accept and apply grants or donations to
assist it in carrying out the provisions of this subchapter.
('81 Code, § 150.54) (Ord. passed 6-24-74; Am. Ord. 11046, passed 7-12-11)
§ 150.053 POWERS CONFERRED BY OTHER LAWS.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to abrogate or impair the
powers of the court or of any department of the municipality to enforce any
provisions of its charter or its ordinances or regulations, nor to prevent or
to punish violations thereof, and the powers conferred by this subchapter shall
be in addition and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other ordinances
or laws.
('81 Code, § 150.55) (Ord. passed 6-24-74; Am. Ord. 11046, passed 7-12-11)
§ 150.054 VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, individually, or as the representative
of any person, firm, or corporation to violate any of the terms or provisions
of this subchapter.
('81 Code, § 150.61) (Ord. passed 6-24-74; Am. Ord. 11046, passed 7-12-11)
Penalty, see §
150.999
OVERSIZED LOADS AND MOVING OF STRUCTURES
§ 150.070 MOVING/RELOCATION PERMIT.
   (A)   No structure may be moved to or from, or relocated upon, a lot within
the town, or transported through the town, without first obtaining a moving/
relocation permit. A moving permit application shall be filed with the town.
The permit fee shall be determined by the Building Official. For the moving
permit application form, see Appendix A.
   (B)   For purposes of this chapter, STRUCTURE shall mean any oversized load
that takes up more than one lane of traffic; or a house, a trailer, a building
or other construction that will be or has been previously used, in whole or in
part, for residential, commercial or other like purpose at another location.
Accessory structures of 350 square feet or less will be exempt.
   (C)   The Building Official must approve any such permit.
   (D)   The Chief of Police must approve any such permit.
   (E)   The route of travel, time start, estimated travel time, photos and any
other necessary and requested information must be provided to ensure public
safety. For further details, see Appendix A.
(Ord. 02014, passed 4-9-02) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.071 STATE LAW COMPLIANCE.
   Any moving/relocation permits issued by the town must be in full compliance
with state law. If any state highways are included within the move, a state
Department of Transportation permit must also be obtained.
(Ord. 02014, passed 4-9-02) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.072 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   (A)   As a condition precedent to the issuance of such permit, the Building
Official shall require proof of automobile liability insurance. During the
move, the moving company shall provide and maintain a comprehensive automobile
liability insurance policy covering owned, hired and other non-owned
automobiles. This shall be done to protect himself or herself, his or her
agents, and his or her employees from claims for damage involving personal
injury. This shall include wrongful death, accidental death and property damage
that may arise from the use of motor vehicles engaged in various operations
under this permit. The automobile liability policy shall provide minimum limits
of liability as follows:
      Public Injury   $ 1,000,000 each person
      Liability   $ 2,000,000 each occurrence
      Property Damage
      Liability    $ 1,000,000 each occurrence
   (B)   The policy or policies shall name the town as additional insured and
shall contain a clause that the insurer will not cancel the coverage without
first giving the town 30 days notice in writing. A copy of such insurance
certificates shall be provided to the Building Official. It shall indemnify the
town against any damage caused by the moving of such building to streets,
curbs, sidewalks, shade trees, highways, and any other property that may be
affected by the moving of a building. Such insurance shall also be conditioned
upon and liable for strict compliance with the terms of the permit, as to route
to be taken and limit of time in which to repair and to pay the town as
liquidated damages an amount not exceeding $50 to be prescribed by the Building
Official for each and every day’s delay in completing such removal, in
repairing any damages to property or public improvements, or in clearing all
public streets, alleys or highways of all debris occasioned thereby.
(Ord. 02014, passed 4-9-02) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.073 HOLD HARMLESS.
   The mover shall indemnify and hold harmless, in writing, the town, it
officers, agents and employees, from all suits, actions or claims of any
character brought for, or on account of, any injuries to, death of, or damage
received by any person or persons. This also applies to any property damage
resulting from the operations of the mover, any of his or her agents or
employees engaged in various operations under this permit.
(Ord. 02014, passed 4-9-02) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.074 SITE CLEANING/GRADING BOND REQUIRED.
   If applicable, the permittee shall be liable for the cleaning and grading of
the vacated lot within 14 days of building removal. Such cleaning and grading
shall be in a manner that insures the maintenance of public health, safety and
welfare.
(Ord. 02014, passed 4-9-02) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.075 CODE REVIEW.
   If applicable, the owner of any house, building or structure proposed to be
moved, shall make all necessary improvements required in order for the house,
building or structure to comply with the requirements of the adopted standard
building code. This must be done within 90 days of the date of issuance of the
moving permit. Upon a showing of delay caused by matters beyond the control of
the owner or house mover, the Building Official may grant such extensions of
time, as deemed reasonable. The application for the moving permit shall be
accompanied by an application for a building permit, which shall be accompanied
by complete plans and specifications showing the changes or conditions of the
structure. This building permit application is to be signed by the owner or the
owner’s agent.
(Ord. 02014, passed 4-9-02)
§ 150.076 PUBLIC SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   A building that occupies any portion of public property after sundown
shall have sufficient lights, continually burning between sunset and sunrise,
for the protection of the public.
   (B)   Flagmen may be required pursuant to the specific circumstances.
   (C)   Vehicular escorts may be required pursuant to the specific
circumstances.
   (D)   Warning lights, reflectors and the like may be required pursuant to
the specific circumstances.
(Ord. 02014, passed 4-9-02) Penalty, see §
150.999
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 150.095 BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   The position of the Building Official shall be established and filled in
accordance with the policies of the Town Personnel Manual and the Building
Official will serve as a regular employee of the town.
('81 Code, § 150.10) (Ord. passed 3-5-79; Am. Ord. passed 9-9-85; Am. Ord. 92-
3A-1-G passed 3-25-92)
§ 150.096 DEPARTMENT PERSONNEL.
   The Building Official, subject to the approval of the Director of the
Engineering and Development Services and the Town Administrator and in
accordance with the policies of the Town Personnel Manual may fill such deputy,
assistant, or clerk positions as provided for by Council.
(‘81 Code, §150.11) (Ord. passed 10-1-62; Am. Ord. passed 7-19-65; Am. Ord. 92-
3A-1-G, passed 3-25-92; Am. Ord. 21037, passed 5-11-21)
§ 150.097 POWERS AND DUTIES OF BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   The Building Official (also known as the Building Inspector), or his or her
appointed designee as designated by the Director of Engineering and Development
Services, shall administer and enforce the provisions of this code relating to
flood damage prevention, the International Code Council Codes as adopted by the
State of South Carolina referenced in
Chapter 150, excluding only the provisions of
Chapter 150 specifically pertaining to the duties of the Fire Code Official.
The Building Official or his or her designee shall have such powers and perform
such duties as mas be provided for him or her in the chapters or as provided in
any other town or state ordinances or statutes.
(‘81 Code, §150.12) (Ord. 99072, passed 1-11-00; Am. Ord. 23016, passed 5-9-23)
Statutory reference:
   Certain duties of Building Official relating to investigation of and reports
concerning fire, see S.C. Code §§ 5-25-160 through 5-25-210
§ 150.098 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.
   Neither the Building Official nor any officer or employee under the Building
Official’s charge or supervision, nor any other person having any duty under
the building code except as a member of the Board of Adjustments and Appeals,
shall be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or
appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, or
in the making of plans or of specifications therefor, unless he or she is the
owner of such building. No such officer or employee shall engage in any work
which is inconsistent with his or her duties or with the interests of the
office of the Building Official.
('81 Code, § 150.13) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.099 REVIEW OF PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT.
   The Building Official shall review or cause to be reviewed each and every
permit requested for all proposed construction or development within the
corporate limits of the municipality to assure that all necessary permits have
been received by such developer from those governmental agencies from which
approval is required by federal or state law, including § 404 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334.
('81 Code, § 150.14) (Ord. passed 1-16-78)
§ 150.100 OCCUPYING BUILDING PRIOR TO ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The Council finds as a fact that some realtors, contractors, and other
persons are permitting the purchasers to occupy buildings which are either new
buildings or for some other reason require a certificate of occupancy before
such certificate of occupancy has been issued, in violation of the building
code of the municipality.
   (B)   Any person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity who or which
permits any other person to occupy a building requiring a certificate of
occupancy before such certificate of occupancy shall have been issued, is
guilty of a misdemeanor.
('81 Code, § 150.23) (Ord. passed 4-5-76) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.110 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY RELATIVE TO IMPACT FEES.
   All municipal impact fees due to the town must be paid in full prior to
either the approval of the final electrical inspection or issuance of the
certificate of occupancy, relative to any structure or improvements covered by
the same. As such, the Building Official shall make the determination as to
which one of the referenced processes applies, based on the type of structure
or improvements involved. Further, if all of the municipal impact fees are not
paid in full, the Building Official is specifically authorized to refuse
approval of the final electrical inspection or to deny the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy, whichever is applicable.
(Ord. 09019, passed 4-14-09)
§ 150.200 CONTRACTORS DECAL PROGRAM.
   Any contractor wishing to perform work within the town must obtain and
display a Town of Mount Pleasant Contractor Decal in the lower passenger side
front windshield of any vehicle used to conduct business within the town. The
first decal will be issued at no charge. Additional decals will be issued at a
cost of $1 per decal. The Building Official shall have the authority to
establish policies to administer this program.
(Ord. 00054, passed 9-22-00)
§ 150.999 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no penalty is
otherwise provided, shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned for not
more than 30 days. However, no penalty shall exceed the penalty provided by
state law for similar offenses. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day that a violation occurs or continues.
('81 Code, § 150.99)
APPENDIX A: MOVING PERMIT APPLICATION FORM
TOWN OF MOUNT PLEASANT - MOVING PERMIT APPLICATION
OWNER
                   MAILING ADDRESS                PHONE NUMBER
 
PREVIOUS OWNER
                    MAILING ADDRESS               PHONE NUMBER
 
MOVING COMPANY
                    MAILING ADDRESS               PHONE NUMBER
 
                                      MOVING COMPANY STATE PERMIT NO.
                                       
                                        
PRESENT ADDRESS OF BUILDING TO BE MOVED
 
 
 
 
LOT NO.
       BLOCK NO.  SECTION TAX MAP NO. FLOOD ZONE ZONING DISTRICT
 
PROPOSED LOCATION BUILDING IS TO BE MOVED TO IF WITHIN CITY LIMITS (PLEASE
NOTE IF TO BE RELOCATED OUTSIDE CITY)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOT NO.
       BLOCK NO.  SECTION TAX MAP NO. FLOOD ZONE ZONING DISTRICT
 
                                                CURRENT APPRAISED VALUE OF
BUILDING USE          ORIGINAL COST OF BUILDING BUILDING
                                                 
                                                 
EXTREME DIMENSIONS                               EXACT WIDTH
                  EXACT LENGTH EXACT HEIGHT      
                                                 
APPROXIMATE MOVING DATE         APPROXIMATE MOVING TIME
DESCRIBE THE EXACT ROUTE TO BE TAKEN (USE BACK IF NECESSARY)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LIST ALTERATIONS AND REPAIRS REQUIRED TO BRING THE BUILDING INTO
COMPLIANCE WITH ALL BUILDING CODES
(USE BACK IF NECESSARY)
 
 
 
 
 
 
ATTACHMENTS (IF RELOCATED IN THE CITY)
_______ RECENT (WITHIN 6 MOS. OF APPLICATION) REGISTERED AND SEALED
ENGINEER'S SITE PLAN ESTABLISHING: (1) LOCATION;
(2) FRONT, REAR AND SIDE YARD SETBACKS; AND (3) FIRST FLOOR ELEVATIONS
REFERENCED TO THE NGVD 1929 DATUM
_______ PHOTOGRAPHS OF ALL ELEVATIONS
_______ BUILDING PLANS (to bring structure up to present building code,
including foundation)
_______ INSURANCE DOCUMENTATION (as required in Sections 75.03, 75.04 and
75.05)
APPROVAL FROM POLICE DEPARTMENT
 
 
_______ APPROVED
 
 
_______ NOT APPROVED
 
 
 
__________________________________________________
SIGNATURE
 
CHAPTER 151: RESERVED
Section:
   
151.001   Purpose
   
151.002   Definitions
   
151.003   Vesting periods
   
151.004   Extensions of vesting periods and limitations thereto
   
151.005   Conditions and limitations
§ 151.001 PURPOSE.
   (A)   This chapter is intended to clarify the rights of property owners
regarding the time frame for which the town's land use decisions can be
considered to confer vested rights.
   (B)   This chapter is written to bring the town into compliance with the
Vested Rights Act, S.C. Code §§ 6-29-1510 et seq.
(Ord. 25012, passed 4-11-25)
§ 151.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING PERMIT. A written warrant or license issued by a local building
official that authorizes the construction or renovation of a building or
structure at a specified location.
   LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCES OR REGULATIONS. Any ordinances or regulations
that establish permitted uses or development standards for the improvement of
property.
   LOCAL GOVERNING BODY.
      (1)   The governing body of a county or municipality; or
      (2)   A county or municipal body authorized by statute or by the
governing body of the county or municipality to make land use decisions. For
the purposes of this section, this includes Town Council, Planning Commission,
Board of Zoning Appeals, Design Review Board, and Old Village Historic District
Commission, as is applicable.
   SITE SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT PLAN. A development plan submitted to a local
governing body
by a landowner describing with reasonable certainty the types and density or
intensity of uses for a specific property or properties.
   VESTED RIGHT. The right to undertake and complete the development of
property under the terms and conditions of a site specific development plan.
(Ord. 25012, passed 4-11-25)
§ 151.003 VESTING PERIODS.
   (A)   Approved site specific development plans shall be vested for an
initial period of two years from the date of final approval by the local
governing body.
   (B)   Within the vesting period, the property owner may make application and
be granted a building permit from the Town Building Official in accordance with
all other applicable town regulations.
(Ord. 25012, passed 4-11-25)
§ 151.004 EXTENSIONS OF VESTING PERIODS AND LIMITATIONS THERETO.
   (A)   Subsequent modifications or amendments to an approved site specific
development plan shall not re- establish or extend the initial two-year vesting
period if the underlying land development ordinances or regulations have been
amended in a manner that would prohibit the execution of the site specific
development plan.
   (B)   After the initial two-year vesting period, a site specific development
plan is eligible for at least five annual extensions of the vested right, which
must be approved unless an amendment to the land development ordinances or
regulations has been adopted that prohibits approval.
      (1)   Any change or amendment to the land development ordinances or
regulations that would no longer allow execution of the site specific
development plan constitutes a prohibition of the approval of the extension.
      (2)   The property owner must submit a written request for the extension
to the local governing body, as defined in this chapter, prior to the
expiration of the initial two-year vesting period and each successive annual
vesting period. Failure to make a timely request voids the request.
(Ord. 25012, passed 4-11-25)
§ 151.005 CONDITIONS AND LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Site specific development plan provisions apply to projects that
require the investment in grading; installation of utilities, streets and other
infrastructure; and other significant expenditures necessary to apply for a
building permit. For purposes of this chapter, the following are considered
site specific development plans:
      (1)   Town Council-approved Planned Development Districts;
      (2)   Town Council-approved impact assessments;
      (3)   Planning Commission-approved sketch plans or preliminary plats;
      (4)   Board of Zoning Appeals-approved variances and special exception
uses;
      (5)   Final planning staff approvals and Design Review Board final
approvals regarding Commercial Design Review Overlay District applications;
      (6)   Old Village Historic District Commission-approved certificates of
appropriateness;
      (7)   Zoning permits approved by the Zoning Administrator, or their
designee; and
      (8)   Staff-approved preliminary plats.
   (B)   A site specific development plan for which a variance, regulation, or
special exception is necessary does not confer a vested right until the
variance, regulation, or special exception is obtained.
   (C)   A vested site specific development plan is subject to later local
governmental overlay zoning that imposes site plan-related requirements but
does not affect allowable types, height as it affects density or intensity of
uses, or density or intensity of uses.
   (D)   Upon expiration of a vested right, a building permit may be issued for
development only in accordance with applicable land development ordinances or
regulations.
   (E)   A vested right to a site specific development plan may be revoked by
the local governing body upon its determination, after notice and a public
hearing, that there was a material misrepresentation by the landowner or
substantial noncompliance with the terms and conditions of the original or
amended approval.
(Ord. 25012, passed 4-11-25)
CHAPTER 152: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
152.01   Statutory authorization
   
152.02   Findings of fact
   
152.03   Purpose and objectives
   
152.04   Definitions
   
152.05   Lands to which regulation applies
   
152.06   Basis for reestablishing the areas of special flood hazard
   
152.07   Compliance required
   
152.08   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
152.09   Interpretation
   
152.10   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
152.11   Partial invalidity and severability
Standards for Flood Hazard Prevention
   
152.20   Standards in general
   
152.21   Specific standards where data is provided
   
152.22   Residential and nonresidential construction
   
152.23   Elevated and crawl space buildings
   
152.24   Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles
   
152.25   [Reserved]
   
152.26   Coastal high hazard areas (VE Zones) and coastal A Zones
   
152.27   Standards for subdivision proposals
   
152.28   Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO Zones)
Permits
   
152.40   Permit required
   
152.41   Permit procedure
Administration and Enforcement
   
152.50   Designation of Building Official and Floodplain Manager
   
152.51   Duties and responsibilities of the Building Official and Floodplain
Manager
   
152.52   Variance procedures
   
152.53   Conditions for variances
 
   
152.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The Legislature of the state has in statute 1976 S.C. Code, Title 6, Chapter
7 delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations
designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the town does ordain this chapter.
('81 Code, § 152.01 a.) (Ord. passed 3-5-84; Am. Ord. passed 9-13-88; Am. Ord.
passed 6-11-91; Am. Ord. 5-19-92)
§ 152.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the town are subject to periodic inundation
which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
   (B)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the
occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to
other lands which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise
unprotected from flood damages.
('81 Code, § 152.01 b.) (Ord. passed 3-5-84; Am. Ord. passed 9-13-88; Am. Ord.
passed 6-11-91; Am. Ord. 5-19-92)
§ 152.03 PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES.
   (A)   Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the
public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private
losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designated to:
      (1)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging
increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
      (2)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
      (3)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood
waters;
      (4)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damage; and
      (5)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
   (B)   Objectives. The objectives of this chapter are:
      (1)   To protect human life and health;
      (2)   To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
      (3)   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
      (4)   To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
      (5)   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains; electric, telephone, and sewer lines; and streets and bridges
located in floodplains;
      (6)   To help maintain a stable tax base providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood
blight areas; and
      (7)   To insure that potential home buyers are notified that property is
in a flood area.
('81 Code, § 152.01 c., d.) (Ord. passed 3-5-84; Am. Ord. passed 9-13-88; Am.
Ord. passed 6-11-91; Am. Ord. 5-19-92)
§ 152.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING. A building customarily incidental and subordinate to,
and detached from, the principal building, and located on the same lot with
such principal building. Garages, carports and storage sheds are common
accessory buildings.
   ADDITION TO EXISTING BUILDING. Any walled and roofed expansion to the
perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-
bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is
connected by a fire wall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing
walls is “new construction”.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Building Official’s interpretation of
any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or VO Zone on a community’s Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet where a
clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   BASEMENT. That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   BREAKAWAY WALL. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the
building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under
specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion
of the building or the supporting foundation system.
   BUILDING. Any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any
occupancy or storage.
   COASTAL A ZONE. An area subject to inundation by at least the 1% annual
chance flood event as determined by detailed methods, and where wave action is
expected with wave heights between one and one-half and three feet. Coastal A
Zones are landward of the VE Zone up to the Limit of Moderate Wave Action
(LiMWA) line.
   COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA. The area subject to high velocity waters caused
by, but not limited to, hurricane wave wash. The area is designated on a FIRM
as Zone VI-30, VE, or V.
   CRAWL SPACE BUILDING. A non-basement building built to have the bottom of
the lowest floor system elevated less than four feet above the average ground
level by means of the foundation system.
   CRITICAL FACILITY. A structure or facility, specifically excluding sanitary
sewer pump stations  and motor fuel-dispensing facilities, but otherwise that:
      (1)   Produces, uses, or stores highly volatile, flammable, explosive,
toxic and/or water-reactive materials;
      (2)   Is a hospital, nursing home, or housing likely to contain occupants
who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid death or injury during a flood;
      (3)   Is a fire station, police station (primary station manned full
time), vehicle and equipment storage facility, or emergency operations center
that is needed for flood response activities before, during or after a flood;
or
      (4)   Is a public or private utility facility that is vital to
maintaining or restoring normal services to flooded areas before, during or
after a flood.
   DESIGN FLOOD ELEVATION (DFE). The elevation of the base flood plus two feet
at any given location in areas of special flood hazard.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or permanent storage
of materials or equipment.
   ELEVATED BUILDING. A non-basement building built to have the bottom of the
lowest floor system elevated four feet or more above the average ground level
by means of the foundation system.
   ELEVATION CERTIFICATE. FEMA Form 81-31, February 13, 2005 or subsequent
revisions, including FEMA Form 086-0-033, revised December 2019, used to show
elevations of real property in relation to base flood elevations.
   ENCLOSED AREA or ENCLOSURE. An area below an elevated building that is
enclosed by the foundation and enclosure walls on all sides.
   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. Any structure for which the “start of construction”
commenced before April 2, 1971.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for  servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community (before April
2, 1971).
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FILL or FILLING. Placement of natural sands, dirt, soil or rock above
natural grade to raise the elevation of the ground, and may also include
concrete, cement, soil cement, brick or similar material as approved on a case-
by-case basis.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). An official map of a community, issued by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the areas of
special flood hazard have been defined.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of
special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the Flood
Boundary Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
   FLOOD-RESISTANT MATERIAL. Any building material capable of withstanding
direct and prolonged contact (minimum 72 hours) with floodwaters, without
sustaining damage that requires more than low-cost cosmetic repair. Please
refer to FEMA Technical Bulletin 2-93, “Flood-Resistant Materials for Buildings
Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas in Accordance with the National Flood
Insurance Program”. Class 4 and 5 materials, referenced therein, are acceptable
flood-resistant materials.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
   FLOOR. The top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including
basement), for example, top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of
wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor
of a garage used solely for parking vehicles.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT FACILITY. A facility which cannot be used for its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair, or seafood
processing facilities. The term does not include long- term storage,
manufacture, sales, or service facilities.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface,
prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a building.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district; or
      (3)   Individually listed on the Town Inventory of Historic Places as
contributing to the historical significance of the district, since the town is
a Certified Local Government.
   LIMIT OF MODERATE WAVE ACTION (LiMWA). The line shown on Flood Insurance
Rate Maps to indicate the inland limit of the area expected to receive one and
one-half foot or greater breaking waves during a 1% annual chance flood event.
   LIMITED STORAGE. An area used for storage, which is limited to that which is
incidental and accessory to the principal use of the primary structure, and can
withstand exposure to the elements with a low flood damage potential. Limited
storage areas shall not be temperature controlled.
   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE. Elevation of the lowest ground surface that touches
any of the exterior walls of a building.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor, provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other
provisions of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A building, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also
includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures
placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved
property.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It
is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the
floodplain. For purposes of this chapter, the term is  synonymous with National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) and when reference is made to MEAN SEA LEVEL it
shall mean the NGVD.
   NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD). The geodetic datum derived by the
US Coast and Geodetic Survey (USCGS), which is now named the National Ocean
Service (NOS), from an adjustment of the first order level nets of both the
United States and Canada. Because sea levels have been rising in varying
amounts with respect to location and time since 1929, the mean tide level and
local mean sea level are now higher than the NGVD by varying amounts and
conversions are necessary to correct for these differences.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Any structure for which the “start of construction”
commenced after April 2, 1971. The term also includes any subsequent
improvements to such structure.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
   NON-COMPLIANT BUILDING. An existing building or structure that is not in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
   NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM (NAVD) OF 1988. Vertical control, as corrected
in 1988, used as the reference datum on Flood Insurance Rate Maps.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a 10-year period for which the cost of repairs at the
time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25% of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SECTION 1316 OF THE NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE ACT OF 1968. The act provides
that no new flood insurance shall be provided for any property found by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency to have been declared by a state or local
authority to be in violation of state or local ordinances.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. (For other than “new construction” or “substantial
improvements” under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (PL 97-348)) includes
“substantial improvement”, and means the date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION, repair, reconstruction, or
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the
first placement of permanent construction of a building (including a
manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings,
installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and
filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor
does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or
the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main building. For a “substantial
improvement”, the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a
manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank, or other man-made facilities
or infrastructures.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition  would
equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any combination of repairs, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition or other improvement to a structure taking place
during a period of five years, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds
50% of the fair market value of the structure, either before the "start of
construction" of the improvement, or if the structure has been damaged or is
being restored, before the damage occurred. This term includes structures that
have incurred "repetitive loss" or "substantial damage", regardless of the
actual work performed. Where more than one improvement is made over a five-year
period, which begins at permit issuance date, the percentage value (that is,
the value of the improvement expressed as a percentage of the value of the
structure immediately before the improvement) of the most recent improvement
shall be added to the percentage value of all other improvements made within
five years of the current improvement. If the cumulative percentage during the
five-year period equals or exceeds a total of 50%, then it shall be classified
as a SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
   SUBSTANTIALLY IMPROVED EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS or SUBDIVISIONS. The
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities
and pads equals or exceeds 50% of the value of the streets, utilities and pads
before repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter where
specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.
   VIOLATION.  The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's flood plain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4),  (c)
(10), (d)(3), (e)(4) or (e)(5) is presumed to be in VIOLATION until such time
as that documentation is provided.
(‘81 Code, § 152.02) (Ord. passed 3-5-84; Am. Ord. passed 6-11-91; Am. Ord.
passed 12 17-91; Am. Ord. passed 5-19-92; Am. Ord. 00072, passed 1-9-01; Am.
Ord. 04078, passed 1-11-05; Am. Ord. 07037, passed 6-12-07; Am. Ord. 07055,
passed 9-11-07; Am. Ord. 18039, passed 6-14-18; Am. Ord. 20065, passed 11-10-
20; Am. Ord. 24004, passed 2-15-24; Am. Ord. 24036, passed 12-16-24)
§ 152.05 LANDS TO WHICH REGULATION APPLIES.
   (A)   (1)   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard
within the jurisdiction of the town as identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) in its Flood Insurance Study for Charleston County,
South Carolina and incorporated areas, dated January 29, 2021, with
accompanying maps and other supporting data that are hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.
      (2)   Upon annexation, any Special Flood Hazard Areas identified by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its Flood Insurance Study for the
unincorporated areas of Charleston County, with accompanying map and other
data, are adopted by reference and declared part of this section.
      (3)   All LOMRs that are issued by FEMA in Special Flood Hazard Areas
identified by this section are hereby adopted.
   (B)   (1)   Special stormwater management areas. A special stormwater
management area is a designated drainage service area not meeting or exceeding
acceptable levels of service, as such, special stormwater management standards
shall apply in order to provide the highest level of protection to safeguard
residents from unmanaged runoff. It is an area where the current hydrology and
hydraulics have been studied and the culminative expansion of impervious
service, land alternating activity, and natural changes in the environment have
exceeded the capacity limitations of the existing infrastructure. As a result,
the quality of life for residents within this area is at risk. Therefore, land
development standards specific to this area shall serve the public by
protecting property from high water levels to the maximum extent possible.
      (2)   Old village stormwater study area. Defined in the report dated
August 2, 2017 titled Old Village Watershed Study Phase One and presented to
Public Services Committee on July 25, 2018 is the boundary area subject to The
Stormwater Management Guide for Homebuilders inside the Old Village Study Area.
(‘81 Code, § 152.03 a.) (Ord. passed 3-5-84; Am. Ord. passed 9-8-86; Am. Ord.
passed 9-13-88; Am. Ord. passed 6-11-91; Am. Ord. 05075, passed 10-12-05; Am.
Ord. 18039, passed 6-14-18; Am. Ord. 20065, passed 11-10-20)
§ 152.06 BASIS FOR REESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   (A)   Special flood hazard area maps have been prepared for Charleston
County and its incorporated areas by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in
its Flood Insurance Rate Study, dated November 17, 2004. The accompanying maps
and other supporting data are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of
this chapter.
   (B)   Basis for establishing the area of special stormwater management. This
incorporates by reference the South Carolina Department of Health and
Environmental Control Standards for Stormwater Management and Sediment
Reduction Regulation 72-307(C), and subpart (4) which reads as follows:
      Specific requirements for the permanent stormwater management portion of
the stormwater management and sediment control plan approval process include,
but are not limited to, the following items. The appropriate plan approval
agency may modify the following items for a specific project or type of
project.
      (4)c. Watersheds, other than Designated Watersheds, that have well
documented water quantity problems may have more stringent, or modified, design
criteria determined by the local government that is responsive to specific
needs of that watershed.
(‘81 Code, § 152.03 b.) (Ord. passed 3-5-84; Am. Ord. passed 9-8-86; Am. Ord.
passed 9-13-88; Am. Ord. passed 6-11-91; Am. Ord. 04056, passed 10-12-04; Am.
Ord. 05075, passed 10-12-05; Am. Ord. 18039, passed 6-14-18)
§ 152.07 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or
structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and
other applicable regulations.
('81 Code, § 152.03 d.) (Ord. passed 3-5-84; Am. Ord. passed 9-8-86; Am. Ord.
passed 9-13-88; Am. Ord. passed 6-11-91)
§ 152.08 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions
shall prevail. If two or more zones transect any structure to be erected, the
structure shall conform to the highest standard of any zone transecting the
structure.
('81 Code, § 152.03 e.) (Ord. passed 3-5-84; Am. Ord. passed 9-8-86; Am. Ord.
passed 9-13-88; Am. Ord. passed 6-11-91)
§ 152.09 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions
shall be:
      (1)   Considered as minimum requirements;
      (2)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
      (3)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
   (B)   In the event any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase
contained in this chapter shall be declared or adjudicated to be invalid or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, all the remaining
provisions of this chapter shall be and remain in full force and effect.
('81 Code, § 152.03 f.) (Ord. passed 3-5-84; Am. Ord. passed 9-8-86; Am. Ord.
passed 9-13-88; Am. Ord. passed 6-11-91)
2007 S-24
§ 152.10 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
consideration. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may increased by man- made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within
such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not
create liability on the part of the town or by any officer or employee thereof
for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
('81 Code, § 152.03 g.) (Ord. passed 3-5-84; Am. Ord. passed 9-8-86; Am. Ord.
passed 9-13-88; Am. Ord. passed 6-11-91)
§ 152.11 PARTIAL INVALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY.
   If any part of this chapter is declared invalid, the remainder of the
chapter shall not be affected and shall remain in force.
(Ord. 20065, passed 11-10-20)
STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD PREVENTION
§ 152.20 STANDARDS IN GENERAL.
   In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required:
   (A)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure;
   (B)   Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or
lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in
addition to, and consistent with, applicable state requirements for resisting
wind forces;
   (C)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with only flood-resistant materials below the design flood elevation;
   (D)   New construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by
methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
   (E)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning and
permanent/fixed generator equipment, and other service facilities (including
ductwork) shall not be located below the design flood elevation in new
construction and substantial improvement construction, except for essential
lighting and power circuits. This requirement does not preclude the
installation of electric vehicle (EV) chargers, service disconnects, pool
equipment filters and pumps, or outdoor faucets for hoses, shower heads and
sinks; provided disconnect and/or back-flow devices are installed to prevent
contamination to the water supply system, and no connection is made to the
sanitary waste collection system and that are designed and/or located so as to
prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding and anchored to prevent flotation;
   (F)   New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;
   (G)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into floodwaters. On-site waste disposal systems
shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding;
   (H)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building
in compliance with the provisions of this section, shall meet the requirements
of new construction as contained in this chapter; and
   (I)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building
not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only
if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced, if classified as a
substantial improvement;
   (J)   Notwithstanding substantial improvement or substantial damage
construction, the minimum elevation of the lowest floor of an improvement or
addition to a non-compliant building shall not be less than the Base Flood
Elevation of the effective FEMA maps plus the town’s freeboard of the existing
building; and all new materials installed below the design flood elevation
shall be flood-resistant;
   (K)   New or replacement electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air
conditioning equipment installed in non-compliant buildings, where substantial
improvement or damage is not a factor, shall be elevated to at least the
existing lowest floor level; and ductwork installed below the design flood
elevation shall be designed so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within during conditions of flooding;
   (L)   Sanitary landfills are prohibited;
   (M)   New critical facilities are prohibited from the 500-year floodplain.
This includes those areas designated as VE, AE, and X (shaded) on the
applicable FIRM.
   (N)   Elevators shall be installed in accordance with FEMA Technical
Bulletin 4-93, “Elevator Installation for Buildings Located in Special Flood
Hazard Areas”, which is incorporated herein by reference, specifically
including any subsequent revisions thereto.
   (O)   Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building
sites will be reasonably safe from flooding.
   (P)   All gas or liquid storage tanks, either located above ground or
buried, shall be anchored to prevent flotation and lateral movement resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads.
   (Q)   In order to address increasing flood levels, flood hazards, and the
associated damage caused by importation of fill, the following shall apply
within the town's 100-year regulatory floodplain, as depicted in the current
effective adopted Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and effective Letter of Map
Revisions (LOMR):
      (1)   Beginning July 1, 2024 (the "Effective Date"), the permitting of
certain foundation types shall be prohibited for all new foundations for single
family dwellings, including attached single-family dwellings. The provisions of
this section do not apply to garages, additions, conversions, substantially
improved, substantially damaged, or nonresidential structures.
      (2)   The most current version of Appendix B to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency's National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) Flood Insurance
Manual dated October 2022 (the "Appendix") is hereby incorporated by reference
and shall govern acceptable foundation types with the following foundations
prohibited:
         (a)   The foundations depicted in Diagrams 1A, 1B, 2A, 2B, 3 and 4 of
the Appendix for new detached single-family dwellings; and
         (b)   The foundations depicted in Diagrams 1A, 2A, 2B, 3 and 4 of the
Appendix for new attached single-family dwellings.
      (3)   The town's Floodplain Manager or his/her duly authorized agent
shall review elevation certificates to ensure the proper type of foundation has
been used pursuant to this section.
   (R)   Enclosures below DFE must be used solely for parking of vehicles,
building access or storage. The following is not allowed in enclosures below
DFE: appliances, heating and air conditioning equipment, ventilation, ductwork
(unless otherwise exempted), plumbing fixtures, materials that are not flood
damage-resistant materials, more than the minimum electric service required to
address life-safety and electric code requirements for vehicle parking,
building access, or storage; unless equipment is elevated/protected to DFE and
it services the elevated floor(s) in accordance with FEMA Technical Bulletin 1
“Requirements for Flood Openings in Foundation Walls and Walls of Enclosures”.
(‘81 Code, § 152.05 a.) (Ord. passed 3-5-84; Am. Ord. passed 6-11-91; Am. Ord.
passed 12-17-91; Am. Ord. passed 5-19-92; Am. Ord. 07055, passed 9-11-07; Am.
Ord. 18039, passed 6-14-18; Am. Ord. 24004, passed 2-15-24; Am. Ord. 24036,
passed 12-16-24)
§ 152.21 SPECIFIC STANDARDS WHERE DATA IS PROVIDED.
   In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data have
been provided, as set forth in §
152.06 or §
152.51(K), the following provisions of this chapter are required.
('81 Code, § 152.05 b.) (Ord. passed 3-5-84; Am. Ord. passed 6-11-91; Am. Ord.
passed 12-17-91; Am. Ord. passed 5-19-92)
§ 152.22 RESIDENTIAL AND NONRESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement
of any residential building (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated no lower than the design flood elevation. Should
solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure for crawl
space, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood
waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of §
152.23.
   (B)   For residential construction inside special stormwater management area
(s). The Stormwater Management Guide for Homebuilders in the Old Village Study
Area shall be followed and approved by the Town Engineer prior to the issuance
of a building permit. Alternative methods of equivalent means to manage and
prevent adverse impacts from diffused water as a result of land altering
activity shall be considered and evaluated based upon long-term maintenance
obligations, acceptance and ownership of the aforementioned commitment by the
Engineering and Development Services Director.
   (C)   Nonresidential construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or nonresidential building (or
manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no
lower than the design flood elevation. Buildings located in all A-zones may be
floodproofed in lieu of being elevated; provided that all areas of the building
below the required elevation are watertight, with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water, and use structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of
buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that
the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be
provided to the Building Official as set forth in §
152.51(I).
   (D)   Buildings constructed on fill material. A residential or
nonresidential building may be constructed on fill material in accordance with
the following:
      (1)   Fill must consist of soil and rock materials only. A registered
professional geotechnical engineer may authorize the use of dredged material as
fill only upon certification of suitability;
      (2)   Fill may not be placed in tidal or non-tidal wetlands without the
required state and federal permits;
      (3)   The fill shall be designed, installed, and tested in accordance
with the requirements of the town adopted and state mandated building codes,
and the extension and slope of the fill beyond the foundation of the building
shall be designed to minimize the potential for erosion and scour; and
      (4)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage
from or onto neighboring properties.
   (E)   Residential accessory buildings. New construction or substantial
improvements to residential accessory buildings that contain habitable space
shall meet the requirements of new construction as contained in this chapter.
Residential accessory buildings that do not contain habitable space and do not
exceed 600 square feet may be exempted from the elevation requirements in AE
Zones only, provided the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The building is securely anchored in accordance with §
152.20(A);
      (2)   The building is constructed of flood-resistant materials below the
design flood elevation in accordance with §
152.20(C);
      (3)   Exterior perimeter walls are provided with openings to relieve
hydrostatic pressure in accordance with §
152.23(A), and the interior is not partitioned or finished into separate rooms;
      (4)   The building is used only for parking of vehicles and/or limited
storage of equipment used to service the principal building; and
      (5)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning, and
other service facilities are prohibited, except for essential lighting and
power circuits.
(‘81 Code, §152.05 b.) (Ord. passed 3-5-84; Am. Ord. passed 6-11-91; Am. Ord.
passed 12-17-91; Am. Ord. passed 5-19-92; Am. Ord. 07055, passed 9-11-07; Am.
Ord. 18039, passed 6-14-18; Am. Ord. 20065, passed 11-10-20; Am. Ord. 21038,
passed 5-11-21)
§ 152.23 ELEVATED AND CRAWL SPACE BUILDINGS.
   New construction or substantial improvements of elevated and crawl space
buildings that include fully-enclosed areas formed by foundation and other
walls below the design flood elevation shall be designed to preclude finished
living space, and to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on the walls.
   (A)   Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified
by a professional engineer or architect, or meet the following minimum
criteria:
      (1)   Provide a minimum of two openings, located on two different walls
of the enclosure, having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
      (2)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade; and
      (3)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in
both directions.
   (B)   For elevated buildings, enclosed areas below the design flood
elevation shall not exceed 299 square feet cumulatively. The enclosed areas
cannot be temperature controlled.
   (C)   Elevated building shall be supported by piers, piles or other open
foundation systems. Non- load-bearing panels may be installed around the
perimeter of the foundation area between the structural supports. These panels
shall not be considered enclosure walls for the purposes of division (B) above,
provided they meet the following conditions:
      (1)   Each panel section installed between structural supports shall be
constructed with permanent openings, and the net area of these openings shall
not be less than 40% of the total area of the opening in which the panel is
installed;
      (2)   Each panel section must have openings within one foot of grade to
allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters as per division (A) above;
      (3)   The area within the foundation perimeter shall not be divided or
partitioned in any manner, except as allowed in division (B) above; and
      (4)   Access to the enclosed area(s) allowed in division (B) above shall
be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door), or
limited storage (standard exterior door), or entry to the living area (stairway
or elevator).
   (D)   A nonconversion agreement, as supplied by the Town Building Inspection
Division, is required to be executed for all new and substantially improved
elevated buildings where the ground floor is below the design flood elevation.
The nonconversion agreement shall be registered with the Charleston County
Register of Deeds (ROD) Office, and a recorded copy must be returned to the
Building Inspection Division Office prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy.
(‘81 Code, § 152.05 b.) (Ord. passed 3-5-84; Am. Ord. passed 6-11-91; Am. Ord.
passed 12-17-91; Am. Ord. passed 5-19-92; Am. Ord. 07055, passed 9-11-07; Am.
Ord. 18039, passed 6-14-18; Am. Ord. 20065, passed 11-10-20)
§ 152.24 MANUFACTURED HOMES AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   All manufactured homes placed, or substantially improved, on
individual lots or parcels, in new manufactured home parks, in expansions to
existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or in substantially improved
manufactured home parks or subdivisions, must meet all the requirements for new
construction, including elevation and anchoring.
   (B)   All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision must comply with the following:
      (1)   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than
the design flood elevation, or
      (2)   The manufactured home must be securely anchored to the adequately
anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
      (3)   In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a
manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, any
manufactured home placed or substantially improved must meet the standards of
division (B)(1) and (2) above.
   (C)   All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either:
      (1)   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or
      (2)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. (A recreational
vehicle is READY FOR HIGHWAY USE, if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is
attached to the site only by quick disconnect-type utilities and security
devices, and has no permanently attached structures.); or
      (3)   Meet all the requirements for new construction, including anchoring
and elevation requirements, as provided in divisions (A) and (B) above.
('81 Code, § 152.05 b.) (Ord. passed 3-5-84; Am. Ord. passed 6-11-91; Am. Ord.
passed 12-17-91; Am. Ord. passed 5-19-92; Am. Ord. 03057, passed 10-14-03; Am.
Ord. 07037, passed 6-12-07; Am. Ord. 07055, passed 9-11-07)
§ 152.25 [RESERVED].
§ 152.26 COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREAS (VE ZONES) AND COASTAL A ZONES.
   Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in §
152.06 are areas designated as coastal high hazard areas and Coastal A Zones.
These areas have special flood hazards associated with wave wash; therefore,
the following provisions apply:
   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be located
landward of the reach of the mean high tide first line of stable natural
vegetation and comply with all applicable Department of Health and
Environmental Control (DHEC) Ocean and Coastal Resource Management (OCRM)
setback requirements;
   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be elevated by
piers, piles or other open foundation systems so that the bottom of the lowest
supporting horizontal member (including pilings or columns) is located no lower
than the design flood elevation;
   (C)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored on
pilings or columns;
   (D)   All pilings and columns and the attached structures shall be anchored
to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement, due to the effect of wind
and water loads acting simultaneously on the building components. The anchoring
and support system shall be designed with wind and water loading values that
equal or exceed the 100-year mean recurrence interval (1% annual chance flood)
and the current edition of the International Building Code or International
Residential Code as adopted by the State of South Carolina..
   (E)   There shall be no fill used as structural support. Non-compacted fill
may be used around the perimeter of a building for landscaping/aesthetic
purposes; provided the fill will wash out from storm surge, thereby rendering
the building free of obstruction prior to generating excessive loading forces,
ramping effects, or wave deflection. The Building Official shall approve design
plans for landscaping/aesthetic fill, only after the applicant has provided an
analysis by an engineer, architect and/or soil scientist, which demonstrates
that the following factors have been fully considered:
      (1)   Particle composition of fill material does not have a tendency for
excessive natural compaction;
      (2)   Volume and distribution of fill will not cause wave deflection to
adjacent properties; and
      (3)   Slope of fill will not cause wave run-up or ramping;
   (F)   There shall be no alteration of sand dunes or vegetation that would
increase the potential flood damage;
   (G)   The space below the lowest floor shall be either free of obstruction
or constructed with non-supporting, breakaway, open latticework, open privacy
slats or shutters, or insect screening intended to collapse under wind and
water loads, without causing collapse, displacement or other structural damage
to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. If
used, the open latticework or open privacy slats or shutters (“open breakaway
panels”) must be made of wood or plastic no thicker than one inch (nominal),
and at least 40% of the area of the panels formed with these materials must be
open. The panels must completely span the areas between piers or other vertical
structural supports, in accordance with division (H) below, and meet the
following design specifications:
      (1)   Design safe loading resistance of each wall shall be not less than
ten nor more than 20 pounds per square foot; or
      (2)   If more than 20 pounds per square foot, a registered professional
engineer or architect shall certify that the design wall collapse would result
from a water load less than that which would occur during the base flood event,
and the elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation system wall
not be subject to collapse, displacement or other structural damage, due to the
effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building
components during the base flood event. Maximum wind and water loading values
to be used in this determination shall each have 1% chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year (100-year mean recurrence interval).
   (H)   If open breakaway panels are utilized, such enclosed space shall not
be designed to be usable for human habitation, but shall be designed to be
usable only for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage. The
open breakaway panels may be used only around the perimeter of the space below
the elevated structure. Interior partitions or enclosures are prohibited, with
the exception of elevator shaft enclosure walls as provided in division (I)
below;
   (I)   Elevator shaft enclosure walls and access stairs attached to or
beneath an elevated building may be excluded from the breakaway requirement, if
the potential loads generated by these obstructions are considered in the
design of the building. However, in all cases, they must be constructed of
flood-resistant materials;
   (J)   Prior to construction, plans for any building that will have open
breakaway panels must be submitted to the Building Official for approval;
   (K)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure
shall not enclose the space below the lowest floor, except with open breakaway
panels, as provided for in divisions (G), (H) and (J);
   (L)   The placement of manufactured homes (mobile homes), except in an
existing manufactured home (mobile home) park or subdivision are prohibited;
provided, however, a replacement manufactured home may be placed on a lot in an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision only if the anchoring standards
of division (D) and the elevation standards of division (B) are met;
   (M)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the
design, specifications and plans for construction are in compliance with the
provisions contained in divisions (B), (C), (D), (E), (G) and (I) of this
section.
   (N)   Appurtenant features, such as swimming pools, decks and patios,
gazebos, fences, and other features as may be determined by the Building
Official as potentially causing an obstruction, must comply with the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Technical Bulletin 5-93, “Free-Of-
Obstruction Requirements for Buildings Located in Coastal High Hazard Areas”,
which is incorporated herein by reference, specifically including any
subsequent revisions thereto.
      (1)   Other small, low value accessory structures may be allowed in the
VE Zone; provided they also comply with the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) Technical Bulletin 5-93, “Free-Of-Obstruction Requirements for Buildings
Located in Coastal High Hazard Areas”. For the purposes of this division, a
SMALL ACCESSORY STRUCTURE is defined as one that has a footprint of less than
100 square feet, and a LOW VALUE ACCESSORY STRUCTURE as one that has a value of
less than $1,000.
      (2)   Any and all other obstructions located in the VE Zone shall meet
all applicable requirements of this section.
(‘81 Code, § 152.05 b.) (Ord. passed 3-5-84; Am. Ord. passed 6-11-91; Am. Ord.
passed 12-17-91; Am. Ord. passed 5-19-92; Am. Ord. 07037, passed 6-12-07; Am.
Ord. 07055, passed 9-11-07; Am. Ord. 18039, passed 6-14-18; Am. Ord. 20065,
passed 11-10-20)
§ 152.27 STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.
   (A)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
   (B)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage;
   (C)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood hazards; and
   (D)   Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development (including manufactured home parks and
subdivisions) which is greater than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres.
   (E)   Subdivision proposals for residential lots located within the Special
Stormwater Management Area, per §
152.05(B)(2), Old Village Stormwater Study Area, are subject to the following:
      (1)   Sketch plan approval from the Planning Commission. The application
shall meet all Sketch Plan Checklist items as well as submit plans relating to
existing area topography, proposed final grade elevations, area designated for
detention if deemed applicable upon further engineering study, and the location
of all stormwater related infrastructure, which may include inlets, channels,
swales, or areas of detention. Engineered designed systems are not necessary
for Sketch Plan approval.
      (2)   Subject to Single Family Stormwater Management and Tree
Preservation Program, §
150.025.
      (3)   Subject to original Ord. 18039 and subsequent amendment 22009;
Stormwater Management Guide for Homebuilders inside the Old Village Study Area.
(‘81 Code, § 152.05 c.) (Ord. passed 3-5-84; Am. Ord. passed 6-11-91; Am. Ord.
passed 12-17-91; Am. Ord. passed 5-19-92; Am. Ord. 21029, passed 5-11-21; Am.
Ord. 22009, passed 2-8-22)
§ 152.28 STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (AO ZONES).
   Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in §
152.05(A)(1) are areas designated as shallow flooding. The following provisions
shall apply within such areas:
   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures shall have the lowest floor elevated to at least as high as the
depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, in feet, above the
highest adjacent grade. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor shall
be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade.
   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential
structures shall:
      (1)   Have the lowest floor elevated to at least as high as the depth
number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, in feet, above the highest
adjacent grade. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor shall be
elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade; or
      (2)   Be completely flood-proofed together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities to or above that level so that any space below that level
is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capacity of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Certification is required as stated
in §
152.51(I).
   (C)   All structures on slopes must have drainage paths around them to guide
water away from the structures.
(Ord. 20065, passed 11-10-20)
PERMITS
§ 152.40 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   A building permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of
this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities.
('81 Code, § 152.03 c.) (Ord. passed 3-5-84; Am. Ord. passed 9-8-86; Am. Ord.
passed 9-13-88; Am. Ord. passed 6-11-91)
§ 152.41 PERMIT PROCEDURE.
   Application for a building permit shall be made to the Building Official on
forms furnished by him or her prior to any development activities, and may
include, but not be limited to, the following plans in duplicate drawn to scale
showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in
question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials or
equipment; drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing.
Specifically, the following information is required:
   (A)   Application stage.
      (1)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest
floor (including basement) of all buildings;
      (2)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential
building will be floodproofed;
      (3)   Certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect
that the nonresidential floodproofed building will meet the floodproofing
criteria in §
152.22;
      (4)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development; and
   (B)   Construction stage. Provide a floor elevation or floodproofing
certification after the lowest floor is completed, or in instances where the
building is subject to the regulations applicable to coastal high hazard areas,
after placement of the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor. Upon
placement of the lowest floor, or floodproofing by whatever construction means,
or upon placement of the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor,
whichever is applicable, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to
the Building Official a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor,
floodproofed elevation, or the elevation of the lowest portion of the
horizontal structural members of the lowest floor, whichever is applicable, as
built, in relation to mean sea level. The certification shall be prepared by,
or under the direct supervision of, a registered land surveyor or professional
engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for a particular
building, the certification shall be prepared by, or under the direct
supervision of, a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. Any
work undertaken prior to submission of the certification shall be at the permit
holder’s risk. The Building Official shall review the floor elevation survey
data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the
permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted
to proceed. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make the corrections
required, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.
('81 Code, § 152.04 b.) (Ord. passed 3-5-88; Am. Ord. passed 6-11-91; Am. Ord.
passed 5-19-92; Am. Ord. passed 1-12-93)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 152.50 DESIGNATION OF BUILDING OFFICIAL AND FLOODPLAIN MANAGER.
   The Building Official and the Floodplain Manager, or their designee, are
appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter.
(‘81 Code, § 152.04 a.) (Ord. passed 3-5-88; Am. Ord. passed 6-11-91; Am. Ord.
passed 5-19-92; Am. Ord. passed 1-12-93; Am. Ord. 07055, passed 9-11-07; Am.
Ord. 24004, passed 2-15-24)
§ 152.51 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL AND FLOODPLAIN
MANAGER.
   Duties of the Building Official and the Floodplain Manager, or their
designee, shall include, but not be limited to:
   (A)   Review all development permits to assure that the permit requirements
of this chapter have been satisfied.
   (B)   Advise permittee that additional federal or state permits may be
required, and if specific federal or state permit requirements are known,
require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the
development permit.
   (C)   Notify adjacent communities and the State Water Resources Commission
prior to any alteration or relocation of a water course, and submit evidence of
such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   (D)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of the watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not
diminished.
   (E)   Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level)
of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved
buildings, in accordance with §
152.41(B).
   (F)   Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level)
to which the new or substantially improved buildings have been floodproofed, in
accordance with §
152.41(B).
   (G)   In coastal hazard areas (V-Zone), certification shall be obtained from
a registered professional engineer or architect that the building is designed
and securely anchored to adequately anchored pilings of columns in order to
withstand velocity waters and hurricane wave wash.
   (H)   In coastal high hazard areas (V-Zones), the Building Official shall
review plan for adequacy of breakaway walls in accordance with §
152.26(H).
   (I)   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular building, the Building
Official shall obtain certification from a registered professional engineer or
architect, in accordance with §
152.22.
   (J)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries
of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a
conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Building
Official shall make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the
location of the boundary shall be given reasonable opportunity to appeal the
interpretation as provided in this section.
   (K)   When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided
in accordance with §
152.06, then the Building Official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize
any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or
other source, in order to administer the provisions of §§
152.20 through
152.27.
   (L)   All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be
maintained in the office of the Building Official and shall be open for public
inspection.
   (M)   The following documents are incorporated by reference, as amended, and
may be used by the Building Official to provide further guidance and
interpretation of this section as found on the website for the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA):
      (1)   FEMA 55, Coastal Construction Manual;
      (2)   All FEMA Technical Bulletins;
      (3)   All FEMA Floodplain Management Bulletins;
      (4)   FEMA 348, Protecting Building Utilities from Flood Damage;
      (5)   FEMA 499, Home Builder’s Guide to Coastal Construction Technical
Fact Sheets; and
      (6)   FEMA 936, Floodproofing Non- Residential Buildings.
(‘81 Code, § 152.04 c.) (Ord. passed 3-5-88; Am. Ord. passed 6-11-91; Am. Ord.
passed 5-19-92; Am. Ord. passed 1-12-93; Am. Ord. 07055, passed 9-11-07; Am.
Ord. 18039, passed 6-14-18; Am. Ord. 24004, passed 2-15-24)
§ 152.52 VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Construction Board of Adjustment as established by the town shall
hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of
this chapter.
   (B)   The Construction Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals
when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Building Official in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.
   (C)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Construction Board of
Adjustment or any taxpayer may appeal such a decision to the appropriate court
as provided in the state statutes.
   (D)   Variances may be issued for the repair, rehabilitation or restoration
of historic structures (see definition) without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this section; except for §
152.53(A) and (D), and upon a determination the proposed repair or restoration
will not result in the building losing its designation as an historical
structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character
and design.
   (E)   Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a
functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this section are met, no
reasonable alternatives exist, and the development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damage and create no additional threat to public safety.
   (F)   In passing upon such applications, the Construction Board of
Adjustment shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all
standards specified in other sections of this chapter; and
      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      (5)   The necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, in the case
of a functionally- dependent facility;
      (6)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program from that area;
      (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
      (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
   (G)   Upon consideration of the factors listed above, and the purposes of
this chapter, the Construction Board of Adjustment may attach such conditions
to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of
this chapter.
(‘81 Code, § 152.04 d.) (Ord. passed 3-5-88; Am. Ord. passed 6-11-91; Am. Ord.
passed 5-19-92; Am. Ord. passed 1-12-93; Am. Ord. 18039, passed 6-14-18)
§ 152.53 CONDITIONS FOR VARIANCES.
   (A)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance
is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and
in the instance of an historical building, a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of
the building.
   (B)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
      (1)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
      (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship and;
      (3)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud upon or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
   (C)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice specifying the difference between base flood elevation and the elevation
to which the building is to be built and stating that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the
reduced lowest floor elevation.
   (D)   The Building Official shall maintain the records of all appeal actions
and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon
request.
('81 Code, § 152.04 d.) (Ord. passed 3-5-88; Am. Ord. passed 6-11-91; Am. Ord.
passed 5-19-92; Am. Ord. passed 1-12-93)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of
its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a
misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any
of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $500
or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both, and in addition shall pay all
costs and expenses involved in the case. However, no penalty shall exceed the
penalty provided by state law for similar offenses. Each day such violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained
shall prevent the town from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to
prevent or remedy any violation, including notifying the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) to initiate a Section 1316 of the National Flood
Insurance Act of 1968 action against the structure upon the finding that the
violator refuses to bring the violation into compliance with the provisions of
this chapter.
(‘81 Code, § 152.03 h.) (Ord. passed 3-5-84; Am. Ord. passed 9-8-86; Am. Ord.
passed 9-13-88; Am. Ord. passed 6-11-91; Am. Ord. 18039, passed 6-14-18)
CHAPTER 153: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND WATER QUALITY REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
153.001   Title
   
153.002   Authority and scope
   
153.003   Findings
   
153.004   Purpose
   
153.005   Severability
   
153.006   Definitions
   
153.007   Licenses and permits; complete plans to be furnished; and compliance
   
153.008   Licensed professional to do work
   
153.009   Construction authorization and compliance
Organization and Coordination
   
153.020   Administration of regulations
   
153.021   Town Stormwater Management Program (SWMP)
   
153.022   Prohibitions and exemptions
   
153.023   Coordination with other agencies
   
153.024   Cooperation with other governments
Stormwater Management Plan Requirements
   
153.040   Scope of development plans
   
153.041   Plan submission and review process
   
153.042   Drainage plan requirements
   
153.043   Stormwater pollution prevention plans
(SWPPPs)
   
153.044   Water quantity controls
   
153.045   Easements
   
153.046   Public comment
   
153.047   Ownership and town participation
   
153.048   Design standards manual
   
153.049   Best management practices manual
Maintenance and Inspection
   
153.050   Stormwater facility maintenance agreements
   
153.051   Construction inspections
   
153.052   Monitoring and long-term maintenance inspections
   
153.053   Performance bonds
   
153.060   Detection and removal of illicit connections and discharges, and
improper disposal [Reserved]
Enforcement, Variances, Appeals and Fees
   
153.070   Enforcement, penalties and abatement
   
153.080   Variances
   
153.090   Appeals
   
153.100   Charges and fees
   
153.110   Connection to conveyances
   
Appendix A: Definitions
   
Appendix B: Forms
Cross-reference:
   Stormwater Management Utility, see
Ch. 52
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Stormwater Management and Water Quality
Regulations of the Town of Mount Pleasant, South Carolina.’
(Ord. 07045, passed 8-14-07)
§ 153.002 AUTHORITY AND SCOPE.
   (A)   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred upon the
town by the South Carolina Constitution, the South Carolina General Assembly,
and in compliance with the requirements imposed upon the town by the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (“NPDES”), and all applicable state
permits and regulations issued in accordance with the federal Clean Water Act,
the South Carolina Pollution Control Act, and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
   (B)   It is the goal of the Town Council that the provisions of this chapter
will result in reduction of the discharge of pollutants to the Town MS4 and its
receiving waters, to the maximum extent practicable.
   (C)   This chapter is to be construed to further its purpose of controlling
and reducing pollutant discharges to the Town MS4 and to the waters of the
state, to assure the obligations under its NPDES permit issued by the
Department of Health and Environmental Control (DHEC), as required by 33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 and 40 C.F.R.§ 122.26.
   (D)   The application of this chapter, the provisions expressed herein, and
the federal and state stormwater regulations shall be minimum stormwater
management requirements, and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any
other town ordinances or powers granted to the town by South Carolina statues,
including, without limitation, the power to require additional or more
stringent stormwater management requirements.
   (E)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply throughout the incorporated
areas of the town.
   (F)   The Town Engineer and Stormwater Program Manager shall be primarily
responsible for the coordination and enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter, the Town Stormwater Management Program (SWMP), and the town's NPDES
permit.
   (G)   To the extent that any provisions or requirements of this chapter
overlap or duplicate the requirements of another chapter, the most stringent
requirement in the Town Code of Ordinances shall apply.
(Ord. 07045, passed 8-14-07)
§ 153.003 FINDINGS.
   The town makes the following findings:
   (A)   Uncontrolled stormwater runoff may have significant, adverse impact on
the health, safety and general welfare of the town and the quality of life of
its citizens, by transporting pollutants into receiving waters and by causing
erosion or flooding.
   (B)   The town is required by federal law (33 U.S.C. § 1342(p) and 40 C.F.R.
§ 122.26) to obtain a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit
from the South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control (“DHEC”)
for stormwater discharges from the Mount Pleasant Stormwater System. The NPDES
permit requires the town to impose controls to reduce the discharge of
pollutants in stormwater to the maximum extent practicable, using management
practices, control techniques and systems, design and engineering methods, and
such other provisions determined to be appropriate for the control of such
pollutants.
   (C)   Additionally, certain facilities that discharge stormwater associated
with an industrial activity, including land-disturbing activities, are required
to obtain NPDES permits. Also, The South Carolina Stormwater Management and
Sediment Reduction Act (S.C. Code §§ 48-14-10 et seq.) requires a state permit
for certain land-disturbing activities.
(Ord. 07045, passed 8-14-07)
§ 153.004 PURPOSE.
   (A)   It is the purpose of this chapter to protect, maintain and enhance the
environment of the town, and the short-term and long-term public health, safety
and general welfare of its citizens, by establishing requirements and
procedures to control the potential adverse effects of increased stormwater
runoff associated with both future development and existing developed land.
Proper management of stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and
private property, insure a functional drainage system, reduce the effects of
development on land and stream channel erosion, attain and maintain water
quality standards, enhance the local environment associated with the drainage
system, reduce local flooding, reduce pollutant loading to the maximum extent
practicable, and maintain to the extent practicable the pre-development runoff
characteristics of the area, and facilitate economic development while
mitigating associated pollutant, flooding and drainage impacts.
   (B)   It is further the purpose of this chapter to comply with the federal
and corresponding state stormwater discharge (NPDES) regulations (40 C.F.R. §
122.26 and S.C. Regulation 61-9.122.26) developed pursuant to the Clean Water
Act, and to assure the town of the authority to take any action required by it
to obtain and comply with its NPDES permit for stormwater discharges. Among
other things, these regulations require the town to establish legal authority
that authorizes or enables the town, at a minimum, to:
      (1)   Control the contribution of pollutants and the quality of
stormwater discharges to the Mount Pleasant Municipal Separate Storm Sewer
System (“MS4"), and stormwater discharges associated with residential,
commercial, industrial and related facilities activity, in order to achieve
compliance with all applicable state NPDES permit requirements to the maximum
extent practicable;
      (2) Prohibit illicit discharges to the Town MS4 and receiving waters;
      (3)   Control spills, dumping or disposal of materials other than
stormwater to the Town MS4 and receiving waters;
      (4) Control, through intergovernmental agreements, contribution of
pollutants from one municipal stormwater system to another;
      (5)   Require compliance with conditions in ordinances, permits,
contracts or orders;
      (6)   Ensure adequate long-term operations and maintenance of best
management practices (BMPs); and
      (7)   Carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures
necessary to determine compliance and noncompliance with permit conditions,
including the prohibition on illicit discharges to the Town MS4 and receiving
waters.
   (C)   The application of this chapter and the provisions expressed herein
shall be the minimum stormwater management requirements, and shall not be
deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by statute. In
addition, if site characteristics indicate that complying with these minimum
requirements will not provide adequate designs or protection for local property
or residents, it is the owner and operator's responsibility to exceed
management practices, control techniques and systems, design and engineering
methods, and such other programs and controls as may be required to meet all
applicable construction quality, water quantity, and water quality regulations
and requirements.
   (D)   This chapter is to be construed to further its purpose of controlling
and reducing pollutant discharges to the Town MS4 and to the waters of the
state, to assure the obligations under its NPDES permit issued by DHEC as
required by 33 U.S.C. § 1251 and 40 C.F.R. § 122.26.
(Ord. 07045, passed 8-14-07)
§ 153.005 SEVERABILITY.
   Should any word, phrase, clause or provision of this chapter be declared
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
declaration shall not affect this chapter as a whole or any part hereof, except
that specific provision declared to be invalid or unconstitutional.
(Ord. 07045, passed 8-14-07)
§ 153.006 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, definitions contained in S.C. Regulation
61-9.122.2 are incorporated herein by reference. Additional terms, phrases and
words shall have the meaning given in Appendix A.
(Ord. 07045, passed 8-14-07)
§ 153.007 LICENSES AND PERMITS REQUIRED; COMPLETE PLANS TO BE FURNISHED; AND
COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   Licenses and permits.
      (1)   Before commencing any construction, clearing or grading on any
commercial or residential tract lot, streets, road or any lands within the town
limits, all necessary licenses and permits shall be obtained; and
      (2)   Complete plans, consisting of general and specific drawings,
specifications and analysis, together with details to provide a comprehensive
plan of the construction contemplated, shall be furnished to, and approved by,
the town.
   (B)   Responsibility of developer.
      (1)   Permits and licenses, payments and notices.  The developer and
contractor shall procure all permits and licenses, pay all charges, fees, and
taxes, and give all notice necessary and incident to the due and lawful
prosecution of the work.
      (2)   Conduct of work. The developer shall at all times conduct the work
in such a manner to:
         (a)   Provide for and insure the safety and convenience of the
traveling public and of the residents along and adjacent to the streets or
roads; and
         (b)   Offer the least practicable obstruction to the flow of traffic.
      (3)   Assumption of responsibilities. The developer and contractor shall
assume their responsibilities to the public, or particularly that portion of
the public that patronizes or abuts his or her development, and the developer
and contractor shall at no time relinquish such responsibility by inferring
that the responsibility lies with the municipality or any other organization.
      (4)   Safeguarding the work.
         (a)   The developer shall provide, erect, and maintain in good
condition, all necessary barricades, suitable and sufficient lights, danger
signals and other signs, and take all necessary precautions for the protection
and safety of the workers, contractors, the public and others, in conformance
with the Uniform Manual of Traffic Safety, federal, state and local safety
codes and regulations.
         (b)   The developer shall indemnify agents and employees from all
suits or claims of any character brought because of injuries or damages
received or sustained by any person or property on account of operations of the
developer; or on account of or in consequence of any neglect in safeguarding
the work; or because of any act of omission, neglect, or misconduct of the
developer or contractor.
      (5)   Correction of deficiencies. The developer shall be responsible for
correcting any and all deficiencies in streets and stormwater management
systems, resulting from faulty design or construction, for a period of two
years from the time the streets and drainage system are accepted by the town,
as evidenced by the recording of the final plat into the town's system.
      (6)   Affidavit. The developer, engineer and prime contractor must sign a
notarized affidavit certifying that the streets and drainage system have been
built to all requirements of the town.
(Ord. 07045, passed 8-14-07)
§ 153.008 LICENSED PROFESSIONAL TO DO WORK.
   (A)   LICENSED PROFESSIONALS are registered professional engineers as
described in S.C. Code Title 40, Chapter 22.
   (B)   Plans and specifications covering road, street, parking areas,
drainage and grading work will be accepted only from registered professionals
qualified under state law.
   (C)   When submitting plans and analyses for road, street, drainage and
grading work, the professional shall place his or her seal on all documents.
   (D)   All work shall be based on surveys prepared by a professional licensed
in the state and shall conform to Class “A” surveys, as defined by the State
Board of Registration for Land Surveys.
   (E)   Nothing contained within this chapter shall relieve the design
professional of his or her responsibility to provide sound design, or any
liability for failure to provide sufficient inspection to insure that
construction complies with the design.
('81 Code, § 154.31) (Ord. passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-02; Am.
Ord. 07045, passed 8-14-07)
§ 153.009 CONSTRUCTION AUTHORIZATION AND COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   Conformance to plans.
      (1)   Finished surfaces and drainage systems in all cases shall conform
to cross sections, dimensions, erosion controls, and grades shown on the
approved plans.
      (2)   Deviations from the plans.
         (a)   Any major deviations from the plans during construction or
otherwise shall, in all cases, be approved by the Town Engineer and authorized,
in writing, prior to the construction of all deviations.
         (b)   Minor variations may be made and shown on the as-built plans.
      (3)   All drainage system construction shall be done in accordance with
the latest edition of the State Highway Department Standard Specifications for
Highway Construction, the South Carolina DHEC Stormwater Management BMP
Handbook, the Town stormwater BMP manual, if available, and all applicable town
ordinances, design standards, and other requirements that may be adopted or
implemented.
         (a)   Field and laboratory testing shall be provided by others.
         (b)   Field and laboratory test results shall be furnished to the town
in accordance with the requirements provided by the Town Engineer or his or her
representative.
      (4)   The developer shall furnish the services of a licensed
professional, as described in §
153.008, to prepare the necessary plats, analyses and plans for ascertaining
whether or not the work performed and materials used in conjunction with the
public streets and drainage systems are in accordance with the requirements and
intent of these specifications.
      (5)   Any work done or materials used without supervision or inspection
of the licensed professional or his or her representatives may be ordered
removed and replaced at the developer's expense.
      (6)   Failure to reject any defective work or material shall not in any
way prevent later rejection, when such defect is discovered.
      (7)   Final inspection will be made by the Town Engineer, or his or her
designee, and acceptance of streets and drainage systems will be made by the
Director of Engineering and Development Services or his or her designee prior
to approval.
   (B)   Compliance with plans.
      (1)   An inspecting professional shall observe construction for
compliance with plans and specifications approved by the town.
      (2)   If construction is found to be in compliance with the plans and
specifications, the inspecting professional shall make the required
certification as to the observation of construction.
      (3)   Should the inspecting professional find that construction is not in
compliance with the plans and specifications, he or she should notify all
concerned, including the Director of Engineering and Development Services or
his or her designee, that he or she will not make the required certification.
      (4)   The inspecting professional shall be a certified professional in
the state and, therefore, is responsible for seeing that the observations of
construction satisfy this requirement, including the intent of the state laws,
and that the public is protected.
      (5)   The inspecting professional for the SWPPP portion of the project
must meet the qualifications requirements set forth in §
153.043(I).
      (6)   The inspecting professional is not an employee of the town, but
rather a professional whose services are obtained by those undertaking the
work.
      (7)   The inspecting professional shall be identified on the plans by
name, firm name, address and telephone number.
      (8)   In the event the inspecting professional is changed:
         (a)   The named inspecting professional shall certify to the work
completed;
         (b)   The developer shall notify the Director of Engineering and
Development Services or his or her designee, of the change in writing; and
         (c)   A new named professional shall certify the remaining work done.
   (C)   Log. All observations by the professional shall be logged, and a copy
of the log shall be provided at the time of request for acceptance of the work
by the town.
   (D)   As-built plans. As-built plans, as referenced in §
155.026(A)(2), shall be furnished to the Director of Planning and Development
upon completion of the work, prior to final acceptance.
   (E)   Certificate of compliance. For the development or construction on all
individual lots, the certificate of compliance, as set forth in
Chapter 155, Appendix B, § 13, shall be signed by the property owner prior to
the issuance of a building permit.
   (F)   Materials and workmanship certification/ as-built certification. The
owner shall provide a materials and workmanship certification/as-built
certification, as set forth in
Chapter 155, Appendix B, § 8, and is required before final plat approval or
issuance, and shall accompany the permit in non-subdivision areas where
improvements are made.
   (G)   Two-year warranty.
      (1)   The developer shall execute an agreement guaranteeing the required
public street and drainage improvements against defect in workmanship and
materials for two years after acceptance of such improvements by the town, as
documented by the date of recording the initial plat with the RMC office.
         (a)   Under this two-year warranty included in
Chapter 155, Appendix B, § 7, the developer is noted as responsible for
maintaining free and clear drainage systems and protecting the drainage system
from damages during the warranty period.
         (b)   Therefore, the developer shall be responsible for:
            1.   Maintaining clean drainage systems during the two-year
warranty period; and
            2.   All costs associated with cleaning and repairing the drainage
systems.
         (c)   Failure to respond to cleaning and repair requests, within the
time frame specified by the town, shall result in the cessation of future phase
work until such a time as the drainage system is cleared, repaired and accepted
by the Town Engineer or town inspection official.
      (2)   The agreement shall be submitted to the Director of Engineering and
Development Services or his or her designee.
      (3)   Along with the Director's recommendation, the town may require a
cash bond or other acceptable surety, in an amount to be determined by the
Director, in addition to the agreement.
      (4)   The two-year warranty period on the piped drainage systems shall
not terminate until an inspection has been performed by a town inspection
official.
         (a)   This inspection will be to ensure that all portions of the
drainage systems are free and clear of silt, sediment and trash associated with
construction activities, and free from defects or damages prior to acceptance
by the town.
         (b)   Video inspections of the drainage system shall be submitted to
the Director of Engineering and Development Services or his or her designee.
   (H)   As-built submittals and facility agreements.
      (1)   Acceptable as-built plans shall be submitted at the time of
application for final plat approval, or upon completion of the work and prior
to:
         (a)   The use or occupancy of any commercial or industrial site;
         (b)   Final acceptance of any road into the Official Town Road
Inventory;
         (c)   Release of any bond held by the town;
         (d)   Approval and/or acceptance for recording of map, plat or
drawing, the intent of which is to cause a division of a single parcel of land
into two or more parcels; and
      (2)   The licensed professional shall certify that:
         (a)   The facilities have been constructed as shown on the as-built
plan, and
         (b)   The facilities meet the approved drainage plan and
specifications.
      (3)   The owner shall submit a copy of the signed permanent stormwater
system maintenance and responsibility agreement, as set forth in
Chapter 155, Appendix B, § 15.
   (I)   Final inspection. A final inspection shall be conducted by the
Director of Engineering and Development Services or his or her designee, upon
completion of the work included in the approved drainage plan, to determine if
the completed work is constructed in accordance with the plan. This inspection
shall be documented in a log/checklist in accordance with
Chapter 155, Appendix B, § 1, Final Inspection Checklist. A complete and
approved checklist shall be submitted for both final plat and end of warranty
approvals.
(Ord. 07045, passed 8-14-07; Am. Ord. 13027, passed 6-11-13; Am. Ord. 21039,
passed 5-11-21)
ORGANIZATION AND COORDINATION
§ 153.020 ADMINISTRATION OF REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The Town Council may, at its discretion, amend or change this chapter
or adopt additional regulations or resolutions to implement this chapter,
comply with the NPDES permit, implement the Stormwater Management Program
(“SWMP”), or to otherwise further the goal of protecting the quality of the
waters into which the Town MS4 outfalls flow.
   (B)   Federal regulations governing stormwater management, as specified in
40 C.F.R. § 122.26, and State regulations, as specified in S.C. Regulation 61-
9.122.26 adopted pursuant thereto, and S.C. Regulation 72.300 et seq. are
adopted as the minimum requirements for all facilities as defined in the
respective regulations.
   (C)   The Town Engineer and Stormwater Program Manager shall be responsible
for day-to-day coordination, implementation and enforcement of this chapter and
the SWMP. This includes, but is not limited to: the SWMP's monitoring program
and the SWMP's stormwater management programs for commercial and residential
activities, construction site runoff, post-construction run-off control, and
illicit discharges and improper disposal. The Town Engineer shall be primarily
responsible for activities related to design and construction activities, and
the Stormwater Program Manager shall be primarily responsible for activities
related to monitoring and inspection. Without limitation of the foregoing, the
Town Engineer and Stormwater Program Manager have the following specific powers
and duties:
      (1)   To issue any permit, certification or license that may be required
by the SWMP;
      (2)   To deny a facility connection to the MS4 or discharge to waters of
the state, if state, federal, or stormwater ordinances and regulations are not
met.
      (3)   To approve BMP plans, and to require as a condition of such
approvals, structural or nonstructural controls, practices, devices or
operating procedures required under the SWMP.
      (4)   To require performance bonds of any person to secure that person's
compliance with any BMP plan, permit, certificate, license or authorization
issued or approved by the Town Engineer or Stormwater Program Manager pursuant
to the SWMP.
      (5)   To comply with all federal and state regulatory requirements,
promulgated or imposed pursuant to the Clean Water Act and the South Carolina
Stormwater Management Act, applicable to the management of stormwater
discharges to or from the Town MS4.
      (6)   To conduct all activities necessary to carry out the stormwater
management program and other requirements included in the town NPDES permit,
the SWMP and this chapter, and to pursue the necessary means and resources
required to properly fulfill this responsibility.
      (7)   In compliance with the Mount Pleasant Code of Ordinances and
procurement policies, to enter into agreements with other governmental entities
or private persons or entities to provide or procure services to conduct and
carry out stormwater management activities, provided proper administrative and
Council approval processes are followed.
      (8)   To maintain the stormwater system consistent with the provisions of
the town NPDES permit, the SWMP and this chapter.
      (9)   To direct, review and recommend for approval by Town Council, the
stormwater management operating budget.
      (10)   To direct, review and recommend for approval by Town Council
necessary changes to the existing Stormwater Management Program.
      (11)   To issue stop work and other orders necessary to insure compliance
with this chapter.
(Ord. 07045, passed 8-14-07)
§ 153.021 TOWN STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM (SWMP).
   (A)   The SWMP developed by the town to comply with the NPDES stormwater
permit serves as the basis for the town's program implementation and
administration. As amended from time to time by the town, the SWMP is hereby
adopted for the life of the town's stormwater system NPDES permit as the
official operational program. The mapping and geographic information system
developed as part of the SWMP shall serve as the official authoritative
information source for program administration.
   (B)   The Town Engineer and Stormwater Program Manager shall implement and
conduct the town's operations according to the Town Stormwater Management
Program. The SWMP serves as the basis for compliance with the NPDES stormwater
permit granted to the town under the provisions of the Water Quality Act of
1987 and 40 C.F.R. § 122.26. This management program is more fully described in
the NPDES stormwater permit, which defines the terms and conditions of the
town's authority to operate its stormwater system.
   (C)   By way of summary only, the SWMP includes the following mandated
elements:
      (1)   A description of structural and source control measures to reduce
pollutants from runoff from commercial and residential areas;
      (2)   A description of a program to implement and maintain structural and
nonstructural best management practices to reduce pollutants in stormwater
runoff from construction sites to the stormwater system.
      (3)   Illicit discharge program.  [Reserved]
      (4)   Monitoring program. [Reserved]
(Ord. 07045, passed 8-14-07)
§ 153.022 PROHIBITIONS AND EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall develop any land or dispose of any hazardous or toxic
substance or other pollutant without having provided for compliance with this
chapter, and with any program, plan, permit, or regulation of the Town SWMP
adopted in accordance with this chapter.
      (1)   The following development activities are exempt from the provisions
of this chapter:
         (a)   Construction or improvement of single-family residences or their
accessory buildings, which are separately built and not part of multiple
construction of a subdivision development, are exempted from division (A)(1)
above; provided they are in compliance with the
Chapter 155, Appendix B, § 13, Certificate of Compliance.
         (b)   Land-disturbing activities on agricultural land for production
of plants and animals useful to man, including but not limited to: forages and
sod crops, grains and feed crops, tobacco, cotton and peanuts; dairy animals
and dairy products; poultry and poultry products; livestock, including beef
cattle, sheep, swine, horses, ponies, mules or goats, including the breeding
and grazing of these animals; bees; fur animals and aquaculture, except that
the construction of an agricultural structure of one or more acres, such as
broiler houses, machine sheds, repair shops and other major buildings, and
which require the issuance of a building permit, shall require the submittal
and approval of a drainage plan prior to the start of the land-disturbing
activity.
         (c)   Land-disturbing activities undertaken on forestland for the
production and harvesting of timber and timber products.
(Ord. 07045, passed 8-14-07; Am. Ord. 13027, passed 6-11-13)
§ 153.023 COORDINATION WITH OTHER AGENCIES.
   The Town Engineer and Stormwater Program Manager shall coordinate the town's
activities with other federal, state and local agencies that manage and perform
functions relating to the protection of receiving waters. Authority not
expressly reserved for other agencies or restricted by statute is placed with
the Town Engineer and Stormwater Program Manager for the protection and
preservation of receiving waters.
(Ord. 07045, passed 8-14-07)
§ 153.024 COOPERATION WITH OTHER GOVERNMENTS.
   (A)   The town may enter into agreements with other governmental and private
entities to carry out the purposes of this chapter. These agreements may
include, but are not limited to, enforcement, resolution of disputes,
cooperative monitoring, cooperative management of stormwater systems, and
cooperative implementation of stormwater management programs.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter or in this section shall be construed as
limitation or repeal of any ordinances of these local governments or of the
powers granted to these local governments by the South Carolina Constitution or
South Carolina statutes, including, without limitation, the power to require
additional or more stringent stormwater management requirements within their
jurisdictional boundaries.
(Ord. 07045, passed 8-14-07)
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN REQUIREMENTS
§ 153.040 SCOPE OF DEVELOPMENT PLANS.
   (A)   In developing plans for residential, commercial or industrial
subdivisions, individual lots in a development shall be required to obtain and
comply with the town water quality approval letter, and the development, as a
whole, shall be considered to be a single land-disturbing activity requiring a
permit. Hydrologic parameters that reflect the ultimate subdivision development
shall be used in all engineering calculations.
   (B)   If individual lots or sections in a development are being developed by
different property owners, all land-disturbing activities related to the
development shall be covered by the approved drainage plan for the development.
Individual lot owners or developers shall sign a certificate of compliance that
all activities on that lot will be carried out in accordance with the approved
drainage plan for the subdivision.
   (C)   Subdivisions that were approved prior to the effective date of these
regulations are exempt from these requirements. Development of new phases of
existing subdivisions, which have not received preliminary plat approval and
are not exempted in §
153.022, shall comply with the provisions of these regulations.
   (D)   For residential land-disturbing activities involving less than one
acre of actual land disturbance, which are not part of a larger common plan of
development or sale, the property owner shall submit a simplified stormwater
management control plan meeting the requirements listed in
Chapter 155, Appendix B, § 13.
   (E)   For commercial land-disturbing activities involving less than one acre
of actual land disturbance, which are not part of a larger common plan of
development or sale:
      (1)   If the development is greater than 5,000 square feet or is
increasing impervious area by more than 10%, the project must meet the standard
stormwater requirements;
      (2)   But if the development is less than 5,000 square feet and does not
increase impervious area by 10%, then a simplified stormwater management
control plan meeting the requirements listed in
Chapter 155, Appendix B, § 13 must be submitted.
      (3)   The simplified plan shall show proposed and existing contours,
direction of flow, and erosion control measures.
   (F)   For land-disturbing activities disturbing more than one acre, all of
the requirements of a drainage plan apply.
   (G)   For land-disturbance activities that are 25 acres or greater and
discharge the pollutant or pollutant(s) of concern to a water body on the most
current South Carolina 303(d) List of Impaired Waters, the stormwater pollution
prevention plans prepared by applicants for construction sites must contain a
written quantitative and qualitative assessment, showing that the BMPs selected
will control the construction and post-construction stormwater discharges so
that the stormwater discharges will not cause or contribute to a violation of
water quality standards. A copy of the 303(d) list can be obtained from Water
Quality Division, Bureau of Water, SCDHEC.
(Ord. 07045, passed 8-14-07; Am. Ord. 13027, passed 6-11-13)
§ 153.041 PLAN SUBMISSION AND REVIEW PROCESS.
   (A)   A drainage plan that includes a stormwater pollution prevention plan
(SWPPP), as described in §
153.043, is required with the preliminary plat submittal or prior to the
issuance of any building permit, unless exempted in §
153.022.
   (B)   All applicable town water quality plan review fees, if any, are due
upon submittal of the drainage plan.
   (C)   A complete Stormwater Discharges from Large and Small Construction
Activities, NPDES General Permit SCR 100000 NOI form, appropriately signed
under state requirements, and a check for the applicable state NPDES permit
fees, made payable to the town, is also due upon submittal of the drainage
plan.
   (D)   A drainage plan must be submitted and approved by the Town Engineer.
   (E)   The drainage plan must meet all design requirements and include all
submittal information identified in §
153.043, Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plans (SWPPPs), §
153.044, Water Quantity Controls, and in the drainage master plan checklist in
Chapter 153, Appendix B, or other appropriate checklists provided by the
Department of Planning and Development, as may be amended from time to time.
   (F)   Should any drainage plan involve any stormwater management facilities
or land to be dedicated to public use, the same information shall also be
submitted for review and approval to the department having jurisdiction over
the land or other appropriate departments or agencies identified by the Town
Engineer for review and approval. This drainage plan shall serve as the basis
for all subsequent construction.
   (G)   The drainage plan may be reviewed, if needed, with the designer, after
town review, where it will be approved, approved with changes, or rejected. If
rejected, changes, additional analysis or other information needed to approve
the next submittal of the plan shall be identified.
   (H)   Once a water quality letter of approval for the drainage plan has been
issued by the Town Engineer and the appeal time period has lapsed, the town
will forward the project NOI to SCDHEC for review and approval.
   (I)   Upon receipt of NPDES permit approval from SCDHEC and a construction
authorization letter from the Town Engineer, an application for a clearing and
grading permit may be submitted.
   (J)   For projects disturbing one acre or greater, all applicable NPDES
inspection fees, if any, are due at the time of application for a clearing and
grading permit.
   (K)   For residential projects disturbing less than one acre, all applicable
NPDES inspection fees, if any, are due at the time of application for a
building permit.
   (L)   Coordination required.
      (1)   All land development activity must comply with all applicable
federal, state and local regulations.
      (2)   A coordination letter from SCDHEC-OCRM shall be submitted to the
town before a clearing and grading permit will be issued.
      (3)   No project shall receive final approval or acceptance by the town,
nor will a certificate of occupancy be issued for commercial projects, until
such time as a statement is received from the project engineer certifying that
construction is complete and in accordance with approved plans.
   (M)   No clearing and grading permit shall be issued or modified without the
following:
      (1)   Right of entry for emergency maintenance if necessary;
      (2)   Right of entry for inspections;
      (3)   Any off-site easements needed;
      (4)   An approved drainage plan and SWPPP, as appropriate.
      (5)   Evidence of a receipt of all other required permits, including
necessary federal, state or local approvals.
      (6)   Properly installed silt fence and tree protection.
      (7)   A pre-construction meeting with town staff to review the project
scope, requirements, and that proper documentary procedures are followed.
   (N)   The approved drainage plan shall contain certification by the engineer
that all land clearing, construction, development and drainage will be done
according to the drainage plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all
site grading permits may be revoked at any time, if the construction of
stormwater management facilities is not in strict accordance with approved
plans.
   (O)   Design certifications, as set forth in Chapter 155, § 14 of
Appendix B, shall be furnished with all proposed construction.
('81 Code, §§ 154.36, 154.43, 156.005, 156.011, 156.012) (Ord. passed 6-9-92;
Am. Ord. passed 2-9-93; Am. Ord. 93066, passed 2-8-94; Am. Ord. 99012, passed
4-21-99; Am. Ord. 99016, passed 6-8-99; Am. Ord. 00035, passed 7-11-00; Am.
Ord. 00063, passed 1-9-01; Am. Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-02; Am. Ord. 06016,
passed 4-12-06; Am. Ord. 07045, passed 8-14-07; Am. Ord. 13027, passed 6-11-13;
Am. Ord. 23016, passed 5-9-23)
§ 153.042 DRAINAGE PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Storm drainage. A drainage system shall be designed and constructed to
provide for the proper drainage of the surface water and the drainage area of
which it is a part, to permit the unimpeded flow of natural watercourses, to
provide for water quality control, and where necessary, water quality
improvements. The information, plans, specifications, certifications and design
evaluations described in the drainage master plan, preliminary plat checklist,
or site plan checklist, whichever is appropriate, shall be submitted to the
Town Engineer. Checklists shall be provided by the Department of Engineering
and Development Services, and may be amended from time to time.
      (1)   Design and construction standards.
         (a)   Drainage systems shall be designed by a licensed engineer and
constructed by the subdivider/developer consistent with the design principals
and standards contained herein, described in the Town BMP manual and
established by SCDHEC-OCRM.
         (b)   In all cases, drainage systems shall conform to cross sections,
dimensions, erosion control measures and grades as shown on the approved
construction plans.
      (2)   Watershed. The watershed containing the site shall be shown, and
shall be extended to a natural watercourse or publicly maintained drainage
facility that is adequate to receive the storm drainage.
      (3)   Connection to public storm sewers. Where adequate existing public
storm sewers are reasonably accessible, as determined by the Director of
Engineering and Development Services or his or her designee, the system
proposed for the land being subdivided is required to be connected thereto.
      (4)   Ditches and swales.
         (a)   Open drainage ditches (a DITCH is a waterway with side slopes 3:
1 or steeper) shall not be permitted in the town.
         (b)   Existing ditches above the SCDHEC-OCRM critical line shall be
piped, filled and regraded, based upon staff recommendations.
         (c)   SWALES are grass-lined drainage ways with 10 to 1 side slopes,
and are encouraged as a means to manage stormwater in a manner that is
protective of water quality.
      (5)   Positive drainage for each lot. The subdivider/developer shall be
responsible for including as part of the drainage plan provisions for positive
drainage for each lot individually as a part of the project development.
         (a)   Individual lot drainage shall be detailed on the construction
plans and shall include, but not be limited to, yard drains for lawn areas,
side and rear yard features to include swales and a piped system of inlets and
other items necessary for the removal of water from the lot.
         (b)   It is not necessary to provide pad-ready lots during subdivision
development.
         (c)   However, positive drainage is required for each lot prior to
plat approval.
         (d)   Rear yard pipe systems are required and shall be designed to
accommodate ten-year storm events.
         (e)   Inlets shall be standard 6490 modified grate or an equivalent
designed to minimize debris clogging.
      (6)   Inspection fee. Upon application for preliminary subdivision plat,
the applicant shall submit such inspection fee for drainage systems, based upon
a per linear foot of roadway centerline as may be established by Town Council.
      (7)   Permanent erosion control features and drainage systems for streets
and lots. Filling, grading, permanent erosion control features, and
installation of drainage systems for lots and streets shall be provided prior
to final plat approval.
   (B)   Erosion, runoff and sedimentation control. Engineering and
construction on any land within the town shall be carried out in such a manner
as to protect neighboring persons and property from damage or loss resulting
from excessive stormwater runoff, soil erosion, or deposition upon private
property or public streets of water-transported silt and debris.
   (C)   Plan requirements. Drainage plans shall include:
      (1)   The information, plans, specifications, certifications and design
evaluations described in the drainage master plan, preliminary plat checklist,
or site plan checklist, whichever is appropriate. Checklists shall be provided
by the Engineering and Development Services Department, and may be amended from
time to time;
      (2)   No grate inlets in the right-of way of public streets;
      (3)   A stormwater pollution prevention plan as described in §
153.043;
      (4)   A permanent maintenance plan for all stormwater management
facilities; and
      (5)   Design components that meet the following special situations, as
appropriate and as described in S.C. Regulation 72-304, Appendix B, Chapter
III, C.3.XIII.
         (a)   All projects must detain the greater of one inch of runoff from
the entire site, or one-half inch of runoff from the developed portion of the
site; and must demonstrate the rate of release extends for 24 hours and does
not exceed the pre-development flow rate.
         (b)   For projects located within 1,000 feet of shellfish beds, 1-1/
2 inches of runoff from the developed portion of the site must be retained
onsite.
         (c)   For bridges that traverse saltwater and/or critical areas.
            1.   No treatment is necessary for runoff from bridge surfaces
spanning SA waters. This runoff can be discharged through scupper drains
directly into surface waters. However, the use of scupper drains should be
limited as much as feasibly possible.
            2.   If the receiving water is either ORW or SFH, then the
stormwater management requirements shall be based on projected traffic volumes
and the presence of any nearby shellfish beds. The following matrix lists the
necessary treatment practices over the different classes of receiving waters.
            3.   The average daily traffic volume (ADT) is based upon the
design carrying capacity of the bridge.
 
Water Quality Class                           Average Daily Traffic Volume
                                              0-30,000 Greater than 30,000
ORW (within 1,000 feet of shellfish beds)     ***      ***
ORW (not within 1,000 feet of shellfish beds) **       **
SFH (within 1,000 feet of shellfish beds)     **       ***
SFH (not within 1,000 feet of shellfish beds) **       **
SA                                            *        *
 
*** The first inch of runoff from the bridge surface must be collected and
routed to an appropriate stormwater management system, or routed so that
maximum overland flow occurs encouraging infiltration before reaching the
receiving body. Periodic vacuuming of the bridge surface should be considered.
** A stormwater management plan must be implemented, which may require the
over-treatment of runoff from associated roadways to compensate for the lack of
direct treatment of runoff from the bridge surface itself. Periodic vacuuming
should be considered. The use of scupper drains should be limited as much as
feasibly possible.
* No treatment is required. The use of scupper drains should be limited as much
as feasibly possible.
         (d)   For golf courses adjacent to receiving water bodies.
            1.   Minimum setbacks from the receiving water body of 20 feet for
all manicured portions of the golf course (fairways, greens and tees) are
required, unless other acceptable management techniques are approved and
implemented to mitigate any adverse impacts.
            2.   All drainage from greens and tees must be routed to interior
lagoons or an equivalent stormwater management system.
            3.   To prevent the conversion of the stormwater system to critical
area and to maintain positive drainage at high tides, all outfalls from the
lagoon system must be located at an elevation above the critical area (if the
discharge is to critical area), and above the normal water elevation a distance
to allow for storage of the first inch of runoff. The volume that must be
stored shall be calculated by multiplying the area of all the greens and tees
by one inch.
            4.   No greens or tees shall be located on marsh hummocks or
islands, unless all drainage can be conveyed to the interior lagoon system or
to an equivalent onsite stormwater management system.
            5. Stormwater impacts to freshwater wetlands shall be limited by
providing minimum-20-foot buffers, or an accepted alternative, between
manicured areas (fairways, greens and tees) and the wetlands. This minimum
buffer must be increased if land application of treated effluent is utilized in
the area.
            6.   An integrated pest management system designed in accordance
with current best technology practices must be employed on the course to limit
the application of chemicals that, if over-applied, may leach into the ground
and adjacent surface waters.
            7.   In accordance with South Carolina Department of Health and
Environmental Control requirements, a two-foot separation must be maintained
between the surface of the golf course and the ground water table where spray
effluent is applied.
            8.   The normal ground water elevation must be established by a
registered engineer or soil scientist.
            9.   All projects within 1,000 feet of shellfish beds must retain
the first 1-1/2 inches of runoff.
            10.   If spray effluent or chemicals are applied to the turf via
the irrigation system, all spray heads must be located and set so as to prevent
any aerosols from reaching adjacent critical areas.
         (e)   For mines and landfills.
            1.   When mining or landfill projects are located within one-half
mile of receiving water bodies, pumping of ground water from sediment basins
must be done with floating intakes only. Pumping of these basins must cease
whenever the water levels come to within two feet of the pond bottom.
            2. In addition, landfill planning must be designed on a
comprehensive site basis for stormwater management and sediment/erosion control
to include management practices for each separate cell as it is phased into the
landfill.
(Ord. 07045, passed 8-14-07; Am. Ord. 13027, passed 6-11-13; Am. Ord. 21039,
passed 5-11-21)
§ 153.043 STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLANS (SWPPPs).
   (A)   Stormwater pollution prevention plan framework.
      (1)   A SWPPP must be prepared as part of the submission of any drainage
plan.
         (a)   At least one SWPPP must be developed for each construction
project covered by this plan, and a licensed engineer must prepare such SWPPP.
         (b)   For projects that disturb more than one acre, the SWPPP must be
prepared, amended when necessary, certified and stamped by a qualified
individual who is licensed as listed in §
153.008.
      (2)   The SWPPP must:
         (a)   Identify all potential sources of pollution that may reasonably
be expected to affect the quality of stormwater discharges from the
construction site;
         (b)   Describe practices to be used to reduce pollutants in stormwater
discharges from the construction site; and
         (c)   Assure compliance with the terms and conditions of the town's
water quality letter of approval, when properly implemented.
      (3)   Once a definable area has been finally stabilized, the permittee
may mark this on the SWPPP, and no further SWPPP or inspection requirements
apply to that portion of the site (e.g., earth-disturbing activities around one
of three buildings in a complex are done and the area is finally stabilized,
one mile of a roadway or pipeline project is done and finally stabilized, and
the like).
      (4)   The permittee must implement the SWPPP as written from commencement
of construction activity until final stabilization is complete.
   (B)   Allowable non-stormwater discharges. The following non-stormwater
discharges are authorized, provided the non-stormwater component of the
discharge is in compliance with § 153.043(E), Management of non-stormwater
discharges allowed under §
153.042(B):
      (1)   Discharges from firefighting activities;
         (2)   Fire hydrant flushings;
         (3)   Waters used to wash vehicles, where detergents are not used;
         (4)   Water used to control dust;
         (5)   Potable water, including uncontaminated water line flushings;
         (6)   Routine external building wash down that does not use
detergents;
         (7)   Pavement wash waters, where spills or leaks of toxic or
hazardous materials have not occurred (unless all spilled material has been
removed), and where detergents are not used;
         (8)   Uncontaminated air conditioning or compressor condensate;
         (9)   Uncontaminated ground water or spring water;
         (10)   Foundation or footing drains, where flows are not contaminated
with process materials such as solvents;
         (11)   Uncontaminated excavation dewatering;
         (12)   Landscape irrigation.
   (C)   SWPPP contents: site and activity description.
      (1)   The SWPPP must identify all operators for the project site, and the
areas of the site over which each operator has control.
      (2)   The SWPPP must describe the nature of the construction activity,
including:
         (a)   The intended sequence and timing of planned major activities
that disturb soils, such as clearing and grubbing, initial and final grading,
and cut and fill activities at the site;
         (b)   Estimates of the total area expected to be disturbed by
excavation, grading, or other construction activities, including dedicated off-
site borrow and fill areas; and
         (c)   A general location map (e.g., USGS quadrangle map, a portion of
a city or county map, or other map) with enough detail to identify the location
of the construction site and surface waters of the state within one mile of the
site.
      (3)   The SWPPP must contain a legible site map, showing the entire site,
identifying:
         (a)   Direction(s) of stormwater flow and approximate slopes
anticipated after major grading activities;
         (b)   Locations of off-site material, waste, borrow or construction
equipment storage areas, excluding roll-off containers;
         (c)   Locations of all surface waters of the state (including
wetlands);
         (d)   Locations where stormwater discharges to a surface water; and
         (e)   Areas where final stabilization has been accomplished and no
further construction-phase permit requirements apply.
      (4)   The SWPPP must describe and identify the location and description
of any stormwater discharge associated with industrial activity other than
construction at the site. This includes stormwater discharges from dedicated
asphalt plants and dedicated concrete plants that are covered by this permit.
   (D)   SWPPP contents: controls to reduce pollutants.
      (1)   The SWPPP must include a description of all pollution control
measures (i.e., BMPs) that will be implemented as part of the construction
activity to control pollutants in stormwater discharges. For each major
activity identified in the project description, the SWPPP must clearly describe
control measures necessary to comply with this chapter and applicable laws and
regulations, the general sequence during the construction process in which the
measures will be implemented, and which operator is responsible for the control
measure's implementation.
      (2)   The SWPPP must include a description of interim and permanent
stabilization practices for the site, including a schedule of when the
practices will be implemented. Site plans should ensure that existing
vegetation is preserved where possible, and that disturbed portions of the site
are stabilized.
      (3)   For sites with stormwater discharges to receiving waters listed as
impaired in South Carolina's 303(d) List of Impaired Waters, the following
requirements apply:
         (a)   If a total maximum daily load (TMDL) that is applicable to
stormwater construction discharges has been established and is in effect, then:
            1.   SWPPP measures or controls that are consistent with the
assumptions and requirements of such TMDL must be incorporated into the
drainage plan; and
            2.   The SWPPP must incorporate any conditions applicable to
project discharges necessary for consistency with the assumptions and
requirements of such TMDL; and
            3.   If a specific wasteload allocation has been established that
would apply to project discharges, the SWPPP must incorporate that allocation
and implement necessary steps to meet that allocation.
         (b)   If a TMDL has specified a general wasteload allocation
applicable to construction stormwater discharges, but no specific requirements
for construction sites have been identified in the TMDL, then:
            1.   DHEC consultation is required to confirm that adherence to a
SWPPP that meets the requirements of this chapter will be consistent with the
TMDL.
            2.   Where a TMDL has not specified a wasteload allocation
applicable to construction stormwater discharges, but has not specifically
excluded these discharges, adherence to a SWPPP that meets the requirements of
this chapter will generally be assumed to be consistent with the approved TMDL.
            3.   If the TMDL specifically precludes such discharges, the town
will not approve the project unless DHEC issues a separate stormwater permit
for the project.
         (c)   If a TMDL has not been established or is not in effect, the
SWPPP must not allow stormwater discharges that will contribute to the
violations of the water quality standards. To accomplish this, the applicant
must:
            1.   First determine whether or not a project discharge may contain
any pollutant that has caused the impairment.
            2.   If project stormwater discharges will not contain the
pollutant(s) of concern, no additional requirements are necessary.
            3.   If project discharges will contain the pollutant(s) of
concern, the BMPs selected for the site must be carefully evaluated and their
performance assessed to ensure that stormwater discharges will not contribute
to or cause a violation of water quality standards.
            4.   For projects that disturb 25 acres or more, the SWPPP must
contain a written quantitative and qualitative assessment that the BMPs
selected will control project stormwater discharges so that they will not
contribute to or cause a violation of water quality standards.
            5.   For more information, please see the DHEC publication entitled
“Antidegradation for Activities Contributing to Nonpoint Source Pollution to
Impaired Waters,” which can be downloaded at the following DHEC website:
www.scdhec.gov/eqc/water/pubs/antidegnps.pdf.
            6.   A copy of the most current 303(d) List of Impaired Waters can
be obtained from:
               Water Quality Division
               Bureau of Water SC DHEC
               2600 Bull Street
               Columbia, SC 29201
               or downloaded at the following DHEC website: www.scdhec.gov/
water/html/tmdl.html.
      (4)   The following records must be maintained as part of the SWPPP:
         (a)   Dates when major grading activities occur;
         (b)   Dates when construction activities temporarily or permanently
cease on a portion of the site. (Note: TEMPORARILY CEASING CONSTRUCTION means
ceasing construction on a portion of the site for more than 14 days. A PORTION
OF THE SITE means, but is not limited to, a PORTION OF THE SITE with dedicated
controls. Where stabilization by the 14th day is precluded by snow cover or
frozen ground conditions, stabilization measures must be initiated as soon as
practicable. Where construction activity on a portion of the site is
temporarily ceased, and earth-disturbing activities will be resumed within 14
days, temporary stabilization measures do not have to be initiated on that
portion of the site); and
         (c)   Dates when stabilization measures are initiated.
         (d)   Electronic storage of the above mentioned information is
acceptable, provided that it is referenced in the SWPPP and it is readily
available.
      (5)   The SWPPP must include a description of all post-construction
stormwater management measures that will be installed during the construction
process to control pollutants in stormwater discharges after construction
operations have been completed.
      (6)   Structural measures should be placed on upland soils to the degree
practicable. Such measures must be designed and installed in compliance with
applicable federal, local or state requirements.
      (7)   The SWPPP must describe measures to prevent the discharge of
building or other similar materials to surface waters of the state, except as
authorized by a permit issued under § 404 of the Clean Water Act. See also §
153.043 (L)(3).
      (8)   The SWPPP must describe measures to minimize, to the extent
practicable, off-site vehicle tracking of sediments onto paved surfaces and the
generation of dust.
      (9)   The SWPPP must include a description of construction and waste
materials expected to be stored on-site, with updates as appropriate. The SWPPP
must also include a description of controls, including storage practices such
as roll-off containers, to minimize exposure of the materials to stormwater,
and spill prevention and response practices.
      (10)   The SWPPP must include a description of pollutant sources from
areas other than construction (including stormwater discharges from dedicated
asphalt plants and dedicated concrete plants), and a description of controls
and measures that will be implemented at those sites to minimize pollutant
discharges. If these areas are located off the construction area on property
not owned by the owner of the project, they can be either included in the SWPPP
for the construction site, with the owner of the dedicated facility being a co-
permittee under the permit issued by the town for the project; or the owner of
the dedicated facility can obtain: (a) their own permit coverage to build the
dedicated facility; and (b) their own coverage under the Stormwater General
Permit for Industrial Activity, Permit #SCR000000, or other appropriate permit.
The method(s) selected to deal with dedicated facility areas must be addressed
in the SWPPP.
   (E)   Management of non-stormwater discharges allowed under §
153.042(B).
      (1)   The SWPPP must identify all allowable sources of non-stormwater
discharges, except for flows from firefighting activities, which are combined
with stormwater discharges associated with construction activity at the site.
      (2)   Non-stormwater discharges should be eliminated or reduced to the
extent feasible.
      (3)   The SWPPP must identify and ensure the implementation of
appropriate pollution prevention measures for the non-stormwater component(s)
of the discharge.
   (F)   Maintenance of controls.
      (1)   All erosion and sediment control measures and other protective
measures identified in the SWPPP must be maintained in effective operating
condition. If site inspections identify BMPs that are not operating
effectively, maintenance must be performed as soon as practical or as
reasonably possible, and before the next storm event whenever practicable, to
maintain the continued effectiveness of stormwater controls.
      (2)   If existing BMPs need to be modified or if additional BMPs are
necessary to comply with the requirements of this permit and/or South
Carolina’s water quality standards, implementation must be completed before the
next storm event, whenever practicable. If implementation before the next storm
event is impracticable, the situation must be documented in the SWPPP and
alternative BMPs must be implemented as soon as reasonably possible.
      (3)   Sediment from sediment traps or sedimentation ponds must be removed
as indicated in the SWPPP, or when the design capacity has been reduced by 50%,
whichever occurs first.
   (G)   Copy of permit requirements. Copies of the town water quality approval
letter, the signed and certified notice of intent form that was submitted to
DHEC, and the co-permittee certifications are required as part of the SWPPP.
Also, upon receipt, a copy of the letter from the DHEC authorizing coverage
under the DHEC construction general permit must also be included as a component
of the SWPPP.
   (H)   Applicable state or federal programs. The SWPPP must be consistent
with all applicable federal or state requirements for soil and erosion control
and stormwater management, including updates to the SWPPP as necessary to
reflect any revisions to applicable federal or state requirements for soil and
erosion control.
   (I)   Inspections. The following inspection requirements duplicate SCDHEC's
construction general permit and are included here to simplify compliance with
both the town's and the DHEC's requirements.
      (1)   After construction begins, inspections must be conducted at a
minimum in accordance with one of the two schedules listed below:
         (a)   At least once every seven calendar days, or
         (b)   At least once every 14 calendar days and within 24 hours of the
end of a storm event of one-half inch or greater.
      (2)   Inspection frequency may be reduced to once every month if the
entire site is temporarily stabilized.
      (3)   On a case-by-case basis, the town may require any permittee who has
coverage under this program to conduct inspections on a more frequent basis
than prescribed in this subsection. Examples
include, but are not limited to: permittees who have compliance problems, and
permittees whose sites’ stormwater discharges to environmentally sensitive
waters (such as waters classified as outstanding resource waters, shellfish
harvesting waters, and the like).
      (4)   Inspections must be conducted by qualified personnel, provided by
the operator or cooperatively by multiple operators. QUALIFIED PERSONNEL means
a person knowledgeable in the principles and practice of erosion and sediment
controls, who possesses the skills to assess conditions at the construction
site that could impact stormwater quality, and to assess the effectiveness of
any sediment and erosion control measures selected to control the quality of
stormwater discharges from the construction activity. This person must be
either the preparer of the SWPPP or an individual who is under the direct
supervision of the preparer of the approved SWPPP, and who meets the
requirements in this paragraph, or an individual who has been certified through
a construction site inspector certification course that has been approved by
DHEC. Inspections may also be conducted by a person with a registration
equivalent to the registration of the preparer of the SWPPP and who meets the
qualifications of this paragraph, or an individual who is under the direct
supervision of the person with an equivalent registration and who meets the
requirements in this paragraph.
      (5)   Inspections must include all areas of the site disturbed by
construction activity and areas used for storage of materials that are exposed
to precipitation. Inspectors must look for evidence of, or the potential for,
pollutants entering the stormwater conveyance system. Sedimentation and erosion
control measures identified in the SWPPP must be observed to ensure proper
operation. Discharge locations must be inspected to ascertain whether erosion
control measures are effective in preventing violations to South Carolina's
water quality standards, where accessible. Where discharge locations are
inaccessible, nearby downstream locations must be inspected to the extent that
such inspections are practicable. Locations where vehicles enter or exit the
site must be inspected for evidence of off-site sediment tracking.
      (6)   Utility line installation, pipeline construction, and other
examples of long, narrow, linear construction activities may limit the access
of inspection personnel to the areas described above. Inspection of these areas
could require that vehicles compromise temporarily or even permanently
stabilized areas, cause additional disturbance of soils, and increase the
potential for erosion. In these circumstances, controls must be inspected on
the same frequencies as other construction projects, but representative
inspections may be performed. For representative inspections, personnel must
inspect controls along the construction site for one-quarter mile above and
below each access point where a roadway, undisturbed right-of-way, or other
similar feature intersects the construction site and allows access to the areas
described above. The conditions of the controls along each inspected quarter
mile segment may be considered as representative of the condition of controls
along that reach extending from the end of the quarter mile segment to either
the end of the next quarter mile inspected segment, or to the end of the
project, whichever occurs first. Representative inspections must include any
areas where stormwater discharges to environmental sensitive waters (such as
waters classified as outstanding resource waters, shellfish harvesting waters,
and the like).
      (7)   An inspection report must be completed for each inspection required
above. At a minimum, the inspection report must include:
         (a)   The inspection date;
         (b)   Names, titles, and, if not previously given in an inspection
report, the qualifications of personnel making the inspection;
         (c)   Weather information for the period since the last inspection (or
since commencement of construction activity if the first inspection), including
a best estimate of the beginning of each storm event, duration of each storm
event, approximate amount of rainfall for each storm event (in inches), and
whether any discharges occurred;
         (d)   Weather information and a description of any discharges
occurring at the time of the inspection;
         (e)   Location(s) of discharges of sediment or other pollutants from
the site;
         (f)   Location(s) of BMPs that need maintenance;
         (g)   Location(s) of BMPs that failed to operate as designed or proved
inadequate for a particular location;
         (h)   Location(s) where additional BMPs are needed that did not exist
at the time of inspection; and
         (i)   Corrective action required, including any changes to the SWPPP
necessary and implementation dates.
         (j)   A record of each inspection and of any actions taken in
accordance with this section must be retained as part of the SWPPP for at least
three years from the date that permit coverage expires or is terminated. The
report must be signed in accordance with of § 122.22 of S.C. Regulation 61-9
      (8)   For construction sites disturbing ten acres or more, a monthly
report must be submitted to the town.
         (a)   The report must be signed in accordance with § 122.22 of S.C.
Regulation 61-9.
         (b)   In lieu of submitting monthly reports, the reports may be stored
electronically in a manner in which town personnel will have access to review
this data, such as on a dedicated website to which town personnel will have
unlimited access.
         (c)   Other forms of electronic storage of monthly reports may be
utilized once arrangements have been made with the town.
      (9)   For construction sites that disturb less than ten acres, the town
may require monthly reports to be submitted on either a project-by-project
basis or an operator-by-operator basis.
      (10)   If the information required in this subsection is already included
on the inspection forms, only copies of the inspection forms need to be
submitted to the town. If the information required in this subsection is not
included on the inspection form, then the monthly reports must include, at a
minimum, the following additional information:
         (a)   A summary of the results of the inspections conducted during the
month;
         (b)   A listing of all deficiencies noted during inspections, with the
date each deficiency was noted;
         (c)   For each deficiency noted that required corrective action:
            1.   A listing of the name(s), address(es), and telephone number(s)
of the party or parties responsible; and
            2.   A statement whether this deficiency was previously listed in a
monthly report;
         (d)   A listing of the corrective actions that were taken to remedy
any deficiencies noted, and the date each corrective action was completed;
         (e)   A statement on whether or not the SWPPP was updated to deal with
any deficiencies noted; and
         (f)   A copy of each inspection conducted during the month attached in
an appendix to the monthly report.
      (11)   For construction sites disturbing ten acres or more, in addition
to the information required above, the first monthly report submitted after
construction has started must include one copy of the co-permittee and
contractor certifications. Subsequent monthly reports on construction sites
that disturb ten acres or more must include copies of certifications for co-
permittees and contractors added after construction has started. For each co-
permittee and contractor certification submitted to the town, the preparer of
the SWPPP, or someone with a registration equivalent to that of the preparer of
the SWPPP, must certify that either an on-site or, when applicable, an off-site
pre-construction conference was held with the co-permittee or contractor in
accordance with this permit. This certification must give the date of the
conference and the responsibilities of each co-permittee and contractor.
      (12)   For construction sites disturbing less than ten acres, the owners/
operators may be required to submit the co-permittee and contractor
certifications on a case-by-case basis. When the owner/operator is required to
submit the co-permittee and contractor certifications, the preparer of the
SWPPP, or someone with a registration equivalent to that of the preparer of the
SWPPP, must certify that either an on-site or an off-site pre-construction
conference was held with the co-permittees and contractors in accordance with
this permit. This certification must give the date of the conference and the
responsibilities of each co-permittee and contractor.
      (13)   Each monthly report with one copy must be submitted to the Town
Stormwater Program Manager on or before 28th day of the month following the
reporting period. For example, the monthly report for July 2007 is due after
July 31, 2007, and on or before August 28, 2007.
      (14)   Until construction starts, the monthly report may just state that
construction activity has not started.
      (15)   When required, monthly reports must be submitted until the notice
of termination is submitted to DHEC. When the notice of termination is
submitted, it must contain a signed statement by the preparer of the SWPPP, or
a person with a registration equivalent to that of the preparer of the SWPPP,
that all work was completed to the best of his or her knowledge and belief, in
accordance with the approved SWPPP and this CGP. For projects disturbing more
than one acre, the certifying person's knowledge and belief must be based on
the results of the periodic inspections conducted by the preparer of the SWPPP
(or a person with an equivalent registration), or by a qualified individual
under his or her direct supervision in accordance with this CGP, or by an
individual certified through a construction site inspector certification course
that has been approved by DHEC.
      (16)   Copies of inspection forms and monthly reports must be submitted
to the Stormwater Program Manager at the following address:
      Town of Mount Pleasant
      P.O. Box 745
      Mount Pleasant, SC 29465
or to a designated town email address, when available.
   (J)   Maintaining an updated plan.
      (1)   The SWPPP, including the site map, must be amended whenever there
is a change in design, construction, operation or maintenance at the
construction site that will result in discharges that will cause, have the
reasonable potential to cause, or contribute to violations to South Carolina's
water quality standards.
      (2)   The SWPPP must be amended if, during inspections or investigations
by site staff or by local, state or federal officials, it is determined that
the SWPPP is ineffective in either eliminating, when reasonably possible, or
significantly minimizing pollutants in stormwater discharges from the
construction site.
      (3)   Based on the results of an inspection, the SWPPP must be modified
as necessary to include additional or modified BMPs designed to correct
problems identified. Revisions to the SWPPP must be completed within seven
calendar days following the inspection. Implementation of these additional or
modified BMPs must be accomplished as described in this section.
   (K)   Signature, plan review and making plans available.
      (1)   A copy of the SWPPP (including a copy of the permit), DHEC notice
of intent, and construction general permit coverage letter from DHEC must be
retained at the construction site (or other location easily accessible during
normal business hours to: DHEC, EPA or town officials) from the date of
commencement of construction activities to the date of final stabilization.
      (2)   If you have day-to-day operational control over SWPPP
implementation, you must have a copy of the SWPPP available at a central
location on-site for the use of all those identified as having responsibilities
under the SWPPP whenever they are on the construction site. If an on-site
location is unavailable to store the SWPPP when no personnel are present,
notice of the plan's location must be posted near the main entrance at the
construction site.
      (3)   For linear construction of roads or utilities (such as roads built
by the South Carolina Department of Transportation and utility construction,
including electrical power lines, gas lines, main sewer trunk lines, and water
distribution lines that are not part of a development), neither of which are a
part of a subdivision or other type of development project, the updated copies
of the approved SWPPP must be sent to the town in situations where it is not
practical to have the approved SWPPP on location. For South Carolina Department
of Transportation Projects where there is no construction trailer on site, the
SWPPP may be kept in the office of the SC DOT resident engineer.
      (4)   SWPPPs must be made available upon request by town. The copy of the
SWPPP that is required to be kept on-site or locally available must be made
available, in its entirety, to the town for review and copying at the time of
an on-site inspection.
      (5)   All SWPPPs must be signed and certified in accordance with § 122.22
of S.C. Regulation 61-9.
   (L)   Management practices.
      (1)   All control measures must be properly selected, installed and
maintained in accordance with any relevant manufacturer specifications and good
engineering practices. If periodic inspections or other information indicate a
control has been used inappropriately or incorrectly, the operator must replace
or modify the control for site situations as soon as practicable.
      (2)   If sediment escapes the construction site, off-site accumulations
of sediment must be removed at a frequency sufficient to minimize off-site
impacts, unless: access to the off-site property cannot be reasonably obtained
from the property owner; or DHEC agrees that it is appropriate to leave the
off-site accumulations in place.
      (3)   Litter, construction debris, oils, fuels, building products with
significant potential for impact (such as stockpiles of freshly treated
lumber), and construction chemicals that could be exposed to stormwater must be
prevented from becoming a pollutant source in stormwater discharges.
      (4)   Except as provided below, stabilization measures must be initiated
as soon as practicable in portions of the site where construction activities
have temporarily or permanently ceased, but in no case more than 14 days after
the construction activity in that portion of the site has temporarily or
permanently ceased.
         (a)   Where stabilization by the 14th day is precluded by snow cover
or frozen ground conditions, stabilization measures must be initiated as soon
as practicable.
         (b)   Where construction activity on a portion of the site is
temporarily ceased, and earth-disturbing activities will be resumed within 14
days, temporary stabilization measures do not have to be initiated on that
portion of the site.
      (5)   A combination of sediment and erosion control measures is required
to achieve maximum pollutant removal.
         (a)   Sediment basins.
            1.   For common drainage locations that serve an area with ten or
more acres disturbed at one time, a temporary (or permanent) sediment basin
that provides storage for a calculated volume of runoff from the drainage area
from at least a ten-year, 24-hour storm, or equivalent control measures, must
be provided, where attainable, until final stabilization of the site.
            2.   Where no such calculation has been performed, a temporary (or
permanent) sediment basin providing at least 3,600 cubic feet of storage per
acre drained, or equivalent control measures, must be provided, where
attainable, until final stabilization of the site.
            3.   When computing the number of acres draining into a common
location, it is not necessary to include flows from off-site areas and flows
from on-site areas that are either undisturbed or have undergone final
stabilization, where such flows are diverted around both the disturbed area and
the sediment basin.
            4.   In determining whether installing a sediment basin is
attainable, the operator may consider factors such as site soils, slope,
available area on-site, and the like. In any event, the operator must consider
public safety as a design factor for the sediment basin, and alternative
sediment controls must be used where site limitations would preclude a safe
design.
         (b)   Sediment controls for drainage locations serving ten or more
acres. For drainage locations that serve ten or more disturbed acres at one
time, and where a temporary sediment basin or equivalent controls are not
attainable, smaller sediment basins and/or sediment traps should be used. Silt
fences, vegetative buffer strips, or a combination of sediment controls that
are equivalent to sediment basins and/or sediment traps are required for all
down-slope boundaries (and for those side-slope boundaries deemed appropriate
as dictated by individual site conditions).
         (c)   Sediment controls for drainage locations serving less than ten
acres. For drainage locations serving less than ten acres, smaller sediment
basins and/or sediment traps should be used.
            1.   At a minimum, silt fences, vegetative buffer strips, or
equivalent sediment controls are required for all down-slope boundaries (and
for those side-slope boundaries deemed appropriate, as dictated by individual
site conditions) of the construction area, unless a sediment basin providing
storage for a calculated volume of runoff from at least a ten-year, 24-hour
storm, or at least 3,600 cubic feet of storage per acre drained, is provided.
            2.   If a basin is not provided, each structural control used must
be designed to handle the entire drainage area it serves.
         (d)   Increased requirements. On a case-by-case or watershed-by-
watershed basis, the town may require the use of a larger storm event and/or a
larger storage volume when designing sediment basins.
      (6)   Velocity dissipation devices must be placed at discharge locations
and along the length of any outfall channel, to provide a non-erosive flow
velocity from the structure to a water course so that the natural physical and
biological characteristics and functions are maintained and protected (e.g., no
significant changes in the hydrological regime of the receiving water).
(Ord. 07045, passed 8-14-07)
§ 153.044 WATER QUANTITY CONTROLS.
   (A)   Statement of compliance required with drainage plan submittal. A
determination that the development is in compliance with the Town Flood Damage
Prevention Ordinance (
Chapter 152) and the design standards listed in this chapter must be included
with the drainage plan submittal.
   (B)   Drainage design guidelines.
      (1)   Piped drainage systems and culverts.
         (a)   Piped collection systems for public streets (catch basins,
inlets, cross drains, and longitudinal piping) shall be designed for the ten-
year frequency storm event.
            1.   Catch basins and inlets shall be spaced so that the spread in
the street for the design flow shall not exceed eight feet.
            2.   A check should be made at all low points to determine and
minimize the impacts from less frequent storms.
            3.   All inlets shall be of the curb-opening-type and low-point
basins shall have double wings to provide for drainage flow in both directions
entering the inlet.
         (b)   Road elevations in A and V zones shall allow passage during a
five-year event as a minimum.
         (c)   Design of road culverts.
            1.   Road culverts (e.g., pipes carrying stormwater under a street
or road from one side of the right-of-way to the other) shall be designed for a
100-year frequency flood event.
            2.   The area inundated under these conditions shall be contained
within a defined drainage easement.
         (d)   The design flow, acres drained, and the hydraulic grade line for
the design flow shall be shown on the plans.
         (e)   Design of pipes and culverts.
            1.   Pipes and culverts should be designed using the methods given
in the hydraulic engineering circulars published by the Federal Highway
Administration.
            2.   The Burkli-Ziegler and Talbot formulas shall not be used since
they have questionable applicability to conditions in the town area.
            3.   All pipe joints shall be wrapped with filter fabric in 18-inch
wide sections, utilizing, at a minimum, fabric with a mass per unit area of
(English measure) 5.0 ounces per square yard, and a thickness of 60 mils; or
(metric measure) 170.0 grams per square meter, and a thickness of 1.5
millimeters.
         (f)   Energy dissipaters shall be provided as needed, where excessive
velocities occur.
         (g)   Use of reinforced concrete pipes.
            1.   Reinforced concrete pipes shall be used at public street
locations and easements designated for maintenance by the town.
            2.   Exceptions may be made by the Director of Planning and
Development for those not at street locations, provided complete data is
submitted.
         (h)   Non-corrosive pipes shall be used at all other locations,
subject to the request of and approval by the Director of Planning and
Development.
   (C)   Minimum design standards.
      (1)   A combination of storage and controlled release of stormwater
runoff shall be required for all development and construction that creates the
peak rate of runoff from the site, unless the designer certifies that no
downstream damage will occur due to the increase in runoff.
      (2)   Certifications are required at the time of approval.
      (3)   The peak release rate of stormwater from all developments where
detention is required shall not exceed the peak stormwater runoff rate from the
area in its natural undeveloped state for all intensities up to and including
the 100-year frequency.
      (4)   The same methodology must be used for calculating the pre-
development and post-development rates of runoff from a site.
      (5)   The “bowstring” method may be used for designing detention
facilities for which the drainage area is less than three acres and a factor of
two applied to the estimated volume.
      (6)   Reservoir routing techniques shall be used for designing all
detention facilities for which the drainage area is three acres or larger.
      (7)   For mosquito control, ponds are to be designed to dry in three days
or to contain a minimum permanent depth of 24 inches of water.
      (8)   All stormwater storage facilities and water quality BMPs in the
town are to be privately owned and maintained.
      (9)   Stormwater management facilities may include both structural and
nonstructural elements. Natural swales and other natural runoff conduits shall
be retained where practicable.
      (10)   Where additional stormwater management facilities are required to
satisfy the minimum control requirements, the following measures are examples
of what may be used:
         (a)   Stormwater detention structures (dry basins);
         (b)   Stormwater retention structures (wet ponds);
         (c)   Facilities designed to encourage overland flow, slow velocities
of flow, and flow through buffer zones;
         (d)   Infiltration practices.
      (11)   Where detention and retention structures are used, designs that
consolidate these facilities into a limited number of large structures will be
preferred over designs that utilize a large number of small structures.
      (12)   A waiver shall only be granted after the applicant has submitted a
certification of no impact, stamped by a professional engineer and containing
descriptions, drawings, and any other information necessary to evaluate the
proposed land-disturbing activity. A separate written waiver request shall be
required if there are subsequent additions, extensions or modifications that
would alter the approved stormwater runoff characteristics to a land-disturbing
activity receiving a waiver.
      (13)   Discharge velocities shall be reduced to provide a nonerosive
velocity flow from a structure, channel or other control measure, or the
velocity of the two-year, 24-hour-design storm runoff in the receiving waterway
prior to the land-disturbing activity, whichever is greater.
      (14)   For all stormwater management facilities, a hydrologic-hydraulic
study shall be done showing how the drainage system will function with and
without the proposed facilities. For such studies, the following land use
conditions shall be used. Existing land use data shall be taken from the most
recent aerial photograph, field checked and updated.
         (a)   For the design of the facility outlet structure, use developed
land use conditions for the area within the proposed development and existing
land use conditions for upstream areas draining to the facility.
         (b)   For any analysis of flood flows downstream from the proposed
facility, use existing land use conditions for all downstream areas.
         (c)   The effects of existing upstream detention facilities can be
considered in the hydrologic-hydraulic study.
         (d)   Drainage report format.
            1.   All basin maps submitted as part of the study shall clearly
indicate node numbers linked with any model output.
            2.   The drainage report must also have tabbed sections linked to a
table of contents.
      (15)   Drainage plans can be rejected by the Town Engineer if they
incorporate structures and facilities that will demand considerable
maintenance, will be difficult to maintain, or utilize numerous small
structures, if other alternatives are physically possible.
      (16)   The drainage system and all stormwater management structures
within the town (including both public and private portions) will be designed
to the same engineering and technical criteria and standards. The Department of
Engineering and Development Services review will be the same whether the
portion of the drainage system will be under public or private control or
ownership.
      (17)   All stormwater management measures shall be designed in accordance
with the design criteria contained in the SCDHEC or Town stormwater BMP manual
and/or stormwater design manual, using procedures contained in this manual or
procedures approved by the Town Engineer.
(Ord. 07045, passed 8-14-07; Am. Ord. 21039, passed 5-11-21)
§ 153.045 EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Drainage easements.
      (1)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way,
channel or stream, adequate acres for stormwater or drainage easements shall be
reserved, conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourses, and of
sufficient width to carry off stormwater and to provide for maintenance and
improvement of such watercourses.
      (2)   Where practicable, drainage easements shall center along or be
adjacent to a common property line.
      (3)   Drainage easements shall have a minimum width of 20 feet.
   (B)   Maintenance.
      (1)   Easements shall be deeded to the town for the purpose intended, as
shown on the plat and stated in the deed of dedication.
      (2)   Maintenance activities will be provided by the town for the
specific intended purpose only.
      (3)   The easement grants to the town the right to enter, inspect,
survey, and conduct needed activities related to the easement’s purpose.
      (4)   The town has no obligation to repair, replace or compensate the
easement owner for the trees, plants, grass, shrubs or other elements damaged
or destroyed during the course of its activities.
   (C)   Lot owner's obligations.
      (1)   Drainage easements shall not be altered after final plat approval
unless approved by the Director of Engineering and Development Services
Department.
         (a)   A site plan and such engineering calculations as are deemed
necessary shall be submitted for approval prior to undertaking such work.
         (b)   Reshaping the topographical features, installation of fences,
structures or hard surfaces shall not be permitted within any drainage
easement.
         (c)   Installation of landscaping items, except for the planting and
maintenance of low-growing grass, shall not be allowed within drainage
easements.
         (d)   Trees, shrubs, and other features remaining within drainage
easements after construction by the subdivision developer are the maintenance
responsibility of the lot owner.
         (e)   Facilities within sanitary sewer, water, utility and other
easements are subject to the requirements set forth in granting such easements.
      (2)   The Director of Engineering and Development Services or his or her
designee is authorized to assess alterations made to drainage easements.
         (a)   If remedial work is deemed necessary, the lot owner shall be
notified by letter.
         (b)   The lot owner shall have 30 days in which to correct the
conditions stated in the letter.
         (c)   A certificate of occupancy shall not be approved if unauthorized
work is undertaken that alters the draining system during building
construction.
   (D)   Easements on common property.
      (1)   Easements that benefit all lot owners, such as access easements,
drainage easements, utility easements and the like, shall be allowed over and
through the common area property.
      (2)   Private easements that exclusively benefit adjoining lot owners
shall not be allowed over and through common area property, unless good and
sufficient cause is shown that the provision of the easement will not interfere
with or otherwise compromise the intended common use and enjoyment of the
common area property by all lot owners.
      (3)   Any easements shall be initially established through the
appropriate plan or plat approval process in conjunction with the initial
establishment of the common area property.
      (4)   Subsequent new easements can only be established through the
appropriate plan or plat approval process as was utilized to initially
establish the common area property.
('81 Code, § 154.34) (Ord. passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord. 93066, passed 2-8-94; Am.
Ord. 00056, passed 11-14-00; Am. Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-02; Am. Ord. 07045,
passed 8-14-07; Am. Ord. 21039, passed 5-11-21)
§ 153.046 PUBLIC COMMENT.
   (A)   Comments regarding plan submittals or plan approvals can be submitted
to the Town Engineer at any time during the project review. All comments will
be reviewed and addressed as appropriate.
   (B)   By announcement of the agenda for Planning Commission meetings, which
are posted in advance of the meeting, the public is notified of the opportunity
for comment.
   (C)   Additionally, a listing of all projects undergoing review by the town
will be posted on the town's website: www.townofmountpleasant.com, and in the
Post and Courier newspaper on a monthly basis.
   (D)   Public comments will be accepted for a period of ten days following
the posting of the specific project.
   (E)   Public comments should be submitted in writing to the Director of
Engineering and Development Services or his or her designee.
(Ord. 07045, passed 8-14-07; Am. Ord. 21039, passed 5-11-21)
§ 153.047 OWNERSHIP AND TOWN PARTICIPATION.
   (A)   All stormwater management facilities shall be privately owned and
maintained unless the town accepts the facility for town ownership and
maintenance. The owner of all private facilities shall grant to the town a
perpetual, non-exclusive easement that allows for public inspection and
emergency repair.
   (B)   All stormwater management measures relying on designated vegetated
areas or special site features shall be privately owned and maintained as
defined on the drainage plan.
   (C)   Transfers of ownership of stormwater BMPs or stormwater retention
facilities shall be reported to the town through the ownership certificate. A
transfer of ownership responsibilities will not be considered in effect until
such form is received by the town. The transfer must include evidence of the
acceptance of the ownership transfer from both parties.
(Ord. 07045, passed 8-14-07)
§ 153.048 DESIGN STANDARDS MANUAL.
   (A)   The town may provide or develop and maintain a stormwater design
standards manual in accordance with the approved Stormwater Management Program.
In the event that the design manual has not been provided or updated, the Town
Engineer may require specific design, structural, testing, inspection or repair
standards until such time as the manual is provided.
   (B)   The stormwater design manual shall serve as guidance for the design,
construction, testing, inspection and repair of stormwater infrastructure.
   (C)   Although the intention of the manual is to establish uniform
practices, it neither replaces the need for engineering judgment nor precludes
the use of information not presented.
   (D)   Other accepted engineering procedures may be used to conduct
hydrologic and hydraulic studies if approved by the Town Engineer.
   (E)   Other options that become available and are not offered in the manual
will be accepted for review and consideration by the Town Engineer.
   (F)   Nothing in this chapter shall absolve the applicant form complying
with other land usage ordinances, regulations or policy requirements.
Applicants should ensure that their project is designed and conducted in
accordance with all other local, state and federal requirements. Reviews and
approvals of projects by town staff do not constitute approval for other
governmental regulatory requirements.
(Ord. 07045, passed 8-14-07)
§ 153.049 BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES MANUAL.
   (A)   Purpose. The town shall provide or develop and maintain a best
management practices manual in accordance with the approved Stormwater
Management Program. The best management practices manual shall serve as
guidance for the design, construction and maintenance of facilities that
discharge stormwater.
   (B)   Contents. The manual will include, but not be limited to, the
following information:
      (1)   Guidance and specifications for the preparation of stormwater
management plans. Acceptable techniques for obtaining, calculating and
presenting the information required in the plans shall be described, as will
design conditions that must be accounted for.
      (2)   Guidance in selecting environmentally sound practices for managing
stormwater. Descriptions of specific techniques and practices shall be
included. Development and use of techniques emphasizing use of natural systems
shall be encouraged.
      (3)   Minimum specifications for designing, constructing and maintaining
stormwater management facilities. These specifications shall be established in
accordance with current good engineering practices.
      (4)   Minimum easement requirements.
      (5)   Post-development performance standards for stormwater management
facilities and practices. Methodology/criteria for evaluation will include:
         (a)   Hydrologic and hydraulic evaluations;
         (b)   Evaluation of best management practices (BMPs); and
         (c)   Evaluation of downstream impacts.
      (6)   BMPs. BMPs can be either structural or nonstructural, and may be
enforced by specific prescription in zoning requirements, subdivision
regulations, or on a site-specific basis as may be prescribed to meet
management program objectives.
   (C)   Updated periodically. The manual shall be updated periodically to
reflect the most current and effective practices, and shall be made available
to the public.
   (D)   Other accepted engineering practices may be used. The manual is not
designed to replace the need for engineering judgment. Rather, other accepted
engineering procedures may be used to conduct hydrologic and hydraulic studies,
if they equal or exceed the procedures contained in the manual, or if they are
approved by the Town Engineer.
   (E)   Compliance with other governmental requirements. Nothing in this
chapter shall absolve the applicant form complying with other land usage
ordinances, regulations or policy requirements. Applicants should ensure that
their project is designed and conducted in accordance with all other local,
state and federal requirements. Reviews and approvals of projects by town staff
do not constitute approval for other governmental regulatory requirements
(Ord. 07045, passed 8-14-07)
MAINTENANCE AND INSPECTION
§ 153.050 STORMWATER FACILITY MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT.
   (A)   Submission and approval required. A proposed inspection and
maintenance agreement for all privately owned and maintained stormwater storage
control facilities shall be submitted to, and approved by, the town prior to
either the final approval of the subdivision final plat or issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.
      (1)   Such agreement shall be in the form and content acceptable to the
Town Engineer.
      (2)   The agreement shall provide access to the facility by virtue of a
nonexclusive perpetual easement granted to the town for regular inspection and
emergency maintenance of the facility.
   (B)   Contents. The maintenance agreement shall, at a minimum, contain:
      (1)   The name, address, and phone number of the owner of the facility
(s);
      (2)   The name, address, and phone number for the party responsible for
maintaining the facility(s);
      (3)   A description of the facility, including access points, easements,
restrictions, inspection and maintenance frequencies, and other pertinent data;
      (4)   A reference to the final approved as-built plans for the site and
general design standards for the facility(s);
      (5)   A statement that properties that will be served by the facility
will be granted rights to construct, use, reconstruct, repair, maintain and
access the facility; or
      (6)   A statement that each lot served by the facility is responsible for
repairs and maintenance of the facility, and any unpaid ad valorem taxes,
public assessments, and nuisance abatement liens charged against the facility,
including all interest charges together with legal fees, costs and expenses of
collection.
         (a)   If an association is delegated these responsibilities, then
membership into the association shall be mandatory for each parcel or lot
served directly or indirectly by the facility and any successive buyer.
         (b)   The association shall have the power to levy assessments for all
obligations, and all unpaid assessments shall become a lien on the individual
lot or parcel;
      (7)   An overall long-term inspection schedule for the facility(s),
including a checklist to assist the owner(s) in scheduling and determining the
need for preventative maintenance; and
      (8)   A statement that no amendments to the agreement shall be made
without the written consent of the town.
   (C)   Periodic preventative maintenance inspections. The agreement shall
provide for periodic preventive maintenance inspections by the town or its
agents.
      (1)   These inspections shall include inspections during the warranty
period, an inspection prior to the end of the two-year infrastructure warranty
period, and annual inspections in perpetuity.
      (2)   During the end of warranty inspection, the town shall request from
the owner an as-built survey of the facility prepared by a registered
professional engineer or land surveyor.
      (3)   This survey will be used to determine if the facility requires
remedial work prior to final approval by the town.
      (4)   The survey will include at a minimum:
         (a)   For pond, wetland, bio-retention, and other like systems, a
scaled drawing of the subject facility, showing its location within the
recorded boundary or easement, any surface encroachments within the drainage
easement, the bank slope and a statement of its condition, the inlet pipe and
slope protection and their condition, and the system depth (taken from a
representative sample of cross sections);
         (b)   For manufactured systems:
            1.   A scaled drawing of the subject facility showing its location
within the recorded boundary or easement, only if any surface encroachments
have been made within the drainage easement; and
            2.   A copy of the manufacturer's recommendations for system
inspection, frequency of inspection, and maintenance schedule or directives;
         (c)   A statement of the overall condition of the facility and inlet
structures by the engineer or land surveyor, along with a comparison to the
design conditions; and
         (d)   A copy of inspection and maintenance logs of the facility(s)
undertaken during the warranty period, including the amount of debris removed,
if any.
         (e)   A statement of probable cost to correct any deficiencies noted
during the inspection and survey.
   (D)   Notification of any deficiency or failure to comply. The agreement
shall provide that the registered professional performing the survey shall
notify the town and the owner(s) of any deficiency or failure to comply with
the approved design drawings.
      (1)   The agreement shall also provide that, upon failure to correct such
deficiencies within 30 days after written notice by the town, the town shall
provide for all work to place the facility in proper working condition.
      (2)   The owner(s) shall be assessed for all work performed by the town
pursuant to this section.
   (E)   Minimum requirements for long-term inspection process.
      (1)   The owner shall be responsible for inspections of the stormwater
facilities, at a minimum on an annual basis, unless a more frequent schedule is
otherwise dictated by manufacturer's recommendations.
         (a)   Inspections shall be performed by a licensed professional
engineer or a certified Clemson Post Construction BMP Inspector.
         (b)   An inspection log of findings and remediations shall be kept by
the facility owner and transferred with the property to future owners.
         (c)   Copies of these inspections and any remediation shall be sent to
the town's Stormwater Manager annually.
      (2)   Subsequent inspections of the stormwater facilities may also be
made by the town to ensure proper inspections and system upkeep.
   (F)   Certification in lieu of inspection. The Town Engineer, at his or her
sole discretion, may accept the certification of a registered professional
engineer or land surveyor in lieu of any inspection required by this agreement.
(Ord. 99016, passed 6-8-99; Am. Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-02; Am. Ord. 07045,
passed 8-14-07; Am. Ord. 21074, passed 11-9-21)
§ 153.051 CONSTRUCTION INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Schedule of inspections by a town inspecting official.
      (1)   For both public streets and development projects, inspections of
completed site work shall be conducted by a representative of the Director of
Planning and Development.
      (2)   Each phase of the work shall be approved before starting the next
phase.
      (3)   Prior to an inspection request, the developer's inspecting
professional shall verify the proper execution of the work.
      (4)   The following minimum number of inspections shall be conducted by
the town at the times indicated:
         (a)   Upon installation of initial erosion control devices;
         (b)   Upon completion of clearing and grubbing;
         (c)   Upon completion of pipe installation to include underdrains,
drainage pipes, culverts, inlets and sediment control. Pipe joints to be
inspected shall have filter fabric wrap installed, but the joint shall be left
exposed until the inspection is complete and approved, at which time the fabric
wrap may be closed and the area backfilled according to design plans and
specification;
         (d)   Upon obtaining the subgrade elevation;
         (e)   Upon completion of curbs and gutters;
         (f)   Upon completion of base placement and compaction;
         (g)   Upon completion of pavement;
         (h)   Upon final cleaning of the streets and drainage system and
completion of grassing;
         (i)   Prior to termination of final plat warranty period and the
town's acceptance of piped drainage systems.
      (5)   A minimum of one block length of street shall be prepared for each
inspection segment.
      (6)   A minimum of 48 hours shall be given prior to the time of
inspection by the town.
      (7)   The developer's inspecting professional's log shall be submitted
with the request for initial approval.
   (B)   Inspection fee schedule.
      (1)   Inspection fees. Upon application for a preliminary plat, the
applicant shall submit such inspection fees for street construction and
drainage systems, based upon a per linear foot of roadway centerline as may be
established by the Town Council.
      (2)   Reinspection fees.
         (a)   Reinspection of previously inspected portions of the work shall
be made at the rate of $100 per reinspection.
         (b)   Reinspection and fees shall be due and payable prior to approval
of a final plat.
         (c)   Failure to pay such fees as required shall cause the work not to
be accepted by the town.
   (C)   Video inspection by subdivider/developer.
      (1)   A video inspection of all storm drainage systems shall be performed
by the subdivider/developer prior to issuance of final plat, and again before
the end of the warranty period.
      (2)   The inspection shall be recorded and a copy of the inspection video
to include inspection reports shall be delivered to the Director of Engineering
and Development Services or his or her designee for review and comment.
      (3)   The video shall be provided on CD/DVD or other electronic delivery
system as technology allows.
      (4)   The inspection video and report shall be clearly labeled with the
name of the subdivider/developer, name of the construction project, phase of
development, date of inspection(s), and name of inspecting company.
      (5)   The report shall include the sequence of inspection through the
drainage system corresponding to the drainage summary on the development's
construction plans.
('81 Code, §§ 156.014 and 156.015) (Ord. passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord. 00035, passed
7-1100; Am. Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-02; Am. Ord. 06016, passed 4-12-06; Am. Ord.
07045, passed 8-14-07; Am. Ord. 21039, passed 5-11-21)
§ 153.052 MONITORING AND LONG-TERM MAINTENANCE INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Monitoring. [Reserved]
   (B)   Inspections.
      (1)   The Director of Public Services, or his or her designee, bearing
proper credentials and identification, may enter and inspect all properties for
regular inspections, periodic investigations, monitoring, observation
measurement, enforcement, sampling and testing, to effectuate the provisions of
this chapter. The Director of Public Services shall duly notify the owner of
the property or the representative on site, and the inspection shall be
conducted at reasonable times.
      (2)   Upon refusal by any property owner to permit an inspector to enter
or continue an inspection, the inspector shall terminate the inspection or
confine the inspection to areas in which no objection is raised. The inspector
shall immediately report the refusal and the grounds to the Director of Public
Services. The Director of Public Services shall promptly seek appropriate
compulsory process.
      (3)   In the event that the Director of Public Services, or his or her
designee, reasonably believes that discharges from the property into the Town
MS4 may cause an imminent and substantial threat to human health or the
environment, the inspection may take place at any time and without immediate
notice to the owner of the property or a representative on site.
         (a)   The town will make all reasonable efforts to contact the owner
of the property prior to entering the property or while in the process of
conducting the inspections.
         (b)   The inspector shall present proper credentials upon reasonable
request by the owner or representative.
      (4)   Inspection reports shall be maintained in a permanent file located
in the office of the Director of Public Services.
(Ord. 07045, passed 8-14-07)
§ 153.053 PERFORMANCE BONDS.
   (A)   Provided, however, the owner(s) thereof shall grant to the town a
perpetual nonexclusive easement that allows for public inspection and emergency
repair, in accordance with the terms of a stormwater facility maintenance
agreement, which is required hereunder and found in Chapter 155, § 15 of
Appendix B.
   (B)   The owner(s) of the stormwater facility shall post a maintenance bond,
letter of credit, cash or other security, in compliance with §
155.051(E) and acceptable to the Town Attorney, prior to the issuance of
approval of the final plat of subdivision.
   (C)   The bond or security will be offered by the owner for a period of not
less than 30 months from the date of the final plat approval.
   (D)   The surety will remain in effect until the owner, his agents,
successors or assigns fully perform the requirements in the referenced two-year
warranty in a manner satisfactory to the town.
   (E)   The amount of the security will be determined in accordance with §
155.051(E).
   (F)   All required maintenance items shall be completed by the owner and
accepted by the town, as required by the terms and conditions of the final plat
approval, prior to the release of the security.
      (1)   If the owner, his or her heirs, successors or assigns fail to
satisfy any of the above requirements, the town shall enforce the bond and draw
upon the security for up to the full amount thereof.
      (2)   The town shall be held harmless from all expenses, damages, claims
and actions arising from, or related to, the performance or nonperformance of
the work by the owner, his or her agents, employees or subcontractors.
(Ord. 07045, passed 8-14-07; Am. Ord. 13027, passed 6-11-13)
§ 153.060 DETECTION AND REMOVAL OF ILLICIT CONNECTIONS AND DISCHARGES, AND
IMPROPER DISPOSAL [RESERVED].
ENFORCEMENT, VARIANCES, APPEALS AND FEES
§ 153.070 ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES AND ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Violations.  
      (1)   Upon determination that a violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter or the SWMP has occurred, the Director of Public Services
Department or Director of Engineering and Development Services may give timely
actual notice at the property where the violation has occurred, or at the
address of the permit holder, and shall give written notice to the violator
within 15 days.
      (2)   This notice shall specify:
         (a)   The nature of the violation;
         (b)   The proposed penalty; and
         (c)   The amount of time in which to correct deficiencies, if
appropriate.
      (3)   It shall be sufficient notification to deliver the notice to the
person to whom it is addressed, or to deposit a copy of such in the United
States Mail, properly stamped, certified and addressed to the address used for
tax purposes.
   (B)   Civil penalties. 
      (1)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to a civil penalty of not more than $500 for each violation.
      (2)   Each separate day of a violation constitutes a new and separate
violation.
   (C)   Additional legal measures.
      (1)   Where the town is fined and/or placed under a compliance schedule
by the state or federal government for a violation(s) of its NPDES permit, and
the town can identify the person(s) who caused such violation(s) to occur, the
town may pass through the penalty and cost of compliance to that person(s).
      (2)   The Town Attorney may institute injunctive, mandamus or other
appropriate action or proceedings at law or equity, including criminal
conviction, for the enforcement of this chapter or to correct violations of
this chapter, and any court of competent jurisdiction shall have the right to
issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus or other
appropriate forms of remedy or relief
   (D)   Corrective action.  
      (1)   In the event a violation of this chapter has not been corrected
within the applicable time period for correction, the town, or its contractor,
may enter upon the lot or parcel of land and correct the violation.
      (2)   The costs incurred as a result of such action (including
inspection, administration, labor and equipment costs) shall be collected from
the bond, if in place and sufficient to cover such costs, or shall become a
lien upon the property and shall be collected in the same manner as town taxes
are collected.
   (E)   Stop work.  
      (1)   Any person who shall proceed with any work that requires a
stormwater management plan hereunder without first submitting a plan and
obtaining a permit, where applicable, shall have automatically placed on the
subject property a stop work order, payable to the Town Stormwater Division, an
administrative fee of $200 or the inspection and administration of the stop
work order, and/or payment of any other applicable penalties associated with
the reason for the stop work order and site protection and cleaning, prior to
lifting of the stop work order.
      (2)   The stop work order may allow or require correction of violations,
but no other project-related activities.
      (3)   Any person in violation of a stop work order is subject to
impoundment of any and all equipment on the property, and payment of all fees,
penalties and impoundment charges prior to retrieving such equipment.
   (F)   Permit suspension and revocation. A site clearing and grading permit
may be suspended or revoked if one or more of the following violations have
been committed:
      (1)   Violations of the conditions of the drainage plan approval;
      (2)   Construction not in accordance with the letter or intent of the
approved plans;
      (3)   Non-compliance with correction notice(s) or stop work order(s); or
      (4)   The existence of an immediate danger in a downstream area, in the
judgment of the Town Engineer or Stormwater Program Manager.
   (G)   Criminal penalties.  
      (1)   In addition to any applicable civil penalties, any person who
negligently, willfully or intentionally violates any provision of this article
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished within the
jurisdictional limits of magistrate's court.
      (2)   Each day of a violation shall constitute a new and separate
offense.
(Ord. 07045, passed 8-14-07; Am. Ord. 21039, passed 5-11-21)
§ 153.080 VARIANCES.
   (A)   The Director of Engineering and Development Services or his or her
designee may grant a variance from the requirements of this chapter, if
exceptional circumstances applicable to a site exist such that strict adherence
to the provisions of the chapter will result in unnecessary hardship and will
not fulfill the intent of the chapter.
   (B)   A written request for a variance shall be required and shall state the
specific variance sought, and the reasons, with supporting data, a variance
should be granted. The request shall include all information necessary to
evaluate the proposed variance.
   (C)   The Director of Engineering and Development Services or his or her
designee shall conduct a review of the request for a variance and issue a
decision within 20 working days of receiving the request.
(Ord. 07045, passed 8-14-07; Am. Ord. 21039, passed 5-11-21)
§ 153.090 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by a decision or notice of violation of town
staff may appeal the same by filing a written notice of appeal with the Town
Engineer within 30 days of the issuance of such decision or notice of
violation. If the person to whom a decision or notice of violation is directed
fails or neglects to appeal the notice of violation within 30 days of the
issuance of the decision or notice of violation, the decision or violation
becomes final.
   (B)   The Town Engineer will review the appeal and will either reverse his
decision or send the decision and notice to the Construction Board of
Adjustment. The notice of appeal shall state the specific reasons why the
violation or decision of town staff is alleged to be in error.
   (C)   The Construction Board of Adjustment shall hear and determine such
appeals in a quasi-judicial capacity, within 30 days or such other times as may
be mutually agreed upon, and will render a decision within ten working days
after the appeal has been heard.
   (D)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Construction Board of
Adjustment may appeal the decision to the Town Court of Common Pleas in
accordance with its rules and procedures.
(Ord. 07045, passed 8-14-07)
§ 153.100 CHARGES AND FEES.
   (A)   Stormwater quality fee. In addition to all other charges, fees, and
penalties, the town shall have the right to develop and impose a stormwater
quality fee to fund implementation of these stormwater management and water
quality regulations, and associated programs and plans. This fee is established
by Town Council as specified on the latest Department of Engineering and
Development Services fee schedule.
   (B)   Drainage inspection fee. The inspection fee for drainage systems is
based upon per linear foot of roadway as determined by Town Council.
   (C)   NPDES inspection fee. The inspection fee for town NPDES site
inspections shall be as follows:
      (1)   For single-family residences or sites of less than one acre.  
         (a)   The fee will be payable prior to the issuance of the building
permit, with the submittal of a signed certificate of compliance, as provided
in
Chapter 155, Appendix B, § 13.
         (b)   The Town Council establishes a fee as specified on the latest
Department of Engineering and Development Services fee schedule.
      (2)   For large residential and commercial developments that disturb one
acre or greater.
         (a)   The fee will be payable prior to the issuance of a clearing and
grading permit.
         (b)   This fee is established by Town Council, based upon the area of
disturbed land as specified on the latest Department of Engineering and
Development Services fee schedule.
   (D)    Reinspection fee. A fee as specified on the latest Department of
Engineering and Development Services fee schedule shall be charged for any
additional inspection required after the initial inspection of site work.
   (E)   Stop work fee. 
      (1)   An administrative fee as specified on the latest Department of
Engineering and Development Services fee schedule shall be charged for the
inspections and management associated with any stop work order issued.
      (2)   The fee will be payable prior to recommencement of work.
(Ord. 07045, passed 8-14-07; Am. Ord. 13027, passed 6-11-13; Am. Ord. 18103,
passed 1-8-19; Am. Ord. 24018, passed 5-16-24)
§ 153.110 CONNECTION TO CONVEYANCES.
   (A)   An encroachment permit is required for any connection to town drainage
or street systems.
   (B)   No discharges except those allowed in §
153.043(B) and/or permitted as part of the town approved drainage system are
allowed.
   (C)   All work performed in making connections to conveyances shall be
performed in such a manner as to protect the stormwater systems from structural
damages.
   (D)   Acceptable best management practices shall be utilized to protect the
drainage systems from illicit discharges, including sediment intrusion. Systems
polluted by these connection activities will require cleaning by the contractor
performing the work.
(Ord. 07045, passed 8-14-07)
APPENDIX A: DEFINITIONS
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE. A discharge prohibited by this article into the Town
Stormwater System or receiving waters, which occurs by chance and without
planning or consideration prior to occurrence.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES MANUAL or BMP MANUAL. The most recent Town manual
of design, performance, and review criteria for stormwater management
practices.
   CLEAN WATER ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended,
codified at 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et. seq.
   DESIGN STORM. A Soil Conservation Service Type III, 24-hour-duration storm,
with a specified return interval or as otherwise specified by the Town
Engineer.
   DEVELOPMENT or DEVELOP LAND. Any of the following actions undertaken by any
person, including, without limitation, any public or private individual or
entity:
      (1)   Division of a lot, tract or parcels, or other divisions by plat or
deed;
      (2)   The construction, installation or alteration of a structure,
impervious surface or drainage facility;
      (3)   Clearing, scraping, grubbing or otherwise significantly disturbing
the soil, vegetation, mud, sand or rock of a site; or
      (4)   Adding, removing, exposing, excavating, leveling, grading, digging,
burrowing, dumping, piling, dredging or otherwise disturbing the soil,
vegetation, mud, sand or rock of a site.
   ILLICIT CONNECTION. A connection to the Town Stormwater System resulting in
a discharge that is not composed entirely of stormwater runoff, except
discharges pursuant to an NPDES permit (other that the NPDES permit for the
Town Stormwater System).
   ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any activity resulting in a discharge to the Town
Stormwater System or receiving waters that is not composed entirely of
stormwater, except:
      (1)   Discharge pursuant to an NPDES permit (other than the NPDES for the
town); and
      (2)   Discharges resulting from firefighting activities.
   IMMINENT AND SUBSTANTIAL THREAT. A threat that is entering or has entered
the stormwater drainage system. The threat must be of such a nature that its
presence and quantity would cause chronic health risks and/or pose a safety
hazard to human health or the environment, if contact were to be made between
the public and the threat. The threat may be comprised of, but not limited to,
chemicals, radioactive materials, or materials in such quantity as to create
such risk. If the substance is identifiable, the material safety data sheet
should be consulted to further determine the level of threat posed.
   IMPROPER DISPOSAL. Any disposal other than through an illicit connection
that results in an illicit discharge, including but not limited to, the
disposal of used oil and toxic materials resulting from the improper management
of such substances.
   MAINTENANCE. Any action necessary to preserve stormwater management
facilities in proper working condition, in order to serve the intended purposes
set forth in this chapter and to prevent structural failure of such facilities.
   MS4 or SMS4. The Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System or Separate Municipal
Storm Sewer System, comprised solely of those portions of a stormwater system
that are owned and operated by the town.
   NPDES. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. See “Clean Water
Act.”
   NPDES PERMIT. The NPDES permit for stormwater discharges issued to the town
pursuant to the Clean Water Act and federal stormwater discharge regulations
(40 CFR § 122.26).
   OPERATOR. For the purpose of this permit and in the context of stormwater
associated with construction activity, OPERATOR means any party associated with
a construction project that meets either of the following two criteria:
      (1)   The party has operational control over construction plans and
specifications. Note: A party has “operational control over construction plans
and specifications,” if it has the authority to prepare or modify such plans
and specifications; or
      (2)   The party has “operational control over day-to-day activities” at a
project that are necessary to ensure compliance with a SWPPP for the site or
other permit conditions (e.g., it is authorized to direct workers at a site to
carry out activities required by the SWPPP or to comply with other permit
conditions). This definition is provided to inform permittees of the EPA's
interpretation of how the regulatory definitions of “owner” or “operator” and
“facility” or “activity” are applied to discharges of stormwater associated
with construction activity.
   OUTFALL. The point where the Town Stormwater System discharges to waters of
the United States.
   PERSON. Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual, association, firm, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership, two or more persons having a joint or common interest, state or
federal government, or an agent or employee thereof, or any other legal entity.
   POLLUTANT. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological
materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock,
sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged
into water.
   RECEIVING WATERS. The waters into which the Town Stormwater System outfalls
flow, and which are located within the jurisdictional boundaries of the town,
including, without limitation, the lakes, rivers, streams, ponds, wetlands and
groundwater of the town.
   REGULATION. Any REGULATION, rule or requirement prepared by the town and
adopted by the Town Council pursuant to this article.
   STORMWATER.  STORMWATER runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and
drainage.
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT. The collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and
disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner to meet the objectives of this
chapter and its terms, including but not limited to, measures that control the
increased volume and rate of stormwater runoff and water quality impacts caused
by man-made changes to the land.
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM or SWMP. The set of drawings and other
documents that comprise all of the information and specifications  for the
programs, drainage systems, structures, BMPs, concepts and techniques for the
control of stormwater, and which is incorporated as part of the NPDES permit
for the town and as part of this article.
   TOWN. Mount Pleasant, South Carolina.
   TOWN COUNCIL. The elected officials of Mount Pleasant, South Carolina.
   TOWN STORMWATER SYSTEM. The conveyance or system of conveyances (including
roads with drainage systems, highways, rights-of-way, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, storm drains, detention
ponds, and other stormwater facilities) that is:
      (1)   Owned or operated by the town;
      (2)   Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
      (3)   Not a combined sewer system; and
      (4)   Not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW).
   VARIANCE. The modification of the minimum stormwater management requirements
contained in this article and the Stormwater Management Program for specific
circumstances, where strict adherence to such requirements would result in
unnecessary hardship and not fulfill the intent of this chapter.
   WATER QUALITY. Those characteristics of stormwater runoff that relate to the
physical, chemical, biological or radiological integrity of water.
   WATER QUANTITY. Those characteristics of stormwater runoff that relate to
the rate and volume of the stormwater runoff.
(Ord. 07045, passed 8-14-07)
APPENDIX B: FORMS
Section
§ 1 DRAINAGE MASTER PLAN CHECKLIST.
   This form is to be completed by the applicant or the applicant’s
representative, and submitted with plans for projects disturbing areas greater
than or equal to one acre (1 ac.).
Project Name:
Applicant’s Name:
Consulting Firm’s Name:
Contact Person:
Date:                    Phone:
Drainage report is to be separately bound, labeled and signed, with a
professional seal affixed. This form is to be completed by applicant and
submitted in the report. (Only one set of construction drawings is needed for
initial review.)
(A)   Report requirements.
(1)   Professional certifications.
      (a)         Owner and inspecting engineer certificate.
      (b)         Certificate of design.
      (c)         Detention/retention certificate/No impact.
      (d)         Application of plat improvements.
(2)   Location map or parcel map, showing at least two main traffic corridors.
(3)   Project narrative.
      (a)         Brief description of pre- and post-developed site
                  conditions.
      (b)         Describe any existing flooding problems in the surrounding
                  area.
 
(4) USGS 7.5 minute topographic map
    (a) Show project location.
    (b) Show route of runoff from site to nearest water body and nearest
        shellfish bed, if applicable.
    (c) Show any critical areas downstream.
(5) FEMA flood zones. Include the following in the report:
    (a) Identify flood zones and referenced FIRM map date and community panel
        number.
    (b) Building minimum first floor elevation.
    (c) Identify road elevation at lowest point.
(6) Predominate soil types.
    (a) Specify soil type and the hydrological soil group.
(7) Wetlands or waters of the state.
    (a) Delineate on plans.
        For any disturbances (i.e., fill of wetlands, creek crossings, and the
    (b) like), notify the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers at 1-800-208-2054 or
        the SCDHEC-OCRM Federal Certification Section to see if additional
        permits are needed.
        If wetlands or waters of the state are to be impacted, work cannot be
    (c) performed in these designated areas until all necessary federal and
        state permits have been acquired.
(8) Pre- and post-drainage basin comparison.
    (a) Maps.
        Pre- and post-development drainage basins and discharge points should
        be labeled in a manner consistent with the drainage model input
        information. Basin boundaries should be accurately shown and
        consistently labeled with the computer model. Depict time of
        concentration routes and curve numbers where applicable. The basin
        analysis should account for all off-site runoff.
    (b) Tabulated peak flow rates for ten-, 25-, 50- and 100-year, 24-hour
        storm events.
    (c) Detention/retention (BMP) analysis, when required. See also item (9)
        below.
 
    (d) Pond volume calculations in one-foot increments. Total sediment and
        runoff storage capacity should be provided.
    (e) Pond and outfall rating table (Stage, Storage, Discharge Summary).
(9) Water quality requirements.
    (a) Sediment basins must provide a minimum trapping efficiency of 80%.
    (b) Sediment basins are required when ten or more disturbed acres drain to
        a common point.
    (c) Stormwater storage should not allow the post-development discharge to
        exceed pre-development two- and ten-year, 24-hour storm events.
    (d) Dry detention basins must contain a riprap berm or stone check coffer
        dam immediately following pond excavation.
        Temporary sediment traps should be sized to handle drainage areas of
    (e) five acres or less, and should provide a minimum storage capacity of
        1,800 cubic feet of storage for each contributing acre.
    (f) Provide pollutant of concern analysis if a 303(d) water body is
        impacted.
        Land disturbance of five acres or more must show the first one-half
    (g) inch of runoff from the entire site, or the first inch of runoff from
        the built-upon area, whichever is greater, can be stored onsite and
        released over a 24-hour period.
        Land disturbance of less than five acres must show that the first one-
        half inch of runoff from the entire site, or the first one inch of
    (h) runoff from the built-upon area, whichever is greater, can be stored
        onsite. Calculating and demonstrating that the stored water is
        released over a 24-hour period is not a requirement.
        If a project disturbs more than 25 acres and the stormwater discharges
    (i) directly into an impaired (303(d)) water body, the town must have
        assurance that stormwater runoff from the site will not cause or
        contribute to further degradation of the water body.
        If a project discharges to shellfish grounds, storage volume
    (j) calculations demonstrating that the first 1-1/2 inches of runoff are
        retained onsite must be provided.
    (k) Bridge runoff, golf course, mine or landfill design standards must be
        in compliance with DHEC-OCRM requirements.
    (l) Inlet protection is required for all inlets that do not discharge to a
        sediment basin.
 
(10)      Energy dissipators/outlet protection.
          (a) All outlets should be stabilized with riprap or approved
              sediment control BMP.
          (b) Filter fabric is to be installed beneath all riprap.
              Stable channel calculations. All channels and diversion ditches
          (c) must be able to handle the ten-year storm event with non-erosive
              velocities of less than five feet per second.
(11)      Permanent stormwater management structure maintenance plan.
              Water quality maintenance and responsibility agreement.
(B)       Construction plan requirements. All sheets must be stamped, signed
          and dated by a South Carolina-licensed professional civil engineer.
Sheet (1) Title sheet. Include title, location map, index, owner information,
          inspecting professional.
Sheet (2) Existing condition. Include one-foot contours, trees, drainage and
          existing features and wetlands.
Sheet (3) Layout plan. Include road geometry, street signs, property lines,
          all existing trees and detention areas.
Sheet (4) Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP). (See BMP manual for
          standard details.)
          (a) Construction sequence (include implementation of all stormwater
              and sediment controls in the first phase of construction).
              Location of all potential sources of pollution, including the
          (b) locations of construction debris management areas and equipment
              washout areas.
          (c) Locations of all temporary and permanent stormwater control
              measures.
          (d) Details for all temporary and permanent stormwater control
              measures.
          (e) Grassing and stabilization specifications.
          (f) Maintenance requirements (for temporary and permanent controls,
              grassing, and the like).
          (g) Construction entrance/exit.
          (h) Individual lot erosion control plan (applicable to
              subdivisions).
 
     (i) Special requirements for utility lines. Address how creek crossings
         are to be handled.
     (j) Existing and proposed easements.
         Slopes exceeding eight vertical feet should be stabilized with
     (k) synthetic or vegetative mats, in addition to hydroseeding. It may be
         necessary to install temporary slope drains during construction.
         Temporary berms may be needed until the slope is brought to grade.
         Stabilization measures shall be initiated as soon as practicable in
         portions of the site where construction activities have temporarily
Note (a) or permanently ceased, but in no case more than 14 days after work
         has ceased, unless activity in that portion of the site will resume
         within 21 days.
         All sediment and erosion control devices shall be inspected every
Note (b) seven days or every 14 calendar days, and within 24 hours of the end
         of a storm event of one-half inch or greater. Damaged or ineffective
         devices shall be repaired or replaced, as necessary.
         Provide silt fence and/or other control devices, as may be required,
Note (c) to control soil erosion during utility construction. All disturbed
         areas shall be cleaned, graded and stabilized with grassing
         immediately after the utility installation.
         All erosion control devices shall be properly maintained during all
         phases of construction until the completion of all construction
         activities and all disturbed areas have been stabilized. Additional
Note (d) control devices may be required during construction in order to
         control erosion and/or offsite sedimentation. All temporary control
         devices shall be removed once construction is complete and the site
         is stabilized.
         The contractor must take necessary action to minimize the tracking of
Note (e) mud onto the paved roadway construction areas. The contractor shall
         daily remove mud/soil from pavement, as may be required.
         Residential subdivisions require erosion control features for
         infrastructure as well as for individual lot construction. Individual
Note (f) property owners shall follow these plans during construction or
         provide an individual plan in accordance with S.C. Regulation 72-300
         et seq. and S.C. Regulation 1000000.
         Temporary diversion berms and/or ditches will be provided as needed
Note (g) during construction to protect work areas from up-slope runoff and/or
         to divert sediment-laden water to appropriate traps or stable
         outlets.
 
Sheet (5) Grading and drainage plan.
          (a) Show existing and proposed contours for each individual lot.
          (b) Pipe schedule and hydraulic analysis.
          (c) Pipe installation requirements.
Sheet (6) Storm drain profile. Profiles for all drainage pipes to be dedicated
          to the town upon completion.
          (a) Pipe profiles with ten-year hydraulic grade line.
Sheet (7) Roadway plan and profile.
              Street plan and three-line profiles showing existing grades or
              cross sections at 50-foot intervals. The plan and profile sheets
              should show street layout, width, curvature, signage, drainage,
          (a) utilities, and sidewalks. The purpose of the three-line profile
              is to include lot drainage that will be accomplished along with
              the street development so that positive lot drainage shall
              occur, and shall be maintained during construction activities
              and thereafter.
Sheet (8) Utility plan.
          (a) Water and sewer plan with sewer manhole inverts and water line
              locations.
Sheet (9) Standards details.
          (a) Typical pavement section, road cross section.
          (b) Storm drain installation requirements.
(C)       Fees.
          Water quality review fee. For land-disturbing activities involving
          more than one acre, $100 per disturbed acre review fee; maximum
          review fee not to exceed $2,000.
 
(D) Clearing and grading permit requirements.
(1) Site operators.
    (a) Contact information for all co-permittees and contractors operating at
        the site and their areas of operation.
    (b) Highway Department approval. Include drainage system approval
        documentation.
    (c) Documentation that all federal and state permits have been received.
(2) NPDES inspection fees paid.
        For single-family residences or sites of less than one acre, the fee
        will be payable prior to the issuance of the building permit, with the
    (a) submittal of a signed certificate of compliance, as provided in
        Chapter 155, Appendix B, § 13. A fee of $25 is established by the Town
        Council for sites of less than one acre.
        For large residential and commercial developments that disturb one or
    (b) more acres, the fee will be payable prior to the issuance of a clearing
        and grading permit. This fee is established by Town Council based upon
        the area of disturbed land as:
           1-5 acres — $100
           5-10 acres — $200
           10+ — $400
 
(Ord. 07045, passed 8-14-07; Am. Ord. 13027, passed 6-11-13)
CHAPTER 154: DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
Section
   
154.01   Title
   
154.02   Authority
   
154.03   Findings
   
154.04   Definitions
   
154.05   Supporting documentation
   
154.06   Jurisdiction
   
154.07   Application and exemptions
   
154.08   Provisions for affordable housing
   
154.09   Determination of fees
   
154.10   Impact fee trust funds
   
154.11   Limitation of expenditures of funds collected
   
154.12   Credits/reimbursements
   
154.13   Appeal process
   
154.14   Refunds
   
154.15   Review
   
154.16   Termination of development impact fee
   
154.17   Liberal construction
   
154.99   Penalties
   
Appendix A:   General Development Impact Fee Schedule
§ 154.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be referred to as the “Development Impact Fee Chapter for
the Town of Mount Pleasant, South Carolina"”
(Ord. 17009, passed 4-3-17; Am. Ord. 18068, passed 10-9-18)
§ 154.02 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is adopted pursuant to and in compliance with the authority of
the South Carolina Development Impact Fee Act, S.C. Code Title 6, Art. 9, Ch. 1
(the "Act"), and is to be interpreted in accordance with such Act, or as it may
be amended in the future.
(Ord. 17009, passed 4-3-17; Am. Ord. 18068, passed 10-9-18)
§ 154.03 FINDINGS.
   The Mount Pleasant Town Council hereby declares that:
   (A)   Adequate parks and recreation facilities, fire protection, municipal
facilities and equipment, and transportation system are vital and necessary to
the health, safety, welfare and prosperity of the town and its citizens.
Substantial growth and new construction is taking place within the town and is
anticipated to continue. This growth creates substantial need for new
infrastructure capacity. Meeting these needs is very costly; however, failure
to do so will result in an inadequate system of facilities and equipment to
accommodate anticipated demand. This would make the town a less desirable place
to live and do business and be detrimental to the health, safety, welfare and
prosperity of the town and its citizens.
   (B)   To the extent that future growth and new construction in the town
place demands on parks and recreation facilities, fire protection, municipal
facilities and equipment, or the transportation system those demands and needs
should be met by shifting a portion of the capital costs for providing new
capacity to serve new development, which creates, in whole or in part, these
demands and needs.
   (C)   By resolution adopted on January 10, 2017, the Town Council directed
the Planning Commission to conduct the necessary studies and develop a
recommended development impact fee ordinance in accordance with the
requirements of the Act.
   (D)   The Planning Commission recommended to Town Council a Development
Impact Fee Study Report for Mount Pleasant dated January 11, 2017, a Town of
Mount Pleasant Transportation Impact Fee Program Update Report, a Town of Mount
Pleasant Capital Improvements Plan with projects eligible for impact fee
funding dated January 11, 2017, and a Housing Affordability Analysis in Support
of a Development Impact Fee Study Report in Mount Pleasant dated January 11,
2017, each of which have an updated final version dated March 28, 2017, adopted
by the Town Council, as modified, on April 3, 2017, effective July 1, 2017.
   (E)   This chapter is enacted to implement the findings and recommendations
of the Development Impact Fee Study Report for Mount Pleasant and endorse the
list of capital projects eligible for impact fee funding in the Town of Mount
Pleasant Capital Improvements Plan.
   (F)   The impact fees prescribed in this chapter are equitable, do not
impose an unfair or disproportionate burden on developers and new construction,
and are in the best interests of the general welfare of Mount Pleasant and its
citizens.
   (G)   New facilities or equipment eligible for development impact fee
funding will benefit all new development or redevelopment in town limits.
Therefore, it is appropriate to treat the entire town as one service area for
calculating, collecting and spending development impact fees.
   (H)   This chapter provides the procedures for timely processing of
applications for determination of appropriate development impact fees
applicable to all development inside town limits subject to the impact fees,
and for the timely processing of applications for individual assessment of
development impact fees, credits or reimbursements allowed or paid.
   (I)   The transportation impact fees presented in
Appendix A  of this chapter reflect the town's commitment to provide road
capacity for future vehicle trips using maximum service capacities defined by
the 2010 Highway Capacity Manual.
   (J)   The transportation fees reflect the Institute of Transportation
Engineers’ Trip Generation Manual, Eleventh Edition, or such edition noted in
Appendix A .
   (K)   The maximum allowable recreation impact fee determined in the
Development Impact Fee Study Report for Mount Pleasant has been reduced by 5%
for the General Development Impact Fee Schedule provide in
Appendix A  of this chapter, setting the fees at 95% of the maximum amount to
provide a reasonable fee for residential investment and to ensure that the
impact fees collected do not exceed the cost to provide capital facilities that
accommodate new development.
   (L)   The maximum allowable fire protection impact fee determined in the
Development Impact Fee Study Report for Mount Pleasant has been reduced by 20%
for the General Development Impact Fee Schedule provided in
Appendix A  of this chapter, setting the fees at 80% of the maximum amount to
provide a reasonable fee for residential and non-residential investments and to
ensure that the impact fees collected do not exceed the cost to provide capital
facilities and equipment that accommodate new development.
   (M)   The maximum allowable municipal facilities and equipment impact fee
determined in the Development Impact Fee Study Report for Mount Pleasant has
been reduced by 20% for the General Development Impact Fee Schedule provided in
Appendix A  of this chapter, setting the fees at 80% of the maximum amount to
provide a reasonable fee for residential and non-residential investments and to
ensure that the impact fees collected do not exceed the cost to provide capital
facilities and equipment that accommodate new development.
   (N)   The maximum allowable cost per trip for the transportation impact fee
determined in the Town of Mount Pleasant Transportation Impact Fee Program
Update Report has been reduced by 20% for the General Development Impact Fee
Schedule summarized in
Appendix A  of this chapter, setting the fees at 80% of the maximum amount to
account for the planning level nature of cost estimates; the forecasting
methodology and various data sources utilized; and to provide a margin of
confidence that transportation impact fee expenditures go toward identified
needs that are not likely to change.
   (O)   Property for which a valid building permit has been issued prior to
the effective date of this chapter shall not be subject to the updated
development impact fees.
(Ord. 17009, passed 4-3-17; Am. Ord. 18068, passed 10-9-18; Am. Ord. 20053,
passed 9-11-20, effective 1-1-21; Am. Ord. 22053, passed 10-21-22)
§ 154.04 DEFINITIONS.
   The following definitions apply within this chapter consistent with the
provisions set forth in the South Carolina Development Impact Fee Act, or as it
may be amended in the future. Where terms are not defined, the definitions used
in the Town of Mount Pleasant Code of Ordinances shall apply.
   AFFORDABLE HOUSING. Housing affordable to families whose incomes do not
exceed 80% of the median income for the service area or areas within the
jurisdiction of the town.
   BUILDING PERMIT. A permit issued for construction on or development of land.
   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT. Improvements with a useful life of five years or more,
by new construction or other action, which increase the service capacity of the
public facility. Public facility categories for the purpose of this chapter
include parks and recreation facilities, fire protection, municipal facilities
and equipment and transportation.
   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN (CIP). A multi-year planning tool used to identify
capital projects and coordinate financing and implementation. The Plan also
identifies capital improvements for which impact fees may be used as a funding
source.
   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. A certificate allowing the occupancy or use of a
building and certifying that the structure or use has been constructed or will
be used in compliance with the Town of Mount Pleasant Code of Ordinances and
all other applicable regulations.
   CREDITS. Impact fee deductions allowed to a fee payer for eligible off-site
capital improvements funded by the fee payer.
   DEVELOPER. An individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity
undertaking new development.
   DEVELOPMENT. Construction or installation of a new building or structure, or
a change in use of an existing building or structure, any of which creates
additional demand and need for public facilities (i.e., parks and recreation,
fire protection, municipal facilities and equipment, or transportation). A
building or structure shall include, but not be limited to, modular buildings
and manufactured housing. DEVELOPMENT does not include alterations made to
existing single-family homes.
   DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL. A document that authorizes the commencement of a
development.
   DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE. A financial payment imposed as a condition of
development approval to pay a proportionate share of the cost for certain off-
site system improvements needed to accommodate future growth. DEVELOPMENT
IMPACT FEES (or IMPACT FEES) are collected by the town for recreation
facilities, fire protection, municipal facilities and equipment, and
transportation.
   DEVELOPMENT PERMIT. A permit issued for construction on or development of
land when no subsequent building permit issued pursuant to Chapter 9 of Title 6
is required.
   DWELLING UNIT. Shall include the definitions for Dwelling, Big House;
Dwelling, Duplex; Group Dwelling; Group Care Dwelling; Manufactured Housing
Unit; Multi-Family Dwelling; Single-Family Dwelling; and Townhouse Dwelling
contained in the Town of Mount Pleasant Zoning Ordinance.
   FEE PAYER. A fee payer is any person who, after the effective date of this
chapter, seeks to develop land by applying for the issuance of a building
permit, or other development permit, subject to development impact fees.
   FIRE PROTECTION IMPACT FEE. A payment of money imposed as a condition of
approval to pay a proportionate share of the cost for improvements to the fire
protection system identified to serve new development.
   MUNICIPAL FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT IMPACT FEE. A payment of money imposed as
a condition of approval to pay a proportionate share of the cost for
improvements to the municipal facilities and equipment system identified to
serve new development: public services, police, stormwater and government
services associated with managing growth (i.e., planning and development,
public services, and the administrative offices on the Town Hall Complex only
for recreation, transportation and fire).
   OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS. Capital improvements located outside of the
boundaries of a development that are required to serve the development's
proportionate share of future year system demands and needs.
   PROPORTIONATE SHARE. The portion of system improvements costs for public
facilities determined in the Development Impact Fee Study Report for Mount
Pleasant and the Town of Mount Pleasant Transportation Impact Fee Program
Update Report that reasonably relates to the service demands and needs of the
development.
   PUBLIC FACILITIES. Improvements to and/or construction of capital
improvements identified in the Town of Mount Pleasant Capital Improvements
Plan, the Development Impact Fee Study Report for Mount Pleasant, or the Town
of Mount Pleasant Transportation Impact Fee Program Update Report. PUBLIC
FACILITIES for the purpose of this chapter shall include parks and recreation
facilities, fire protection, municipal facilities and equipment, and
transportation.
   RECREATION IMPACT FEE. A payment of money imposed as a condition of approval
to pay a proportionate share of the cost for improvements to the recreation
system identified to serve new development.
   SERVICE AREA. A defined geographic area in which specific public facilities
provide service to development within the area defined.
   SQUARE FOOTAGE. The total floor space within the exterior walls of a
building not including space in cellars or basements.
   SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT. A capital improvement to a public facility which is
designed to provide service to a service area.
   SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT COSTS. The costs incurred for construction and
reconstruction of system improvements, including design, acquisition,
engineering and other costs attributable to the improvements, and also
including the cost of providing additional public facilities needed to serve
new growth and development. SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT COSTS do not include:
      (1)   Construction, acquisition, or expansion of public facilities other
than capital improvements eligible for impact fee funding that are identified
in the Town of Mount Pleasant Capital Improvements Plan;
      (2)   Repair, operation or maintenance of existing or new capital
improvements;
      (3)   Upgrading, updating, expanding or replacing existing capital
improvements to serve existing development in order to meet stricter safety,
efficiency, environmental or regulatory standards;
      (4)   Upgrading, updating, expanding or replacing existing capital
improvements to provide better service to existing development;
      (5)   Administrative and operating costs of the governmental entity; or
      (6)   Principal payments and interest or other finance charges on bonds
or other indebtedness except financial obligations issued by or on behalf of
the governmental entity to finance capital improvements eligible for impact fee
funding that are identified in the Town of Mount Pleasant Capital Improvements
Plan.
   TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEE. A payment of money imposed as a condition of
approval to pay a proportionate share of the cost for improvements to the
transportation system identified to serve new development.
   VOLUME TO SERVICE CAPACITY RATIO. A measurement of the relationship between
average daily traffic volumes (demand) and average daily maximum service
capacities (supply) for transportation facilities in the Mount Pleasant Study
Area. A volume to service capacity ratio greater than 1.00 identified the need
for a capacity-enhancing improvement. This measurement is consistent with the
methodology used by the Charleston Area Transportation Study (CHATS)
Metropolitan Planning Organization for developing the 2035 Long Range
Transportation Plan.
(Ord. 17009, passed 4-3-17; Am. Ord. 18068, passed 10-9-18)
§ 154.05 SUPPORTING DOCUMENTATION.
   (A)   This chapter is based upon the conclusions and recommendations
presented in the Development Impact Fee Study Report for Mount Pleasant, Town
of Mount Pleasant Transportation Impact Fee Program Update Report, Town of
Mount Pleasant Capital Improvements Plan, and Housing Affordability Analysis in
Support of a Development Impact Fee Study in Mount Pleasant prepared consistent
with the provisions set forth in the Act and adopted by Town Council on April
3, 2017, effective July 1, 2017. All four documents are on file in the Town's
Clerk of Council Office and are incorporated into this chapter by reference.
   (B)   All development impact fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall
be used to implement any or all of the public facilities deemed eligible for
impact fee funding identified in the Town of Mount Pleasant Capital
Improvements Plan as prioritized therein.
(Ord. 17009, passed 4-3-17; Am. Ord. 18068, passed 10-9-18)
§ 154.06 JURISDICTION.
   A development impact fee shall apply to all new development or redevelopment
located within town limits, including those locations annexed by the town in
the future.
(Ord. 17009, passed 4-3-17; Am. Ord. 18068, passed 10-9-18)
§ 154.07 APPLICATION AND EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all new development or
redevelopment within town limits for which a building permit or development
permit is required except for the following:
   (A)   Rebuilding the same amount of floor space of a structure that was
destroyed by fire or other natural catastrophe;
   (B)   Remodeling or repairing a structure with the same use of land that
does not result in an increase in the number of service units or place new
demand on recreation facilities, fire protection, municipal facilities and
equipment, or transportation system;
   (C)   Replacing a residential unit, including a manufactured home, with
another residential unit on the same lot, if the amount of demand for
facilities and services generated by the new residential unit does not
increase;
   (D)   Placing a construction trailer or temporary office on a lot during the
period of construction on the same lot;
   (E)   Construction of an addition to a residential structure that does not
increase the amount of demand for facilities and services generated by the same
use of land;
   (F)   Adding uses that are typically accessory to residential uses, such as
a tennis court or a clubhouse, unless it is demonstrated clearly that the use
creates new demand for recreation facilities, fire protection, municipal
facilities and equipment, or the transportation system;
   (G)    All or part of a particular development project if:
      (1)   The project is determined to create affordable housing; and
      (2)   The exempt development's proportionate share of system improvements
is funded through a revenue source other than development impact fees.
   (H)   Constructing a new elementary, middle or secondary school;
   (I)   Constructing a new volunteer fire department; and
   (J)   Relocating an existing commercial or residential development when such
development was
required by a condemning authority to relocate as a result of the proper
exercise of eminent domain to the extent that:
      (1)   The relocated development has the same use of land and materially
equivalent square footage of the previously existing development prior to the
taking;
      (2)   The relocated development does not result in an increase in the
number of service units or place new demand on recreation facilities, fire
protection, municipal facilities and equipment, or transportation system;
      (3)   The relocated development was situated within the corporate limits
of the town at the time the condemning authority commenced the acquisition; and
      (4)   If the relocated development receives or is eligible for relocation
or reestablishment benefits under state or federal law, such relocation or
reestablishment benefits shall be payable to the town for development impact
fees.
(Ord. 17009, passed 4-3-17; Am. Ord. 18068, passed 10-9-18; Am. Ord. 25029,
passed 7-10-25)
§ 154.08 PROVISIONS FOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
   Because all or part of any particular development project may be exempt from
development impact fees for affordable housing, the following sets forth the
administrative standards for determining what constitutes affordable housing
and the procedures for exemption from one or more development impact fees.
   (A)   Median family income. Affordable housing is based upon 80% of the
median family income for residents living within the town. Median family income
shall be determined once a year utilizing the following procedure:
      (1)   The most recently available figures from the U.S. Census Bureau
American Community Survey will serve as the base year for this evaluation;
      (2)   Each subsequent year will be adjusted once annually thereafter
during January of the calendar year based upon the previous year's published
Consumer Price Index (CPI) increase for the U.S. Southeast Region, until the
next U.S. Census Bureau data set is published and this procedure is replicated.
   (B)   Maximum expenditure. The maximum expenditure for housing costs shall
correspond to the Fannie Mae Foundation Mortgage Calculator multiplier of 30%
of gross family income as used in the Housing Affordability Analysis in Support
of a Development Impact Fee Study in Mount Pleasant. Affordable housing based
upon 80% of median family income is:
      (1)   Multi-family rental dwelling units of which the gross monthly rent
cost does not exceed 30% of 80% of the gross median family monthly income.
      (2)   Fee simple ownership dwelling units of which the cost of
homeownership for the dwelling unit do not exceed 30% of 80% of the gross
median family monthly income as reflected in the sales price using the Fannie
Mae Foundation Mortgage Calculator (or comparable methodology) assuming a 20%
down payment and a specified interest rate. The specified interest rate shall
be determined by selecting the lowest 30-year fixed mortgage rate reported by
area lending institutions as of the first week of January for any given year
and shall remain so for the balance of the year.
   (C)   Procedures for exemption from development impact fees.
      (1)   A developer seeking exemption from one or more development impact
fees for the construction of affordable multi-family rental dwelling units must
identify the alternate source of funds for the impact fee and, unless the
alternate source is from town resources, post a financial guarantee suitable to
the town prior to the issuance of a building permit. The amount of the
financial guarantee shall reflect the amount of development impact fees due for
all affordable housing units as if they were not affordable housing units. No
certificate of occupancy for any of the units may be issued until the impact
fees for the affordable housing units have been paid by the alternate source or
from the proceeds of the financial guarantee.
      (2)   If the alternate source of funds for impact fees is from town
resources, prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy by the town, the
developer shall record an agreement approved by the town restricting the
monthly rental cost of each affordable housing unit for a period of ten years.
Upon delivery of the recorded rent control agreement, the certificate of
occupancy shall be issued.
      (3)   A developer seeking exemption from one or more development impact
fees for construction of a fee simple ownership dwelling unit shall identify
the alternate source of funds for the impact fees and, unless the alternate
source is from town resources, post a financial guarantee suitable to the town
prior to the issuance of a building permit. The amount of the financial
guarantee shall reflect the amount of development impact fees due for all
affordable housing units as if they were not affordable housing units. No
certificate of occupancy may be issued for the affordable housing dwellings
until the impact fees have been paid by the alternate source or from the
proceeds of the financial guarantee.
      (4)   If the alternate source of funds for impact fees is from town
resources, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the town, the
developer shall file with the town a closing statement for the dwelling unit
indicating an arm's length sales price no greater than that allowed for
affordable housing at the time of final sale and a recorded covenant, approved
by the town, restricting the sales price of the dwelling, for a period of ten
years, to the original sales price, adjusted annually for inflation.
   (D)   Workforce Housing Exemption Grant Program. Owner-occupied dwelling
units initially occupied by individuals or families earning no more than 80% of
the median family income for the Charleston North Charleston-Summerville
Metropolitan Statistical Area, as published annually by the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development and adjusted for household size, may be awarded a
Workforce Housing Exemption Grant by the town.
      (1)   Grant amount. The amount of the grant shall be equal to the amount
of municipal impact fees required to be paid upon issuance of a building
permit.
      (2)   Procedure.
         (a)   An applicant seeking a Workforce Housing Exemption Grant must
submit a grant application to the town prior to the issuance of a building
permit. Applications shall be accompanied by
an affidavit certifying that the occupants are qualified pursuant to this
section.
         (b)   Completed applications shall be processed on a first-come,
first-served basis. Grants shall be awarded pursuant to the provisions herein
until such time as the grant funds, if any, appropriated by Town Council have
been exhausted.
         (c)   If the Workforce Housing Exemption Grant application is
approved, the applicant will receive a voucher for the grant amount that shall
be presented to the permitting office at the time of issuance of a building
permit. The amount indicated in the voucher shall be deducted from the total
fees required to be paid at the time of issuance of the building permit.
      (3)   Term of affordability.
         (a)   Resale of workforce housing units receiving a Workforce Housing
Exemption Grant shall be limited by deed restriction to the original sales
price, adjusted for inflation, plus the cost of any eligible improvements, and
to a purchaser eligible, as described above, for a period of not less than 30
years after issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
         (b)   The maximum annual increase permitted for inflation shall be 3%,
which is the approximate 30-year average annual increase in the Consumer Price
Index (CPI).
         (c)   The owner must provide an itemized list of all capital
improvements and upgrades for which credit is requested as part of the resale
price. All improvements claimed must be documented with receipts, contracts, or
other evidence supporting their value.
         (d)   The deed restrictions shall include, at a minimum, the following
elements:
            1.   Duration.
            2.   Occupancy requirement and restrictions against leasing/
subleasing.
            3.   Restriction on resale.
            4.   Requirement to notify the town in the case of conveyance (for
owner-occupied units), lease renewal (for rental units), or establishment of a
new rental contract (for rental units).
            5.   Right of first refusal, if applicable.
            6.   Distribution of gross sales proceeds, if applicable.
         (e)   A copy of the deed restrictions shall be submitted to the town
for approval prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the dwelling
unit receiving a Workforce Housing Exemption Grant.
(Ord. 17009, passed 4-3-17; Am. Ord. 18068, passed 10-9-18; Am. Ord. 25012,
passed 4-11-25)
§ 154.09 DETERMINATION OF FEES.
   (A)   General provisions.
      (1)    The Engineering and Development Services Department shall
determine and collect all development impact fees administered within town
limits.
      (2)    Upon the effective date of this chapter, development impact fees
shall be charged to new development or redevelopment in accordance with the
procedures set forth in this chapter. The fees to be collected will be
determined prior to the issuance of a building permit or development permit. No
building permit or development permit shall be issued for any development
requiring the payment of development impact fees until the fees have been
remitted to the Department of Engineering and Development Services, or in the
case of affordable housing, the appropriate financial guarantees have been
filed with the Town Chief Financial Officer. Payment of such fees shall not
relieve the developer from obligations to comply with any other applicable town
ordinances, regulations or requirements prior to receiving a certificate of
occupancy.
      (3)   All monies paid by the fee payer pursuant to this chapter shall be
identified as development impact fees and promptly deposited in the appropriate
development impact fee trust fund described under in §
154.10 of this chapter.
      (4)   For the purpose of calculating transportation development impact
fees, the use of land types assumed in the General Development Impact Fee
Schedule of this chapter (i.e.,
Appendix A ) shall be defined in accordance with the definitions contained in
the Institute of Transportation Engineers' Trip Generation Manual, Eleventh
Edition, or such edition noted in
Appendix A .
      (5)   Payment of development impact fees according to the General
Development Impact Fee Schedule (i.e.,
Appendix A ), or independent impact fee calculation study as provided for in
this chapter, shall constitute full and complete payment of the new
development's proportionate share of public facilities costs.
      (6)   A developer may negotiate and contract with the town to provide
facilities or services in lieu of payment of development impact fees in
accordance with § 6-1-1050 of the Act (S.C. § 6-1-1050) and this chapter.
   (B)   Recreation impact fee.
      (1)   Formula. Recreation impact fees collected within town limits shall
be in accordance with the following formula:
 
Impact Fee = (NNDU) x (COST)
Where:        
NNDU =       The number of net new dwelling units for which the building permit
             is being sought.
             The cost per dwelling unit for providing improvements to parks and
             recreation facilities as indicated in
             Appendix A and based on information presented in the Development
COST =       Impact Fee Study Report for Mount Pleasant adopted by Town Council
             on April 3, 2017, effective July 1, 2017. The cost shall be 95% of
             the maximum allowable recreation impact fee as provided in
             Appendix A of this chapter.
 
      (2)   Determining recreation impact fees. The amount of recreation impact
fees attributable to a specific development shall be determined through the
following process:
         (a)   Verify the type and number of new residential dwelling units for
which the building permit is being sought;
         (b)   Determine whether any of the proposed residential dwelling units
qualify for a discount on recreation impact fees as "affordable housing" and,
if so, the number and type of such units;
         (c)   Determine the applicable residential dwelli\ng unit category set
forth in
Appendix A  (as applicable) of this chapter; and
         (d)   Multiply the discounted development impact fee rate for the
residential dwelling unit category by the number of net new units to be covered
by the building permit.
      (3)   Independent recreation impact fee calculation. In the event that a
fee payer or town staff contend that the use of land for which the building
permit is being sought is not within those uses of land identified in
Appendix A , or if the fee payer contends that the
Appendix A  calculations are not accurate for its intended use, then  the
Director of Engineering and Development Services , or its designee, shall make
a determination as to the most comparable use of land category to assume for
calculating recreation impact fees. If the fee payer disagrees with the
determination of  the Director of Engineering and Development Services  or if
the town otherwise deems it appropriate, an independent impact fee calculation
may be performed to quantify the fair share of system improvement costs
attributable to the development. Preparation of an independent impact fee
calculation will immediately halt the building permit application process until
such time that the necessary calculation is deemed complete by  the Director of
Engineering and Development Services . If an independent calculation is
requested, it must accompany the building permit application and be prepared in
accordance with the following provisions:
         (a)   Independent calculations for the determination of recreation
impact fees must be performed by a certified professional engineer, architect,
landscape architect, planner or other duly qualified and accredited
professional approved by  the Director of Engineering and Development Services
.
         (b)   The independent calculation shall be subject to review and
approval by  the Director of Engineering and Development Services , or its
designee.
         (c)   T he Director of Engineering and Development Services  shall
either approve or provide in writing the reasons for disapproval of the
independent calculation study within 30 days of its submittal for review.
         (d)   Prior to commencing the study, the developer's hired
professional and  the Director of Engineering and Development Services , or its
designee, shall agree upon the relevant factors and values that will be
utilized in the independent calculation of impact fees.
      (4)   The maximum allowable recreation impact fee determined in the
Development Impact Fee Study Report for Mount Pleasant shall be reduced by 5%
for the purposes of completing an independent impact fee calculation, setting
the fee at 95% of the maximum amount.
   (C)   Fire protection impact fee.
      (1)   Formula. Fire protection impact fees collected within town limits
shall be in accordance with one of the following formulas:
         (a)   Residential development.
 
Impact Fee = (NNDU) x (COST)
Where:        
NNDU =       The number of net new dwelling units for which the building permit
             is being sought.
             The cost per dwelling unit for providing fire protection services
             as indicated in
             Appendix A and based on information presented in the Development
COST =       Impact Fee Study Report for Mount Pleasant adopted by Town Council
             on April 3, 2017, effective July 1, 2017. The cost shall be 80% of
             the maximum allowable fire protection impact fee as provided in
             Appendix A of this chapter.
 
         (b)   Non-residential development.
 
Impact Fee = (NNSF) x (COST)
Where:        
NNSF =       The amount of net new square footage generated by the proposed
             development for the specified use of land.
             The cost per square foot for providing fire protection services as
             indicated in
             Appendix A and based on information presented in the Development
COST =       Impact Fee Study Report for Mount Pleasant adopted by Town Council
             on April 3, 2017, effective July 1, 2017. The cost shall be 80% of
             the maximum allowable fire protection impact fee as provided in
             Appendix A of this chapter.
 
      (2)   Determining fire protection impact fees. The amount of fire
protection impact fees attributable to a specific development shall be
determined through the following process:
         (a)   Verify the type and number of new residential dwelling units or
new nonresidential square footage for which the building permit is being
sought;
         (b)   For residential development, determine whether any of the
proposed residential dwelling units qualify for a discount on fire protection
impact fees as "affordable housing" and, if so, the number and type of such
units;
         (c)   Determine the applicable use of land category and impact fee per
unit set forth in
Appendix A  (as applicable) of this chapter; and
         (d)   Multiply the discounted development impact fee rate for
residential development by the number of net new dwelling units (as determined
in the Development Impact Fee Study Report for Mount Pleasant); and
         (e)   Multiply the discounted development impact fee rate for non-
residential development by the net new square footage.
      (3)   Independent fire protection impact fee calculation. In the event
that a fee payer or town staff contend that the use of land for which the
building permit is being sought is not within those uses of land identified in
Appendix A , or if the fee payer contends that the
Appendix A  calculations are not accurate for its intended use, then  the
Director of Engineering and Development Services , or its designee, shall make
a determination as to the most comparable use of land category to assume for
calculating fire protection impact fees. If the fee payer disagrees with the
determination of  the Director of Engineering and Development Services  or if
the town otherwise deems it appropriate, an independent impact fee calculation
may be performed to quantify the fair share of system improvement costs
attributable to the development. Preparation of an independent impact fee
calculation will immediately halt the building permit application process until
such time that the necessary calculation is deemed complete by  the Director of
Engineering and Development Services . If an independent calculation is
requested, it must accompany the building permit application and be prepared in
accordance with the following provisions:
         (a)   Independent calculations for the determination of fire
protection impact fees must be performed by a certified professional engineer,
architect, landscape architect, planner or other duly qualified and accredited
professional approved by  the Director of Engineering and Development Services
.
         (b)   The independent calculation shall be subject to review and
approval by  the Director of Engineering and Development Services  or their
designee.
         (c)   T he Director of Engineering and Development Services  shall
either approve or provide in writing the reasons for disapproval of the
independent calculation study within 30 days of its submittal for review.
         (d)   Prior to commencing the study, the developer's hired
professional and  the Director of Engineering and Development Services , or its
designee, shall agree upon the relevant factors and values that will be
utilized in the independent calculation of impact fees.
         (e)   The maximum allowable fire protection impact fee determined in
the Development Impact Fee Study Report for Mount Pleasant shall be reduced by
20% for the purposes of completing an independent impact fee calculation,
setting the fee at 80% of the maximum amount.
   (D)   Municipal facilities and equipment impact fee.
      (1)   Formula. Municipal facilities and equipment impact fees collected
within town limits shall be in accordance with one of the following formulas:
         (a)   Residential development.
 
Impact Fee = (NNDU) x (COST)
Where:        
NNDU =       The number of net new dwelling units for which the building permit
             is being sought.
             The cost per dwelling unit for providing municipal facilities and
             equipment as indicated in
             Appendix A and based on information presented in the Development
COST =       Impact Fee Study Report for Mount Pleasant adopted by Town Council
             on April 3, 2017, effective July 1, 2017. The cost shall be 80% of
             the maximum allowable municipal facilities and equipment impact
             fee as provided in
             Appendix A of this chapter.
 
         (b)   Non-residential development. 
 
Impact Fee = (NNSF) x (COST)
Where:        
NNSF =       The amount of net new square footage generated by the proposed
             development for the specific use of land.
             The cost per square foot for providing municipal facilities and
             equipment as indicated in
             Appendix A and based on information presented in the Development
COST =       Impact Fee Study Report for Mount Pleasant adopted by Town Council
             on April 3, 2017, effective July 1, 2017. The cost shall be 80% of
             the maximum allowable municipal facilities and equipment impact
             fee as provided in
             Appendix A of this chapter.
 
      (2)   Determining municipal facilities and equipment impact fees. The
amount of municipal facilities and equipment impact fees attributable to a
specific development shall be determined through the following process:
         (a)   Verify the type and number of new residential dwelling units or
the new nonresidential square footage for which the building permit is being
sought;
         (b)   For residential development, determine whether any of the
proposed residential dwelling units qualify for a discount on municipal
facilities and equipment impact fees as "affordable housing" and, if so, the
number and type of such units;
         (c)   Determine the applicable use of land category and impact fee per
unit set forth in
Appendix A  (as applicable) of this chapter; and
         (d)   Multiply the discounted development impact fee rate for
residential development from
Appendix A  by the number of net new dwelling units (as determined in the
Development Impact Fee Study Report for Mount Pleasant); and
         (e)   Multiply the discounted development impact fee rate for non-
residential development from
Appendix A  by the net new square footage.
      (3)   Independent municipal facilities and equipment impact fee
calculation. In the event that a fee payer or town staff contend that the use
of land for which the building permit is being sought is not within those uses
of land identified in
Appendix A , or if the fee payer contends that the
Appendix A  calculations are not accurate for its intended use, then t the
Director of Engineering and Development Services , or its designee, shall make
a determination as to the most comparable use of land category to assume for
calculating municipal facilities and equipment impact fees. If the fee payer
disagrees with the determination of  the Director of Engineering and
Development Services  or if the town otherwise deems it appropriate, an
independent impact fee calculation may be performed to quantify the fair share
of system improvement costs attributable to the development. Preparation of an
independent impact fee calculation will immediately halt the building permit
application process until such time that the necessary calculation is deemed
complete by  the Director of Engineering and Development Services . If an
independent calculation is requested, it must accompany the building permit
application and be prepared in accordance with the following provisions:
         (a)   Independent calculations for the determination of municipal
facilities and equipment impact fees must be performed by a certified
professional engineer, architect, landscape architect, planner or other duly
qualified and accredited professional approved by  the Director of Engineering
and Development Services .
         (b)   The independent calculation shall be subject to review and
approval by  the Director of Engineering and Development Services  or their
designee.
         (c)   T he Director of Engineering and Development Services  shall
either approve or provide in writing the reasons for disapproval of the
independent calculation study within 30 days of its submittal for review.
         (d)   Prior to commencing the study, the developer's hired
professional and  the Director of Engineering and Development Services , or its
designee, shall agree upon the relevant factors and values that will be
utilized in the independent calculation of impact fees.
         (e)   The maximum allowable municipal facilities and equipment impact
fee determined in the Development Impact Fee Study Report for Mount Pleasant
shall be reduced by 20% for the purposes of completing an independent impact
fee calculation, setting the fee at 80% of the maximum amount.
   (E)   Transportation impact fee.
      (1)   Formula. Transportation impact fees collected within town limits
shall be in accordance with one of the following formulas:
         (a)   Residential development.
 
Impact Fee = (NNDU) x (COST)
Where:        
NNDU =       The number of net new dwelling units for which the building permit
             is being sought.
             The cost per dwelling unit for providing transportation
             improvements as indicated in
             Appendix A and based on information presented in the Development
COST =       Impact Fee Study Report for Mount Pleasant adopted by Town Council
             on April 3, 2017, effective July 1, 2017. The cost shall be 80% of
             the maximum allowable transportation impact fee as provided in
             Appendix A of this chapter.
 
         (b)   Non-residential development.
 
Impact Fee = (NNSF) x (COST)
Where:        
             The amount of net new square footage or other land measuring
NNSF =       criteria generated by the proposed development for the specified
             use of land.
             The cost per square foot for providing transportation improvements
             as indicated in
             Appendix A and based on information presented in the Development
COST =       Impact Fee Study Report for Mount Pleasant adopted by Town Council
             on April 3, 2017, effective July 1, 2017. The cost shall be 80% of
             the maximum allowable transportation impact fee as provided in
             Appendix A of this chapter.
 
      (2)   Determining transportation impact fees. The amount of
transportation impact fees attributable to a specific development shall be
determined through the following process:
         (a)   Verify the type and number of new residential dwelling units or
the type and intensity of new non-residential square footage or other use of
land measuring criteria for which the building permit is being sought;
         (b)   For residential development, determine whether any of the
proposed residential dwelling units qualify for a discount on transportation
impact fees as "affordable housing" and, if so, the number and type of such
units;
         (c)   Determine the applicable use of land category and impact fee per
unit set forth in
Appendix A  (as applicable) of this chapter; and
         (d)   Multiply the discounted impact fee rate for the specified use of
land by the number of units or square footage for the same use of land within
the development.
      (3)   Independent transportation impact fee calculation. In the event
that a fee payer or town staff contend that the use of land for which the
building permit is being sought is not within those uses of land identified in
Appendix A , or if the fee payer contends that the
Appendix A  calculations are not accurate for its intended use, then  the
Director of Engineering and Development Services , or its designee, shall make
a determination as to the most comparable use of land category to assume for
calculating transportation impact fees. If the fee payer disagrees with the
determination of  the Director of Engineering and Development Services  or if
the town otherwise deems it appropriate, an independent impact fee calculation
may be performed to quantify the fair share of transportation system
improvement costs attributable to the development. Preparation of an
independent impact fee calculation will immediately halt the building permit
application process until such time that the necessary calculation is deemed
complete by  the Director of Engineering and Development Services . If an
independent calculation is requested, it must accompany the building permit
application and be prepared in accordance with the following provisions:
         (a)   Independent calculations for the determination of transportation
impact fees must be performed by a duly qualified and licensed engineer in the
State of South Carolina, based upon sound traffic engineering studies utilizing
accepted engineering practices and planning principles.
         (b)   The independent calculation shall be subject to review and
approval by  the Director of Engineering and Development Services . In the case
of large projects involving multiple uses and complex calculations, the town
may seek additional assistance from qualified transportation consultants at the
expense of the developer.
         (c)   T he Director of Engineering and Development Services , in
consultation with the Town Transportation Director, shall either approve or
provide in writing the reasons for disapproval of the independent calculation
study within 30 days of its submittal for review.
         (d)   Prior to commencing the study, the developer's hired
professional and  the Director of Engineering and Development Services  shall
agree upon the relevant factors and values that will be utilized in the
independent calculation of impact fees.
         (e)   Process for the independent calculation study for determination
of transportation impact fees:
            1.   Determine base trip generation for the proposed use(s) of land
utilizing the Institute of Transportation Engineers' Trip Generation Manual,
Eleventh Edition (or subsequent editions).
            2.   Base trip generation may be reduced by rate of pass-by capture
using methodology in the most current Trip Generation Handbook published by the
Institute of Transportation Engineers.
            3.   Base trip generation may be reduced by rate of internal
capture when two or more uses of land are proposed and at least one of those
uses of land is residential in nature and at least one of the other uses of
land is non-residential in nature using methodology recommended in the most
current Trip Generation Handbook published by the Institute of Transportation
Engineers, subject to approval for use by the Town Planning Director.
            4.   The maximum allowable transportation impact fee determined in
the Development Impact Fee Study Report for Mount Pleasant shall be reduced by
20% for the purposes of completing an independent impact fee calculation,
setting the fee at 80% of the maximum amount.
            5.   The independent impact fee calculation shall be based on one
of the following formulas:
               a.   Residential development.
 
Impact Fee = (NNDU) x (TRIPS) x (COST)
Where:        
NNDU =       The number of net new dwelling units generated by the proposed
             development for the specified use of land.
             The number of new average daily trips generated by the proposed
TRIPS =      development taking into account the rate of pass-by capture or
             rate of internal capture approved by the Director of Engineering
             and Development Services.
             The cost per trip for providing transportation improvements as
             indicated in
             Appendix A and based on information presented in the Development
COST =       Impact Fee Study Report for Mount Pleasant adopted by Town Council
             on April 3, 2017, effective July 1, 2017. The cost shall be 80% of
             the maximum allowable transportation impact fee as provided in
             Appendix A of this chapter.
 
               b.   Non-residential development.
 
Impact Fee = (NNSF) x (TRIPS) x (COST)
Where:        
NNSF =       The amount of net new square footage generated by the proposed
             development for the specified use of land.
             The number of new average daily trips generated by the proposed
TRIPS =      development taking into account the rate of pass-by capture or
             rate of internal capture approved by the Director of Engineering
             and Development Services.
             The cost per trip for providing transportation improvements as
             indicated in
             Appendix A and based on information presented in the Development
COST =       Impact Fee Study Report for Mount Pleasant adopted by Town Council
             on April 3, 2017, effective July 1, 2017. The cost shall be 80% of
             the maximum allowable transportation impact fee as provided in
             Appendix A of this chapter.
 
   (F)   Special cases. The  Engineering and Development Services  shall take
the following special cases into account when calculating development impact
fees for a building permit application:
      (1)   When an application for a building permit has been made that
contains two or more uses of land in any combination, including two or more
uses of land within a single building or structure, the total development
impact fee assessment shall be the sum of the products, as calculated above,
for each use of land unless an independent impact fee calculation is performed,
and approved for use by  the Director of Engineering and Development Services ,
or its designee, consistent with §§
154.09(B)(3),
154.09(C)(3),
154.09(D)(3) or
154.09(E)(3) (as applicable) of this chapter.
      (2)   In the case of a change, redevelopment or modification of a use of
land which requires a building permit, and which is not exempted from
development impact fees under §
154.07 of this chapter, the impact fee calculation shall be based upon the net
increase in new or proposed use of land as compared to the existing or previous
use of land.
      (3)   In the case of a demolition or termination of an existing use or
structure, development impact fees for future redevelopment shall be based upon
the net increase in development impact fees for the new or proposed use of land
as compared to the existing actual active previous use of land since its
original occupancy. Credit for the prior use shall not be transferable to
another location.
      (4)   In the case of relocating an existing use of land, development
impact fees shall be assessed to the relocated use at its new location. Future
redevelopment of the old location from which the use was removed will receive a
credit against development impact fees assessed equal to the impact fees that
would have been assessed against the relocated use. Credits shall not be
transferable to the new location.
      (5)   Before a building permit application may become eligible for the
provisions set forth in §
154.09(F)(2) through (4) of this chapter, a developer shall provide reasonably
sufficient evidence that a previous use of land had been actively maintained on
the site within 60 months of the date of application for a building permit.
Such evidence may include proof of utility records, records for the use sought
to be shown, or other documentation.
      (6)   Any claim of existing or previous use must be made no later than
the time for application of a building permit. Any claim made after such time
shall be deemed invalid.
(Ord. 17009, passed 4-3-17; Am. Ord. 18068, passed 10-9-18; Am. Ord. 20053,
passed 9-11-20, effective 1-1-21; Am. Ord. 21040, passed 5-11-21; Am. Ord.
22053, passed 10-21-22)
§ 154.10 IMPACT FEE TRUST FUNDS.
   (A)   Development impact fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be
kept separate from other revenue of the town. There shall be one trust fund
established for each development impact fee category depicted in
Appendix A  of this chapter: recreation, fire protection, municipal facilities
and equipment, and transportation. All development impact fees collected shall
be properly identified by property address noted on the approved building
permit and by the appropriate trust account.
   (B)   Any funds on deposit not immediately necessary for expenditure shall
be maintained in an interest-bearing account prior to expenditure on
recommended projects. Interest earned on development impact fees in deposit
must be considered revenue to the trust fund account for which income is earned
and must be subject to all restrictions placed on the use of development impact
fees pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 17009, passed 4-3-17; Am. Ord. 18068, passed 10-9-18)
§ 154.11 LIMITATION OF EXPENDITURES OF FUNDS COLLECTED.
   (A)   Eligible system improvement costs. Funds from development impact fee
trust accounts shall be expended only for the public facilities and system
improvements identified as eligible for impact fee funding in the Town of Mount
Pleasant's most recent adopted Capital Improvements Plan, incorporated herein
by reference. No funds shall be used for administrative or operating costs
associated with imposing any of the development impact fees. Eligible
components of a public facility may include, but are not limited to, the
following:
      (1)   Design and construction plan preparation;
      (2)   Right-of-way acquisition;
      (3)   Construction of new facilities, structures, or amenities that
provide additional capacity;
      (4)   Purchase of new equipment (>$100,000 purchase price) that provide
additional capacity;
      (5)   Construction of new through lanes and/or turn lanes;
      (6)   Construction of new bridges;
      (7)   Construction of new drainage facilities associated with capital
improvements;
      (8)   Purchase and installation of traffic signalization;
      (9)   Construction of new curbs, medians, and shoulders;
      (10)   Relocating utilities to accommodate new road construction; and
      (11)   Principal payments, interest and other finance charges on bonds or
other indebtedness issued by or on behalf of the town for financing any or all
public facilities.
   (B)   Rationale nexus test. The Town's Chief Financial Officer, or its
designee, shall make an annual report to the Town Council and publish this
report for access by the general citizenry showing where development impact
fees have been collected and what projects have been funded with these
revenues. The Council shall consider this report and whether the fees are being
spent for the benefit of new development within town limits. If the Council
determines that this is not the case, then it shall adjust the Town of Mount
Pleasant Capital Improvements Plan and other projected capital expenditures to
correct the condition.
   (C)   Expenditure of funds. Development impact fee funds shall be expended
in the order in which they were collected. The disbursal of such funds shall
require approval of the Town Council, upon recommendation of the Town
Administrator or its designee.
   (D)   Reimbursement. Impact fee funds not obligated for expenditure within
three years of the date that they are scheduled to be expended in the Town of
Mount Pleasant Capital Improvements Plan shall be returned, with actual
interest earned, to the record owner of the property for which the fees were
collected, on a first-in, first-out basis.
(Ord. 17009, passed 4-3-17; Am. Ord. 18068, passed 10-9-18)
§ 154.12 CREDITS/REIMBURSEMENTS.
   (A)   General provisions.
      (1)   A developer shall be entitled to a credit against development
impact fees assessed pursuant to this chapter, applying the same discount rates
applied to the maximum allowable impact fees presented in this chapter for the
various impact fee categories, for town-approved monetary or in-kind
contributions toward some or all of the public facilities included in the Town
of Mount Pleasant Capital Improvements Plan that are eligible for impact fee
funding.
      (2)   Development impact fees shall not be imposed on a fee payer or
developer who has entered into a credit agreement with the town for certain
contribution, payment, construction or dedication of land up to the cash value
of the specific improvements identified within the agreement. Any difference
between total development impact fees due, by impact fee category, for the
development and the cash value of the executed credit agreement remain eligible
for collection pursuant to the rules and requirements of this chapter.
      (3)    Any request for development impact fee credit or reimbursement
shall be submitted to the Director of Engineering and Development Services at
the time of application consistent with other provision in this chapter. Town
Council agreements may be submitted in advance of the application.
   (B)   Application for credit agreement.
      (1)    The determination of the amount of any credit shall be undertaken
through submission of an application for credit agreement, which shall be
submitted through the Engineering and Development Services Department for
review by the Director of Engineering and Development Services, or its
designee.
      (2)   The application for credit agreement shall include the following
information:
         (a)   The following documentation must be provided if the proposed
application involves a credit for any cash contribution:
            1.   A certified copy of the development approval in which the
contribution was agreed; and
            2.   Proof of payment (if already made); or
            3.   Proposed method of payment (if not already made).
         (b)   The following documentation must be provided if the proposed
application involves credit for dedication of land:
            1.   A drawing and legal description of the land;
            2.   The appraised fair market value of the land at the date a
building permit application is sought for the use of land, prepared by a
professional real estate appraiser who is a member of the member Appraisal
Institute (MAL) or who is a member of Senior Residential Appraisers (SRA); and
            3.   A certified copy of the development permit in which the land
was agreed to be dedicated (if applicable).
         (c)   The following documentation must be provided if the proposed
application involves credit for construction:
            1.   The proposed construction documents of the specific
construction project prepared and certified by a duly qualified and licensed
engineer in the State of South Carolina;
            2.   The projected costs for the suggested improvements, which
shall be based on local information for similar improvements, along with the
construction schedule for the completion of said improvements. Such estimated
cost shall include construction or reconstruction of the project; the cost of
labor and materials; the cost of all lands, property, rights, easements and
franchises acquired; financing charges or interest prior to and during
construction and for one year after completion of construction; costs of plans
and specifications; surveys of estimates of costs and revenues; costs of
professional services; and all of the expenses necessary or incidental to
determining the feasibility or practicability of such construction or
reconstruction.
      (3)    Within 14 days of receipt of the proposed application for credit
agreement, the Director of Engineering and Development Services, or its
designee, shall determine if the application is complete. If it is determined
that the proposed agreement is not complete, the Director of Engineering and
Development Services shall send written notification to the applicant outlining
the deficiencies. The Director of Engineering and Development Services shall
take no further action on the proposed Application for credit agreement until
all such deficiencies have been corrected or otherwise settled.
      (4)   Once the Director of Engineering and Development Services
determines the proposed application for credit agreement is complete, it shall
be reviewed within 30 days by a committee of designated staff composed of the
Town Administrator, Town Chief Financial Officer, Director of Engineering and
Development Services, and the Department Head for the impact fee category under
consideration (either the Recreation Director for the recreation impact fee,
the Fire Chief for the fire protection impact fee, the Director of Public
Services for the municipal facilities and equipment impact fee, or the Director
of Engineering and Development Services for the transportation impact fee).
Together, this group will be known as the Development Impact Fee Credit Review
Committee.
      (5)   If the application for credit agreement is approved by the
Development Impact Fee Credit Review Committee, a credit agreement shall be
prepared and signed by the applicant and the Town Administrator. It shall
specifically outline the contribution, payment, construction or land
dedication; the time by which it shall be complete, dedicated or paid, and any
extensions thereof; and the dollar credit the applicant shall receive for the
contribution, payment or construction against development impact fees. Any
credit agreement shall be limited to the impact fee dollars owed for the
project as defined in §
154.12(A) of this chapter, by the developer, for the impact fee category under
consideration, unless Town Council decides to entertain a credit agreement in
excess of fees owed that may be transferred to another project of the same
developer in the same service area (see §
154.03(G) of this chapter for definition of service area). The agreement may
also include provisions for rescinding the credit and issuing stop work orders
if the dedication and/or work and/or construction are not timely accomplished.
      (6)   A fee payer affected by the decision of the Credit Review Committee
regarding credits may appeal such decision pursuant to §
154.14(A) of this chapter.
(Ord. 17009, passed 4-3-17; Am. Ord. 18068, passed 10-9-18; Am. Ord. 20053,
passed 9-11-20, effective 1-1-21; Am. Ord. 21040, passed 5-11-21)
§ 154.13 APPEAL PROCESS.
   A developer shall have the following rights for appeal of development impact
fees imposed by the town on their development pursuant only to this chapter:
   (A)   Administrative appeal.
      (1)   A developer may file an administrative appeal with the Town
Administrator regarding the payment of development impact fees, independent
calculation of impact fees, or credits or reimbursements by filing a written
notice of appeal. Said notice shall be filed within 30 days of the decision
sought to be appealed. The filing of an appeal will immediately halt the
building permit application process, unless the developer posts a bond or
submits an irrevocable letter of credit for the full amount of the development
impact fees as calculated by the town to be due. All notices of appeal shall
include a full explanation of the reasons for the appeal, specifying the
grounds therefore, and containing any documentation that the developer desires
to be considered. The appeal shall contain the name and address of the
developer filing the appeal and shall state their capacity to act as a
representative or agent if they are not the owner of the property to which
impact fees or credits pertain.
      (2)   Within 30 days following receipt of the written notice of appeal,
the Town Administrator will review the appellant's written report, supporting
documentation and departmental staff reports. The 30-day review period may be
extended if additional information is needed from the appellant in order to
render a decision. Upon completion of the administrative review, the Town
Administrator will provide a written response to the appellant constituting a
final administrative determination.
      (3)   Any person desiring to appeal the final administrative
determination of the Town Administrator regarding payment of development impact
fees or credits shall file a written notice of appeal to the Town Council. Said
notice of appeal to Town Council shall be filed with the Clerk of Town Council
within 15 days following receipt of the final administrative determination.
Receipt shall be construed to have occurred when the final administrative
decision is deposited in the United States mail postage prepaid to the person
whose name and address is identified in the original notice of appeal.
      (4)   The Town Clerk of Council will schedule all impact fee appeals for
the first Town Council meeting following ten days from receipt of the written
notice of appeal to the Town Council. Postponements of the Town Council appeal
date may be granted by the Town Administrator if they are requested in writing
at least ten days in advance of the scheduled Town Council meeting date.
      (5)   When an appeal is scheduled for oral presentation before the Town
Council, the appellant and town staff shall each be given ten minutes at the
oral argument to present the appeal and to discuss the submitted written
record.
   (B)   Payment under protest. A fee payer may pay development impact fees
under protest. Payment under protest does not preclude the developer from
filing an administrative appeal nor is the fee payer estopped from receiving a
refund of an amount considered to have been collected illegally. A fee payer,
at its option, may also post a bond or submit an irrevocable letter of credit
for the amount of development impact fees due instead of making a cash payment
under protest, pending the outcome of an appeal.
   (C)   Mediation. Town Council shall provide for mediation by a qualified
independent party, upon voluntary agreement by both the developer and the town,
to address a disagreement related to development impact fees calculated by the
town. Neither a request for, nor participation in, mediation shall preclude a
fee payer from pursuing other developer rights or remedies otherwise available
by law.
(Ord. 17009, passed 4-3-17; Am. Ord. 18068, passed 10-9-18)
§ 154.14 REFUNDS.
   (A)   General provisions. Funds not obligated for expenditure within three
years of the date that they are scheduled to be expended in the Town of Mount
Pleasant Capital Improvements Plan shall be refunded to the record owner of
property for which the impact fees were paid, with actual interest earned, on a
first-in, first-out basis. For the purpose of determining whether fees have
been spent or encumbered, the first money placed in a trust fund account shall
be deemed to the first money taken out of that account when withdrawals have
been made.
   (B)   Refund process.
      (1)   The owner of property eligible for a refund of one or more
development impact fee payments shall submit to the Town Chief Financial
Officer a notarized sworn statement that the person is the current owner of the
property for which a refund is due, a certified copy of the latest recorded
deed, and a copy of the most recent ad valorem tax bill for the property.
      (2)   When a right to a refund exists, the town shall send a refund to
the current owner of record within 90 days after it is determined by Town
Council that a refund is due.
      (3)   All refunds shall include the pro rata portion of the interest
earned while on deposit in the specific development impact fee trust account.
      (4)   A record owner of property for which one or more development impact
fee refunds are due has standing to sue for such refund pursuant to § 6-1-1020
(D) of the Act (S.D. Code § 6-1-1020(D)) if there has not been a good-faith
effort towards a timely payment of a refund pursuant to division (B) of this
section.
(Ord. 17009, passed 4-3-17; Am. Ord. 18068, passed 10-9-18)
§ 154.15 REVIEW.
   (A)   Town Council shall be responsible for preparing and publishing an
annual report describing the amount of development impact fees collected,
appropriated and spent during the preceding fiscal year.
   (B)   The Planning Commission shall be responsible for a holistic review and
update of the Development Impact Fee Study Report for Mount Pleasant, Town of
Mount Pleasant Transportation Impact Fee Program Update Report, Town of Mount
Pleasant Capital Improvements Plan, Housing Affordability Analysis in Support
of a Development Impact Fee Study in Mount Pleasant, and the Development Impact
Fee Ordinance for the Town of Mount Pleasant in the same manner and on the same
review cycle as the Town of Mount Pleasant Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 17009, passed 4-3-17; Am. Ord. 18068, passed 10-9-18)
§ 154.16 TERMINATION OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE.
   Development impact fees for the Town of Mount Pleasant shall be terminated
within 15 years after the effective date of this chapter, or when sufficient
fees have been collected to fund all of the projects eligible for development
impact fee funding that are identified in the Town of Mount Pleasant Capital
Improvements Plan, whichever shall first occur, unless:
   (A)   Town Council adopts a revised Development Impact Fee Study Report for
Mount Pleasant or amends the Town of Mount Pleasant Capital Improvements Plan
for a subsequent amount of time; or
   (B)   Town Council adopts an updated Development Impact Fee Ordinance for
the Town of Mount Pleasant pursuant to the substantive and procedural
requirements set forth in the South Carolina Development Impact Fee Act, as
amended.
(Ord. 17009, passed 4-3-17; Am. Ord. 18068, passed 10-9-18)
§ 154.17 LIBERAL CONSTRUCTION.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed to effectively
carry out its purpose in the interest of further promoting and protecting
public health, safety, welfare and convenience.
(Ord. 17009, passed 4-3-17; Am. Ord. 18068, passed 10-9-18)
§ 154.99 PENALTIES.
   Town Council shall have the following remedies, which may be exercised
individually or collectively, for collecting development impact fees. The
failure to pursue any remedy at any time shall not be deemed as a waiver of
town rights to pursue any remedy at such other time as may be deemed
appropriate.
   (A)   Interest and penalties. The town may, at its discretion, add to the
amount of calculated development impact fees due prior to award of a
certificate of occupancy, reasonable interest and penalties for non-payment or
late payment of required funds. Penalties for unpaid development impact fees
shall be administered consistent with
Chapter 10 (General Provisions), §
10.99 in the Town of Mount Pleasant Code of Ordinances, which declares the
violation a penalty subject to a fine not to exceed $500 or imprisonment not to
exceed 30 days. Each day of violation shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (B)   Withholding certificate of occupancy. The town may withhold a
certificate of occupancy until full and complete payment has been made by the
developer of development impact fees due for the development.
   (C)   Lien. The town may impose a lien on the developer's property for
failure of the developer to pay required development impact fees in full.
   (D)   Other. The town may pursue the collection of the development impact
fees, including interest, by way of civil process in the Court of Common Pleas
for Charleston County.
(Ord. 17009, passed 4-3-17; Am. Ord. 18068, passed 10-9-18)
APPENDIX A: GENERAL DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE SCHEDULE
RESIDENTIAL IMPACT FEES (1, 2, 3)
                                    FIRE PROTECTION IMPACT MUNICIPAL FACILITIES
RESIDENTIAL   RECREATION IMPACT FEE FEE                    AND EQUIPMENT IMPACT
                                                           FEE
Dwelling Type Discounted Fee Per    Discounted Fee Per     Discounted Fee Per
              Unit                  Unit                   Unit
RESIDENTIAL IMPACT FEES (1, 2, 3)
                    RECREATION IMPACT  FIRE PROTECTION    MUNICIPAL FACILITIES
RESIDENTIAL         FEE                IMPACT FEE         AND EQUIPMENT IMPACT
                                                          FEE
Dwelling Type       Discounted Fee Per Discounted Fee Per Discounted Fee Per
                    Unit               Unit               Unit
Single Family
(attached or        $2,412.53          $204.24            $493.56
detached)
Multifamily         $1,569.92          $132.90            $321.18
(>2 dwelling units)
                                       FIRE PROTECTION    MUNICIPAL FACILITIES
                                      IMPACT FEE         AND EQUIPMENT IMPACT
                                                         FEE
         NON-RESIDENTIAL      Discounted Fee Per Discounted Fee Per
                                       Square Foot        Square Foot
                                       $0.53              $0.61
 
 
TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEE (1, 2, 3, 4)                        Eleventh Edition
2015 ADT trip ends 703,516 Net total cost of transportation   $77,597,092
                           improvement
2035 ADT trip ends 875,750 Discount Rate                      20%
Net new trip ends  172,234 Discounted Impact Fee Per Trip End $360.43
 
 
TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEE
Land use ITE code Development Eleventh Edition Per Pass-by rate Discounted Fee
                  type        Daily trips
TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEE
                                     Eleventh
Land use      ITE code Development   Edition   Per       Pass-by Discounted Fee
                       type          Daily               rate
                                     trips
Port &                 General                 per
Terminal      22       aviation      14.94     employee  N.A.    $5,384.77
                       airport
              110      General light 0.00487   Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $1.76
                       industrial
              130      Industrial    0.00337   Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $1.21
                       park
              140      Manufacturing 0.00475   Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $1.71
Industrial    150      Warehousing   0.00171   Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $0.62
              151      Mini-         0.00145   Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $0.52
                       warehouse
              170      Utilities     0.01229   Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $4.43
                       Specialty
              180      trade         0.00982   Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $3.54
                       contractor
                       Single-family
              210      detached      9.43      Unit      N.A.    $3,398.82
                       housing
                       Single-family
              215      attached      7.20      Unit      N.A.    $2,595.07
                       housing
                       Multifamily
              220      housing (low- 6.74      Unit      N.A.    $2,429.27
                       rise)
                       Multifamily
Residential   221      housing (mid- 4.54      Unit      N.A.    $1,636.34
                       rise)
                       Multifamily
              222      housing       4.54      Unit      N.A.    $1,636.34
                       (high-rise)
              253      Congregate    2.21      Unit      N.A.    $796.54
                       care facility
              254      Assisted      2.6       Beds      N.A.    $937.11
                       living
                       Continuing
              255      care          2.47      Unit      N.A.    $890.25
                       community
              310      Hotel         7.99      Room      N.A.    $2,879.81
Lodging       312      Business      4.02      Room      N.A.    $1,448.91
                       hotel
              330      Resort hotel  5.55      Room      N.A.    $2,000.37
              416      Campground/RV 3.66      Camp site N.A.    $1,319.16
                       park
              420      Marina        2.41      Berth     N.A.    $868.63
              430      Golf course   3.74      Acre      N.A.    $1,347.99
Recreational           Golf driving            Tee/
              432      range         13.65     Driving   N.A.    $4,919.82
                                               Position
                       Multipurpose
              435      recreational  0.03580   Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $12.90
                       facility
              445      Multiplex     0.06322   Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $22.79
                       movie theater
              490      Tennis courts 30.32     Tennis    N.A.       $10,928. 13
                                               Court
              491      Racquet/      27.71     Tennis    N.A.    $9,987.4 1
Recreational           tennis club             Court
              492      Health/       0.03977   Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $14.33
                       fitness club
              493      Athletic club 0.07251   Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $26.13
                       Recreational
              495      community     0.02882   Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $10.39
                       center
              530      Private       2.86622   Student   N.A.    $1,033.06
                       school (K-8)
              532      Private       2.27027   Student   N.A.    $818.27
                       school (K-12)
                       Charter
              536      elementary    3.23853   Student   N.A.    $1,167.25
                       school
                       Junior/
Institutional 540      community     1.15      Student   N.A.    $414.49
                       college
              560      Church        0.00760   Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $2.74
              561      Synagogue     0.00760   Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $2.74
              565      Daycare       0.04762   Sq. Ft.   44%     $9.61
                       center
              566      Cemetery      6.02      Acre      N.A.    $2,169.77
              580      Museum        0.0035    Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $1.26
              590      Library       0.07205   Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $25.97
              610      Hospital      0.01077   Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $3.88
              620      Nursing home  0.00675   Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $2.43
              630      Clinic        0.03760   Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $13.55
                       Animal
Medical       640      hospital/     0.0215    Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $7.75
                       veterinary
                       clinic
                       Free-standing
              650      emergency     0.02494   Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $8.99
                       room
                       General
              710      office        0.01084   Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $3.91
                       building
              712      Small office  0.01439   Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $5.19
                       building
                       Corporate
              714      headquarters  0.00795   Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $2.87
                       building
Office                 Single tenant
             715      office        0.01307   Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $4.71
                      building
                       Medical-
              720      dental office 0.03600   Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $12.98
                       building
              750      Office park   0.01107   Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $3.99
                       Research and
              760      development   0.01108   Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $3.99
                       center
              770      Business park 0.01244   Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $4.48
                       Building
              812      materials and 0.01705   Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $6.15
                       lumber store
                       Free-standing
              813      discount      0.05052   Sq. Ft.   29%     $12.93
                       superstore
              814      Variety store 0.06366   Sq. Ft.   34%     $15.14
                       Free standing
              815      discount      0.05387   Sq. Ft.   20%     $15.53
                       store
              816      Hardware/     0.00807   Sq. Ft.   26%     $2.15
                       paint store
                       Nursery
              817      (garden       0.0681    Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $24.55
                       center)
                       Shopping
              820      center (150-  0.03701   Sq. Ft.   29%     $9.47
                       300k)
Retail                 Shopping
              820      center (300-  0.03701   Sq. Ft.   19%     $10.80
                       900k)
                       Shopping
              821      plaza (40-    0.09449   Sq. Ft.   40%     $20.43
                       150k) w/
                       supermarket
                       Shopping
              821      plaza (40-    0.06752   Sq. Ft.   40%     $14.60
                       150k) w/out
                       supermarket
              822      Strip retail  0.05445   Sq. Ft.   40%     $11.78
                       plaza
              840      Automobile    0.02784   Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $10.03
                       sales (new)
              841      Automobile    0.02706   Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $9.75
                       sales (used)
              843      Automobile    0.05457   Sq. Ft.   43%     $11.21
                       parts sales
              848      Tire store    0.02769   Sq. Ft.   25%     $7.49
              850      Supermarket   0.09384   Sq. Ft.   24%     $25.71
              857      Discount club 0.04246   Sq. Ft.   34%     $10.10
                       Sporting
              861      goods         0.02378   Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $8.57
                       superstore
                       Home
              862      improvement   0.03074   Sq. Ft.   42%     $6.43
                       superstore
              863      Electronics   0.04105   Sq. Ft.   40%     $8.88
                       superstore
              866      Pet supply    0.0355    Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $12.80
                       superstore
Retail        867      Office supply 0.03718   Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $13.40
                      superstore
              876      Apparel store 0.06640   Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $23.93
              879      Arts and      0.05655   Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $20.38
                       crafts store
                       Pharmacy/
              880      drugstore     0.09008   Sq. Ft.   53%     $15.26
                       without drive
                       thru
                       Pharmacy/
              881      drugstore     0.10840   Sq. Ft.   49%     $19.93
                       with drive
                       thru
              890      Furniture     0.0063    Sq. Ft.   53%     $1.07
                       store
              899      Liquor store  0.10721   Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $38.64
              912      Drive-in bank 0.10035   Sq. Ft.   35%     $23.51
              918      Hair salon    0.0145    Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $5.23
                       Copy, print &
              920      express print 0.0688    Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $24.80
                       store
              930      Fast casual   0.09714   Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $35.01
                       restaurant
              931      Fine dining   0.08384   Sq. Ft.   44%     $16.92
                       restaurant
                       High-turnover
              932      (sit-down)    0.10720   Sq. Ft.   43%     $22.02
                       restaurant
                       Fast-food
              933      restaurant    0.45049   Sq. Ft.   55%     $73.07
                       without drive
                       thru
                       Fast-food
              934      restaurant    0.46748   Sq. Ft.   55%     $75.82
                       with drive
                       thru
                       Coffee/donut
              936      shop w/out    0.44188   Sq. Ft.   55%     $71.67
                       drive-thru
                       window
                       Coffee/donut
Services      937      shop with     0.53357   Sq. Ft.   55%     $86.54
                      drive-thru
                      window
                       Quick                   Servicing
              941      lubrication   40        Position  N.A.    $14,417. 05
                       vehicle shop
              942      Automobile    0.01955   Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $7.05
                       care center
                       Convenience
              945      store/gas     265.12    Fueling   70%        $28,666. 87
                       station (GFA            Position
                       2-4k)
                       Convenience
              945      store/gas     327.58584 Fueling   70%        $35,421. 17
                       station (GFA            Position
                       4-5.5k)
                       Convenience
              945      store/gas     387.17307 Fueling   70%        $41,864. 21
                       station (GFA            Position
                       5.5-10k)
              947      Self-service  108       Stall     48%     $20,241. 54
                       car wash
              948      Automated car 0.16309   Sq. Ft.   48%     $30.57
                       wash
              971      Brewery tap   0.06169   Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $22.23
                       room
              975      Drinking      0.11360   Sq. Ft.   N.A.    $40.94
                       place
General Development Impact Fee Schedule Notes:
1.   Fees listed in Appendix A are discounted per unit. This is the “COST”
factor in the formula for the corresponding impact fee category in §
154.09.   
2.   If the fee payer is applying for a permit to allow for a change in use or
an expansion, redevelopment, or modification of existing development, the fee
required to be paid shall be based on the net increase for the new use compared
to the previous use.
3.   Notwithstanding the provisions above regarding the applicable fees listed
in the transportation impact fee schedule, transportation impact fees may be
calculated independently as provided in §
154.09.
4.   a.   Uses not specifically listed in the transportation impact fee section
of the schedule above shall be determined by the Director of Engineering and
Development Services, based upon either the trip generation characteristics for
a specific use listed in the ITE Trip Generation Manual, eleventh edition, or a
use with similar trip generation characteristics listed in the same manual. If
a building permit is requested for mixed uses, then the fee shall be determined
according to the above schedule by apportioning the space committed to uses
specified on the schedule.
   b.   All trip generation rates are taken from the ITE Trip Generation Manual
based on average weekday vehicle trip ends unless otherwise noted.
   c.   All land uses that have ITE pass-by data are reduced by the average
p.m. peak hour pass-by rate for that specific use.
   d.   Any use listed in the ITE Trip Generation Manual which provides a rate
based on occupancy (i.e., per occupied room) will consider the entire
development occupied for purposes of calculating the fee.
 
(Am. Ord. 20053, passed 9-11-20, effective 1-1-21; Am. Ord. 21040, passed 5-11-
21; Am. Ord. 22053, passed 10-21-22)
CHAPTER 155: LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
155.001   Title
   
155.002   Authority and jurisdiction
   
155.003   Purpose
   
155.004   Definitions
   
155.005   Compliance
Plan and Plat Preparation and Requirements
   
155.020   Submission and review procedures
   
155.021   Sketch plan submission and review
   
155.022   Sketch plan requirements
   
155.023   Preliminary plat submission and review
   
155.024   Preliminary plat requirements
   
155.025   Final plat submission and review
   
155.026   Final plat requirements
   
155.027   Recording of final plat
   
155.028   Exceptions
   
155.029   Impact assessments
   
155.030   Plat certificates
Design Standards
   
155.044   Improvement procedures in general
   
155.045   Location
   
155.046   Professional liability
   
155.047   Blocks and lots
   
155.048   Streets
   
155.049   Sidewalks
   
155.050   Easements
   
155.051   Storm drainage and flood areas
   
155.052   Inspections
   
155.053   Sewer and water supply
   
155.054   Greenspace Preservation and Protection Plan. and environmental
guidelines for land development
Required Improvements
   
155.071   Markers
   
155.072   Addressing system
Administration
   
155.084   Recorded restrictive covenants
   
155.085   Vested rights
   
155.086   Fees
   
155.087   Amendments to land use regulations
   
155.088   Streets, drainage system and stormwater control facility financial
guarantee
 
   
155.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A: Plat certificates
   
Appendix B: Forms
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the Land Development Regulations of the town.
('81 Code, § 154.01) (Ord. passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord. 99012, passed 4-21-99; Am.
Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-02))
§ 155.002 AUTHORITY AND JURISDICTION.
   This chapter was prepared in pursuance of authority conferred by the S.C.
Code of 1976, Title 6, Chapter 7. The provisions set forth herein shall apply
throughout the incorporated areas of the town.
('81 Code, § 154.02) (Ord. passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-02)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to establish land development regulations, see S.C. Code Title 6,
Chapter 7
§ 155.003 PURPOSE.
   The public health, safety, economy, good order, appearance, convenience,
morals, and general welfare require the harmonious, orderly, and progressive
development of land within the municipalities of the state. In furtherance of
this general intent, the regulation of the land development is authorized for
the following purposes, among others:
   (A)   To encourage the development of economically sound and stable
municipalities and counties.
   (B)   To assure the timely provisions of required streets, utilities, and
other facilities and services to new land developments;
   (C)   To assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access
circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in and through new land
developments;
   (D)   To assure the provision of needed open public open spaces and building
sites in new land developments through the dedication or reservation of land
for recreational, educational, transportation, and other public purposes; and
   (E)   To assure, in general, the wise and timely development of new areas,
and redevelopment of previously developed areas in harmony with the
comprehensive plans of municipalities and counties.
('81 Code, § 154.03) (Ord. passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord. 99012, passed 4-21-99; Am.
Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-02)
§ 155.004 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER. The Director of Engineering and Development
Services.
   ANNUAL MEETING SCHEDULE.  A schedule of all regular meetings of appointed
and elected officials of the Town of Mount Pleasant, published no later than
December of each year, and which may be amended from time to time.
   APPLICANT.  The individual specified on an application form for any Sketch
Plan, Plat, or other formal submittal to the Town as being the point of contact
for such application.
   CRITICAL AREA. Pursuant to Title 48 of the South Carolina Code of Laws,
CRITICAL AREA includes coastal waters, tidelands, beaches, and the beach/dune
system.
   EASEMENT. A grant by the property owner of the use of a strip of land for a
specific purpose. Ownership is retained by the property owner, who is
responsible for the general upkeep and maintenance of the easement.
   ENGINEER. A registered professional engineer in the state.
   FINAL PLAT. A plat of all or part of a subdivision of property, including
supporting data, showing all features and improvements required by these
regulations, which substantially conforms to the approved Preliminary Plat. A
FINAL PLAT is prepared after all required improvements, such as installation of
infrastructure, are complete.
   LAND DEVELOPMENT. A change in land characteristics through redevelopment,
construction, subdivision into parcels, condominium complexes, apartment
complexes, commercial parks, shopping centers, industrial parks, mobile home
parks, or similar developments for sale, lease, or any combination of owner and
rental characteristics.
   LOT. A single parcel or tract of land as a part of a subdivision, or a tract
of land of less than five acres.
   METES AND BOUNDS. A system of describing and identifying land by measure and
direction, bearing  and distances, from an identifiable point of reference,
such as a monument or other marker, to another marker.
   PLAT. A drawing showing an actual subdivision of property into two or more
lots, tracts or parcels.
   PRELIMINARY PLAT.  A plat of all or part of a subdivision of property,
showing all features and improvements required by these regulations, which
substantially conforms to the approved Sketch Plan. A PRELIMINARY PLAT is
prepared prior to the installation of required improvements, such as
infrastructure.
   PRELIMINARY STAFF REVIEW. A non- binding review of a Sketch Plan by
Department of Planning and Development staff required prior to formal submittal
of the Sketch Plan to the Planning Commission.
   REGULATIONS. The whole body of regulations, text, charts, diagrams,
notations, and references contained, or referred to, in this chapter.
   SKETCH PLAN.  A map of property indicating a proposed subdivision design,
and which includes all information listed in the Sketch Plan Approval Checklist
provided by the Director of Engineering and Development Services, as may be
amended from time to time.
   STREET. For the purpose of this chapter, a street falls into one of the
following categories that most accurately describes it:
      (1)   Public street. Vehicular way deeded to and accepted by the
governing authority for perpetual maintenance, and includes:
         •   Highways and thoroughfares. Streets designed primarily to move
large volumes of traffic and that provide for the movement of traffic;
         •   Collector street. A street used to collect and distribute medium
traffic volumes between origin and destination points. Principal entrance and
circulation streets of subdivisions also are classified as collectors; and
         •   Minor street. A street primarily used for abutting properties.
      (2)   Private street. Vehicular way held in private or corporate
ownership, and one which is ineligible for public expenditures and/or public
maintenance, and includes:
         •   Alley. An improved private right- of-way used primarily as a
secondary means of access to the side or rear of properties whose principal
frontage is on another street.
   STREET, DEAD-END. Any street having one outlet for vehicular traffic and
having no intersections aside from this single vehicular outlet. A DEAD-END
STREET may be designed in such a manner as to permit its extension at a later
date.
   STREET, STUB. A street intended to be extended in conjunction with the
subdivision and/or development of the adjacent parcel(s).
   SUBDIVIDER. Shall carry the same meaning as the term DEVELOPER as used in
this chapter.
   SUBDIVISION. A division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots,
building sites, or other divisions. The land is divided for sale, lease, or
building development, whether immediately or in the future. The definition
includes all land divisions involving a new street or change in existing
streets. It includes re-subdivisions involving the further division or
relocation of lot lines of any lot or lots within any previously approved or
recorded subdivision, as well as combination of lots of record. The following
exceptions are included within this definition only for the purpose of
requiring that the local planning agency be informed and have a record of the
subdivisions.
      (1)   Combining or recombining portions of previously platted lots where
the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to
the ordinance standards.
      (2)   Dividing land into parcels of five acres or more where a new street
is involved. The Planning Commission must receive plats of these exceptions as
information and indicate that fact on the plats.
      (3)   Combining or recording entire lots of record where no new street or
change in existing streets is involved.
   SUBDIVISION PLAN. Maps or drawings upon which the subdivision is presented
for approval, including both the plat showing the division of the site and the
plans and specifications for the improvements that are required in conjunction
with the division of the property.
   WAIVER. A grant of relief from certain requirements of the Land Development
Regulations by the Planning Commission. Such relief may only be granted where
expressly permitted by this chapter.
('81 Code, §154.04) (Ord. passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord. 99012, passed 4-21-99; Am.
Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-02; Am. Ord. 14047, passed 8-12-14; Am. Ord. 16038,
passed 6-15-16; Am. Ord. 16082, passed 10-11-16; Am. Ord. 21041, passed 5-11-
21)
§ 155.005 COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   Compliance with state law. All land subdivisions in the town shall be
in accord within (Class A) Urban Land Surveys as promulgated by S.C. Code,
1976, Title 40, Chapter 21, as amended July 1, 1991, and described by the
Minimum Standards Manual for the Practice of Land Surveying in South Carolina.
   (B)   Conformance to plans.
      (1)   Finished surfaces in all cases shall conform to cross sections,
dimensions, and grades shown on the approved plans.
      (2)   Deviations from the plans.
         (a)   Any major deviations from the plans during construction or
otherwise shall, in all cases, be approved by the Director of Engineering and
Development Services, or his or her designee, and authorized, in writing, prior
to the construction of all deviations.
         (b)   Minor variations may be made and shown on the as-built plans.
      (3)   Drainage systems in all cases shall conform to cross sections,
dimensions, erosion control, and grades as shown on the approved plans.
       (4)   The developer shall furnish the services of a licensed
professional to prepare the necessary plats, analyses and plans for
ascertaining whether or not the work performed and materials used in
conjunction with the public streets are in accordance with the requirements and
intent of these specifications.
         (a)   Any work done or materials used without supervision or
inspection of the licensed professional or his or her representatives may be
ordered removed and replaced at the developer's expense.
         (b)   Failure to reject any defective work or material shall not in
any way prevent later rejection, when such defect is discovered.
         (c)   Final inspection and acceptance of streets will be made by the
Director of Planning and Development, or his or her designee, prior to
approval.
   (C)   Responsibility of developer.
      (1)   The developer and contractor shall procure all permits and
licenses, pay all charges, fees, and taxes, and give all notice necessary and
incident to the due and lawful prosecution of the work.
      (2)   The developer shall at all times conduct the work in such a manner
to:
         (a)   Provide for and insure the safety and convenience of the
traveling public and of the residents along and adjacent to the streets or
roads; and
         (b)   Offer the least practicable obstruction to the flow of traffic.
      (3)   The developer and contractor shall assume their responsibilities to
the public, or particularly that portion of the public that patronizes or abuts
his or her development, and the developer and contractor shall at no time
relinquish such responsibility by inferring that the responsibility lies with
the municipality of any other organization.
      (4)   Safeguarding the work.
         (a)   The developer shall provide, erect, and maintain in good
condition, all necessary barricades, suitable and sufficient lights, danger
signals, and other signs and take all necessary precautions for the protection
and safety of the workers, contractors, the public and others in conformance
with the Uniform Manual of Traffic Safety, federal, state, and local safety
codes and regulations.
         (b)   The developer shall indemnify agents, and employees from all
suits or claims of any character brought because of injuries or damages
received or sustained by any person or property on account of operations of the
developer; or on account of or in consequence of any neglect in safeguarding
the work; or because of any act of omission, neglect, or misconduct of the
developer or contractor.
   (D)   Acceptance of dedication and maintenance of improvements.
      (1)   The dedication of public space, parks, right-of-way, easements, or
the like on the plat shall not constitute an acceptance of the dedication by
the town.
      (2)   The acceptance of the dedication shall be indicated by the
recording of appropriate legal documents.
('81 Code, Art. III intro, and §§156.004, 156.006 and 156.017) (Ord. passed 6-
9-92; Am. Ord. 00035, passed 7-11-00; Am. Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-02; Am. Ord.
16082, passed 10-11-16; Am. Ord. 21041, passed 5-11-21)
PLAN AND PLAT PREPARATION AND REQUIREMENTS
§ 155.020 SUBMISSION AND REVIEW PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The following steps describe the procedure for obtaining approval of
land subdivision within the town, except as otherwise permitted in §
155.028.
   (B)   The procedure includes:
      (1)   Submission and review of a Sketch Plan;
      (2)   Submission, review, and approval of a Preliminary Plat;
      (3)   Submission, review, and approval of a Final Plat; and
      (4)   Recording of a Final Plat.
   (C)   Step 2 shall be completed prior to clearing, grading or making any
other street or other improvements, or installing any utilities.
   (D)   Step 3 shall be completed prior to building construction and/or sale
or transfer of any lots within the subdivision, unless otherwise authorized by
the Town.
('81 Code, Art. II intro) (Ord. passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord. 00063, passed 1-9-01;
Am. Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-02; Am. Ord. 16082, passed 10-11-16)
§ 155.021 SKETCH PLAN SUBMISSION AND REVIEW.
   (A)   A Sketch Plan submittal shall be required prior to the filing of a
Preliminary Plat.
   (B)   The purpose of the Sketch Plan is to assist the Subdivider prior to
extensive engineering work necessary for the preparation of a Preliminary Plat
and Final Plat as required herein.
   (C)   Preliminary Staff Review.
      (1)   An Applicant shall prepare and submit a Sketch Plan for Preliminary
Staff Review on or before the deadline date specified on the Annual Meeting
Schedule.
      (2)   Incomplete submittals shall be returned to the Applicant without
acceptance by the Town for review.
      (3)   Department of Planning and Development staff shall review the
Sketch Plan and provide written comments to the Applicant prior to the next
Planning Commission application deadline. Staff shall also schedule a meeting
with the Applicant to review these written comments, with such meeting to occur
prior to the next Planning Commission application deadline.
   (D)   Planning Commission review.
      (1)   Following the staff review, the Applicant shall submit the Sketch
Plan to the Planning Commission, via the Department of Planning, Land Use, and
Neighborhoods, on or before the deadline date specified on the Annual Meeting
Schedule.
      (2)   The Sketch Plan shall be accompanied by an application fee, as
determined by Town Council and set forth on the Department of Planning and
Development Fee Schedule.
      (3)   Incomplete submittals shall be returned to the Applicant without
acceptance by the Town for review.
      (4)   The Planning Commission shall review and act upon the Sketch Plan
within 60 days of the date on which it is scheduled or eligible to be
considered.
         (a)   If no action is taken by the Commission within this time, the
Sketch Plan shall be deemed to have been approved.
         (b)   The 60-day time limit may be extended by mutual agreement of the
affected parties.
      (5)   The Planning Commission shall either approve, conditionally
approve, or disapprove the Sketch Plan.
         (a)   If the Sketch Plan is conditionally approved or disapproved, the
reasons for such action shall be stated in the Planning Commission’s motion for
the record.
         (b)   With a conditional approval, the Planning Commission may require
the Applicant to resubmit the Sketch Plan to the Commission with all
recommended changes before approval is effective.
         (c)   Planning Commission approval or conditional approval of a Sketch
Plan shall be vested for a period of two years, subject to the rights and
restrictions contained within
Chapter 156.
('81 Code, §154.10) (Ord. passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord. 99012, passed 4-21-99; Am.
Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-02; Am. Ord. 02068, passed 1-14-03; Am. Ord. 05035,
passed 6-14-05; Am. Ord. 16082, passed 10-11-16; Am. Ord. 21041, passed 5-11-
21)
§ 155.022 SKETCH PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The Sketch Plan shall be legibly drawn to scale.
   (B)   Said Sketch Plan shall include, at a minimum, the information listed
in the Sketch Plan Approval Checklist provided by the Department of Engineering
and Development Services, as may be amended from time to time.
('81 Code, §154.20) (Ord. passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord. 99012, passed 4-21-99; Am.
Ord. 00052, passed 9-12-00; Am. Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-02; Am. Ord. 13027,
passed 6-11-13; Am. Ord. 16082, passed 10-11-16; Am. Ord. 21041, passed 5-11-
21)
§ 155.023 PRELIMINARY PLAT SUBMISSION AND REVIEW.
   (A)   The Subdivider shall prepare and submit Preliminary Plat, construction
drawings, and a drainage report to the Department of Engineering and
Development Services, for the purpose of determining adherence of the
subdivision to the approved Sketch Plan, relevant design standards, and
improvement requirements.
      (1)   An Applicant shall prepare and submit a Preliminary Plat on or
before the deadline date specified on the Annual Meeting Schedule.
      (2)   Incomplete submittals shall be returned to the Applicant without
acceptance by the Town for review.
      (3)   The following are required to be included with the application and
Preliminary Plat materials:
         (a)   Application fee; and
         (b)   Inspecting services fee.
   (B)   Sixty-day time limit for review and response.
      (1)   Staff shall review and act upon the Preliminary Plat within 60 days
of the date of receipt of the complete submittal. If no action is taken by
staff within this time, the Preliminary Plat shall be deemed to have been
approved.
      (2)   The 60-day time limit may be extended by mutual agreement of the
affected parties.
   (C)   Staff shall either approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the
plat.
      (1)   If the Preliminary Plat is conditionally approved or disapproved,
the reasons for such action shall be provided, in writing, by the Director of
Engineering and Development Services, or his or her designee.
      (2)   On approval with conditions, the staff may require the Subdivider
to resubmit the Preliminary Plat with all required changes before approval is
effective.
   (D)   Approval of the Preliminary Plat does not constitute final approval.
      (1)   Preliminary Plat approval shall be authorization for the Subdivider
to proceed with:
         (a)   The installation of the site improvements;
         (b)   The marking of lots and easements; and
         (c)   The preparation of the Final Plat.
      (2)   However, Preliminary Plat approval shall not authorize the sale or
transfer of lots.
      (3)   Preliminary Plats shall be vested for a period of two years,
subject to the rights and restrictions contained within
Chapter 156.
   (E)   Appeals.  Approval or disapproval of the Preliminary Plat by the
Director of Engineering and Development Services, or his or her designee, may
be appealed by any party of interest to the Planning Commission for review.
      (1)   Submittal of the appeal shall be made no later than 15 days after
the decision for approval has been rendered, and shall be accompanied by a
written explanation of the basis of the appeal.
      (2)   Failure to meet the filing deadline shall be considered a waiver of
the right to appeal.
      (3)   The Commission shall act upon the appeal request within 60 days of
the meeting at which the request is scheduled to be considered, which shall be
the next meeting for which the normal 28-day application deadline can be met.
      (4)   The decision of the Commission shall be final.
      (5)   An appeal from the decision of the Commission may be taken to
Circuit Court within 30 days after actual notice of the decision.
('81 Code, §154.11) (Ord. passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord. 99020, passed 7-13-99; Am.
Ord. 00063, passed 1-9-01; Am. Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-02; Am. Ord. 05035,
passed 6-14-05: Am. Ord. 10071, passed 12-14-10; Am. Ord. 16082, passed 10-11-
16; Am. Ord. 21041, passed 5-11-21)
§ 155.024 PRELIMINARY PLAT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The Preliminary Plat shall be legibly drawn to prescribed scale.
   (B)    Said Preliminary Plat shall include, at a minimum, the information
listed in the Preliminary Plat Application Checklist provided by the Department
of Engineering and Development Services, as may be amended from time to time.
('81 Code, §154.21) (Ord. passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-02; Am.
Ord. 13027, passed 6-11-13; Am. Ord. 16082, passed 10-11-16; Am. Ord. 21041,
passed 5-11-21)
§ 155.025 FINAL PLAT SUBMISSION AND REVIEW.
   (A)   Submittal package. The Subdivider shall prepare and submit a Final
Plat to the Department of Engineering and Development Services staff for
approval.
      (1)   The Final Plat shall include, at a minimum, the information listed
in the Final Plat Application Checklist provided by the Department of
Engineering and Development Services, as may be amended from time to time.
      (2)   Final Plat approval shall not be considered until all required on-
site improvements have been completed, inspected, and approved by the proper
officials, all fees paid, and a complete submittal package containing all
documentation required by this chapter has been received by the Town.
      (3)   Partial submittals shall not be accepted.
   (B)   Conformance with the Preliminary Plat. The Final Plat shall
substantially conform to the Preliminary Plat as previously approved by the
Department of Engineering and Development Services staff.
      (1)   The Final Plat shall incorporate all modifications required by the
staff in its review of the Preliminary Plat.
      (2)   However, the Final Plat may be submitted in sections, each covering
a reasonable portion of the entire proposed subdivision as shown on the
approved Preliminary Plat.
   (C)   Sixty-day time limit for review and response.
      (1)   Staff shall review and act upon the Final Plat within 60 days of
the date of receipt of the complete submittal.
      (2)   The 60-day time limit may be extended by mutual agreement of the
affected parties.
   (D)   Approval. If the Final Plat and all supplementary data comply with all
applicable requirements of this chapter, the plat shall be approved, in
writing, by the Director of the Department of Engineering and Development
Services, or his or her designee, on a reproducible copy of the Final Plat.
   (E)   Disapproval.
      (1)   If the Final Plat is disapproved, the reasons for such action shall
be provided, in writing, by the Director of the Department of Engineering and
Development Services, or his or her designee.
      (2)   If applicable, any modification required by staff after Preliminary
Plat review, as a prerequisite to approval of the Final Plat, shall be noted on
the Final Plat.
   (F)   Appeals. Approval or disapproval of the Final Plat by the Director of
the Department of Engineering and Development Services, or his or her designee,
may be appealed by any party of interest tothe Planning Commission for review.
      (1)   Submittal of the appeal shall be made no later than 15 days after
the decision for approval has been rendered, and shall be accompanied by a
written explanation of the basis of the appeal.
      (2)   Failure to meet the filing deadline shall be considered a waiver of
the right to appeal.
      (3)   The Commission shall act upon the appeal request within 60 days of
the meeting at which the request is scheduled to be considered, which shall be
the next meeting for which the normal 28-day application deadline can be met.
      (4)   The decision of the Commission shall be final.
      (5)   An appeal from the decision of the Commission may be taken to
Circuit Court within 30 days after actual notice of the decision.
   (G)   Materials and workmanship certification/ as- built certification.
Materials and workmanship certification/as-built certification, as set forth in
Appendix B, § 8, of this chapter, is required before Final Plat approval or
issuance, and shall accompany the permit in non-subdivision areas where
improvements are made.
    (H)   Two-year warranty.
      (1)   The developer shall execute an agreement guaranteeing the required
public street improvements against defect in workmanship and materials for two
years after acceptance of such improvements by the Town, as documented by the
date of recording the initial plat with the RMC office.
      (2)    The agreement shall be submitted to the Director of the Department
of Engineering and Development Services, or his or her designee.
      (3)   Along with the Director's recommendation, the Town may require a
cash bond or other acceptable surety, in an amount to be determined by the
Director, in addition to the agreement.
('81 Code, §§154.12, 156.013 and 156.016) (Ord. passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord. 97001,
passed 2-11-97; Am. Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-02; Am. Ord. 13027, passed 6-11-13;
Am. Ord. 16082, passed 10-11-16; Am. Ord. 21041, passed 5-11-21)
§ 155.026 FINAL PLAT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)    Application for Final Plat approval shall be made in the Department
of Engineering and Development Services, and shall include such information as
set forth in the Final Plat Application Checklist provided by the Department of
Engineering and Development Services, as may be amended from time to time.
      (1)   For large subdivisions, the Final Plat may be submitted for
approval progressively in sections conforming to the approved Preliminary Plat.
      (2)   As-built plans shall be submitted at the time of application for
plat approval or upon completion of the work.
      (3)   However, record drawings may be substituted with prior approval of
the Town Engineer, if the work substantially conforms to approved construction
plans.
      (4)   The Final Plat, accompanying data, and approval from the Town
Engineer(s), or his or her designee(s), that all work has been satisfactorily
completed, shall be submitted as a package.
      (5)   Incomplete submittals shall be returned without review.
   (B)    The Final Plat shall meet the requirements of the Charleston County
ROD Office for recording, and shall be submitted at a scale of one inch equals
100 feet or larger.
      (1)   Minimum plat size shall be 81/2 × 11 inches.
      (2)   Where necessary, the plat may be on several sheets, accompanied by
an index sheet or key map insert showing the entire subdivision.
      (3)   Five copies of the plat shall be submitted.
('81 Code, §154.22) (Ord. passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord. 02045, 7-11-02; Am. Ord.
13027, passed 6-11-13; Am. Ord. 16082, passed 10-11-16; Am. Ord. 21041, passed
5-11-21)
§ 155.027 RECORDING OF FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   (1)   After the Final Plat has been approved by the staff, copies
meeting all requirements shall be filed for recording by the Charleston County
Register of Mesne Conveyance within 30 days of the date of final approval.
      (2)   If the Subdivider fails to arrange for the recording of the plat
within such period, the actions of the staff shall be null and void, unless an
extension of time is granted, in writing, by the staff upon written request by
the Subdivider.
   (B)   (1)    Recording of the Final Plat shall constitute an irrevocable
offer to deed all streets and other public ways shown thereon to the Town
(unless a notation stating that there is no offer of dedication of certain
designated streets is placed on the plat by the Subdivider and approved by the
Director of the Department of Engineering and Development Services, or his or
her designee), and to dedicate, deed, or reserve, as specified by the Director,
all park reservations, school sites, and other such areas to the public use.
      (2)   Recording of the plat, however, shall not impose any duty upon the
Town, County, or State concerning improvement, maintenance, or acceptance of
such streets or reserved areas, until the proper authorities have made formal
acceptance of same by legal action.
('81 Code, §154.13) (Ord. passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord. 2045, passed 7-9-02; Am. Ord.
16082, passed 10-11-16; Am. Ord. 21041, passed 5-11-21)
§ 155.028 EXCEPTIONS.
    In the case of any proposed subdivision that involves minimal or no street
construction or dedication of street rights-of-way, the following procedures
may be followed to obtain review and approval of the plan. At the discretion of
the Director of the Department of Engineering and Development Services, or his
or her designee, this exception may not apply when there are extenuating
circumstances warranting review of the proposed subdivision by the Planning
Commission. In such case, the procedure specified in  §
155.020 shall apply.
   (A)   The Subdivider shall submit one paper copy of a Preliminary Plat,
along with the other reports, documents, plans, and fees, as stated in §§
155.023 and
155.025 of this chapter, t o the Director of the Department of Engineering and
Development Services, or his or her designee, who within 15 business days
thereafter shall notify the Subdivider of any additions or modifications to the
plat that may be necessary to comply with the standards of this chapter.
   (B)    Following notification from the Director of the Department of
Engineering and Development Services, or his or her designee, the Subdivider
shall then proceed with site development, marking of lots, easements and
buffers, and preparation of a Final Plat.
   (C)   Upon completion of site development, a Final Plat shall be submitted.
('81 Code, §154.14) (Ord. passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-02; Am.
Ord. 16082, passed 10-11-16; Am. Ord. 21041, passed 5-11-21)
§ 155.029 IMPACT ASSESSMENTS.
   (A)   If an Impact Assessment for a residential subdivision is required
pursuant to the Zoning Code, the request is sent to Town Council, following
Conceptual Plan and Impact Assessment review and recommendation by the Planning
Commission.
      (1)   Town Council shall approve, or stipulate approval with conditions,
or disapprove the request, pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 156 .
      (2)   Any stipulations, revisions, or conditions placed on the
development by Town Council must be made prior submittal of a Final Plat, or as
specified by Town Council.
   (B)   Plans for review and coordination and other submittals are subject to
the following:
      (1)   Plans for review and coordination that are submitted for Impact
Assessments shall include the information required for Conceptual Plan
submittal. In addition, they shall include a master drainage plan, a master
sanitary sewer plan, and a master potable water distribution plan.
      (2)    All other submittal requirements are as stated in §
156.054 of the Zoning Code, and contained in the Impact Assessment Application
Checklist, the requirements of which shall be compiled by Department of
Engineering and Development Services staff, and may be subject to alteration
from time to time, as deemed necessary.
('81 Code, §154.16) (Ord. passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord. 2045, passed 7-9-02; Am. Ord.
11050, passed 7-12-11; Am. Ord. 14047, passed 8-12-14; Am. Ord. 16082, passed
10-11-16; Am. Ord. 21041, passed 5-11-21)
§ 155.030 PLAT CERTIFICATES.
   Requirements for plat certificates appear in Appendix A.
('81 Code, § 154.23) (Ord. passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-02)
DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 155.044 IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURES IN GENERAL.
   (A)    Approval by the Director of the Department of Engineering and
Development Services, or his or her designee, of the Final Plat for recording
shall be withheld unless and until the Subdivider has installed the required
improvements as specified.
   (B)   Any authorized agent of the Planning Commission, the Town, or other
affected public authority shall be granted the right of free access to the
subdivision at all times, for the purpose of inspecting the construction and
installation or improvements in accordance with approved plans and
specifications and requirements of this chapter.
   (C)   (1)    If exigencies of construction necessitate major changes in the
approved plans and specifications, the Subdivider shall request approval of
such changes by the Planning Commission or Department of Engineering and
Development Services staff, as applicable, prior to undertaking such changes.
      (2)   Minor changes may be made by the design professional and noted on
the final plans as submitted to the Town.
('81 Code, §154.40) (Ord. passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-02; Am.
Ord. 16082, passed 10-11-16; Am. Ord. 21041, passed 5-11-21)
§ 155.045 LOCATION.
   (A)   No platting of land for residential use is to occur in areas subject
to flooding by normal tides, swamps, marshes, or in other undrained areas
unless suitable provision is made for satisfactory drainage.
   (B)   As a minimum, streets shall be elevated to allow passage during a
five-year storm event.
('81 Code, § 154.30) (Ord. passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-02)
§ 155.046 PROFESSIONAL LIABILITY.
   Nothing contained within this chapter shall relieve the design professional
of his or her responsibility to provide sound design, or any liability for
failure to provide sufficient inspection to insure that construction complies
with the design.
('81 Code, § 154.31) (Ord. passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-02)
§ 155.047 BLOCKS AND LOTS.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. The following are considered the minimum
requirements for meeting the terms of this section; however, the Planning
Commission may grant a waiver from one or more of the design standards
contained in this section where deemed appropriate, if all conditions specified
in §
155.047(A)(1) through (4) are met.
      (1)   There are topographical constraints, such as the presence of
wetlands or critical areas, or other unusual conditions, such as the presence
of historic trees (as defined in Chapter 156 of this code), pertaining to the
particular parcel(s) of land that do not generally apply to other parcels in
the vicinity and that are not the result of actions of the applicant;
      (2)   The applicant demonstrates that compliance with one or more
provisions of this section is unreasonable, in conflict with the public
interest, or a practical impossibility;
      (3)   The modification will not adversely affect the reasonable
development of adjacent property; and
      (4)   In all cases, the public welfare and interests of the town shall be
protected and the general intent and spirit of the regulations preserved.
      (5)   Applications for a waiver shall be accompanied by written
justification explaining how all conditions are met. Financial disadvantage or
mere inconvenience shall not be considered sufficient justification for a
waiver.
      (6)   Each waiver request shall be evaluated on its own merits, and the
granting of a particular waiver shall not set a precedent for other waiver
requests.
      (7)   In approving a request for a waiver from the provisions of this
section, the Planning Commission may impose reasonable conditions that will, in
its judgment, justify such waiver and ensure that the intent of these Land
Development Regulations is upheld.
      (8)   A request for a waiver may be made on its own or in conjunction
with a Sketch Plan submittal. The Planning Commission shall review and act upon
the waiver request within 60 days of the date on which it is scheduled to be
considered.
   (B)   Blocks. The length, width, and shape of blocks shall be determined
with regard to:
      (1)   Provision of adequate building sites suitable to special needs of
the type of use (residential, commercial, industrial, other) contemplated.
      (2)   Zoning requirements as to lots sizes and dimensions.
      (3)   Needs for convenient access, circulation, control, and safety of
street traffic.
      (4)   Limitations and opportunities of topography and drainage features.
      (5)   Block lengths shall not exceed 1,400 feet.
      (6)   Eyebrow designs (partial circle cul-de- sacs) shall not be
permitted.
   (C)   Lots.
      (1)   Lots shall be accessible by improved public streets, except as
provided below.
         (a)   Postage stamp lots.
            1.   Individual units in attached buildings and the buildings
themselves located in commercial and mixed use developments may be located on
their own fee-simple lot, with access provided by a shared ingress/egress
easement. The intent is to allow a fee-simple lot subdivision exclusive to the
actual building pad or close proximity thereto in a “postage stamp” fashion
within the larger parcel boundary. This necessitates elimination of the normal
yard setback requirements and bufferyard requirements on these “postage stamp”
lots.
            2.   The shared ingress/egress easement and all required parking
for the use shall be located on property owned by a property owners’
association, with covenant restrictions insuring access and maintenance of the
same, and a method of collecting sufficient funds through assessments to owners
to cover the maintenance costs.
            3.   A copy of these restrictive covenants shall be approved by the
town prior to subdivision of the property into fee-simple lots.
            4.   Qualification for subdivision pursuant to these provisions is
contingent upon buildings located on the proposed lots meeting all applicable
building and fire code provisions and an approved drainage plan.
         (b)   Subdivision of residential lots containing more than one
dwelling unit.
            1.   Purpose. The purpose of these requirements is to provide for a
one-time subdivision of an existing lot of record containing multiple dwelling
units in order to enable the property owner to convey clear title to each lot
and dwelling unit. This is in recognition of unique settlement patterns of
coastal Lowcountry communities, where developed properties may contain more
than one dwelling unit.
            2.   Applicability. The provisions contained within this section
are only applicable to existing lots of record zoned RC-1, RC-2, RR, CC, R-l,
or R-2 and which currently contain two or more detached dwelling units, but not
accessory dwelling units approved and permitted by the town, and did so at the
time of the adoption of Ordinance No. 12074. Applicants for subdivisions of
residential lots containing more than one dwelling unit may be required to
provide documentation, such as a certificate of occupancy or tax records, to
this effect.
            3.   Reviewing authority. Plats submitted for subdivisions of lots
containing more than one dwelling unit shall be reviewed by the Town Engineer,
or his or her designee.
            4.   Standards. Each of the following standards must be met:
               a.   Regardless of total lot size and density provisions, each
existing lot of record may be subdivided only one time and into not more lots
than there are dwelling units. The subdivision plat shall clearly state that
the parcels created by this process shall not be divided again, except in full
compliance with all regulations in effect at that time.
               b.   Each lot should meet the minimum lot size and dimensional
standards of the zoning district in which it is located. However, in
recognition that many of the lots that contain multiple dwelling units and may
be eligible for this subdivision were platted prior to existing Zoning Code
regulations concerning minimum lot standards, lot size and dimensional
requirements may be reduced by no more than 20% in order to accomplish the
subdivision.
               c.   The lot shall be subdivided so that each existing dwelling
unit meets the minimum setback requirements of the zoning district in which it
is located. However, in recognition that many of the lots that contain multiple
dwelling units and may be eligible for this subdivision were platted prior to
existing Zoning Code regulations concerning minimum lot standards, setback
requirements may be reduced by no more than 50% in order to accomplish the
subdivision.
               d.   Flag lots are not permitted. However, lots may be located
in a configuration similar to a flag lot (one in front of the other), with
access to the rear lot provided through an access easement. Such access
easement shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width and shall provide a minimum of
14 feet unobstructed vertical clearance so as to accommodate emergency
vehicles, shall meet all applicable Fire Code provisions, and shall be approved
in writing by the Fire Chief, or his or her designee. The access easement shall
also be identified on the plat and shall run with the land in perpetuity.
               e.   The subdivision plat shall include a note stating that the
town is not responsible for either construction or routine maintenance of the
access easement.
               f.   Each lot must have Mount Pleasant Waterworks water and
sewer service.
               g.   Each dwelling unit must have its own individual utility
meters.
               h.   When access easements are required, joint access easements
shall be utilized where possible.
               i.   Each lot shall have an individual address provided by the
town.
               j.   All other applicable subdivision requirements shall be met.
      (2)   The lot size, width, shape, grade, and zoning orientation shall be
in proper relation to:
         (a)   Applicable zoning requirements;
         (b)   Street and block design;
         (c)   Existing and proposed topographical conditions; and
         (d)   The type of development and use contemplated.
      (3)   Flag lots shall not be permitted.
      (4)   The minimum lot width required for the zoning district must be met
as measured at the front yard setback building line.
      (5)   However, the minimum front building line setback for cul-de-sac
lots and the rear building line setback line for lots falling on a curve
section of a dedicated street may be indicated where the lot meets the minimum
width requirements and shown on the preliminary and final plats (or other plat
submitted for recording).
      (6)   All lots served by public water and sewers shall meet the minimum
area requirements for the zoning districts within which they are located.
      (7)   Lots that require the installation of individual wells and/or
individual septic tanks shall be required to meet standards established by the
County Health Department.
      (8)   Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to
straight street lines, and radial to curved street lines.
      (9)   Excessive lot depth in relation to lot width shall be avoided.
         (a)   As a general rule, the depth of residential lots in all
districts except the R-4 Medium Density Residential District, and TH Townhouse
District shall not be less than one nor more than 2-1/2 times their width.
            1.   In the R-4 Medium Density Residential District, the depth of
residential lots shall not be less than one nor more than three times their
width. Due to the minimum lot area and dimensional requirements of this zoning
district, lots platted at the minimum 40-foot width must be exactly 100 feet in
depth in order to meet the minimum lot area requirement and not exceed the
width to depth ratio.
            2.   In the TH Townhouse District, the width to depth ratio shall
not apply. Due to the minimum lot area and lot width requirements of this
zoning district, lots platted at the minimum width cannot meet the minimum lot
area requirement without exceeding the width to depth ratio.
         (b)   Lot width shall be measured at the front building line setback,
except as provided in division (C)(5) of this section.
      (10)   Corner lots shall be of sufficient size and shape to permit
required building setback and orientation to both streets.
      (11)   Any remnants of land not meeting all the requirements of this
chapter for a lot shall be incorporated either in existing or proposed lots or
shallbe legally deeded to public use, if acceptable to the town.
      (12)   Each proposed lot shall be so designed as to allow the development
of a private driveway designed in accordance with
Chapter 156  serving the lot and sufficient space for off-street parking and
loading.
      (13)   Only parallel parking shall be permitted within the right-of-way.
      (14)   Lot area. The minimum lot area as required herein shall consist of
high ground land only, and shall not include land within the OCRM's designated
critical area or portions of lots located in lakes, ponds, lagoons, or similar
bodies of water, or other areas designated as wetlands on a certified plat of
the property.
('81 Code, § 155.84) (Ord. passed 8-13-79; Am. Ord. passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord.
99012, passed 4-21-99; Am. Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-02; Am. Ord. 09088, passed 1-
13-10; Am. Ord. 12074, passed 11-13-12; Am. Ord. 14047, passed 8-12-14; Am.
Ord. 16038, passed 6-15-16) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.048 STREETS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   The layout of the streets as to arrangement, character, width,
grade, and location may be required to conform to the town's Comprehensive Plan
and Official Map, to adjoiningstreet systems or adjoining properties, and to
the topography, natural features, and drainage systems to be provided.
         (a)   Connectivity to adjoining properties shall be required in most
instances.
         (b)   Stub Streets for the future connection to adjoining lands, as
approved by the town, shall be constructed along with other streets in the
development.
         (c)   Temporary endings shall be provided with a based turn around.
      (2)   Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through
traffic will be discouraged.
      (3)   Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed
collector or through street, the Planning Commission may require marginal
access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting, deep lots, or such other
treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties
and to afford separation of through and local traffic.
      (4)   Half streets along property lines shall be prohibited.
      (5)   Dead-end streets. Dead-end streets reduce efficiency in the
transportation network, limit emergency access to lots on the street, and can
promote higher vehicle speeds due to the lack of intersections. The purpose in
limiting the length of dead-end streets is to ensure that new development is
designed to be inherently safe, walkable, and efficient for the facilitation of
traffic and pedestrian movement.
         (a)   Dead-end streets, designed to be so permanently, shall be no
longer than 800 feet, provided, however, that:
            1.   For low-density property with the zoning classifications of
RC-1, RC-2, CC, RR, R-1, and R-2, a maximum length of 1,000 feet shall be
allowed; and
            2.   Not more than 25 lots have sole access to the dead-end street.
         (b)   Street length shall be measured from the intersection of the
centerline of the new street right-of-way and the edge of the existing street
right-of-way, along the centerline of the new street, to the outermost pavement
edge at the terminus of the new street.
         (c)   All permanent dead-end streets shall be provided at the closed
end with a turnaround having a street property line diameter of 80 feet.
         (d)   The Planning Commission may grant a waiver from the provisions
of §
155.048(A)(5) herein above where deemed appropriate, if all conditions
specified in §
155.048(A)(5)(d)1. through 3. are met.
            1.   There are topographical constraints or other unusual
conditions pertaining to the particular parcel(s) of land that do not generally
apply to other parcels in the vicinity and that are not the result of actions
of the applicant;
            2.   The applicant demonstrates that compliance with the provisions
is unreasonable, in conflict with the public interest, or a practical
impossibility; and
            3.   In all cases, the public welfare and interest of the town
shall be protected and the general intent and spirit of the regulations
preserved.
            4.   Applications for a waiver shall be accompanied by written
justification explaining how all conditions are met. Financial disadvantage or
mere inconvenience shall not be considered sufficient justification for a
waiver.
            5.   Each waiver request shall be evaluated on its own merits, and
the granting of a particular waiver shall not set a precedent for other wavier
requests.
            6.   In approving a request for a waiver from these provisions, the
Planning Commission may impose reasonable conditions that will, in its
judgment, justify such waiver and ensure that the intent of these land
development regulations is upheld.
            7.   A request for a waiver may be made on its own or in
conjunction with a Sketch Plan submittal. The Planning Commission shall review
and act upon the waiver request within 60 days of the date on which it is
scheduled to be considered.
         (e)   Should the Planning Commission grant a waiver from these
requirements, as provided in §
155.048(A)(5)(d), the following conditions shall apply, in addition to any and
all conditions placed upon the approval by the Planning Commission.
            1.   A turnaround at the terminus of the street is required.
Turnarounds for emergency vehicles may also be required at various intervals
along the street. Determination regarding the necessity of such turnarounds
shall be made in consultation with the Fire Department. All turnarounds shall
meet National Fire Protection Association standards;
            2.   The street shall be designed in such a manner so as to limit
vehicle speed. This could include design elements such as planter islands,
medians, on-street parking, and/or raised crosswalks. All such design elements
shall be the maintenance responsibility of the neighborhood Property Owners’
Association. A note to this effect shall be included on all plans and plats
submitted to the town; and
            3.   Unless precluded by the manner in which adjacent properties
have developed, opportunities for future vehicular connectivity shall be
provided in one or more locations. The right-of-way for any stub street shall
extend to the property line. The location of such stub street(s) shall be at
the discretion of the Planning Commission, in consideration of practical
potential development scenarios involving the adjacent parcel(s).
      (6)   No street name shall be used that will duplicate or be confused
with the names of existing streets or subdivisions east of the Cooper River.
         (a)   Street names proposed by the subdivider shall be approved by E-
911.
         (b)   The subdivider shall submit verification that he or she has
obtained approval of the names from E-911.
         (c)    If the names of existing streets occur, the Planning, Land Use,
and Neighborhoods and Development Department shall require the subdivider to
substitute names free from duplication or confusion.
         (d)   The Planning, Land Use, and Neighborhoods and Development
Department shall maintain an up-to-date file of all street names in use east of
the Cooper River, and make such information available for guidance of
subdividers.
      (7)   Alleys.
         (a)   Alleys shall be permitted where required to provide for service
access, such as off- street parking, loading and unloading, consistent with and
adequate for the uses proposed.
         (b)   Where provided, alleys shall be privately owned and
appropriately noted on the final plat.
      (8)   Additional access to subdivisions.
         (a)   Roads of an existing subdivision shall not be used as the sole
means of ingress and egress in developing a new subdivision or extending an
existing one, unless granted by the Planning Commission.
         (b)   If, in judgment of the Planning Commission, the increased
traffic and noise would create a safety hazard or otherwise be detrimental to
residents of the existing subdivision, additional access shall be provided.
      (9)   Prior to acceptance by the town, rights- of-way and easements shall
be stabilized, grassed, cleaned and neatly trimmed.
      (10)   Prior to acceptance by the town, streets and drainage systems
shall be cleaned.
      (11)   Erosion and silt control measures shall be provided in accordance
with applicable standards.
      (12)   Landscaping, signs, or other objects shall not interfere with
needed sight distance.
      (13)   Private streets are not allowed for purposes of subdivision,
unless otherwise provided in §
155.047(C)(1)(a)-(d), in accordance with the provisions thereof.
      (14)   Street name signs and traffic control devices.
         (a)   Street name signs, pavement markings and other traffic-control
devices shall be installed at all intersections and other locations by the
subdivider.
         (b)   The design, construction, materials, and placement of all street
name signs shall conform to the requirements of the town.
         (c)   Traffic control devices shall conform to the requirements of
latest edition of the South Carolina Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
   (B)   Licenses and permits required and complete plans to be furnished.
      (1)   Before commencing any construction, clearing, or grading on any
commercial or residential tract lot, streets, road or any lands within the town
limits:
         (a)   All necessary licenses and permits shall be obtained; and
         (b)   Complete plans, consisting of general and specific drawings,
specifications, and analysis, together with details to provide a comprehensive
plan of the construction contemplated, shall be furnished to, and approved by,
the town.
      (2)   Subdivision plans.
         (a)   Subdivision plans shall show:
            1.   Alignment;
            2.   Street and right-of-way width;
            3.   Street name;
            4.   A typical section;
            5.   North arrow; and
            6.   Original and proposed center and right-of-way line elevations.
         (b)   Cross sections at 50-foot maximum intervals may be submitted for
the plotting of right-of- way elevations.
      (3)   Elevations and grades.
         (a)   Elevations are not to be assumed, but are to be tied into the
closest Coast and Geodetic Survey benchmark, or to an approved benchmark that
has been previously tied to the same.
         (b)   Data shall be platted to current datum.
         (c)   NGVD plans, profiles and grades shall be platted to a minimum
scale of one inch equals 100 feet horizontal, and one inch equals two feet
vertical.
      (4)   Details shall be furnished for all projects and shall include, as
required, typical pavement sections, curb and gutter, inlet, manhole, frame,
grate, sewer, painted stripes, signs, and walks.
         (a)   Pavement sections shall show the location of all utilities.
         (b)   Curb and gutter inlets will be used to intercept runoff from
vehicular pavements where curb and gutter is used to control drainage.
         (c)   Grate or weir type inlets will be used in turf areas.
      (5)   An inspecting professional shall observe construction for
compliance with plans and specifications approved by the town.
         (a)   If construction is found to be in compliance with the plans and
specifications, the inspecting professional shall make the required
certification as to the observation of construction.
         (b)    Should the inspecting professional find that construction is
not in compliance with the plans and specifications, he or she should notify
all concerned, including the Director of Engineering and Development Services,
or his or her designee, that he or she will not make the required
certification.
         (c)   The inspecting professional shall be a professional registered
in the state and, therefore, is responsible for seeing that the observations of
construction satisfy this requirement, including the intent, of the state laws,
and that the public is protected.
         (d)   The inspecting professional is not an employee of the town, but
rather a professional whose services are obtained by those undertaking the
work.
         (e)   The inspecting professional shall be identified on the plans by
name, firm name, address, and telephone number.
         (f)   In the event the inspecting professional is changed:
            1.   The named inspecting professional shall certify to the work
completed;
            2.    The developer shall notify the Director of the Department of
Engineering and Development Services, or his or her designee, of the change in
writing; and
            3.   A new named professional shall certify the remaining work
done.
      (6)   All observations by the professional shall be logged, and a copy of
the log shall be provided at the time of request for acceptance of the work by
the town.
      (7)   As-built plans, as referenced in §
155.026(A)(2), shall be furnished to the Director of the Department of
Engineering and Development Services, or his or her designee, upon completion
of the work prior to final acceptance.
      (8)   For the development or construction on all individual lots, the
certificate of compliance, as set forth in
Appendix B, § 13, at the end of this chapter, shall be signed by the property
owner prior to the issuance of a building permit.
   (C)   Licensed professional to do work.
      (1)   Plans and specifications covering road, street, parking areas,
drainage, and grading work will be accepted only from registered professionals
qualified under state law.
      (2)   When submitting plans and analyses for road, street, drainage, and
grading work, the professional shall place his or her seal on all documents.
      (3)   All work shall be based on surveys prepared by a professional
licensed in the state and shall conform to Class “A” surveys, as defined by the
State Board of Registration for Land Surveys.
   (D)   Construction authorization.  Where no new construction of public
streets is involved, the Preliminary Plat or site plan shall contain dated
approval blocks for signatures of the water and sewer utility serving the
proposed construction; the Town Fire Department; and the Director of the
Department of Engineering and Development Services.
   (E)   Specifications.
      (1)   All streets public and private, shown on the Final Plat shall be
graded, constructed, and surfaced in accordance with standards and
specifications contained in this section.
         (a)   The developer shall be responsible for correcting any and all
deficiencies in streets, resulting from faulty design or construction, for a
period of two years from the time the streets are accepted by the town, as
evidenced by the recording of the Final Plat into the town's system.
         (b)   The developer, engineer and prime contractor must sign a
notarized affidavit certifying that the streets have been built to all
requirements of the town.
      (2)   All public street and public drainage construction shall be done in
accordance with the latest edition of the State Highway Department Standard
Specifications for Highway Construction, and this subchapter.
         (a)   Field and laboratory testing shall be provided by others.
         (b)    Field and laboratory test results shall be furnished to the
town in accordance with the requirements provided by the Director of the
Department of Engineering and Development Services, or his or her designee.
      (3)   Where private development facilities tie into public facilities,
the work shall meet the requirements of this section.
   (F)   Design standards. All streets shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the following standards:
      (1)   French drains shall be installed along both sides of the roadway
for all streets, except where the Director of Planning and Development, or his
or her designee, approves in writing its omission based on data presented with
a written request from the design professional.
      (2)   Minimum base course thicknesses.
         (a)   Minimum base course thickness shall be six inches, except in
those areas where the roadway elevation is between elevations 6.5 and 10.0.
         (b)   Between elevations 6.5 and 10.0 the base thickness shall be: ten
inches between elevations 6.5 to 7.5, and eight inches between 7.5 and 10.0
msl.
      (3)   Minimum wearing course thicknesses.
         (a)   The minimum wearing course thickness for minor streets shall be
a total of 21/2 inches compacted, which may be placed in two equal lifts of 11/
4 inches compacted.
         (b)   Major roads shall have specific design calculations submitted
for design thickness.
         (c)    Pavement designs may be provided with soil tests to demonstrate
less wearing course thickness, if approved by Department of Engineering and
Development Services.
      (4)   No catch basins shall be permitted within the radius portion of
street intersections.
      (5)   No manhole covers or water valves shall be permitted within the
curb portion of the roadways.
      (6)   All divided roadways shall have a six- inch vertical curb and
gutter along the median portion of such roads.
      (7)   All pipe trenches under pavement or which the 1:1 shear plane
intersects a line two feet from the back of pavement shall be compacted in six-
inch lifts to 98% modified proctor density.
      (8)   Geometric design elements for collector and arterial streets shall
be in accordance with AASHTO design guidelines.
      (9)   Adequate design shall be provided and maintained on all streets.
      (10)   The minimum road elevation shall be elevation 6.5 msl.
      (11)   Concrete curbs and gutters.
         (a)   Concrete curbs and gutters shall be installed on all streets,
street and driveway intersections under development and on public streets
affected by any site being developed.
         (b)   Curbs, gutters and such additional pavement shall be designed
and installed in accordance with the town's thoroughfare plan.
      (12)   Reserve strips or parcels controlling access to streets are
prohibited.
      (13)   Street jogs with the centerline offsets of less than 125 feet
shall be avoided.
      (14)   Compound curves are prohibited.
      (15)   When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one
point by more than ten degrees, they shall be connected by a curve street
centerline radius that shall be a minimum of 100 feet on residential minor
streets, and a minimum of 50 feet shall be provided between reversed curves on
these streets.
      (16)   Street intersection radii.
         (a)   Streets shall be laid out so as to avoid acute angles between
streets at their intersections.
         (b)   Small radius alignment on the approach to the intersections
shall be avoided.
         (c)   Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a
radius of not less than 20 feet.
         (d)   Larger radii or chambered corners will be required when such
design is advisable to permit the construction of curbs of large radii.
         (e)   The minimum street intersection radius shall be 30 feet.
         (f)   Provide a larger radius when so advised.
      (17)   Street widths
         (a)   Street widths shall not be less than the following:
 
Street Type                Right-of-way Width Pavement (back of curb to back of
                                              curb)
Minor circulation street      50 feet         24 feet
Collector and entry roads     60 feet         28 feet
Highways and thoroughfares                    
   Two lanes               80 feet         special
   Four lanes              100 feet        design
Cul-de-sac                    40-foot radiu   30-foot radius
 
         (b)   Edge of pavement radius shall be not less than 30 feet at the
intersection of highways or thoroughfares.
         (c)   Curb and gutter shall extend around the radius to the point of
tangency.
      (18)   Streets and intersection approaches shall not be excessive in
grade nor be less than 4/10 of 1%.
      (19)   Temporary dead-end streets shall be provided with a turn-around in
accordance with subsection (17) above.
      (20)   Intersection signalization.
         (a)   The construction of new roadway intersections and existing
roadway intersections on which traffic light signalization is installed
initially or replaced in whole shall utilize “mast arm” type supports.
         (b)   The utilization of mast arm type supports shall also apply to
the replacement of existing street light signals on projects involving
intersection improvements or street widening.
         (c)    The utilization of mast arm type supports pursuant to the
preceding requirements shall apply to all projects, including those resulting
from private development and projects of public entities.
      (21)   Street trees. The planting of street trees can provide innumerable
benefits relative to the visual quality and health of the built environment,
but may also result in damage to expensive public infrastructure as they
mature. Therefore, a balanced approach to their installation is required to
secure their benefits and to limit their detrimental effects. In light of these
factors, street trees may be planted within the public street right-of-way in
accordance with the following design standards. (Note that these provisions
apply to the construction of new streets.)
         (a)   Minimum right-of-way width in which street trees are planted
shall be 60 feet.
         (b)   Minimum horizontal distance between edge of pavement, back of
curb or sidewalk, and the centerline of the planted tree shall be five feet;
the effect of which is to create a suitable “verge” or planting strip for the
trees.
      (c)   An approved root-barrier treatment shall be included in the street
tree planting to protect the roadway and/or sidewalk from future root damage.
This treatment may be in spot locations if design plans are sufficiently
detailed to allow this, or may be along an entire street segment. If street
trees are provided, the appropriate treatment shall be indicated on the
approved construction plans for new streets.
      (d)   Utility easement location. The location of utility easements shall
not conflict with these provisions. It will be the responsibility of the civil
engineering design professional to coordinate this function with the utility
provider.
('81 Code, §§ 154.32 154.33, 154.42, 155.94, 156.001 -156.003, 156.008 -
156.010) (Ord. passed 8-13-79; Am. Ord. passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord. passed 2-9-93;
Am. Ord. 95012, passed 4-11-95; Am. Ord. 99012, passed 4-21-99; Am. Ord. 00063,
passed 1-9-01; Am. Ord. 00064, passed 1-9-01; Am. Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-02;
Am. Ord. 06027, passed 5-10-06; Am. Ord. 09088, passed 1-13-10; Am. Ord. 13027,
passed 6-11-13; Am. Ord. 16038, passed 6-15-16; Am. Ord. 16082, passed 10-11-
16; Am. Ord. 19029, passed 5-14-19; Am. Ord. 21041, passed 5-11-21; Am. Ord.
23016, passed 5-9-23) Penalty,  see §
155.999
§ 155.049 SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   Appropriate pedestrian access required. Appropriate pedestrian access
shall be provided for all new developments and renovation or remodeling
equaling 50% of the existing building's value and for subdivisions, either
through the construction of concrete sidewalks or pedestrian path/bikeway
systems, or a combination of the both, as provided in
Chapter 156  of the code.
   (B)   General requirements for sidewalks. In all cases where sidewalks are
required, prior to the approval of a final plat for the property, sidewalks
shall either be installed, inspected and deemed acceptable by the town, or the
owner shall provide a performance bond, letter of credit, certified check, or
other security acceptable to the town in the amount of 150% of the cost of
construction as a guarantee that the work will be performed. However, in all
cases where such sidewalks are required, they shall be installed no later than
at the time of the two-year warranty inspection, as provided in § 7 of Appendix
B hereto.
      (1)   In conventional developments, sidewalks shall be placed in the
right- of-way, parallel to the street located typically three feet from the
back of the curb.
      (2)   In commercial and high-density residential developments, the
sidewalk may abut the curb.
      (3)   Sidewalks in other developments shall be offset at least three feet
from the edge of the curb.
      (4)   When a sidewalk is placed on one side of the street only, it shall
be located, if possible, on the side without the water line.
      (5)   Cul-de-sac streets.
         (a)   Sidewalks on one side of the street shall terminate at the base
of the radius on a cul-de- sac.
         (b)   No sidewalk shall be required on cul-de-sac streets having less
fewer than three lots on one side of the street.
      (6)   In planned developments, the pedestrian system (other than any
sidewalks to be owned and maintained by the town) may be located away from the
road system to link dwelling units with other dwelling units, the street,
activity centers and recreational areas.
      (7)   Pedestrian access requirements shall also apply to private streets,
access ways and portions of parking lots that function as streets and
thoroughfares.
   (C)   Sidewalk specifications.
      (1)   Sidewalks proposed for ownership and maintenance by the town shall
be a minimum of four feet wide and four inches thick, constructed of Class “C”
concrete having a 28-day compressive strength of 2,500 psi and meeting all
applicable ADA standards.
      (2)   Hiking and bicycle paths.
         (a)   Dimensions, construction specifications, and surface materials
of hiking and bicycle paths shall be determined, based upon the number and type
of users, and the location and purpose of the path, subject to approval by the
Planning Commission during the Sketch Plan review process.
         (b)   Graded areas shall be planted with grass or treated with other
suitable ground cover.
   (D)   Plan drawings.
      (1)   The location of all pedestrian access systems shall be drawn to
scale and clearly shown on the applicable drawings (either Sketch Plan,
construction plans, or site plans) submitted for approval.
      (2)   Dimensions and specifications shall be shown on a typical detail
section of the construction plans.
   (E)   Responsibility and maintenance.
      (1)   Concrete-paved sidewalks constructed within the right-of-ways of
public streets shall become owned and maintained by the Town, subject to the
standard two-year warranty provision.
      (2)   Pedestrian access systems other than concrete paved sidewalks,
either constructed inside or outside of the right-of-way on a public street,
shall be maintained by the subdivision's local homeowners' association.
      (3)   The construction of the pedestrian access system shall be the
responsibility of the developer.
      (4)   Construction verification or guarantees, as described above in
division (B), shall be submitted with the Final Plat.
   (F)   Modification. After review of the applicable Sketch Plan or
Preliminary Plat, the Planning Commission may modify any of these requirements:
      (1)   In order to preserve topographical or natural features of the
project area;
      (2)   To provide visual interest; or
      (3)   If the applicant requests such modification and can demonstrate
that an alternative pedestrian system provides safe and convenient circulation
in the spirit of these provisions.
('81 Code, § 155.94) (Ord. passed 8-13-79; Am. Ord. passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord.
95012, passed 4-11-95; Am. Ord. 99012, passed 4-21-99; Am. Ord. 00064, passed
1-9-01; Am. Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-02; Am. Ord. 07015, passed 6-12-07; Am. Ord.
13027, passed 6-11-13; Am. Ord. 16082, passed 10-11-16) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.050 EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Drainage easements.
      (1)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way,
channel or stream, adequate acres for storm water or drainage easements shall
be reserved, conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourses, and
of sufficient width to carry off storm water and to provide for maintenance and
improvement of such watercourses.
      (2)   Where practicable, drainage easements shall center along or be
adjacent to a common property line.
      (3)   Drainage easements shall have a minimum width of 20 feet.
   (B)   Utility easements.
      (1)   Adequate areas of suitable size and location shall be allocated for
utility easements.
      (2)   The location and size of such easements shall be agreed to by the
public and private utilities involved, and shall center along or be adjacent to
a common property line where practicable.
   (C)   Maintenance.
      (1)   Easements shall be deeded to the town for the purpose intended, as
shown on the plat and stated in the deed of dedication.
      (2)   Maintenance activities will be provided by the town for the
specific intended purpose only.
      (3)   The easement grants to the town to the right to enter, inspect,
survey, and conduct needed activities related to the easements' purpose.
      (4)   The town has no obligation to repair, replace or compensate the
easement owner for the trees, plants, grass, shrubs or other elements damaged
or destroyed during the course of its activities.
   (D)   Lot owner's obligations.
      (1)    Drainage easements shall not be altered after Final Plat approval
unless approved by the Director of the Department of Engineering and
Development Services, or his or her designee.
         (a)   A site plan and such engineering calculations as are deemed
necessary shall be submitted for approval prior to undertaking such work.
         (b)   Reshaping the topographical features or installation of fences
or hard surfaces shall not be permitted within drainage easements containing
swales.
         (c)   Installation of landscaping items, except for the planting and
maintenance of low
growing grass, shall not be allowed within drainage easements.
         (d)   Trees, shrubs, and other features remaining within drainage
easements after construction by the subdivision developer are the maintenance
responsibility of the lot owner.
         (e)   Facilities within sanitary sewer, water, utility, and other
easements are subject to the requirements set forth in granting such easements.
      (2)    The Director of the Department of Engineering and Development
Services, or his or her designee, is authorized to assess alterations made to
drainage easements.
         (a)   If remedial work is deemed necessary, the lot owner shall be
notified by letter.
         (b)   The lot owner shall have 30 days in which to correct the
conditions stated in the letter.
         (c)   A certificate of occupancy shall not be approved if unauthorized
work is undertaken that alters the draining system during building
construction.
   (E)   Easements on common property.
      (1)   Areas designated on approved plans and plats as common area
property [also shown as HOA (homeowners' association), POA (property owners'
association), or similar designations] are intended primarily for the common
use and enjoyment of all subdivision residents.
      (2)   Easements that benefit all lot owners, such as access easements,
drainage easements, utility easements and the like, shall be allowed over and
through the common area property.
      (3)   Private easements that exclusively benefit adjoining lot owners,
shall not be allowed over and through common area property, unless good and
sufficient cause is shown that the provision of the easement will not interfere
with or otherwise compromise the intended common use and enjoyment of the
common area property by all lot owners.
      (4)   Any easements shall be initially established through the
appropriate plan or plat approval process in conjunction with the initial
establishment of the common area property.
      (5)   Subsequent new easements can only be established through the
appropriate plan or plat approval process as was utilized to initially
establish the common area property.
('81 Code, §154.34) (Ord. passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord. 93066, passed 2-8-94; Am.
Ord. 00056, passed 11-14-00; Am. Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-02; Am. Ord. 16082,
passed 10-11-16; Am. Ord. 21041, passed 5-11-21)
§ 155.051 STORM DRAINAGE AND FLOOD AREAS.
   (A)   Storm drainage. A drainage system shall be designed and constructed by
the subdivider to provide for the proper drainage of the surface water of the
subdivision, and the drainage area of which it is a part, to permit the
unimpeded flow of natural watercourses.
      (1)   Design and construction standards.
         (a)   Drainage systems shall be designed and constructed by the
Subdivider/developer consistent with the design principals and standards
contained herein and established by SCDHEC- OCRM.
         (b)   Drainage systems in all cases shall conform to cross sections,
dimensions, erosion control measures and grades as shown on the approved
construction plans.
      (2)   The off-street drainage system shall include the watershed
affecting the subdivision, and shall be extended to a natural watercourse or
publicly maintained drainage facility that is adequate to receive the storm
drainage.
      (3)   Where adequate existing public storm sewers are reasonably
accessible as determined by the Director of the Department of Engineering and
Development Services, or his or her designee, require that the system proposed
for the land being subdivided be connected thereto.
      (4)   Detention/retention ponds, lakes, and the like.
         (a)   Where detention/retention ponds, lakes, and the like are
incorporated as part of the drainage system, the designing engineer shall
designate a minimum floor elevation.
         (b)   The minimum elevation shall be such that flooding shall not
result from a 100-year flood and in accordance with the town's Flood Damage
Prevention Chapter.
      (5)   Ditches.
         (a)   Open drainage ditches (a ditch is a waterway with side slopes 3:
1 or steeper) shall not be permitted in the town.
         (b)   Existing ditches above the OCRM critical line shall be piped,
filled, and regraded, when required by the Planning Commission based upon
staff's recommendation.
      (6)   The Subdivider/developer shall be responsible for providing
positive drainage for each lot individually as a part of the project
development.
         (a)   Individual lot drainage shall be detailed on the construction
plans and shall include, but not be limited to, yard drains for lawn areas,
side and rear yard features to include swales and a piped system of inlets and
other items necessary for the removal of water from the lot.
         (b)   It is not necessary to provide pad- ready lots during
subdivision development.
         (c)   However, positive drainage is required for each lot prior to
plat approval.
         (d)   Rear yard pipe systems are required and shall be designed to
accommodate ten- year storm events.
         (e)   Inlets shall be designed to minimize debris clogging.
         (f)   To promote responsible land development practices, it shall be
unlawful to:
            1.   Place fill along the outer perimeter of any subdivided
property;
            2.   Alter the ground above the existing elevation in a manner that
solely benefits the stormwater management of the subdivision and directly
impacts adjacent properties by way of casting surface water onto or impeding
the flow of surface runoff from another property; or
            3.   Place fill or impediments to surface flow within ten feet of
any pre-existing perimeter lot line abutting adjacent properties.
            4.   The provisions of this division shall not apply to the
following:
               a.   Existing subdivided lots recorded with the Office of the
Register of Deeds for Charleston County prior to the date of the adoption of
the ordinance enacting this division (Ord. 240004);
               b.   Internal lot lines to the subdivision which conform to a
unified grading plan;
               c.   Continuation of a planned development with the same
ownership as in a phased development;
               d.   When fill is used to ensure positive flow through a low-
lying areas without redirection of the pre-determined flow path; and
               e.   When fill is added to meet minimum road elevation when the
design incorporates stormwater management improvements to capture roadway
runoff and all offsite runoff to prevent impacts to adjacent properties.
      (7)   Upon application for Preliminary Plat, the applicant shall submit
such inspection fee for drainage systems based upon a per linear foot of
roadway centerline as may be established by Town Council.
      (8)   Filling, grading, permanent erosion control features, and
installation of drainage systems for lots and streets shall be provided prior
to Final Plat approval.
      (9)   Prior to the termination of the two-year warranty period, an
inspection of the piped drainage systems may be performed by a Town inspection
official.
         (a)   This inspection will be to ensure that all piped drainage
systems are free and clear of silt, sediment, and trash associated with
construction activities prior to acceptance by the Town.
         (b)   Under the Two-Year Warranty included in § 7 of Appendix B, the
developer is noted as responsible for maintaining free and clear drainage
systems during the warranty period.
         (c)   Therefore, the developer shall be responsible for:
            1.   Maintaining clean drainage systems during the two-year
warranty period; and
            2.   All costs associated with cleaning the piped drainage systems.
      (10)   Failure to respond to cleaning requests shall result in the
cessation of future phase work until such a time as the drainage system is
cleared and accepted by the inspection official.
   (B)   Flood areas. If the area being subdivided, or any part thereof, is
located within the boundary of a designated flood hazard area or coastal high
hazard area, as delineated by the Flood Insurance Rate Maps of the town,
adequate plans and specifications for protection from flooding shall be
provided as herein required and as may be specified by the Planning Commission.
      (1)   Land subject to flooding.
         (a)   Any plat of a subdivision that contains land subject to flooding
shall be accompanied by evidence that no appreciable expansion of the area
subject to flooding would result from the proposed development of the land
being subdivided, and that the proposed development will be adequately
protected from inundation without appreciable interference with the flow of any
watercourse or into an impounding basin.
         (b)   All such evidence, including surveys and specifications, shall
be submitted with the preliminary plat and no plat shall be approved in the
absence thereof.
      (2)   In no case shall any fill, levee, or other protective works be
approved unless sufficient compensating adjustments of waterways, ditches, or
impounding basins are made to prevent any appreciable expansion of flood hazard
areas.
      (3)   Street elevations.
         (a)   No street shall be approved that would be subject to frequent
inundation of flooding based on a five-year storm event.
         (b)   The minimum street elevation shall be 6½ feet.
         (c)   Low points in streets shall be designed to accommodate a 50-year
flood frequency without stormwater over-topping the curb.
      (4)   Floor and mechanical system elevations.
         (a)   Minimum floor and mechanical system elevations shall be shown on
the construction plans and plats for all lots.
         (b)   These elevations shall be either the elevations established by
the Flood Damage Prevention Chapter in special flood hazard areas, or the
elevations determined by the designer in conjunction with the project
development.
   (C)   Erosion, runoff, and sedimentation control.
      (1)   Every subdivision shall be served by storm drainage facilities,
including drain sewers, catch basins, culverts, impoundment ponds, and other
facilities required to insure that the waters draining from the developed
property, including that drainage from the property in its natural condition
and that increased or diverted by reason of the development, shall not be
delivered to the area drainage facilities in such volume or rate as to overtax
the capacity of the facilities and cause flooding conditions in the event of a
100-year precipitation condition. All such drainage facilities shall be
designed and installed in accordance with the regulations of the town.
      (2)   Engineering and construction on any land within the town shall be
carried out in such a manner as to protect neighboring persons and property
from damage or loss resulting from excessive stormwater runoff, soil erosion,
or deposition upon private property or public streets of water-transported silt
and debris.
      (3)   Drainage plans and studies shall be submitted for review by the
Department of Engineering and Development Services.
         (a)   These plans and studies shall be prepared by a design
professional currently registered to practice in the state, with his or her
stamp affixed.
         (b)   Profile for drainage pipes shall be included and will show
existing ground line, finished grade, drainage structures, intersecting
sanitary sewers and other intersecting underground utilities.
         (c)    Existing and proposed utility lines crossing the storm drain
pipe shall be shown in the profile on their proper elevation.
         (d)   Pipes that conflict at crossings shall be adjusted with adequate
details included.
         (e)   Grate inlets are not permitted in the right-of way of public
streets.
   (D)   Coordination required.
      (1)   All land development activity must comply with the applicable
sections of the latest edition of the South Carolina Stormwater Management and
Sediment Control Handbook for Land Disturbance Activities.
      (2)   A stormwater approval letter from SCDHEC-OCRM shall be submitted to
the town before construction approval or a Clearing and Grading Permit will be
issued.
      (3)   No project shall receive final approval or acceptance by the town
nor will a certificate of occupancy be issued for commercial projects, until
such time as a statement is received from the project engineer certifying that
construction is complete and in accordance with approved plans.
   (E)   Drainage design guidelines.
      (1)   Piped drainage systems and culverts.
         (a)   Piped collection systems for public streets (catch basins,
inlets, cross drains, and longitudinal piping) shall be designed for the ten-
year frequency storm event.
            1.   Catch basins and inlets shall be spaced so that the spread in
the street for the design flow shall not exceed eight feet.
            2.   A check should be made at all low points to determine and
minimize the impacts from less frequent storms.
            3.   All inlets shall be of the curb opening type and low point
basins shall have double wings to provide for drainage flow in both directions
entering the inlet.
         (b)   Road elevations in A and V zones shall allow passage during a
five-year event as a minimum.
         (c)   Design of road culverts.
            1.   Road culverts, for example, pipes carrying storm water under a
street or road from one side of the right-of-way to the other, shall be
designed for a 100-year frequency flood event.
            2.   The area inundated under these conditions shall be contained
within a defined drainage easement.
         (d)   The design flow, acres drained, and the hydraulic grade line for
the design flow shall be shown on the plans.
         (e)   Design of pipes and culverts.
            1.   Pipes and culverts should be designed using the methods given
in the hydraulic engineering circulars published by the Federal Highway
Administration.
            2.   The Burkli-Ziegler and Talbot formulas shall not be used since
they have questionable applicability to conditions in the town area.
            3.   All pipe joints shall be wrapped with filter fabric in 18-inch
wide sections utilizing, at a minimum, fabric with a mass per unit area of:
(English measure) 5.0 ounces per square yard and a thickness of 60 mils or
(metric measure) 170.0 grams per square meter and a thickness of 1.5
millimeters.
         (f)   Energy dissipaters shall be provided, as needed, where excessive
velocities occur.
         (g)   Use of reinforced concrete pipes.
            1.   Reinforced concrete pipes shall be used at public street
locations and easements designated for maintenance by the town.
            2.   Exceptions may be made by the Director of Planning and
Development, or his or her designee, for those not at street locations,
provided complete data is submitted.
         (h)   Non-corrosive pipes shall be used at all other locations,
subject to a request with complete data as approved/disapproved by the Director
of Planning and Development, or his or her designee.
      (2)   Stormwater control facilities.
         (a)   A combination of storage and controlled release of storm water
runoff shall be required for all development and construction that create the
peak rate of runoff from the site, unless the designer certifies that no
downstream damage will occur due to the increase runoff.
         (b)   Certifications are required at the time of approval.
         (c)   The peak release rate of storm water from all developments where
detention is required shall not exceed the peak storm water runoff rate from
the area in its natural undeveloped state for all intensities up to and
including the 100-year frequency.
         (d)   The same methodology must be used for calculating the pre-
development and post- development rates of runoff from a site.
         (e)   The “bowstring” method may be used for designing detention
facilities for which the drainage area is less than three acres and a factor of
two applied to the estimated volume.
         (f)   Reservoir routing techniques shall be used for designing all
detention facilities for which the drainage area is three acres or larger.
         (g)   For mosquito control, ponds are to be designed to dry in three
days or to contain a minimum permanent depth of 24-inches of water.
         (h)   All stormwater storage facilities within single-family
residential subdivisions in the town are to be privately owned and maintained;
provided, however, the owner(s) thereof shall grant to the town a perpetual
non-exclusive easement that allows for public inspection and emergency repair,
in accordance with the terms of a pond maintenance agreement, which is required
hereunder and found in § 15 of Appendix B.
   (F)   Drainage certifications. Design certifications, as set forth in § 14
of Appendix B, shall be furnished with all proposed construction.
('81 Code, §§ 154.36, 154.43, 156.005, 156.011, 156.012) (Ord. passed 6-9-92;
Am. Ord. passed 2-9-93; Am. Ord. 93066, passed 2-8-94; Am. Ord. 99012, passed
4-21-99; Am. Ord. 99016, passed 6-8-99; Am. Ord. 00035, passed 7-11-00; Am.
Ord. 00063, passed 1-9-01; Am. Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-02; Am. Ord. 06016,
passed 4-12-06; Am. Ord. 07015, passed 6-12-07; Am. Ord. 13027, passed 6-11-13;
Am. Ord. 16082, passed 10-11-16; Am. Ord. 21041, passed 5-11-21; Am. Ord.
24004, passed 2-15-24)
§ 155.052 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Schedule.
      (1)    For both public streets and development projects, inspections of
completed site work shall be conducted by a representative of the Director of
the Department of Engineering and Development Services, or his or her designee.
      (2)   Each phase of the work shall be approved before starting the next
phase.
      (3)   Prior to an inspection request. the inspecting professional shall
verify the proper execution of the work.
      (4)   The following minimum number of inspections shall be conducted at
the times indicated:
         (a)   Upon installation of initial erosion control devices;
         (b)   Upon completion of clearing and grubbing;
         (c)   Upon completion of pipe installation to include underdrains,
drainage pipes, culverts, inlets and sediment control - pipe joints to be
inspected shall have filter fabric wrap installed but the joint left exposed
until the inspection is complete and approved, at that time the fabric wrap may
be closed and the area backfilled according to design plans and specification;
         (d)   Upon obtaining the subgrade elevation;
         (e)   Upon completion of curbs and gutters;
         (f)   Upon completion of base placement and compaction;
         (g)   Upon completion of pavement;
         (h)   Upon final cleaning of the streets and drainage system and
completion of grassing;
         (i)   Prior to termination of Final Plat warranty period and the
town's acceptance of piped drainage systems.
      (5)   A minimum of one block length of street shall be prepared for each
inspection segment.
      (6)   A minimum of 48 hours shall be given prior to the time of
inspection by the town.
      (7)   The inspecting professional's log shall be submitted with the
request for initial approval.
   (B)   Inspection fee schedule.
      (1)   Upon application for a Preliminary Plat, the Applicant shall submit
such inspection fees for street construction and drainage systems, based upon a
per linear foot of roadway centerline as may be established by the Town
Council.
      (2)   Reinspection fees.
          (a)   Reinspection of previously inspected portions of the work shall
be made as specified on the latest Department of Engineering and Development
Services fee schedule.
         (b)   Reinspection and fees shall be due and payable prior to approval
of a Final Plat.
         (c)   Failure to pay such fees as required shall cause the work not to
be accepted by the Town.
      (3)   If more than one inspection is made per phase, the fee for each
additional phase inspection for the subminimal work shall be as specified on
the latest Department of Engineering and Development Services fee schedule.
   (C)   Video inspection by Subdivider/developer. A video inspection of all
storm drainage systems shall be performed by the Subdivider/developer prior to
issuance of Final Plat and again before the end of the warranty period. The
inspection shall be recorded and a copy of the inspection video to include
inspection reports shall be delivered to the Director of Engineering and
Development Services for review and comment. The video shall be provided on CD/
DVD or other electronic delivery system as technology allows. The inspection
video and report shall be clearly labeled with the name of the Subdivider/
developer, name of the construction project, phase of development , date of
inspection(s), and name of inspecting company. The report shall include the
sequence of inspection through the drainage system corresponding to the
drainage summary on the development’s construction plans.
('81 Code, §§ 156.014 and 156.015) (Ord. passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord. 00035, passed
7-11-00; Am. Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-02; Am. Ord. 06016, passed 4-12-06; Am.
Ord. 16082, passed 10-11-16; Am. Ord. 21041, passed 5-11-21; Am. Ord. 24018,
passed 5-16-24)
§ 155.053 SEWER AND WATER SUPPLY.
   (A)   Sanitary sewage disposal.
      (1)   The developer shall install public sanitary sewer lines where
public sanitary sewer service is available within 500 feet of the property in
accordance with the policy of the Mount Pleasant Waterworks and
Chapter 51, Water and Sewers, of the Mount Pleasant Code of Ordinances.
      (2)   Sanitary waste disposal systems shall be designed according to
criteria approved by the Mount Pleasant Waterworks.
      (3)   Septic tanks and fields shall be approved by South Carolina
Department of Health and Environmental Control.
   (B)   Water supply.
      (1)   The developer shall install water lines when public water service
is available within 500 feet of the property.
      (2)   Installation shall include fire hydrants, valves, house
connections, and other appurtenances.
      (3)   All work shall be in accord with the policy of the Mount Pleasant
Waterworks.
      (4)   Water supply systems shall be designed according to criteria
approved by the Mount Pleasant Waterworks.
         (a)   All fire hydrants shall be of a type accepted by the Mount
Pleasant Waterworks and the Mount Pleasant Fire Department:
            1.   Three-way with one 4½-inch discharge and two 2½-inch
discharges;
            2.   With at least a 5½-inch foot valve; and
            3.   On a minimum 8-inch water main.
         (b)   Fire hydrant spacing shall not exceed 300 feet to structures.
      (5)   New residential subdivisions shall be designed to ensure that all
fire hydrants have the capability to flow at a minimum of 1,000 gallons of
water per minute, at 20 pounds per square inch residual pressure.
   (C)   Dry fire hydrants.
      (1)   As referenced herein, DRY FIRE HYDRANTS shall refer to a pre-
engineered system of piping with a Fire Department-approved connection adjacent
to a water supply, to which a fire truck can attach a hose to draft water into
its pump, and which at the opposite end terminates in pipe with a submerged
strainer.
      (2)   Dry hydrants are designed to provide an alternate or supplemental
water source to public water systems, and for emergency fire-fighting purposes.
      (3)   Dry hydrants may be installed in and adjacent to ponds, lakes, and
other approved non-tidal water sources.
         (a)   All dry fire hydrants shall meet requirements of the National
Fire Protection Association Standard 1231, “Water Supplies for Suburban and
Rural Fire Fighting.”
         (b)   Dry fire hydrants shall only be used as a temporary solution to
achieve fire flows in urban and rural settings where there is no public water
system available, and in urban settings with a public water system where the
fire flow demand exceeds the capacity of the public water system.
         (c)   Dry fire hydrants shall be used as follows:
            1.   In urban areas served by a public water system, dry hydrants
may be installed where their use does not exceed 33% of the building's required
fire flow and in no case shall be greater than 1,000 foot roadway travel
distance from the structure(s) to be protected.
            2.   In rural areas not serviced by a public water system, dry
hydrants may be installed without travel distance requirements, based on
individual case needs as approved by the Fire Chief or his or her
representative.
            3.   Dry hydrants in rural and urban areas may remain the primary
water source until such time as the area receives water service, or proper fire
flow capacity, and then they shall be abandoned.
            4.   Dry hydrant(s) shall transfer with property ownership, with
the new owner being responsible for maintenance and operation of hydrant(s) and
water source per this section as if they were the original installer.
         (d)   Prior to installation, a dry fire hydrant application and permit
form shall be filed with the Fire Chief, stating the reason for the request to
install dry fire hydrant(s), along with providing NAPA Standard 1231
information regarding the hydrant's design and water supply.
         (e)   All applications for dry fire hydrants shall be accompanied by a
letter of credit to ensure the dry fire hydrant(s) and water sources are
maintained operational.
            1.   The letter of credit for each hydrant shall be in the amount
of $1,000, and each shall include a fee of $135 per hydrant to cover the cost
of inspection, annual testing and inspection of the water source by the Fire
Department for each 36-month period.
            2.   All criteria hereunder shall be met prior to the town
approving a permit.
            3.   Each permit shall be valid for 36 months, at which time a new
dry fire hydrant application and permit form shall be filled out and submitted
with the appropriate fee for permit renewal.
            4.   Renewals shall be limited to terms of three years.
            5.   Federal, state and local government entities are exempt from
the fee and letter of credit requirements hereunder.
         (f)   The Fire Department shall test all dry hydrants and inspect
water sources for visible problems on a semi-annual basis, with deficiencies
being reported to the hydrant owner in the form of an order of correction.
         (g)   Failure to maintain the hydrant shall be a violation of this
chapter and the Standard Fire Prevention Code.
         (h)   If a property owner or agent desires the dry hydrant to be
tested annually by an outside source, they shall remit results to the Fire
Department on forms provided.
            1.   However, the initial filing fee remains the same, and the Fire
Department reserves the right to check the results and the water source, by
inspection or testing if necessary.
            2.   The final determination pertaining to testing shall be made by
the Fire Department.
('81 Code, §§ 154.37 and 154.44) (Ord. passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord. 96049, passed
11-12-96; Am. Ord. 98006, passed 3-10-98; Am. Ord. 99012, passed 4-21-99; Am.
Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-02; Am. Ord. 16082, passed 10-11-16)
§ 155.054 GREENSPACE PRESERVATION AND PROTECTION PLAN, AND ENVIRONMENTAL
GUIDELINES FOR LAND DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   A Greenspace Preservation and Protection Plan shall be provided in
accordance with these requirements for all new residential development
consisting of five acres and larger. The cumulative acreage of a multi-phased
project of five acres and larger shall be subject to these requirements.
Additionally, the provisions of this section shall not apply to nonresidential
subdivisions or land zoned MF, Multi-family Residential District.
      (1)   Intent and purpose. The desired outcome is to provide reasonable
utilization of the property while achieving the intent and purpose of this
Greenspace Preservation and Protection Plan, rather than to maximize the
development capacity of the property.
         (a)   Intent. The intent is to ensure that development is conducted in
a manner that is harmonious with the natural environment and maximizes the
quality and survivability of retained vegetation.
         (b)   Purpose. The purpose is to identify those natural features that
should be preserved so that development may occur around those features.
      (2)   Findings. The Town Council finds and declares the following:
         (a)   The existing vegetation requirements have resulted in the
excessive removal of natural vegetation during land development; and
         (b)   To remedy these conditions, an amendment to these regulations is
now necessary; and
         (c)   These regulations will include a tree and topographical plan
that will form the basis of the arrangement of development on the property, as
well as additional areas of preservation to ensure the adequate preservation of
natural vegetation along street frontage and internal to the development; and
         (d)   Council now deems these provi- sions are in the best interest of
the citizens of the town to accomplish these desires.
      (3)   Specific requirements.
         (a)   Tree and topographical exhibit. A tree and topographical exhibit
is required to facilitate the preservation of valuable existing natural
conditions.
            1.   A quantitative and qualitative analysis of the natural
attributes of the property shall include the existing grade of the property and
the quantity and quality of existing vegetation. A plan shall be submitted
enumerating the stated attributes at preliminary staff review and sketch plan
application.
            2.   Applicant shall submit a site analysis with the following
information:
               a.   Property boundaries.
               b.   Topography showing one-foot contours, ponds, ditches and
any other significant natural drainage features.
               c.   Survey of protected trees with:
                  i.   Illustrated protection zones, and
                  ii.   Tree assessment per zoning code requirements.
               d.   Wetland and critical area delineation, with existing
buffers, if applicable.
               e.   Existing easements.
               f.   Existing structures, roadbeds and paths.
         (b)   Additional areas of preservation. The following additional areas
of preservation within the proposed development are required, based on the
factors identified in division (A)(3)(a)1. and 2. herein above:
            1.   Street frontage areas of preser- vation.
               a.   A minimum-25-foot-wide, natural and undisturbed buffer
shall be provided on collector and entry roads (60 feet or greater right-of-way
width).
               b.   In the absence of existing vegetation, replanting is
required, based on the density and diversity of the representative sampling of
100 square feet (ten by ten) of existing natural vegetation within close
proximity to the subject area, comprised of canopy and understory trees and
shrubs.
               c.   Easement treatment. If future utility installation is
anticipated, additional area shall be set aside so as not to interfere with the
natural and undisturbed buffer. Penetration for utilities should be
perpendicular to the buffer and limited to roadway access as a preferred
option.
            2.   Internal areas of preservation. A suitable amount of natural
vegetation shall be preserved within new development, based upon the following
requirements.
               a.   Percentage required.
                  i.   For developments where the minimum lot size is less than
10,000 square feet, a minimum of 30% of the developable land shall be set aside
for internal areas of preservation, although more may be required, based upon
site analysis provided by the tree and topographical exhibit. For the purposes
described herein, developable land shall not include fresh and saltwater
wetlands, retention ponds and rights-of-way.
                  ii.   For developments where the minimum lot size is equal to
or greater than 10,000 square feet, a minimum of 20% of the developable land
shall be set aside for internal areas of preservation, although more may be
required, based upon site analysis provided by the tree and topographical
exhibit. For the purposes described herein, developable land shall not include
fresh and saltwater wetlands, retention ponds and rights-of-way.
               b.   Minimum dimensional requirements. The minimum dimensional
requirement shall be that of the zoning district, and not less in size than the
smallest building lot shown on plans or plats.
               c.   Connectivity. Internal areas of preservation shall be
integrated amongst the building lots and strategically connected with other
greenspace requirements.
               d.   Planting in the absence of existing vegetation shall be in
accordance with the provisions of division (A)(3)(b)1.b. above.
               e.   Terraced fill around ponds, wetland areas and buffers is
encouraged to meet these requirements.
      (4)   Street frontage and internal areas of preservation. Street frontage
and internal areas of preservation established pursuant to these requirements:
         (a)   Shall be located on separate lots owned by a homeowners’
association.
         (b)   Canopy trees shall count towards the minimum 160 inches per acre
of retained vegetation.
         (c)   Shall remain in an essentially undisturbed condition, except for
the following:
            1.   Allowed clearing of an eight-foot-wide corridor for the
installation of low-impact physical improvements limited to pervious pedestrian
trails and pedestrian benches; and
            2.   One open recreational field per development, no larger than
4,000 square feet to allow for active recreation and neighborhood sports.
      (5)   Review and approval procedure.
         (a)   A Greenspace Preservation and Protection Plan conforming to the
requirements contained herein shall be submitted at preliminary staff review
and sketch plan application.
         (b)   Staff will review the same for adherence to the stated intent
and purpose, with such review forming the basis for a recommendation to the
Planning Commission.
         (c)   The Planning Commission shall approve, disapprove or modify the
plan as deemed appropriate.
      (6)   Appeals. Appeals from a final decision of the Planning Commission
may be filed in accordance with procedures established by applicable law.
   (B)   An Environmental Standard shall be provided in accordance with these
requirements for all nonresidential development as of the effective date March
1, 2023. The 2024 updates shall be effective June 11, 2024. This provision
shall apply to nonresidential subdivisions, multi-family residential proposals,
HOA amenity centers, utilities and recreational facilities, and any mixed-use
developments where parcels are not proposed to be fee-simple residential lots.
      (1)   Intent and purpose. The desired outcome is to implement a program
to enhance commercial and nonresidential development through incentivizing and
establishing developmental standards in a manner that conforms to the strategic
and comprehensive initiatives for the preservation and protection of our
natural resources.
         (a)   Intent. The intent is to ensure development is conducted in a
manner that utilizes best environmental practices and encourages
environmentally responsible techniques through the use of low-impact site
design and construction methods.
         (b)   Purpose. The purpose is to use conservation practices, nature-
based solutions, encourage the use of advancing energy-saving technology,
support of eco-friendly materials, advocate for responsible construction
methods, improve wildlife habitat and biodiversity, enhance aesthetic value,
and to incorporate all areas of protection and preservation of our natural
environment through site design and development.
      (2)   Findings. The Town Council finds and declares the following:
         (a)   Future development types and patterns will continue to consist
of new commercial, commercial re-development, multi-family, recreational and
economic development; and
         (b)   To implement a program to advance the use of low-impact
development is in conformance with the town strategic and comprehensive plans,
making these conditions an amendment to these regulations is now necessary; and
         (c)   These regulations will include a point system for measuring and
administering fair and consistent standards for implementing low-impact
development techniques. Points shall be pre-determined by the Environmental
Manager, or his or her designee, based upon effectiveness of pursing overall
program intent, proportional financial obligation, level of long-term
maintenance associated with the technique; and
         (d)   Four impacts are categorized as influential to the endeavors of
this program. These are:
            1.   Protect, restore, and conserve natural water resources;
            2.   Preserve and improve ecosystem biodiversity;
            3.   Improve community livability, mobility, aesthetics, and well-
being; and
            4.   Promote energy efficiency and sustainable material resources.
         (e)   Council now deems these provisions are in the best interest of
the citizens of the town to accomplish these desires.
      (3)   Land to which these regulations apply.
         (a)   All land located and annexed within the jurisdictional
boundaries and any land to be incorporated through annexation shall be subject
to these standards for development.
         (b)   Any land owned by the town, state, county or regional
government.
      (4)   Land uses and development types subject to these standards.
         (a)   All nonresidential development, including commercial,
industrial, economic development, master planned developments, which do not
specifically exclude this program, office and business districts, lands located
within special overlay districts, public service providers, such as recreation,
sanitary treatment operation facilities, excluding pump and sub-electrical
stations.
         (b)   Any development requiring more than four parking spaces,
including temporary sales offices and trailers.
         (c)   Land disturbance of 0.1 acres or greater located within the
boundaries of land subject to these regulations as noted herein as division (B)
(4)(a) and (b).
         (d)   Structural and nonstructural renovation projects exceeding
$250,000, subject to these regulations as noted herein in divisions (B)(4)(a)
and (b).
      (5)   Land to which these regulations do not apply.
         (a)   Proposals currently within the development review and approval
process as of January 1, 2023. This includes projects submitted for the Design
Review Board or Planning Commission prior to the scheduled deadlines. This does
not include submittals to town officials for internal review processing.
         (b)   Roadway projects not associated with private subdivision
proposals, utility extensions involving sub-surface infrastructure, activity
requiring an encroachment permit, activity requiring a temporary permit unless
it's a sale trailer on vacant property, and upfit or renovation projects
exceeding a total invested value of less than 50% of the current appraised
property value, and planned developments approved by Council specifically
excluding these standards herein.
         (c)   Proposed projects resulting in less than 0.1 acre of land
disturbance, including phased or portions of a larger common plan. These
include repairs, modifications, and design changes during construction when the
changes do not impact program compliance.
      (6)   Requirements.
         (a)   As outlined in the latest edition of “The Environmental
Guidelines for Land Development,” any land development and structural projects
meeting the categories of division (B)(3) and (4) herein shall be subject to
and must adhere to standards established within the referenced guide.
         (b)   “The Environmental Guidelines for Land Development” is to be
used by the design professional and approved by the Environmental Manager prior
to the issuance of a clearing and grading or building permit. Alternative
methods of equivalent means to comply with the spirit and intent shall be
considered and evaluated, based upon satisfying the use of low-impact
development as defined in “Low Impact Development in Coastal South Carolina: A
Planning and Design Guide,” and standards found in the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency Office of Research and Development.
(Ord. 18075, passed 11-13-18; Am. Ord. 23006, passed 2-14-23; Am. Ord. 24021,
passed 6-12-24)
ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 155.071 MARKERS.
   (A)   Street markers.
      (1)   All changes in direction (P.C., P.T., and the like) of street
centerlines shall be marked with a large nail or spike in the pavement.
      (2)   The radius center point of cul-de-sacs shall be marked with a large
nail or spike.
      (3)   The points thus marked in divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) above shall
be shown on the final plat, along with such bearings and distance ties as
needed for their use in locating lot corners.
   (B)   Drainage easement markers. All changes in direction and all
intersections with street right-of-way and lot lines shall be marked as
directed in division (C)(1).
   (C)   Lot markers.
      (1)   Lot corners.
         (a)   Lot corners shall be marked with 1/2-inch diameter, 18-inch long
iron rods, except that where the distance, as measured along the street right-
of-way, exceeds 500 feet between markers, additional markers shall be
installed.
         (b)   Intervisible corner markers shall be shown on the final plat,
along with the bearing and distance for these intervisible markers noted on the
plans.
      (2)   The intersection of lot lines and right- of-way lines of drainage
easements shall be marked with 1/2-inch iron rods as in division (C)(1) above.
   (D)   Benchmarks. Benchmarks shall be monumented and complete descriptions
and elevations given on the final plat.
   (E)   Buffer and critical line attachment markers. All changes in direction
in direction of buffers and the OCRM Critical Line shall be marked with 1/2-
inch iron rods.
('81 Code, § 154.41) (Ord. passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-02)
§ 155.072 ADDRESSING SYSTEM.
   (A)   Uniform numbering system adopted.
      (1)   A uniform system of numbering properties and principal buildings,
as shown on the maps identified by the title, “Uniform Numbering System Map,
County of Charleston, S.C.,” dated September 30, 1983, (hereinafter referred to
as “property number map”), which is filed in the Town Department of Planning
and Development office, is adopted for use in the town.
      (2)   This map and all explanatory matter thereon is adopted and made a
part of this chapter.
   (B)   Assignment of numbers.
      (1)   All properties or parcels of land within the incorporated limits of
the town shall hereafter be identified by reference to the uniform numbering
system adopted herein; provided, further that all existing numbers of property
and buildings not now in conformity with provisions of this chapter shall be
changed to conform to the system herein adopted.
      (2)   All numbers shall be assigned by the Department of Planning and
Development office on the basis of one number for each 40 feet of frontage
along the street.
         (a)   Grid lines, as shown on the property numbering map, indicate the
point at which numbers will change to the next higher multiple of 100, and the
range of numbers between grid lines thereon shall be consistent with the range
of numbers as indicated on the map.
         (b)   All buildings north of east-west streets and east of north-south
streets shall bear even numbers, and likewise, all buildings on the south side
of east-west streets and west of north-south streets shall bear odd numbers.
         (c)   All streets running more nearly north-south shall be numbered as
north-south streets, and all streets running more nearly east-west shall be
numbered as east-west streets.
      (3)   No building shall be assigned more than one number.
      (4)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, when multiple
buildings have frontage within one or more assigned 40-foot frontage areas and,
under the remaining provisions of this chapter, each such building would be
assigned a separate number designation; but, if due to a limited amount of
frontage, sufficient numbers are not available, then all such buildings at that
location will be assigned the same number and each such building will carry a
letter designation such as A, B, C, in addition to the assigned number.
   (C)   Location of numbers.
      (1)   When each house or building has been assigned its respective number
or numbers, the owner, occupant, or agent shall place, or cause to be placed,
upon each house or building controlled by him or her the number or numbers
assigned under the uniform system as provided in this chapter.
      (2)   Such numbers shall be placed on existing buildings on or before the
effective date of this chapter, and within 20 days after the assigning of the
proper number in the case of numbers assigned after the effective date of this
chapter.
         (a)   The cost of numbers shall be paid for by the property owner.
         (b)   Residential numbers used shall not be less than three inches in
height.
         (c)   Business numbers shall not be less than four inches in height.
         (d)   These numbers shall be made of a durable and clearly visible
material, and shall be in a contrasting color from the building.
      (3)   Placement of numbers.
         (a)   The numbers shall be conspicuously placed immediately above, on,
or at the side of the proper door of each building so that the number can be
seen plainly from the street line.
         (b)    Whenever any building is situated more than 50 feet from the
street line, the number must be placed near the walk, driveway, or common
entrance to such building and upon a mail box, gate post, fence, post, or other
appropriate place so as to be easily discernible from the street line.
   (D)   Administration.
      (1)   For the purpose of facilitating correct numbering, grid maps of all
streets, avenues, and public ways within the town showing the proper numbers of
all houses or other buildings fronting upon all streets, avenues, or public
ways shall be kept on file in the Department of Planning and Development. These
grid maps shall be open to inspection of all persons during normal office
hours.
      (2)   Assignment of numbers.
         (a)    It shall be the duty of the Department of Planning, Land Use,
and Neighborhoods to inform any party applying therefor of the number or
numbers belonging to or embraced within the limits of any lot or property as
provided in this subchapter.
         (b)   In case of conflict as to the proper number to be assigned to
any building, the Department of Planning, Land Use, and Neighborhoods shall
determine the number of such building.
      (3)   Whenever any house, building or structure shall be erected or
located in the town after the establishment of the uniform system of numbering
provided for herein has been completed, in order to preserve the continuity and
uniformity of numbers of the houses, buildings, and structures, it shall be the
duty of the owner to procure the correct number or numbers as designated by the
Department of Planning, Land Use, and Neighborhoods for the number or numbers
so assigned upon the building as provided by this chapter.
         (a)   No building permit shall be issued for any house, building, or
structure until the owner has procured from the Department of Planning, Land
Use, and Neighborhoods the official number of the premises.
         (b)   Final approval of any structure erected, repaired, altered, or
modified after the effective date of this chapter shall be withheld by the Town
Building Official, until permanent and proper numbers have been affixed to the
structure.
   (E)   Application to portions of the town. The provisions of this chapter
shall be applicable only in those portions of the town that are not located
within the confines of any unincorporated area within the county.
('81 Code, §§99.01 - 99.05) (Ord. passed 11-7-83; Am. Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-
02; Am. Ord. 16082, passed 10-11-16; Am. Ord. 21041, passed 5-11-21)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 155.084 RECORDED RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS.
   (A)   Pursuant to the provisions of S.C. Code § 6-29-1145, the applicant for
a development approval (permit) shall confirm that the activity for which
approval has been requested is not restricted by any recorded covenant that is
contrary to, conflicts with or prohibits the activity, by signing a Development
Approval Application (Permit): Recorded Covenant Affidavit.
   (B)   If it has actual notice of the existence of a recorded covenant that
is contrary to, conflicts with or prohibits the activity for which approval has
been requested, either from information in the affidavit, from materials or
information submitted by the applicant, or from any other source, including but
not limited to, other property holders, the town shall immediately cease
processing the application, request or permit, and shall not approve the same
unless confirmation from the applicant is received that the restrictive
covenant has been released, by action of the appropriate authority or property
holders, or by court order.
   (C)   As used in this section:
      (1)   ACTUAL NOTICE is not constructive notice of documents filed in the
local offices concerning the property, and does not require the town to conduct
searches in any records offices for filed restrictive covenants;
      (2)   PERMIT does not mean an authorization to build or place a structure
on a tract or parcel of land, and expressly applies only to applications for
subdivision, as defined in this chapter;
      (3)   RESTRICTIVE COVENANT does not mean a restriction concerning a type
of structure that may be built or placed on a tract or parcel of land.
(Ord. 08021, passed 4-8-08)
§ 155.085 VESTED RIGHTS.
   For establishment of a property owner’s vested rights, refer to the Zoning
Code.
(Ord. 05035, passed 6-14-05)
§ 155.086 FEES.
   (A)   Upon submission of a Sketch Plan or Preliminary Plat, as required in
these regulations, the applicant shall submit such required fees as may be
established from time to time.
   (B)   The fees shall be submitted with the plan or plat and, upon acceptance
of the plat for review and consideration, shall be deposited into the Treasury
of the Town.
   (C)   Failure to pay such fees as required shall cause the plat to be
returned to the applicant without acceptance for review or consideration by the
Town.
('81 Code, § 154.70) (Ord. passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-02; Am.
Ord. 16082, passed 10-11-16)
§ 155.087 AMENDMENTS TO LAND USE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Amendments to these regulations shall be proposed by the Planning
Commission or shall be submitted for approval, disapproval, or suggestion of
the Commission before being enacted.
   (B)   The Town Council may adopt amendments to these regulations, as
provided in State Code.
   (C)   No amendment, failing of passage at its final proposal, shall be
resubmitted within one calendar year.
('81 Code, § 154.72) (Ord. passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord. 00063, passed 1-9-01; Am.
Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-02)
§ 155.088 STREETS, DRAINAGE SYSTEM AND STORMWATER CONTROL FACILITY FINANCIAL
GUARANTEE.
   (A)   The developer of a subdivision shall post a financial guarantee at the
time of the final plat approval; the purpose of which shall be to protect and
ensure the integrity and satisfactory condition of the streets, drainage system
and stormwater quality and quantity control facility for period of two years,
as provided in § 7 of
Appendix B hereto.
   (B)   The financial guarantee may be in the form of a letter of credit,
surety bond, certified check, or other instruments readily convertible to cash.
   (C)   The financial guarantee shall inure for an initial period of two
years, and shall not expire but automatically renew for one year or until the
improvements are deemed satisfactory and released by the Town Engineer,
following an acceptable two-year warranty inspection.
   (D)   The amount of the financial guarantee shall be equal to 15% of the
contract cost to install the improvements. An itemized list for each
improvement shall accompany the financial guarantee, excluding the cost for
clearing and grading, which shall bear the signature and seal of a licensed
professional engineer.
      (1)   The installation cost for the streets shall include all aspects of
the road, such as but not limited to: select fill for the underlying subgrade,
base course, asphalt, underdrain, curb and gutter, shoulder and slope
stabilization.
      (2)   The cost of the drainage system installation shall include the
contractor cost for pipe delivery and installation, specified select backfill
and bedding, compaction testing, inlet boxes, grates and tops.
      (3)   The installation cost for the stormwater control facility or pond
shall include per cubic yard of excavation, grading, and slope stabilization.
      (4)   The installation cost for the water quality features shall be the
manufacture's cost for the material and the contractor's cost for installation.
   (E)   All items deemed not acceptable at the two-year warranty inspection
shall be corrected to an acceptable level within 60 days from the date of
notice thereof.
      (1)   If the owner, his or her heirs, successors or assigns, fail to
satisfy any of the items identified on the inspection report, the town shall
enforce the financial guarantee and may draw upon the security for up to the
full amount thereof.
      (2)   The town may avail unto itself any lawful manner to effect
satisfactory correction of deficient items not covered by the financial surety.
      (3)   The transfer of maintenance responsibility to the town and release
of the financial guarantee shall not be complete until the Town Engineer deems
conditions are satisfactory.
   (F)   All stormwater storage and water quality facilities, such as ponds and
pollution removal devices, within commercial and residential developments are
to be privately owned and maintained.
(Ord. 07015, passed 6-12-07; Am. Ord. 13027, passed 6-11-13) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any violation of these regulations or amendments thereof, including
the transfer or sale of property by reference to, or exhibition of, or by other
use of plat of land without the required approval of the Planning Commission or
Department of Engineering and Development Services, as applicable, as required
for recording, shall be a misdemeanor under the laws of the state, punishable
as other misdemeanors as provided by law; and the description by metes and
bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of
selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties.
   (B)   The Town, through its attorney, may enjoin such transfer or sale or
agreement by action of injunction.
('81 Code, §154.71) (Ord. passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-02; Am.
Ord. 16082, passed 10-11-16; Am. Ord. 21041, passed 5-11-21)
APPENDIX A: PLAT CERTIFICATES
Section
§ 1 PLAT CERTIFICATES.
   (A)   Each Preliminary Plat drawing submitted for approval pursuant to these
regulations shall carry the following certificates printed or stamped thereon
as follows:
      (1)   Preliminary Engineering Certificate.
      “I hereby certify that this proposed Preliminary Plat correctly
represents data compiled or verified through a survey completed by me on
                     , 20      of property shown and described hereon.
                                                     , Registered Surveyor, No.
       
      (2)   Certificate of Design.
      I hereby certify that the design and layout of the drainage facilities
for the proposed lots, blocks streets, and other planned features included in
this proposed Preliminary Plat have been prepared by me or under my direct
supervision.
                                                     , Registered Professional,
No.        
      (3)   Application for Plat Improvements.
      I hereby certify that no grading or clearing shall commence on the land
included in this plat until a land clearing and grading permit has been issued,
and that no installation of improvements shall be undertaken until a
construction authorization letter from the Town Engineer has been issued.
      Subdivider:                                  Owner:
                                   
      Date:                                     Date:
                            
      (4)   Certificate of Purpose.
      This is a Preliminary Plat. The use of this plat for the sale or transfer
of property is forbidden.
      Subdivider:                                  Owner:
                                   
      Date:                                     Date:
                            
   (B)   Each application for Final Plat shall carry the following certificate
printed or stamped thereon as follows:
      (1)   Surveyor's Certificate.
         It is hereby certified that this plat is true and correct, and was
prepared from an actual survey of the property made by me or under my
supervision; that all monuments shown hereon actually exist and their location,
size, type, and material are correctly shown and is accordance with a class “A”
survey.
                                               , Registered Surveyor, No.
       
      (2)   Owner's Acknowledgment
State of South Carolina
County of Charleston
The owner of record of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed
thereto, and in person or through a duly authorized agent, acknowledges that
this plat was made from an actual survey and dedicates to the use of the public
forever the following. (Provide only those applicable.)
Public Streets:
                                                                            
Public Easements:
                                                                       
Public Parks/Open Space:
                                                              
Type name, address, and telephone number of owner or subdivider:
                                                                         Date:
                                 
Signature of Subdivider
      Type name, address, and telephone number of owner of record:
                                                                         Date:
                                 
Signature of Owner
      (3)   Pond and Drainage Certification. The owner of record of the land
shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed thereto, and any subsequent
owner, heir, successor or assign, acknowledges and agrees to the perpetual
maintenance of the pond(s) located in this subdivision; and does release and
hold harmless the town from any and all liabilities, claims, demands,
attorney's fees and costs or judgements arising from said pond(s); and
specifically releases the town from any and all liability and responsibility
for flooding or erosion from storm drains or from flooding from high water or
natural creeks, river, or drainage features. A drainage easement is established
for the sole purpose of providing for the emergency protection of the free flow
of surface waters along all watercourses, as established by these regulations
and the Director of the Department of Engineering and Development Services, or
his or her designee. The town may conduct emergency maintenance operations
within this easement where emergency conditions exist. Emergency maintenance
shall be the removal of trees and other debris, excavation, filling, and the
like necessary to remedy a condition, which, in the judgement of the Director,
or his or her designee, is potentially injurious to life, property or the
public road or utility system. Such emergency maintenance, conducted for the
common good, shall not be construed as constituting a continual maintenance
obligation on the part of the Town.
                                                                         Date:
                                 
Signature of Owner
      (4)   Place for Final Plat approval by the Director of the Department of
Engineering and Development Services or his or her designee.
      (5)   Place for approval of Department of Health and Environment Control,
if applicable for septic tank lots.
      (6)   Place for certificate of recording.
(('81 Code, §154.23) (Ord. passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord. 99055, passed 11-9-99; Am.
Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-02; Am. Ord. 16082, passed 10-11-16; Am. Ord. 21041,
passed 5-11-21)
APPENDIX B: FORMS
Section
   
1   Final inspection checklist
   
2   Inspection fee computations
   
3   Ownership certification
   
4   Ownership and inspecting engineer certificate
   
5   Right-of-way deeds
   
6   Drainage easement
   
7   Two-year warranty
   
8   Materials and workmanship certification
   
9   [Reserved]
   
10   Homeowners' association articles of incorporation
   
11   Homeowners' association declaration of covenants
   
12   Inspection professional log
   
13   Certificate of compliance
   
14   Drainage certifications
   
15   Stormwater facility maintenance agreement
§ 1 FINAL INSPECTION CHECKLIST.
   This form is to be completed by the applicant or the applicant’s
representative and submitted with plans.
Name of Subdivision:
________________________________________________________________________
Name of Neighborhood:
______________________________________________________________________
Phase/Section Information:
____________________________________________________________________
Inspecting Professional:
______________________________________________________________________
Inspecting Certification:
______________________________________________________________________
Date: ________________                   Phone: ________________
 
FINAL PLAT INSPECTION CHECKLIST FOR SUBDIVISION – DRAINAGE
Description                          Date Approved by Field Engineer
Underdrains installed.
Street(s).
Drainage system installed per plans.
 
FINAL PLAT INSPECTION CHECKLIST FOR SUBDIVISION – DRAINAGE (Continued)
Description Date Approved by Field Engineer
FINAL PLAT INSPECTION CHECKLIST FOR SUBDIVISION – DRAINAGE (Continued)
Description                              Date Approved by Field Engineer
System.
Culverts and inlets installed per plans.
Erosion control installed per plans.
Pond and outfall slopes converted and
stabilized.
Outfalls–headwalls complete and grouted.
Lot drainage provided and stabilized.
Drainage system cleaned.
Stormwater video inspection received.
Stormwater video inspection reviewed.
Defects/damages repaired.
Stormwater bond received.
 
FINAL INSPECTION – END OF WARRANTY PERIOD – DRAINAGE
Description Date Approved by Field Engineer
FINAL INSPECTION – END OF WARRANTY PERIOD – DRAINAGE
Description                                    Date Approved by Field Engineer
Erosion control in place.
Pond and outfall slopes stabilized.
Inlets and culverts undamaged.
Culverts and inlets free of silt.
Culverts and inlets cleaned.
Outfalls clear.
Stormwater video inspection received.
Stormwater video inspection reviewed.
Defects/damages repaired.
As-built/Engineer’s inspection received.
Stormwater pond/BMP maintenance data received.
 
FINAL PLAT INSPECTION CHECKLIST FOR SUBDIVISION – STREETS
Description Date Approved by Field Engineer
FINAL PLAT INSPECTION CHECKLIST FOR SUBDIVISION – STREETS
Description                                     Date Approved by Field Engineer
Street and curbing cleaned.
Street(s).
Street signs in place.
Stop signs and other traffic control devices in
place.
Sidewalks.
Paving and base laboratory data provided as
required.
Lot corners visible.
Street markers visible.
Benchmarks in place.
Buffer markers visible.
As-built plans. End of S/D checklist.
Donor's and contractor's names.
E-911 verification of street names.
Field Engineer's completion certification.
Water and sewer operating permits.
Erosion control in place.
Street signs in place.
Pavement free from damage.
Curbing free from damage.
Buffer areas marked.
Utilities buried.
Sidewalks.
 
 
FINAL INSPECTION CHECKLIST FOR SUBDIVISION – TREES
Description                           Date Approved by Site Planner
Replacement of tree survey submitted.
Replacement trees field verified.
   OR
Fees-in-lieu received.
 
('81 Code, § 154.50) (Ord. passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord. 99055, passed 11-9-99; Am.
Ord. 00035, passed 7-11-00; Am. Ord. 00063, passed 1-9-01; Am. Ord. 02045,
passed 7-9-02; Am. Ord. 07045, passed 8-14-07; Am. Ord. 13027, passed 6-11-13)
§ 2 INSPECTION FEE COMPUTATIONS.
   (A)   Measure length of cul-de-sacs to point of curb, not the center radius
point.
 
   Street Nam   Length
   —          —
   —          —
   —          —
   Total Leng   —
 
   (B)   Street inspection fee calculation.
         Total length × fee amount/L.F.
         ( ) × ( ) = $           .
         Amount of fee $         .
   (C)   Drainage inspection fee calculation.
         Total length × fee amount /L.F.
         ( ) × ( ) = $            .
         Amount of fee $              .
 
2013 S-44
   Land Development Regulations   107
   (D)   If no new streets are required, the fee is $150.
('81 Code, § 154.51) (Ord. passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord. 99055, passed 11-9-99; Am.
Ord. 00035, passed 7-11-00; Am. Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-02; Am. Ord. 13027,
passed 6-11-13)
§ 3 OWNERSHIP CERTIFICATION.
   This is to certify that the undersigned is the legal owner of the property
to be dedicated to the town and is authorized to sign all documentation related
to the final plat for:
                                                               .
   Name:                                           
   Date:                                             
   Corporate Seal
   Notarized:
('81 Code, § 154.53) (Ord. passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord. 99055, passed 11-9-99; Am.
Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-02; Am. Ord. 07015, passed 6-12-07; Am. Ord. 13027,
passed 6-11-13)
§ 4 OWNERSHIP AND INSPECTING ENGINEER CERTIFICATE.
   This is to certify that the undersigned is the legal owner of the property
to be dedicated to the town and is authorized to sign all documentation related
to the improvements. As the legal owner, he/she is accepting full
responsibility for construction quality control and ensuring all sediment and
erosion control devices are kept in good working condition throughout the
construction process.
   As the owner, I will be employing  (engineer) , who is a South Carolina-
licensed professional engineer in civil engineering, as the inspecting
professional. The inspecting professional shall be responsible for
administering and conducting the necessary inspections, testing and reporting
as outlined in the inspection professional log in
Chapter 155, Appendix B, § 12. The inspecting professional will be responsible
for certifying the materials and workmanship certificate prior to final
acceptance by the town.
Owner Signature:                                                 Registered
Engineer:                                           
Date:                                                      Seal and Date:
                                            
Corporate Seal                  Notarized:
(Ord. 07015, passed 6-12-07; Am. Ord. 13027, passed 6-11-13)
§ 5 RIGHT-OF-WAY DEEDS.
   Provide warranty deed for the transfer of the right-of-way to the town on
legally correct documents of the form suitable to the donor.
('81 Code, § 154.54) (Am. Ord. 99055, passed 11-9-99; Am. Ord. 02045, passed 7-
9-02; Am. Ord. 13027, passed 6-11-13)
§ 6 DRAINAGE EASEMENT.
   State on document: Drainage Easement, County of Charleston, Town of Mount
Pleasant
   Whereas, the Town of Mount Pleasant by and through the Town Council, is
desirous of providing drainage in the section of Charleston County, known as,
                                  , and to accomplish this must obtain an
easement permitting the maintenance of a drainage system through the portion of
said section, as listed below; and
   Whereas, the undersigned owners of the property are desirous of cooperating
with said town and are minded to grant unto it an easement in and to the
property necessary therefor.
   Now, therefore, in consideration of the foregoing and the benefits to be
derived by the improvements to the drainage conditions, the undersigned have
granted, bargained and sold, released and conveyed by these presents do grant,
bargain, sell, release and convey unto the Town of Mount Pleasant:
   All those certain drainage easements as shown on a plat entitled: “Final
plat,                            Town of Mount Pleasant, Charleston County,
South Carolina,” dated                             , and duly recorded in the
RMC Office for Charleston County, South Carolina, in Plat Book             at
page            .
   Said drainage easements having such size, shape, location, buttings, and
boundings, as shown on said plat reference, to which is hereby made for a more
complete description.
   Provided however, the Town of Mount Pleasant shall not be responsible for
aquatic-growth control, normal cleaning or general maintenance, all of which
shall be the responsibility of the grantor herein, its successors and assigns.
   And to the end that the same may be properly maintained for drainage, the
said Town of Mount Pleasant shall at all times have the right of ingress and
egress to the land affected by said easement.
   The Town has no obligation to repair, replace or to compensate the owner for
trees, plants, grass, shrubs and other elements damaged or destroyed within the
easements during the course of its activities. As a matter of course, no
structures should be placed within drainage easements.
('81 Code, § 154.55) (Ord. passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord. 99055, passed 11-9-99; Am.
Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-02; Am. Ord. 13027, passed 6-11-13; Am. Ord. 16082,
passed 10-11-16)
§ 7 TWO-YEAR WARRANTY.
   The owner and subdivider of the land (describe property/reference plat), and
whose name is subscribed hereto, acknowledges and agrees to maintenance of the
streets, sidewalks, and storm drainage facilities until a satisfactory
inspection is completed no sooner than two years from the date of final plat
approval. Maintenance will be constructed to include preserving and ensuring
all aspects of the road and drainage system are kept in good condition, show no
signs of structural defects and damages, are free from sediment by periodic
silt removal, and the functional integrity remains at an acceptable level as
deemed by the Town Engineer.
   Notarized:                  Owner:
                                            
                        Date:                                             
('81 Code, § 154.56) (Ord. passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord. 11-9-99; Am. Ord. 00063,
passed 1-9-01; Am. Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-02; Am. Ord. 07015, passed 6-12-07;
Am. Ord. 13027, passed 6-11-13)
§ 8 MATERIALS AND WORKMANSHIP CERTIFICATION.
   I,  (engineer) , am the designated inspecting engineer, No.          in the
State of South Carolina, and I hereby certify that all storm water, road and
other facilities for  (subdivision name) have been constructed in substantial
accordance with the design plans approved by the Town of Mount Pleasant. This
was accomplished through routine field inspections and testing.
   Engineer Name:
                                                        Owner:
                                                  
   Date:                                                     Date:
                                        
   Notarized:
('81 Code, § 154.57) (Ord. passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord. 99055; passed 11-9-99; Am.
Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-02; Am. Ord. 07015, passed 6-12-07; Am. Ord. 13027,
passed 6-11-13)
§ 9 [RESERVED]
§ 10 HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION.
   Provide legally correct articles of incorporation on a form suitable to the
donor. Include date of approval by Secretary of State.
('81 Code, § 154.57B) (Ord. passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord. 99055, passed 11-9-99; Am.
Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-02; Am. Ord. 13027, passed 6-11-13)
§ 11 HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION DECLARATION OF COVENANTS.
   Provide legally correct declaration of covenants. Include provisions for
homeowners' association to maintain elements shown on plat, and the ability to
assess owner to collect funds necessary for such maintenance. In the case of
subsequent annexation of additional property in future phases to that which is
governed by the original covenants, the provision of a legally correct
supplemental declaration or other appropriate amending document subjecting the
additional property to the original covenants shall be required. Proof of
recordation of the covenants and/or supplements is required prior to the
issuance of any building permits.
('81 Code, § 154.58) (Ord. passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord. 99055, passed 11-9-99; Am.
Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-02; Am. Ord. 13027, passed 6-11-13)
§ 12 INSPECTION PROFESSIONAL LOG.
(A) At a minimum, provide dates of approval to the town's Field Engineer for
    each of the following elements of each drainage system:   
(1) Pond bank and slope stabilization;   
(2) Outfall stabilization;
(3) Cleaning of drainage system; and   
(4) Video inspection and review.
    At a minimum, provide hard copies of appropriate documentation of
(B) activities to the stormwater construction inspector for each of the
    following elements:
(1) Project specifications;
(2) Compaction testing records;
(3) Correction of defects/problems (if any);
(4) Details/records of major infrastructure changes;
(5) Copy of inspection log for erosion control devices and infrastructure
    inspections (pipe and underdrains); and
(6) BMP maintenance schedule and inspection forms.
(C) At a minimum, provide dates of approval to the town's Field Engineer for
    each of the following elements of each street system:
(1) Subgrades;
(2) Curb and gutter;
(3) Base;
(4) Paving;
(5) Traffic control devices and street signs;
(6) Cleaning of streets; and
(7) Lot benchmark and other marker placement.
 
('81 Code, § 154.59) (Ord. passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord. 99055, passed 11-9-99; Am.
Ord. 00035, passed 7-11-00; Am. Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-02; Am. Ord. 07045,
passed 8-14-07; Am. Ord. 13027, passed 6-11-13)
§ 13 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.
   AGREEMENT AND CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE FOR CONSTRUCTION ON AN INDIVIDUAL
LOT IN A SUBDIVISION OR A LOT LOCATED IN THE TOWN , EITHER RESIDENTIAL OR
COMMERCIAL, EQUALING LESS THAN ONE ACRE IN SIZE.
   Property Location:
                                                                                                  
   The undersigned owner agrees that the activities undertaken at the above
described location shall be carried out in compliance with the approved
stormwater management and sediment control plan, and the following:
   (1)   Prior to any other activity on the lot, silt fencing shall be properly
installed, in accordance with the details shown on the following page, along
the curbing in front of the lot (except at the access entrance), along the OCRM
Critical Line, and along wetlands and any other locations needed to maintain
erosion control at the site;
   (2)   Silt fencing shall be maintained in good working condition until such
time as permanent erosion control features are in place and functioning;
   (3)   Access to the site will be limited to one location with a maximum
width of 20 feet. The access shall preferably be at the proposed driveway
location, and will be consistent with the attached details;
   (4)   The construction entrance shall be maintained in good working
condition until such time as permanent access areas are in place and
functioning;
   (5)   Construction debris and waste materials, concrete truck washout,
sanitary facilities and waste, and chemicals such as paint or other
construction substances will be collected and secured on site. These materials
will be removed to a proper disposal facility as needed to maintain and neat
and orderly site.
   (6)   At no time will any of the above materials be deposited into the
street or storm drainage system. Any spills must be immediately contained and
cleaned according to manufacturers’ specifications. Discharges of petroleum
products to the storm drainage system must be reported to the Town Engineer
immediately.
   (7)   All design contours, swales, positive drainage, and any other drainage
features that are a part of the current drainage system or planned drainage
system will be installed or maintained in good working order.
   (8)   The streets and public facilities near the work shall be kept clean
and free of deposited materials. Failure to maintain facilities will result in
possible fines, stopping of the work until cleaned, and increasing
environmental controls as directed by the Town Field Engineer;
   (9)   The cost of repairs to the public street and damage to the public
drainage system caused by activities at the location shall be paid prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy; and
   (10)   In the event that no existing sediment and erosion control plan can
be identified for reference, as a condition of the building permit, the
applicant must prepare a site plan that accounts for local drainage from and
onto adjoining properties, and that protects the building from local drainage
flows.
                                                                                                                                                   
      Owner                                                                                            
                        Address
('81 Code, § 156.001) (Ord. passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord. passed 2-9-93; Am. Ord.
02045, passed 7-9-02; Am. Ord. 07045, passed 8-14-07; Am. Ord. 13027, passed 6-
11-13; Am. Ord. 16082, passed 10-11-16)
§ 14 DRAINAGE CERTIFICATIONS.
    (A)   Design certification. No increase in rate of runoff; furnished with
all proposed construction.
      STORM WATER FACILITIES
      Designer's Certification
      I,                                        , certify that I am a
Registered Professional                      , No.          in the State of
South Carolina, and that the design of the drainage facilities dated
                         , has been undertaken under my direction.
      I hereby aver that construction of the project, according to the plans
presented to the Town of Mount Pleasant, will not increase the rate of runoff
from the site.
                                                                      
      Name
                                                                      
      Date
                                                                      
      (Professional Seal)
   (B)   Design certification. Rate increase; no impact furnished with all
proposed construction.
      STORM WATER FACILITIES
      Designer's Certification
      I,                                        , certify that I am a
Registered Professional                      , No.          in the State of
South Carolina, and that the design of the drainage facilities dated
                         , has been undertaken under my direction.
      I hereby aver that construction of the project, according to the plans
presented to the Town of Mount Pleasant, will increase the rate of runoff from
the site; however, there will be no adverse impact on downstream facilities or
property due to this increase in runoff.
                                                                      
      Name
                                                                      
      Date
                                                                      
      (Professional Seal)
('81 Code, § 156.012) (Ord. passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-02; Am.
Ord. 13027, passed 6-11-13)
§ 15 STORMWATER FACILITY MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT.
Project Name:
                                                                                               
Project Number:              
TMS Location:
                                                                                              
Type of Stormwater Facility:
___ Wet Pond          ___ Bio-System         ___ Other (describe)
                                        
___ Dry Pond          ___ Manufactured
system                                                        
I,
                                                                                        
, as owner of the above described facility accept the responsibility for
ownership and proper maintenance of the permanent pond(s) and or other
structural best management practices on the site, per the approved and
designated maintenance plan and schedule shown below.
I will complete any necessary repairs and/or preventative maintenance
procedures in a timely manner to ensure proper functioning of the pond as a
stormwater management device.
It is my understanding that the maintenance plan may be amended/revised at any
time by The Town of Mount Pleasant, if the current schedule is deemed
insufficient, and I will abide by any prescribed changes.
I agree to perform at a minimum, unless more frequent inspections are dictated
by either the system manufacturer or the Town of Mount Pleasant, an annual
inspection of the stormwater facility.
I understand more routine inspections may be performed by the owner or owner's
representatives on a more frequent basis; however, the annual inspection must
be performed and reported on by a licensed professional engineer.
I understand that the report of the annual inspection must include the results
of the inspection and remedial actions undertaken or planned.
I agree to send the inspection reports and other requested documentation to the
town's Stormwater Manager for review on an annual basis or by June 30 of each
reporting year.
I agree to maintain an inspection log of findings and remediations. This log
shall be kept by the facility owner and transferred with the property to future
owners.
I will continue to own and maintain the pond until the Town of Mount Pleasant
is notified in writing of a transfer in ownership and maintenance
responsibility.
The notification will include a date for the transfer of responsibility and a
letter of acceptance from the new owner.
                                                                                                                                                    
Signature                  Printed Name            Date
                                                                                                                                                          
Address
                                                                                                                                                          
City                     State            Zip Code
                                                                                                                       
Office (daytime) Phone Number                Fax Number
                                                                                                                       
Mobile Phone Number                  E-mail Address
   LONG-TERM MAINTENANCE SCHEDULE
INSPECTION RESPONSIBILITIES FOR DETENTION BASINS 
   1.   Detention basin to be owned and maintained by
                                                                        .
   2.   Grass to be mowed on a regular basis (minimum twice a year).
   3.   Dike to be maintained with prompt repair of any eroded areas and no
tree growth allowed to occur. Trash to be removed from within and around the
pond and the outlet structure, on a regular basis and after any large storm
events.
   4.   Outlet structure to be inspected and sediment to be removed on a
regular basis during construction.
   5.   Repairs to outlet structure and outlet pipe to be made if needed.   
   6.   Sediment accumulation to be removed from pond by contractor at the end
of construction.
   7.   Outlet discharge and emergency spillway to be inspected on a regular
basis and after large storm events.
      a.   Repair if necessary.
   8.   Pond bottom to be inspected as necessary to provide positive drainage
to the outlet.
   9.    At the time of the end of warranty as-built survey, the average pond
depth was                          feet/inches. This pond system is designed to
have a water quality trapping efficiency of           %. This efficiency is
considered impacted once the pond bottom has filled to                         
feet/ inches. The functionality of the pond may also be impacted by other, non-
sediment-related pollutants, and may require other repair or management
actions.
For bio systems, such as bio-retention, constructed wetlands, or other
"naturalized forms" of water quality controls that may be installed and
maintained by the owner, reference to the maintenance and repair of specific
systems should be made using the SCDHEC BMP Manual, or as identified and
recommended by the design professional or licensed professional engineer.
MANUFACTURED WATER QUALITY CONTROL SYSTEMS
   1.   Inspection frequencies and specific inspection activities shall follow
the manufactures' recommendations or requirements.
   2.   The system shall be cleaned in accordance with the manufactures'
recommendations or requirements or as may be dictated by the Town of Mount
Pleasant.
   3.   A log of the quantity and quality of the materials removed may be
required by the Town of Mount Pleasant.
   4.   Materials removed from the system, including polluted water generated
during the cleaning process, must be properly disposed of.
(Ord. 99016, passed 6-8-99; Am. Ord. 02045, passed 7-9-02; Am. Ord. 07045.
passed 8-14-07; Am. Ord. 13027, passed 6-11-13)
CHAPTER 156: ZONING CODE
Section
Subchapter A: Introduction
   
156.001   Title
   
156.002   Purpose
   
156.003   Authority
   
156.004   Applicability
   
156.005   Relationship to Comprehensive Plan
   
156.006   Relationship to other regulations
   
156.007   Use of land or buildings
   
156.008   Structures to have access
   
156.009   Severability
   
156.010   Repeal of existing Code
   
156.011   Effective date
   156.012 through 156.019   Reserved
Subchapter B: Zoning Districts
Part 1: General Provisions
   
156.020   Introduction
   
156.021   Districts established
   
156.022   Zoning Map
   
156.023   Split-zoned lots
   
156.024   Building Height Plan Map
   
156.025   Density
   156.026 through 156.034   Reserved
Part 2: Base Zoning Districts
Subpart 2.1: Residential Districts
   
156.035   Dimensional standards for non-residential uses in residential
districts
   
156.036   RC-1 and RC-2 (Rural Conservation Districts)
   
156.037   RR (Rural Residential District)
   
156.038   CC (Community Conservation District)
   
156.039   R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 (Residential Districts)
   
156.040   TH (Townhouse District)
   
156.041   RM (Mixed Residential District)
   156.042 through 156.054   Reserved
Subpart 2.2: Non-Residential and Mixed Use Districts
   
156.055   OP-1 (Office Professional District)
   
156.056   OP-2 (Office Professional-2 District)
   
156.057   NC-1 (Neighborhood Commercial District)
   
156.058   NC-2 (Neighborhood Commercial-2 District)
   
156.059   AB-1 (Areawide Business District)
   
156.060   AB-2 (Areawide Business-2 District)
   
156.061   ED (Economic Development District)
   
156.062   LI (Light Industrial District)
   156.063 through 156.079   Reserved
Subpart 2.3: CL (Cultural Landscape District)
   
156.080   Purpose
   
156.081   Location
   
156.082   Allowed uses and dimensional standards
   
156.083   Development standards
   156.084 through 156.089   Reserved
Subpart 2.4: SCW (Shem Creek Waterfront Districts)
   
156.090   SCW purpose and findings
   
156.091   District boundary
   
156.092   Allowed uses
   
156.093   Dimensional standards
   
156.094   Design standards
   
156.095   Development standards
   156.096 through 156.104   Reserved
Subpart 2.5: WG-C (Waterfront Gateway-Cooper River District)
   
156.105   Purpose and goals
   
156.106   Location
   
156.107   Use mixing requirements
   
156.108   Development and design standards
   
156.109   Parking requirements
   156.110 through 156.114   Reserved
Subpart 2.6: Conservation and Recreation Districts
   
156.115   CO (Conservation-Open Space District)
   
156.116   CRO (Conservation-Recreation-Open Space District)
   156.117 through 156.124   Reserved
Subpart 2.7: Public-Institutional Districts
   
156.125   Purpose
   
156.126   Site and architectural design in Public-Institutional Districts
   
156.127   PI-1 (Public-Institutional-1 District)
   
156.128   PI-2 (Public-Institutional-2 District)
   156.129 through 156.159   Reserved
Part 3: Planned Districts
Subpart 3.1: PD (Planned Development District)
   
156.160   Purpose
   
156.161   Location and applicability
   
156.162   Allowed uses
   
156.163   Design and development standards
   
156.164   Planned development district map
   156.165 through 156.179   Reserved
Part 4: Overlay Districts
Subpart 4.1: Mixed Use Centers Overlay District
   
156.180   Purpose
   
156.181   District boundary
   
156.182   Applicability
   
156.183   Design review required
   
156.184   Hierarchy of standards
   
156.185   Bufferyards
   
156.186   Parking
   
156.187   NMU-OD (Neighborhood Mixed Use Overlay District)
   
156.188   CMU-OD (Community Mixed Use Overlay District)
   
156.189   RC-OD (Redevelopment Center Overlay District)
   156.190 through 156.199   Reserved
Subpart 4.2: NP-OD (Neighborhood Character Preservation Overlay District)
   
156.200   Purpose and findings
   
156.201   District boundary
   
156.202   Applicability
   
156.203   Dimensional standards
   156.204 through 156.214   Reserved
Subpart 4.3: OV-HD (Old Village Historic District)
   
156.215   Purpose
   
156.216   District boundary
   
156.217   Prohibited uses
   
156.218   Lot dimensional, frontage, coverage, yard, and height requirements
   156.219 through 156.229   Reserved
Subpart 4.4: SB-OD (Sweetgrass Basket Overlay District)
   
156.230   Purpose
   
156.231   District boundary
   
156.232   Allowed uses
   
156.233   Dimensional standards
   
156.234   Bufferyard requirements
   
156.235   Commercial site design standards
   156.236 through 156.249   Reserved
Subpart 4.5: VSP-OD (Village-Scale Pedestrian Overlay District)
   
156.250   Purpose
   
156.251   District boundary
   
156.252   Design review required
   
156.253   Open space and parks
   
156.254   Coleman Boulevard development standards
   
156.255   Johnnie Dodds Boulevard development standards
   
156.256   Chuck Dawley Boulevard development standards
   156.257 through 156.299   Reserved
Subchapter C: Use Regulations
Part 1: General Provisions
   
156.300   Purpose.
   
156.301   Applicability
   
156.302   Zoning permit required
   
156.303   Replacement of an existing detached house dwelling
   
156.304   Critical facilities in special flood hazard areas
   
156.305   Outdoor storage of vehicles
   156.306 through 156.314   Reserved
Part 2: Attainable Housing
   
156.315   Generally
   
156.316   Attainable housing units defined
   
156.317   Eligibility
   
156.318   Deed restrictions
   
156.319   Design and development standards
   
156.320   Attainable housing plan
   156.321 through 156.324   Reserved
Part 3: Principal Uses and Structures
Subpart 3.1: General Provisions
   
156.325   Applicability
   
156.326   Multiple principal uses on a single parcel
   156.327 through 156.334   Reserved
Subpart 3.2: Principal Use Table
   
156.335   Introduction
   
156.336   Classification of new and unlisted principal uses
   
156.337   Preemption
   
156.338   Principal use table
   156.339 through 156.344   Reserved
Subpart 3.3: Principal Use Conditions
   
156.345   Applicability
   
156.346   Adult uses
   
156.347   Agricultural, produce, or seafood stand
   
156.348   Agricultural storage
   
156.349   Airport or aviation facility
   
156.350   Amenity building and/or facility in a residential development
   
156.351   Amusement center
   
156.352   Animal boarding facility, day care, or shelter
   
156.353   Apiculture
   
156.354   Artisan workshop or artist studio without retail sales
   
156.355   Boat launch or dock
   
156.356   Boutique hotel or inn
   
156.357   Brewery, winery or distillery
   
156.358   Campground or campsite
   
156.359   Car wash
   
156.360   Community service facility
   
156.361   Cultural facility
   
156.362   Duplex dwelling
   
156.363   Equestrian facility
   
156.364   High-impact entertainment and high impact recreation
   
156.365   Hotel, motel, or extended stay
   
156.366   Manufacturing and production
   
156.367   Mixed use building
   
156.368   Motor vehicle rental or sales
   
156.369   Motor vehicle service or repair
   
156.370   Neighborhood gathering place
   
156.371   Neighborhood recreation
   
156.372   Nursery operation, commercial
   
156.373   Parking lot or structure
   
156.374   Pre-school, educational nursery, or day care
   
156.375   Pump station
   
156.376   Rural compound
   
156.377   School, primary and school, secondary
   
156.378   Self-service storage facility
   
156.379   Shooting range, indoor
   
156.380   Sweetgrass basket stand
   
156.381   Tattoo or body piercing studio
   
156.382   Townhouse dwelling
   
156.383   Watercraft or marine equipment service or repair
   
156.384   Wholesale sales
   156.385 through 156.419   Reserved
Part 4: Accessory Uses and Structures
Subpart 4.1: General Provisions
   
156.420   Applicability
   
156.421   Compliance with other regulations
   
156.422   Establishment of accessory uses and structures
   
156.423   Major and minor accessory structures defined
   
156.424   Setbacks, height, and size of accessory uses and structures
   156.425 through 156.434   Reserved
Subpart 4.2: Accessory Use Table
   
156.435   Introduction
   
156.436   Accessory use table
   156.437 through 156.444   Reserved
Subpart 4.3: Accessory Use Conditions
   
156.445   Accessory dwelling unit
   
156.446   Accessory manufacturing or repair facility
   
156.447   Clothing and home goods donation bin
   
156.448   Fences
   
156.449   Gasoline or fuel oil pump and storage tank
   
156.450   Home-based business
   
156.451   Outdoor retail displays
   
156.452   Outdoor storage
   
156.453   Shipping container
   156.454 through 156.469   Reserved
Part 5: Temporary Uses and Structures
Subpart 5.1: General Provisions
   
156.470   Purpose
   
156.471   Applicability
   
156.472   Exemptions
   
156.473   Site plan required
   
156.474   Compliance with other regulations
   
156.475   Property owner consent required
   
156.476   Development standards
   156.477 through 156.484   Reserved
Subpart 5.2: Temporary Use Table
   
156.485   Introduction
   
156.486   Classification of new and unlisted temporary uses
   
156.487   Temporary use table
   156.488 through 156.494   Reserved
Subpart 5.3: Temporary Use Conditions
   
156.495   Commercial-type dumpster
   
156.496   Farmers’ market
   
156.497   Interim and part-time uses and structures
   
156.498   Mobile vending
   
156.499   Portable storage unit
   156.500 through 156.514   Reserved
Part 6: Short-Term Rentals
   
156.515   Purpose
   
156.516   Applicability
   
156.517   Definitions
   
156.518   Maximum number allowed
   
156.519   Short-term rental permit
   
156.520   Additional requirements for short-term rentals
   
156.521   Prohibitions
   
156.522   Violations and penalties
   
156.523   Appeals
   
156.524   Subsequent applications
   156.525 through 156.534   Reserved
Part 7: Small Wireless Facilities and Telecommunications Towers
Subpart 7.1: Small Wireless Facilities Within the Right-of-Way
   
156.535   Purpose and intent
   
156.536   Applicability
   
156.537   Definitions
   
156.538   Application process
   
156.539   Fees and costs
   
156.540   Application review timeframes
   
156.541   Consolidated application for multiple SWF
   
156.542   Appearance, maximum height, and proximity of SWF in covered areas
   
156.543   Applicable design requirements
   
156.544   Historic and design districts
   
156.545   Covered areas in neighborhoods zoned for residential use
   
156.546   General conditions and requirements of permit approval
   
156.547   Covered areas in any zoning district in which overhead lines have
been placed underground
   
156.548   Removal of SWF if use discontinued or abandoned
   
156.549   Safety requirements
   
156.550   Appeals
   
156.551   Severability
   
156.552   Penalties
   156.553 through 156.559   Reserved
Subpart 7.2: Telecommunications Towers
   
156.560   Title
   
156.561   Purpose
   
156.562   Definitions
   
156.563   Permitted use
   
156.564   Conditional use
   
156.565   Special exception use
   
156.566   Additional provisions
   
156.567   Application requirements
   
156.568   Appeals
   156.569 through 156.579   Reserved
Subchapter D: Buffers and Screening
Part 1: General Provisions
   
156.580   Applicability
   
156.581   Existing vegetation preferred
   
156.582   Vegetation removal prohibited
   
156.583   Invasive species
   
156.584   Minimum plant standards
   
156.585   Plant species
   
156.586   Required vegetation is protected
   
156.587   Impacts from aerial transmission power lines
   
156.588   Impacts from road improvements
   156.589 through 156.599   Reserved
Part 2: Perimeter and Right-of-Way Bufferyards
   
156.600   Purpose
   
156.601   Applicability
   
156.602   Exceptions
   
156.603   Location of perimeter and right-of-way bufferyards
   
156.604   Perimeter and right-of-way bufferyard types
   
156.605   Perimeter and right-of-way bufferyard specifications
   
156.606   Special right-of-way bufferyards
   
156.607   Scenic highway bufferyards
   
156.608   Use of perimeter and right-of-way bufferyards
   
156.609   Alternative compliance
   156.610 through 156.619   Reserved
Part 3: Critical Area Buffers
   
156.620   Purpose and intent
   
156.621   Applicability
   
156.622   Critical area buffer required
   
156.623   Prohibited elements in a critical area buffer
   
156.624   Allowed uses in a critical area buffer
   
156.625   Stormwater control measures
   
156.626   Vision corridors
   
156.627   Critical area buffer and vision corridor delineation and record
   
156.628   Violations and enforcement
   156.629 through 156.639   Reserved
Part 4: Wetland Buffers
   
156.640   Purpose
   
156.641   Applicability
   
156.642   Wetland buffer required
   
156.643   Impervious surfaces in a wetland buffer
   
156.644   Removal of invasive species
   
156.645   Trail system
   156.646 through 156.649   Reserved
Part 5: Historical and Cultural Resources Buffers
   
156.650   Purpose
   
156.651   Applicability
   
156.652   Historical and cultural resources buffer required
   
156.653   Removal of invasive species
   
156.654   Trail system
   156.655 through 156.659   Reserved
Part 6: Lots Without an Existing Buffer
   
156.660   Applicability
   
156.661   Planting standards
   156.662 through 156.669   Reserved
Part 7: Maintenance
   
156.670   Applicability
   
156.671   Maintenance responsibility
   
156.672   Vegetation maintenance
   
156.673   Landscaping maintenance bond
   156.674 through 156.699   Reserved
Subchapter E: Tree Protection
   
156.700   Authority and purpose
   
156.701   Jurisdiction and applicability
   
156.702   Tree removal and replacement
   
156.703   Exemptions
   
156.704   Exceptions
   
156.705   Tree Protection Zones (TPZ)
   
156.706   Remedial procedures
   
156.707   Irreparable damage in tree protection zones
   
156.708   Public trees
   
156.709   Notice of violation and penalty
   
156.710   Definitions
   156.711 through 156.729   Reserved
Subchapter F: Parking and Loading
Part 1: General Provisions
   
156.730   Purpose
   
156.731   Applicability
   
156.732   Location of required parking spaces
   156.733 through 156.739   Reserved
Part 2: Parking Ratios
   
156.740   Minimum off-street parking ratios
   
156.741   Off-street parking table
   
156.742   Bicycle parking
   156.743 through 156.754   Reserved
Part 3: Off-Street Parking Space and Lot Design
   
156.755   Applicability
   
156.756   General requirements
   
156.757   Surfacing
   
156.758   Parking space and travel aisle dimensions
   
156.759   Drive-throughs
   
156.760   Design regulations for commercial, institutional, and apartment
complex parking lots
   156.761 through 156.769   Reserved
Part 4: Alternative Parking Plans
   
156.770   Purpose
   
156.771   Applicability
   
156.772   Off-site parking
   
156.773   On-street parking
   
156.774   Shared parking
   
156.775   Parking demand studies
   156.776 through 156.784   Reserved
Part 5: Off-Street Loading
   
156.785   Applicability
   
156.786   Off-street loading space required
   156.787 through 156.809   Reserved
Subchapter G: Signs
Part 1: General Regulations
   
156.810   Purpose
   
156.811   Applicability
   
156.812   Exempt signs
   
156.813   Prohibited signs
   
156.814   Content neutrality and substitution
   
156.815   Classification of sign users and interpretation of tables
   
156.816   Sign features
   156.817 through 156.824   Reserved
Part 2: Sign Standards
Subpart 2.1: Non-Residential Signs
   
156.825   Freestanding sign standards
   
156.826   Attached sign standards
   
156.827   Mural standards
   
156.828   Off-premises sign standards
   156.829 through 156.834   Reserved
Subpart 2.2: Residential Signs
   
156.835   Residential sign standards
   156.836 through 156.844   Reserved
Subpart 2.3: Incidental and Temporary Signs
   
156.845   Incidental sign standards
   
156.846   Temporary sign standards
   156.847 through 156.859   Reserved
Part 3: Administration and Enforcement
   
156.860   Administration
   
156.861   Master Sign Program
   
156.862   Sign permits
   
156.863   Sign inspection and maintenance
   
156.864   Abandoned signs
   
156.865   Measurements
   
156.866   Definitions
   156.867 through 156.879   Reserved
Subchapter H: Building and Site Design
Part 1: General Provisions
   
156.880   Purpose
   
156.881   Town commercial areas
   
156.882   Design review process required
   
156.883   Town design principles
   156.884 through 156.889   Reserved
Part 2: Building Design Standards
   
156.890   General provisions
   
156.891   Building setback
   
156.892   Building step-back
   
156.893   Primary façade and entry orientation
   
156.894   Top, middle, and base
   
156.895   Massing
   
156.896   Wall planes
   
156.897   Materials
   
156.898   Roof form
   
156.899   Windows
   
156.900   Columns
   
156.901   Awnings, canopies, and balconies
   
156.902   Sign bands
   
156.903   Screening of mechanical equipment
   
156.904   Colors
   156.905 through 156.914   Reserved
Part 3: Site Design Standards
Subpart 3.1: Siting of Buildings and Parking Areas
   
156.915   Purpose
   
156.916   Applicability
   
156.917   Parking lot areas and facilities
   156.918 through 156.924   Reserved
Subpart 3.2: Access and Connectivity
   
156.925   General provisions
   
156.926   Pedestrian access, crosswalks, and sidewalks
   
156.927   Vehicular access
   
156.928   Internal access roads
   
156.929   Access easements
   
156.930   Drive-through and drive-up uses
   156.931 through 156.939   Reserved
Subpart 3.3: Site Components
   
156.940   General provisions
   
156.941   Utilities
   
156.942   Shopping cart storage
   
156.943   Mailboxes, outdoor sales racks, and similar items
   
156.944   Outdoor furniture
   
156.945   Bollards
   
156.946   Loading areas, service courtyards, and dumpsters
   
156.947   Screening for enclosures
   
156.948   Satellite dishes
   
156.949   Telecommunication towers and associated ground-mounted equipment
   
156.950   Free-standing signage
   
156.951   Truncated domes (detectable warnings)
   156.952 through 156.964   Reserved
Subpart 3.4: Exterior Lighting
   
156.965   Purpose
   
156.966   Exemptions
   
156.967   Prohibited exterior lighting
   
156.968   General exterior lighting standards
   
156.969   Uniformity
   
156.970   Lighting color
   
156.971   Lighting height
   
156.972   Building lighting, building area lighting, and service area lighting
   
156.973   Pole-mounted lighting
   
156.974   Lighting zones
   
156.975   Lighting levels
   
156.976   Limits to off-site impacts
   
156.977   Limitation on hours of operation
   
156.978   Special purpose lighting
   
156.979   Street lighting
   
156.980   Exterior lighting plan required
   
156.981   Definitions
   156.982 through 156.989   Reserved
Subpart 3.5: Landscaping
   
156.990   Purpose
   
156.991   General landscaping standards
   
156.992   Landscape design
   
156.993   Evaluation criteria
   
156.994   Certificate of occupancy
   
156.995   Design review process
   
156.996   Maintenance
   156.997 through 156.1009   Reserved
Part 4: Special Design Subareas
Subpart 4.1: General Provisions
   
156.1010   Special design subareas
   
156.1011   Hierarchy of authority
   156.1012 through 156.1019   Reserved
Subpart 4.2: Commercial Village
Special Design Subarea
   
156.1020   General provisions
   
156.1021   Supplemental building design standards
   156.1022 through 156.1034   Reserved
Subpart 4.3: Village-Scale Pedestrian
Special Design Subarea
   
156.1035   Applicability
   
156.1036   Activity zone
   
156.1037   Terminal vistas
   
156.1038   Colemen Boulevard standards
   
156.1039   Johnnie Dodds Boulevard standards
   
156.1040   Chuck Dawley Boulevard standards
   
156.1041   Supplemental building design standards
   156.1042 through 156.1054   Reserved
Subpart 4.4: Shem Creek Waterfront
Special Design Subarea
   
156.1055   Applicability
   
156.1056   Supplemental building design standards
   156.1057 through 156.1074   Reserved
Subchapter I: Procedures
Part 1: General Provisions
   
156.1075   Purpose
   
156.1076   Applicability
   
156.1077   Summary of procedures
   
156.1078   General procedural requirements and authority
   
156.1079   Pre-application meeting
   
156.1080   Completeness review
   
156.1081   Preliminary staff review
   
156.1082   Notice provisions
   
156.1083   Removal of applications from a meeting agenda
   
156.1084   Public hearings
   
156.1085   Modifications to approved applications
   
156.1086   Building permit required
   
156.1087   Review of decisions and interpretations
   
156.1088   Moratoria
   156.1089 through 156.1094   Reserved
Part 2: Submittal Requirements
   
156.1095   Purpose
   
156.1096   Format of applications
   
156.1097   Authorization of agent
   
156.1098   Application checklists
   
156.1099   Recorded restrictive covenants
   
156.1100   Permits required by other agencies
   
156.1101   Fees
   156.1102 through 156.1109   Reserved
Part 3: Annexation and Initial Zoning
   
156.1110   Purpose
   
156.1111   Applicability
   
156.1112   Initiation
   
156.1113   Completeness
   
156.1114   Notice
   
156.1115   Decision
   
156.1116   Review criteria
   
156.1117   Scope of approval
   
156.1118   Reapplication
   
156.1119   Appeals
   
156.1120   Recordkeeping
   156.1121 through 156.1124   Reserved
Part 4: Comprehensive Plan Adoption
   
156.1125   Purpose
   
156.1126   Applicability
   
156.1127   Initiation
   
156.1128   Completeness
   
156.1129   Notice
   
156.1130   Decision
   
156.1131   Review criteria
   
156.1132   Scope of approval
   
156.1133   Reapplication
   
156.1134   Appeals
   
156.1135   Recordkeeping
   156.1136 through 156.1139   Reserved
Part 5: Comprehensive Plan and
Future Land Use Map Amendments
   
156.1140   Purpose
   
156.1141   Applicability
   
156.1142   Initiation
   
156.1143   Completeness
   
156.1144   Notice
   
156.1145   Decision
   
156.1146   Review criteria
   
156.1147   Scope of approval
   
156.1148   Reapplication
   
156.1149   Appeals
   
156.1150   Recordkeeping
   156.1151 through 156.1154   Reserved
Part 6: Zoning Map Amendments (Rezonings)
   
156.1155   Purpose
   
156.1156   Applicability
   
156.1157   Initiation
   
156.1158   Completeness
   
156.1159   Notice
   
156.1160   Decision
   
156.1161   Review criteria
   
156.1162   Scope of approval
   
156.1163   Reapplication
   
156.1164   Appeals
   
156.1165   Recordkeeping
   156.1166 through 156.1169   Reserved
Part 7: Zoning Permits
   
156.1170   Purpose
   
156.1171   Applicability
   
156.1172   Initiation
   
156.1173   Completeness
   
156.1174   Notice
   
156.1175   Decision
   
156.1176   Review criteria
   
156.1177   Scope of approval
   
156.1178   Reapplication
   
156.1179   Appeals
   
156.1180   Recordkeeping
   156.1181 through 156.1184   Reserved
Part 8: Short-Term Rental Permits
   
156.1185   Cross-reference to applicable procedure
   156.1186 through 156.1199   Reserved
Part 9: Special Exception Use Permits
   
156.1200   Purpose
   
156.1201   Applicability
   
156.1202   Initiation
   
156.1203   Completeness
   
156.1204   Notice
   
156.1205   Decision
   
156.1206   Review criteria
   
156.1207   Scope of approval
   
156.1208   Reapplication
   
156.1209   Appeals
   
156.1210   Recordkeeping
   156.1211 through 156.1214   Reserved
Part 10: Impact Assessments
   
156.1215   Purpose
   
156.1216   Applicability
   
156.1217   Initiation
   
156.1218   Submittal requirements
   
156.1219   Completeness
   
156.1220   Notice
   
156.1221   Decision
   
156.1222   Review criteria
   
156.1223   Scope of approval
   
156.1224   Reapplication
   
156.1225   Appeals
   
156.1226   Recordkeeping
   156.1227 through 156.1229   Reserved
Part 11: Technical Review and Code Compliance
   
156.1230   Purpose
   
156.1231   Applicability
   
156.1232   Initiation
   
156.1233   Completeness
   
156.1234   Notice
   
156.1235   Decision
   
156.1236   Review criteria
   
156.1237   Scope of approval
   
156.1238   Reapplication
   
156.1239   Appeals
   
156.1240   Recordkeeping
   156.1241 through 156.1244   Reserved
Part 12: Design Review
   
156.1245   Purpose
   
156.1246   Applicability
   
156.1247   Initiation
   
156.1248   Completeness
   
156.1249   Notice
   
156.1250   Decision
   
156.1251   Review criteria
   
156.1252   Scope of approval
   
156.1253   Reapplication
   
156.1254   Appeals
   
156.1255   Recordkeeping
   156.1256 through 156.1259   Reserved
Part 13: Certificates of Appropriateness
   
156.1260   Purpose
   
156.1261   Applicability
   
156.1262   Initiation
   
156.1263   Completeness
   
156.1264   Notice
   
156.1265   Decision
   
156.1266   Review criteria
   
156.1267   Scope of approval
   
156.1268   Reapplication
   
156.1269   Appeals
   
156.1270   Recordkeeping
   156.1271 through 156.1274   Reserved
Part 14: Demolition by Neglect
   
156.1275   Purpose
   
156.1276   Applicability
   
156.1277   Initiation
   
156.1278   Completeness
   
156.1279   Notice
   
156.1280   Decision
   
156.1281   Review criteria
   
156.1282   Scope of approval
   
156.1283   Reapplication
   
156.1284   Appeals
   
156.1285   Recordkeeping
   156.1286 through 156.1289   Reserved
Part 15: Variances
   
156.1290   Purpose
   
156.1291   Applicability
   
156.1292   Initiation
   
156.1293   Completeness
   
156.1294   Notice
   
156.1295   Decision
   
156.1296   Review criteria
   
156.1297   Scope of approval
   
156.1298   Reapplication
   
156.1299   Appeals
   
156.1300   Recordkeeping
   156.1301 through 156.1304   Reserved
Part 16: Zoning Code Interpretations
   
156.1305   Purpose
   
156.1306   Applicability
   
156.1307   Initiation
   
156.1308   Completeness
   
156.1309   Notice
   
156.1310   Decision
   
156.1311   Review criteria
   
156.1312   Scope of approval
   
156.1313   Reapplication
   
156.1314   Appeals
   
156.1315   Recordkeeping
   156.1316 through 156.1319   Reserved
Part 17: Appeals of Administrative Decisions
   
156.1320   Purpose
   
156.1321   Applicability
   
156.1322   Initiation
   
156.1323   Completeness
   
156.1324   Notice
   
156.1325   Decision
   
156.1326   Review criteria
   
156.1327   Scope of approval
   
156.1328   Reapplication
   
156.1329   Appeals
   
156.1330   Recordkeeping
   156.1331 through 156.1334   Reserved
Part 18: Text Amendments
   
156.1335   Purpose
   
156.1336   Applicability
   
156.1337   Initiation
   
156.1338   Completeness
   
156.1339   Notice
   
156.1340   Decision
   
156.1341   Review criteria
   
156.1342   Scope of approval
   
156.1343   Reapplication
   
156.1344   Appeals
   
156.1345   Recordkeeping
   156.1346 through 156.1349   Reserved
Part 19: Small Wireless Facilities Applications
   
156.1350   Cross-reference to applicable procedure
   156.1351 through 156.1369   Reserved
Part 20: Telecommunications Towers Applications
   
156.1370   Cross-reference to applicable procedures
   156.1371 through 156.1389   Reserved
Subchapter J: Reviewing and Decision-Making Bodies
Part 1: General Provisions
   
156.1390   Purpose
   156.1391 through 156.1394   Reserved
Part 2: Administrative Review and Decision-Making Bodies
Subpart 2.1: Department of Planning, Land Use, and Neighborhoods
   
156.1395   Director of Planning, Land Use, and Neighborhoods
   
156.1396   Zoning Administrator
   156.1397 through 156.1404   Reserved
Subpart 2.2: Engineering and Development Services Department
   
156.1405   Director of the Engineering and Development Services Department
   
156.1406   Deputy Director of the Engineering and Environmental Division
   156.1407 through 156.1414   Reserved
Subpart 2.3: Technical Review and Code Compliance Team
   
156.1415   Composition
   
156.1416   Meetings
   
156.1417   Powers and duties
   156.1418 through 156.1429   Reserved
Part 3: Appointed Review and
Decision-Making Bodies
Subpart 3.1: General Provisions
   
156.1430   Applicability
   
156.1431   Term of office
   
156.1432   Attendance, removal, and vacancies
   
156.1433   Chairpersons, Vice-Chairpersons, and Secretaries
   
156.1434   Meetings and quorums
   
156.1435   Rules of procedure
   
156.1436   Liability of members
   156.1437 through 156.1444   Reserved
Subpart 3.2: Planning Commission
   
156.1445   Establishment and membership of the Planning Commission
   
156.1446   Powers and duties
   156.1447 through 156.1454   Reserved
Subpart 3.3: Board of Zoning Appeals
   
156.1455   Establishment and membership of the Board of Zoning Appeals
   
156.1456   Powers and duties
   
156.1457   Financing
   156.1458 through 156.1464   Reserved
Subpart 3.4: Design Review Board
   
156.1465   Establishment and membership of the Design Review Board
   
156.1466   Powers and duties
   156.1467 through 156.1474   Reserved
Subpart 3.5: Historic District
Preservation Commission
   
156.1475   Establishment and membership of the Historic District Preservation
Commission
   
156.1476   Jurisdiction
   
156.1477   Powers and duties
   
156.1478   Professional advisor
   156.1479 through 156.1484   Reserved
Subpart 3.6: Historical Commission
   
156.1485   Establishment and membership of the Historical Commission
   
156.1486   Purpose
   
156.1487   Jurisdiction
   
156.1488   Powers and duties
   156.1489 through 156.1494   Reserved
Subpart 3.7: Special Purpose and
Advisory Commissions
   
156.1495   Establishment and membership
   
156.1496   Purpose
   
156.1497   General provisions
   
156.1498   Powers and duties
   156.1499 through 156.1514   Reserved
Subchapter K: Nonconformities
Part 1: General Provisions
   
156.1515   Purpose
   
156.1516   Burden of proof
   
156.1517   Principal structures legally constructed prior to August 13, 1979
   
156.1518   Nonconformities created by government action
   156.1519 through 156.1524   Reserved
Part 2: Nonconforming Lots
   
156.1525   Continuance of nonconforming lots
   
156.1526   Discontinuance of nonconforming lots
   156.1527 through 156.1534   Reserved
Part 3: Nonconforming Structures, Uses, and Site Features
   
156.1535   Purpose
   
156.1536   Continuing existing nonconformities
   
156.1537   Determination of value
   
156.1538   Repairs, alterations, and maintenance
   
156.1539   Change of use
   
156.1540   Abandonment of use
   
156.1541   Restoration of damaged structures
   
156.1542   Extensions of nonconformities
   
156.1543   Construction approved prior to chapter
   
156.1544   Cessation
   
156.1545   Insufficient automobile parking facilities
   
156.1546   Nonconforming building or impervious surface coverage
   
156.1547   Historic properties
   
156.1548   Exception for increased elevation
   156.1549 through 156.1554   Reserved
Part 4: Nonconforming Signs
   
156.1555   Generally
   
156.1556   Continuation of existing signs
   
156.1557   Repair, alteration, and maintenance of signs
   
156.1558   Abandonment
   156.1559 through 156.1564   Reserved
Part 5: Nonconforming Exterior Lighting
   
156.1565   Continuation of existing exterior lighting
   
156.1566   Repairs, alterations, and maintenance
   
156.1567   Abandonment of use
   
156.1568   Restoration of damaged nonconforming exterior lighting
   156.1569 through 156.1574   Reserved
Subchapter L: Enforcement
   
156.1575   Purpose
   
156.1576   Violations
   
156.1577   Penalties
   
156.1578   Enforcement procedures
   
156.1579   Revocation of permit or approval
   156.1580 through 156.1589   Reserved
Subchapter M: Rules of Interpretation and Measurement
Part 1: Rules of Interpretation
   
156.1590   General rules of interpretation
   
156.1591   Interpretation of Zoning Map
   
156.1592   Conflicting provisions
   156.1593 through 156.1599   Reserved
Part 2: Rules of Management
Subpart 2.1: General Provisions
   
156.1600   Purpose
   156.1601 through 156.1604   Reserved
Subpart 2.2: Build-to-Line
   
156.1605   Generally
   
156.1606   How to measure build-to-lines
   156.1607 through 156.1609   Reserved
Subpart 2.3: Building Coverage
   
156.1610   Generally
   
156.1611   How to calculate building coverage
   156.1612 through 156.1614   Reserved
Subpart 2.4: Density
   
156.1615   Generally
   
156.1616   How to calculate maximum density
   156.1617 through 156.1619   Reserved
Subpart 2.5: Gross Floor Area
   
156.1620   Generally
   
156.1621   How to calculate gross floor area
   156.1622 through 156.1624   Reserved
Subpart 2.6: Height
   
156.1625   Generally
   
156.1626   How to measure height
   
156.1627   Exceptions
   156.1628 through 156.1629   Reserved
Subpart 2.7: Impervious Surface Coverage
   
156.1630   Generally
   
156.1631   How to calculate impervious surface coverage
   156.1632 through 156.1634   Reserved
Subpart 2.8: Lot Area, Width, and Depth
   
156.1635   Generally
   
156.1636   How to calculate lot area
   
156.1637   How to measure lot width
   
156.1638   How to measure lot depth
   156.1639 through 156.1644   Reserved
Subpart 2.9: Setbacks and Yards
   
156.1645   Generally
   
156.1646   Lot orientation, yards, and setbacks
   
156.1647   How to measure setbacks
   
156.1648   Front yards and setbacks
   
156.1649   Rear yards and setbacks
   
156.1650   Side yards and setbacks
   
156.1651   Encroachments
   156.1652 through 156.1659   Reserved
Subpart 2.10: Use Separation
   
156.1660   Generally
   
156.1661   How to measure separation distance
   156.1662 through 156.1674   Reserved
Subchapter N: Definitions and Acronyms
Part 1: Acronyms
   
156.1675   Purpose
   
156.1676   List of acronyms
   156.1677 through 156.1679Reserved
Part 2: Definitions
   
156.1680   Purpose
   
156.1681   Defined terms
   156.1682 through 156.1689Reserved
Subchapter O: Building Permit Allocation System
   
156.1690   Title
   
156.1691   Authority
   
156.1692   Purpose and intent
   
156.1693   Jurisdiction; applicability
   
156.1694   Implementation and administration of building permit allocation
system
   
156.1695   Availability and allocation of permits
   
156.1696   Permit allocations
   
156.1697   Application requirements and procedures
   
156.1698   Commencement of construction
   
156.1699   Exemptions
   
156.1700   Monitoring and evaluation
   
156.1701   Appeals
   
156.1702   Liberal construction
   
156.1703   Severability; conflict
   156.1704 through 156.1709Reserved
SUBCHAPTER A: INTRODUCTION
§ 156.001 TITLE.
   (A)   This chapter is known and may be cited as the Zoning Code of the Town
of Mount Pleasant, South Carolina, and may be cited and abbreviated as the
“Mount Pleasant Zoning Code” or “Zoning Code.”
   (B)   The map referred to herein shall be known and may be cited as the
Zoning Map of the Town of Mount Pleasant, South Carolina, and may be cited and
abbreviated as the “Mount Pleasant Zoning Map” or “Zoning Map.”
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.002 PURPOSE.
   (A)   This chapter is enacted to:
      (1)   Regulate the:
         (a)   Location, bulk, number of stories, and sizes of buildings and
other structures;
         (b)   Percentage of lots that may be occupied;
         (c)   Sizes of yards, courts, and other open spaces;
         (d)   Density and distribution of populations; and
         (e)   Uses of buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry,
residence, recreation, conservation, protection against floods, public
activities, and other purposes;
      (2)   Create districts for these purposes;
      (3)   Provide the method of administration, amendment, and appeal;
      (4)   Create and define the duties of the Planning Commission with
respect to these regulations;
      (5)   Provide for the imposition of penalties for violations of these
regulations;
      (6)   Establish a means by which conflicting regulations can be repealed;
and
      (7)   For other purposes.
   (B)   These zoning regulations have been designed, among other things, to:
      (1)   Encourage such distribution of population and such classification
of land uses and distribution of land development and utilization as would tend
to facilitate economic and adequate provisions for transportation,
communications, roads, airports, water supply, drainage, sanitation, education,
recreation, or other public requirements;
      (2)   Lessen congestion on streets;
      (3)   Secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers;
      (4)   Provide adequate light and air;
      (5)   Foster the state's agricultural and other industries;
      (6)   Protect the food supply;
      (7)   Guide the development of the town in accordance with existing and
future needs;
      (8)   Prevent the overcrowding of land and the undue concentration of
population;
      (9)   Protect scenic areas;
      (10)   Preserve historical and cultural resources;
      (11)   Promote desirable living conditions and the sustained stability of
neighborhoods;
      (12)   Protect property against blight and depreciation;
      (13)   Secure economy in government expenditures;
      (14)   Conserve the value of land and buildings;
      (15)   Encourage the most appropriate use of land and structures;
      (16)   Conserve natural and environmental resources; and
      (17)   Accommodate housing that is affordable for the town’s entire
spectrum of households.
   (C)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these
regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and welfare. The zoning regulations in
districts as herein established have been made in accordance with the town
Comprehensive Plan for the above purposes.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.003 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred by the South
Carolina Local Government Comprehensive Planning Enabling Act of 1994, S.C.
Code Title 6, Chapter 29, as amended.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.004 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Jurisdiction. The regulations in this chapter apply to all land and
improvements within the corporate limits of the town, including any land and
improvements hereafter annexed to the town.
   (B)   Application of regulations. These regulations apply uniformly to each
class or kind of structure or land, and are the minimum standards for all site
clearing, development, buildings, structures, or alterations to land or
structures within the corporate limits of the town.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.005 RELATIONSHIP TO COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   Pursuant to S.C. Code § 6-29-720, this chapter is based, in part, on and
designed to implement the Comprehensive Plan, as amended from time to time. The
Comprehensive Plan is the result of careful consideration of existing and
projected conditions in the community. It is designed to help ensure efficient,
equitable, and reasoned land use decisions, and is to be used as a guide to the
Zoning Code and Zoning Map amendment process.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.006 RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER REGULATIONS.
   (A)   This chapter works in conjunction with
Chapter 155 and the other chapters in Mount Pleasant Code Title XV to regulate
the development, redevelopment, and use of land and structures in the town.
   (B)   The use and development of land and structures is subject to all
applicable requirements of this chapter;
Chapter 150; Title IX; Chapter 116; and all other applicable requirements of
the Mount Pleasant Code of Ordinances and state and federal law.
   (C)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
chapter are considered the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of
public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare. Meeting
minimum requirements of this chapter may not be sufficient to meet minimum
requirements of
Chapter 150 or other chapters of the town code or state or federal law.
   (D)   When applicable regulations conflict with one another, the provisions
of Subchapter M, Part 1 apply.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.007 USE OF LAND OR BUILDINGS.
   (A)   No land or building shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no
building or part thereof shall hereafter be constructed, erected, altered, or
moved, unless in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for
the zoning district in which it is, or will be, located.
   (B)   When an area proposed for development forms an integral part of, or is
immediately adjacent to, or otherwise clearly affects the future of any
established section of the town, the design, scale, and location on the site
shall be compatible with the adjacent community and consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.008 STRUCTURES TO HAVE ACCESS.
   All structures shall be so located as to provide safe and convenient access
for servicing, fire protection, and required off-street parking.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.009 SEVERABILITY.
   Town Council declares that the requirements and provisions of this chapter
are severable. If a court of competent jurisdiction declares any word, phrase,
clause, or provision of this chapter unconstitutional or invalid, the court’s
decision does not affect the validity of this chapter as a whole or any word,
phrase, clause, or provision of this chapter other than the word, phrase,
clause, or provision declared unconstitutional or invalid.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.010 REPEAL OF EXISTING CODE.
   This chapter repeals
Chapter 156: Zoning Code of the Town of Mount Pleasant Code of Ordinances, and
all amendments to it, in effect prior to the effective date specified in §
156.011.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.011 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter, the Zoning Code of the Town of Mount Pleasant, South Carolina,
was adopted on January 14, 2025, and takes effect on May 1, 2025.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.012 THROUGH 156.019 RESERVED.
SUBCHAPTER B: ZONING DISTRICTS
PART 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.020 INTRODUCTION.
   (A)   Generally. This subchapter describes the purpose of each base,
planned, floating, and overlay, zoning district in the town. The purpose
statements provide a foundation for the various standards applicable to the
various zoning districts and assist in interpretation of the district
standards. The purpose statements are not regulations, but rather a summary of
the district character and regulatory intent.
   (B)   Allowed uses. The particular uses allowed in each zoning district are
set forth in Subchapter C. Allowed uses in a PD District are specified in the
rezoning ordinance that establishes the PD District and any amendments thereto.
   (C)   Development standards. Development standards for the base districts,
including setbacks and height limits, are specified in the subpart or section
associated with each zoning district. Development standards for PD Districts
are specified in the rezoning ordinance associated with a particular site.
   (D)   Additional district regulations. Additional supplemental regulations
for each district, where applicable, are also included in this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.021 DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   In order to accomplish the purposes set forth in §
156.002, the municipality is divided into the zoning districts identified in
Table 156.021-2: Zoning Districts and described in Parts 2, 3, and 4 of this
subchapter.
   (B)   Table 156.021-1 describes the three types of zoning districts
established in this subchapter.
 
Table 156.021-1: Descriptions of District Types
District Type Description
              Base districts establish uniform use, dimensional, and
Base          development standards for each class or kind of building,
              structure, or use in a district.
              Planned districts are a special type of base district that
              accommodate innovative developments that cannot be achieved in a
Planned       standard base district. Planned districts allow for adjustments
              to generally applicable use, dimensional, and development
              standards. Development in planned districts is subject to a site
              plan approved as part of a rezoning application.
              Overlay districts establish additional standards that supplement
Overlay       the base, planned, or floating districts. All standards
              applicable to the underlying base, planned, or floating zoning
              district apply in addition to the overlay district regulations.
 
Table 156.021-2: Zoning Districts
District Type District Category District Name District Description
Table 156.021-2: Zoning Districts
District Type District Category        District Name District Description
                                       RC-1          Rural Conservation-1
                                       RC-2          Rural Conservation-2
                                       RR            Rural Residential
                                       CC            Community Conservation
              Residential              R-1           Residential-1
                                       R-2           Residential-2
                                       R-3           Residential-3
                                       R-4           Residential-4
                                       TH            Townhouse
                                       RM            Mixed Residential
                                       OP-1          Office Professional-1
                                      OP-2          Office Professional-2
                                      NC-1          Neighborhood Commercial-1
                                      NC-2          Neighborhood Commercial-2
                                      AB-1          Areawide Business-1
Base          Non-Residential and      AB-2          Areawide Business-2
              Mixed-Use                ED            Economic Development
                                       LI            Light Industrial
                                       CL            Cultural Landscape
                                       SCW           Shem Creek Waterfront
                                       WG-C          Waterfront Gateway-Cooper
                                                     River
              Conservation and         CO            Conservation-Open Space
              Recreation               CR-O          Conservation-Recreation-
                                                     Open Space
              Public and Institutional PI-1          Public-Institutional-1
                                       PI-2          Public-Institutional-2
District Type District Category        District Name District Description
Planned       —                      PD            Planned Development
                                                    Mixed Use Centers:
              —                      NMU-OD        Neighborhood Mixed Use
                                       CMU-OD        Community Mixed Use
                                       RC-OD         Redevelopment Center
             —                      NP-OD         Neighborhood Character
Overlay                                              Preservation
                                       OV-HD         Old Village Historic
                                                     District
              —                      SB-OD         Sweetgrass Basket
              —                      VSP-OD        Village-Scale Pedestrian
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.022 ZONING MAP.
   (A)   The location and boundaries of the zoning districts established in
this chapter are shown and maintained as part of the Town of Mount Pleasant
Geographic Information System (GIS) under the direction of the Director of
Planning, Land Use, and Neighborhoods and the Information Technology Division
of the Finance and Corporate Services Department.
   (B)   The zoning GIS layer constitutes the town’s Zoning Map and is part of
this chapter. The zoning designations in the GIS layer have the same force and
effect as if fully set forth or described in this chapter.
   (C)   All amendments to the Zoning Map:
      (1)   Are effective upon Town Council’s approval of second reading of the
rezoning ordinance, pursuant to §
30.46;
      (2)   Shall be reflected on the Zoning Map promptly after the ordinance
is signed; and
      (3)   Shall be identified by updating the original digital data of each
change, together with the date of the change.
   (D)   No change of any nature shall be made on the Zoning Map, except in
conformity with the procedures set forth by this chapter. Any unauthorized
change is considered a violation of this chapter (See Subchapter L).
   (E)   In the event that the zoning GIS layer becomes damaged, destroyed, or
lost, the PLAN Director shall work with the Information Technology Division to
recreate the zoning GIS layer based on the records in the town’s Book of
Ordinances maintained by the Clerk of Council, Town Council meeting minutes,
and other official town records. The recreated zoning GIS layer shall supersede
the prior zoning GIS layer.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.023 SPLIT-ZONED LOTS.
   (A)   The creation of a split-zoned lot, whether through rezoning or the
abandonment of an existing lot line, is prohibited, except on lots where a
portion of the lot is comprised of water or marsh. On these lots, a zoning
district boundary line may be established to provide for a different zoning
district on the portion of the lot comprised of water or marsh.
   (B)   Existing split-zoned lots are nonconforming and subject to the
provisions in
Subchapter K.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.024 BUILDING HEIGHT PLAN MAP.
   (A)   The Building Height Plan Map, including any amendments thereto, is
adopted by reference and made a part of this subchapter.
   (B)   Unless otherwise specified on the Building Height Plan Map, the zoning
district maximum height applies to all lots.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.025 DENSITY.
   (A)   The number of dwelling units allowed on developable land shall not
exceed the maximum number established by the dimensional standards table for
each zoning district.
   (B)   For the purposes of lot subdivision and development, the densities
specified in this subchapter only apply to parcels of land equal to or greater
than one acre in size. The ability to subdivide parcels of land that are less
than one acre in size is controlled by minimum lot size and dimensional
requirements of the zoning district classification.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.026 THROUGH 156.034 RESERVED.
PART 2: BASE ZONING DISTRICTS
SUBPART 2.1: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
§ 156.035 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR NON-RESIDENTIAL USES IN RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Dimensional standards do not apply to lots and principal structures
located in residential districts not intended to be used for dwellings,
agricultural, or commercial uses. Examples include, but are not limited to,
open space, pump stations, and playgrounds.
   (B)   Dimensional standards for detached houses apply to civic,
agricultural, and commercial lots and structures, unless otherwise specified.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.036 RC-1 AND RC-2 (RURAL CONSERVATION DISTRICTS).
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   RC-1 District. The purpose of the RC-1, Rural Conservation-
1 District, is to provide types and intensity of development that primarily
support the needs of the agricultural industry, while secondarily allowing for
compatible rural residential development.
      (2)   RC-2 District. The purpose of the RC-2, Rural Conservation-
2 District, is to retain moderate population growth to reduce the demand for
public services and facilities, while retaining the rural community character
of these areas.
   (B)   Location. 
Figure 156.036-1: Areas for RC District Implementation depicts the areas where
the RC-1 and RC-2 Districts may be implemented.
      (1)   RC-1 District. The RC-1 District may be implemented on lots
recommended in the 2019–2029 Comprehensive Plan as Rural Residential (Rural
Neighborhood) and:
         (a)   Located on Cat Island;
         (b)   Located east of U.S. Highway 17 and beyond the Urban Growth
Boundary (UGB); or
         (c)   Greater than three acres in size as of the effective date of
this chapter and located west of U.S. Highway 17 and beyond Guerin's Bridge
Road.
      (2)   RC-2 District. The RC-2 District may be implemented on lots
recommended in the 2019–2029 Comprehensive Plan as Rural Residential (Rural
Neighborhood) and:
         (a)   Located within the UGB;
         (b)   Located west of U.S. Highway 17 between the UGB and Guerin’s
Bridge Road (excepting Cat Island); or
         (c)   Less than three acres in size as of the effective date of this
chapter and located west of U.S. Highway 17 and beyond Guerin’s Bridge Road.
Figure 156.036-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12927.png]
 
   (C)   Allowed uses. See
Subchapter C.
   (D)   Dimensional standards. Table 156.036-1 establishes dimensional
standards for the RC-1 and RC-2 Districts.
Table 156.036-1: RC-1 & RC-2 Districts Dimensional Standards
Key: min. = minimum required | max. = maximum allowed | ac = acres | ft. =
feet | sf = square feet |
SFHA = Special Flood Hazard Area | du/ac = dwelling units per acre
 RC-1 District RC-2 District
Table 156.036-1: RC-1 & RC-2 Districts Dimensional Standards
Key: min. = minimum required | max. = maximum allowed | ac = acres | ft. =
feet | sf = square feet |
SFHA = Special Flood Hazard Area | du/ac = dwelling units per acre
                         RC-1 District RC-2 District
Lot Dimensions (min.)
   Lot area           10 ac         30,000 sf
   Lot width          135 ft.       100 ft.
   Lot depth          135 ft.       100 ft.
Setbacks (min.)
   Front              50 ft.        50 ft.
   Rear               30 ft.        30 ft.
   Side               15 ft.        15 ft.
Building coverage (max.) 20,000        sf 30%
   Height (max)1
   Outside SFHA       35 ft.        35 ft.
   Inside SFHA        40 ft.        40 ft.
Density (max)            0.10 du/ac    0.33 du/ac
1 Unless otherwise specified by an overlay district or the Building Height
Plan Map
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.037 RR (RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT).
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the RR, Rural Residential District, is to
allow the development of large lot subdivisions in areas within the urban
growth boundary.
   (B)   Location. The RR District is generally appropriate in areas designated
as conventional residential neighborhood on the Comprehensive Plan Future Land
Use Map.
   (C)   Allowed uses. See Subchapter C.
   (D)   Dimensional standards. Table 156.037-1 establishes dimensional
standards for the RR District.
Table 156.037-1: RR District Dimensional Standards
Key: min. = minimum required | max. = maximum allowed | sf = square feet | ft
= feet |
SFHA = Special Flood Hazard Area | du/ac = dwelling units per acre
Table 156.037-1: RR District Dimensional Standards
Key: min. = minimum required | max. = maximum allowed | sf = square feet | ft
= feet |
SFHA = Special Flood Hazard Area | du/ac = dwelling units per acre
Lot Dimensions (min.)
   Lot area           20,000 sf
   Lot width          80 ft.
   Lot depth          110 ft.
Setbacks (min.)
   Front              30 ft.
   Rear               30 ft.
   Side (individual)  10 ft.
   Side (combined)    25 ft.
Building coverage (max.) 30%
Height (max.)1           40 ft.
   Outside SFHA       35 ft.
   Inside SFHA        40 ft.
Density (max.)           3 du/ac
1 Unless otherwise specified by an overlay district or the Building Height
Plan Map
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.038 CC (COMMUNITY CONSERVATION DISTRICT).
   (A)   Purpose. The purposes of the CC, Community Conservation, District are
to preserve and protect the unique development characteristics of early
residential settlements and to sustain the sense of community inherent therein.
   (B)   Location.
      (1)   The CC District is generally appropriate in areas designated as
Settlement Community on the Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map and located
inside the Urban Growth Boundary.
      (2)   The CC District may be appropriate in areas designated as
Agricultural/Forested on the Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map and located
inside the Urban Growth Boundary, if compatible with any adopted Small Area
Plan.
   (C)   Allowed uses. See
Subchapter C.
   (D)   Dimensional standards. Table 156.038-1 establishes dimensional
standards for the CC District.
Table 156.038-1: CC District Dimensional Standards
Key: min. = minimum required | max. = maximum allowed | sf = square feet | ft
= feet | SFHA = Special Flood Hazard Area | du/ac = dwelling units per acre
Table 156.038-1: CC District Dimensional Standards
Key: min. = minimum required | max. = maximum allowed | sf = square feet | ft
= feet | SFHA = Special Flood Hazard Area | du/ac = dwelling units per acre
Lot Dimensions (min.)
   Lot area           12,500 sf
   Lot width          80 ft.
   Lot depth          110 ft.
Setbacks (min.)
   Front              30 ft.
   Rear               30 ft.
   Side (individual)  10 ft.
   Side (combined)    25 ft.
Building coverage (max.) 35%
Height (max.)1           40 ft.
   Outside SFHA       35 ft.
   Inside SFHA        40 ft.
Density (max.)           3 du/ac
1 Unless otherwise specified by an overlay district or the Building Height
Plan Map
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.039 R-1, R-2, R-3, AND R-4 (RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS).
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   The purposes of the R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 Residential Districts
are to provide for residential neighborhoods with small and medium lot sizes
and to encourage the formation and continuation of a stable, healthy
residential environment.
      (2)   The regulations that apply within these districts are designed to:
         (a)   Discourage unwarranted and blighting encroachments by limiting
commercial uses and prohibiting industrial uses;
         (b)   Disallow any other use that would subsequently interfere with
the development or continuation of residential uses; and
         (c)   Discourage any use that would generate traffic on minor streets
other than that required to serve residences on these streets.
   (B)   Location.
      (1)   The R-1 and R-2 Districts are generally appropriate in areas
designated as Conventional Residential Neighborhood, Traditional Residential
Neighborhood, and Mixed Neighborhood on the Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use
Map.
      (2)   The R-3 and R-4 Districts are generally appropriate in areas
designated as Traditional Residential Neighborhood and Mixed Neighborhood on
the Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map.
   (C)   Allowed uses. See
Subchapter C.
   (D)   Dimensional standards. Table 156.039-1 establishes dimensional
standards for the Residential Districts based on dwelling type.
Table 156.039-1: R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 Districts Dimensional Standards
Key: min. = minimum required | max. = maximum allowed | sf = square feet |
ft = feet | SFHA = Special Flood Hazard Area | du/ac = dwelling units per
acre
 R-1 District   R-2 District   R-3 District          R-4 District
 Dwelling Type
 Detached House Detached House Detached House Duplex Detached House
Table 156.039-1: R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 Districts Dimensional Standards
Key: min. = minimum required | max. = maximum allowed | sf = square feet |
ft = feet | SFHA = Special Flood Hazard Area | du/ac = dwelling units per
acre
             R-1 District R-2 District R-3 District          R-4 District
             Dwelling Type
             Detached     Detached     Detached Duplex       Detached House
             House        House        House
Lot Dimensions (min.)
Lot area     10,000 sf    8,000 sf     6,000 sf 3,500 sf per 4,000 sf
                                                du
Lot width    80 ft.       60 ft.       50 ft.   60 ft.       40 ft.
Lot depth    110 ft.      90 ft.       70 ft.   85 ft.       50 ft.
Setbacks (min.)
Front        30 ft.       25 ft.       20 ft.   20 ft.       4 ft.
Rear         30 ft.       25 ft.       20 ft.   20 ft.       20 ft.
Side         10 ft.       10 ft.       10 ft.   10 ft.       5 ft.2
(individual)
Side         25 ft.       20 ft.       20 ft.   20 ft.       10 ft.
(combined)
Building
coverage     35%          40%          50%      50%          50%
(max.)
Height (max.)1
Outside SFHA 35 ft.       35 ft.       35 ft.   35 ft.       35 ft.
Inside SFHA  40 ft.       40 ft.       40 ft.   40 ft.       40 ft.
Density      3 du/ac      3 du/ac      6 du/ac  6 du/ac      6 du/ac
(max.)
1 Unless otherwise specified by an overlay district or the Building Height
Plan Map.
2 Minimum side yard requirements are 5 feet, except where zero lot lines
have been indicated on preliminary and final plats.
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.040 TH (TOWNHOUSE DISTRICT).
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   The purpose of the TH, Townhouse, District is to provide for
quality residential developments primarily containing attached dwellings on
individual lots.
      (2)   The regulations that apply within this district are designed to:
         (a)   Discourage unwarranted and blighting encroachments by
prohibiting the commercial and industrial uses of land; and
         (b)   Disallow any other use that would substantially interfere with
the development and continuation of attached dwelling developments.
   (B)   Location. The TH District is generally appropriate in areas designated
as Traditional Residential Neighborhood, Mixed Neighborhood, Community Scale
Hub, and Redevelopment Center on the Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map.
   (C)   Allowed uses. See
Subchapter C.
   (D)   Dimensional standards. 
Table 156.040-1 establishes dimensional standards for the TH District.
   (E)   Maximum development. No more than eight townhouse dwellings shall be
constructed or attached together in a continuous row, and no such row shall
exceed 200 feet in length.
   (F)   Off-site parking allowed.
      (1)   Off-street parking as required by Subchapter F may be provided on
the premises or in a community parking lot or garage, the title to which and/or
easement for the use of which runs with and/or is appurtenant to the title of
townhouse.
      (2)   An off-site parking lot or garage shall be located a maximum of 200
feet from the entrance to the dwelling it serves.
   (G)   Recreation area required.
      (1)   In new townhouse subdivisions with six or more dwelling units, at
least 8% of net development acreage shall be designated for recreational open
space use.
      (2)         (2)   The 8% of land area shall not include freshwater or
saltwater wetlands, or land used to provide minimum yard requirements, parking
areas for dwelling units, or streets.
Table 156.040-1: TH District Dimensional Standards
Key: min. = minimum required | max. = maximum allowed | sf = square feet |
ft = feet | du = dwelling unit | SFHA = Special Flood Hazard Area | du/ac =
dwelling units per acre | n/a = not applicable
 Building Type
 Townhouse Duplex, Triplex, Quadplex Non-Residential
Table 156.040-1: TH District Dimensional Standards
Key: min. = minimum required | max. = maximum allowed | sf = square feet
| ft = feet | du = dwelling unit | SFHA = Special Flood Hazard Area |
du/ac = dwelling units per acre | n/a = not applicable
                         Building Type
                         Townhouse      Duplex, Triplex, Non-Residential
                                        Quadplex
Lot Dimensions (min.)
Lot area                 1,500 sf       2,500 sf per du  6,000 sf
Lot width                18 ft.         50 ft.           50 ft.
Lot depth                N/A            70 ft.           70 ft.
Front                    4 ft./25 ft.1  4 ft./25 ft.1    20 ft.
Rear                     25 ft./35 ft.2 25 ft./35 ft.2   20 ft.
Side                     10 ft.3        10 ft.           10 ft.
Building coverage (max.) 50%            50%              50%
Height (max.)4
Outside SFHA             35 ft.         35 ft.           35 ft.
Inside SFHA              40 ft.         40 ft.           40 ft.
Density (max)            9 du/ac        9 du/ac          N/A
1 The lesser setback applies when parking is accommodated in the rear
yard. The greater setback applies when parking is accommodated in the
front yard.
2 The lesser setback applies when parking is accommodated in the front
yard. The greater setback applies when parking is accommodated in the
rear yard.
3 The side setback only applies between an end unit and its side lot
line.
4 Unless otherwise specified by an overlay district or the Building
Height Plan Map.
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.041 RM (MIXED RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT).
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the RM, Mixed Residential, District, is to:
      (1)   Promote mixed use neighborhoods in appropriate locations;
      (2)   Encourage a mixture of housing types and sizes to increase housing
choice; and
      (3)   Encourage small-scale, neighborhood retail and service uses in
proximity to dwellings to reduce vehicle trips and encourage walkable
neighborhoods.
   (B)   Location. The RM District is generally appropriate in areas designated
as Mixed Neighborhood and Redevelopment Center on the Comprehensive Plan Future
Land Use Map.
   (C)   Allowed uses. See
Subchapter C.
   (D)   Dimensional standards.
      (1)   
Table 156.041-1 establishes dimensional standards for the RM District.
      (2)   Dimensional standards for detached houses apply to non-residential
lots and structures.
   (E)   Maximum development. No more than eight townhouse dwellings shall be
constructed or attached together in a continuous row, and no such row shall
exceed 200 feet in length.
   (F)   Recreation area required.
      (1)   In new developments with six or more dwelling units, at least 8% of
net development acreage shall be designated for recreational open space use.
      (2)   The 8% of land area shall not include freshwater or saltwater
wetlands, or land used to provide minimum yard requirements, parking areas for
dwelling units, or streets.
   (G)   Placement of drives and parking areas. All driveways and parking areas
shall be located at least ten feet from any lot line.
Table 156.041-1: RM District Dimensional Standards
Key: min = minimum required | max = maximum allowed | sf = square feet | ft
= feet | SFHA = Special Flood Hazard Area | du/ac = dwelling units per acre
 Dwelling Type
 Detached House Townhouse Duplex, Triplex, Quadplex Multiplex
Table 156.041-1: RM District Dimensional Standards
Key: min = minimum required | max = maximum allowed | sf = square feet | ft =
feet | SFHA = Special Flood Hazard Area | du/ac = dwelling units per acre
                Dwelling Type
                Detached House Townhouse      Duplex, Triplex, Multiplex
                                              Quadplex
Lot Dimensions (min.)
Lot area        4,000 sf       1,500 sf       2,500 sf per du  2,500 sf per du
Lot width       40 ft.         18 ft.         50 ft.           100 ft.
Lot depth       50 ft.         N/A            70 ft.           100 ft.
Setbacks (min.)
Front           4 ft.          4 ft./25 ft.1  20 ft.           35 ft.
Rear            20 ft.         25 ft./35 ft.2 20 ft.           25 ft.
                                                               15 ft.
Side            5 ft.          10 ft.3        10 ft.           individual; 35
                                                               ft. combined
Building        50%            50%            50%              40% to 50%4
coverage (max.)
Height (max.)5
Outside SFHA    35 ft.         35 ft.         35 ft.           35 ft.
Inside SFHA     40 ft.         40 ft.         40 ft.           40 ft.
Density (max)   9 du/ac        9 du/ac        9 du/ac          9 du/ac
1 The lesser setback applies when parking is accommodated in the rear yard.
The greater setback applies when parking is accommodated in the front yard.
2 The lesser setback applies when parking is accommodated in the front yard.
The greater setback applies when parking is accommodated in the rear yard.
3 The side setback only applies between an end unit and its side lot line.
4 On detached house, townhouse, duplex, triplex, and quadplex lots, no more
than 50% of the lot may be covered by principal buildings. On multiplex lots,
no more than 40% of the lot may be covered by principal and accessory
buildings; except where parking is located within the structure, the coverage
may be increased to 50%.
5 Unless otherwise specified by an overlay district or the Building Height
Plan Map.
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.042 THROUGH 156.054 RESERVED.
SUBPART 2.2: NON-RESIDENTIAL  AND MIXED USE DISTRICTS
§ 156.055 OP-1 (OFFICE PROFESSIONAL DISTRICT).
   (A)   Purpose. The OP-1 District is intended to accommodate residential
dwellings and small professional offices compatible with nearby residences.
This district is designed to exclude retail and other types of uses that would
generate excessive traffic to the site by limiting lot and building size.
   (B)   Location. The OP-1 District is generally appropriate in areas
designated as Neighborhood Scale Commercial on the Comprehensive Plan Future
Land Use Map.
   (C)   Allowed uses. See
Subchapter C.
   (D)   Dimensional standards. Table 156.055-1 establishes dimensional
standards for the OP-1 District.
Table 156.055-1: OP-1 District
Dimensional Standards
Table 156.055-1: OP-1 District
Dimensional Standards
Key: min = minimum required | max = maximum allowed | sf = square feet | ft =
feet | GFA = gross floor area | SFHA = Special Flood Hazard Area
Setbacks (min.)1
Front                25 ft.
Rear                 25 ft.
Side                 10 ft.
Building GFA (max.)2 1,200 sf
Height (max.)2
Outside SFHA         35 ft.
Inside SFHA          40 ft.
 
1 The required setback distance from a lot line adjacent to a street is
determined through the design review approval process, using a build-to line of
20 to 30 feet. Additional setback distance may be required to meet minimum
bufferyard requirement.
2 Unless otherwise specified by an overlay or floating district or the Building
Height Plan Map.
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.056 OP-2 (OFFICE PROFESSIONAL-2 DISTRICT).
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   The OP-2 District is intended to primarily accommodate business,
office, public, and semi-public uses, with limited residential uses on upper
stories of mixed use buildings.
      (2)   The regulations that apply within this district are designed to:
         (a)   Encourage the formation and continuance of a quiet, compatible,
and uncongested environment for office-type business or professional firms; and
         (b)   Discourage any encroachment by unrestricted retail and/or
wholesale business establishments, industrial concerns, or other uses capable
of adversely affecting the specialized commercial and housing character of the
district.
   (B)   Location. The OP-2 District is generally appropriate in areas
designated as Community Scale Commercial, Community Scale Hub, Town Scale
Commercial, Neighborhood Scale Hub, and Marine/Waterfront on the Comprehensive
Plan Future Land Use Map.
   (C)   Allowed uses. See
Subchapter C.
   (D)   Dimensional standards. Table 156.056-1 establishes dimensional
standards for the OP-2 District.
Table 156.056-1: OP-2 District
Dimensional Standards
Table 156.056-1: OP-2 District
Dimensional Standards
Key: min = minimum required | max = maximum allowed | sf = square feet | ft =
feet
Setbacks (min.)1
Front             25 ft.
Rear              15 ft.
Side              10 ft.
Side (corner lot) 25 ft.
Height (max.)2
Outside SFHA      35 ft.
Inside SFHA       40 ft.
1 The required setback distance from a lot line adjacent to a street is
determined through the design review approval process, using a build-to line
of 20 to 30 feet. Additional setback distance may be required to meet minimum
bufferyard requirement.
2 Unless otherwise specified by an overlay district or the Building Height
Plan Map.
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.057 NC-1 (NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT).
   (A)   Purpose. The NC-1 District is intended to:
      (1)   Promote mixed use neighborhoods in appropriate locations;
      (2)   Encourage entrepreneurship and remove barriers to the establishment
of small businesses; and
      (3)   Reduce vehicle trips and encourage walkable neighborhoods by making
it convenient for neighbors to walk down the street to access daily services or
make quick, incidental purchases.
   (B)   Location. The NC-1 District is generally appropriate in areas
designated as Mixed Neighborhood or Neighborhood Scale Commercial on the
Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map.
   (C)   Allowed uses. See
Subchapter C.
   (D)   Prohibited uses. Any use or operation utilizing drive-through or
drive-in service is prohibited in the NC-1 District.
   (E)   Dimensional standards. Table 156.057-1 establishes dimensional
standards for the NC-1 District.
   Table 156.057-1: NC-1 District
   Dimensional Standards
Key: min = minimum required | max = maximum allowed | sf = square feet | ft =
feet | GFA = gross floor area | SFHA = Special Flood Hazard Area
   Table 156.057-1: NC-1 District
   Dimensional Standards
Key: min = minimum required | max = maximum allowed | sf = square feet | ft =
feet | GFA = gross floor area | SFHA = Special Flood Hazard Area
Setbacks (min.)1
Front              30 ft.
Rear               15 ft.
Side               10 ft.
Side (corner lot)  30 ft.
Building GFA (max) 1,200 sf
Height (max)2
Outside SFHA       35 ft.
Inside SFHA        40 ft.
1 The required setback distance from a lot line adjacent to a street is
determined through the design review approval process, using a build-to line
of 20 to 30 feet. Additional setback distance may be required to meet minimum
bufferyard requirement.
2 Unless otherwise specified by an overlay district or the Building Height
Plan Map.
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.058 NC-2 (NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL-2 DISTRICT).
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   The NC-2 District is intended to primarily accommodate local and
neighborhood- oriented retail and service uses, with limited residential uses
on upper stories of mixed use buildings.
      (2)   The regulations that apply within this district are designed to
encourage the formation and continuance of a stable, healthy, and compatible
environment for uses that:
         (a)   Are located so as to provide nearby residential areas with
convenient shopping and service facilities;
         (b)   Reduce traffic and parking congestion;
         (c)   Prevent the further development of strip commercial areas by
restricting the size of NC-2 District areas and the size of buildings within
the district; and
         (d)   Discourage industrial and other encroachment capable of
adversely affecting the localized commercial and housing character of the
district.
   (B)   Location. The NC-2 District is generally appropriate in areas
designated as Neighborhood Scale Commercial, Neighborhood Scale Hub, Community
Scale Commercial, and Rural Residential on the Comprehensive Plan Future Land
Use Map.
   (C)   Allowed uses. See
Subchapter C.
   (D)   Prohibited uses. Any use or operation utilizing drive-through or
drive-in service is prohibited in the NC-2 District.
   (E)   Dimensional standards. Table 156.058-1 establishes dimensional
standards for the NC-2 District.
Table 156.058-1: NC-2 District
Dimensional Standards
Key: min = minimum required | max = maximum allowed | sf = square feet | ft =
feet | GFA = gross floor area | SFHA = Special Flood Hazard Area
Table 156.058-1: NC-2 District
Dimensional Standards
Key: min = minimum required | max = maximum allowed | sf = square feet | ft =
feet | GFA = gross floor area | SFHA = Special Flood Hazard Area
Setbacks (min.)1
Front               30 ft.
Rear                15 ft.
Side                10 ft.
Side (corner lot)   30 ft.
Building GFA (max.) 6,000 sf
Height (max.)2
Outside SFHA        35 ft.
Inside SFHA         40 ft.
1 The required setback distance from a lot line adjacent to a street is
determined through the design review approval process, using a build-to line
of 20 to 30 feet. Additional setback distance may be required to meet minimum
bufferyard requirement.
2 Unless otherwise specified by an overlay district or the Building Height
Plan Map.
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.059 AB-1 (AREAWIDE BUSINESS DISTRICT).
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   The purpose of the AB-1, Areawide Business-1, District is to
accommodate a mixture of office, retail, and service uses, with limited
residential uses on upper stories of mixed use buildings.
2025 S-75
      (2)   The regulations that apply within this district are designed to:
         (a)   Encourage an economically healthy environment, particularly for
those businesses that have a market area beyond just one or a few
neighborhoods; and
         (b)   Discourage the encroachment of other uses capable of adversely
affecting the basic commercial character of the district.
   (B)   Location. The AB-1 District is generally appropriate in areas adjacent
to arterial roads and designated as Community Scale Commercial, Town Scale
Commercial, and Marine/Waterfront on the Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use
Map.
   (C)   Allowed uses. See
Subchapter C.
   (D)   Dimensional standards. Table 156.059-1 establishes dimensional
standards for the AB-1 District.
Table 156.059-1: AB-1 District
Dimensional Standards
Key: min = minimum required | max = maximum allowed | sf = square feet | ft =
feet | SFHA = Special Flood Hazard Area
Table 156.059-1: AB-1 District
Dimensional Standards
Key: min = minimum required | max = maximum allowed | sf = square feet | ft =
feet | SFHA = Special Flood Hazard Area
Setbacks (min.)1
Front             30 ft.
Rear              15 ft.
Side              10 ft.
Side (corner lot) 30 ft.
Height (max.)2
Outside SFHA      35 ft.
Inside SFHA       40 ft.
 
1 The required setback distance from a lot line adjacent to a street is
determined through the design review approval process, using a build-to line of
20 to 30 feet. Additional setback distance may be required to meet minimum
bufferyard requirement.
2 Unless otherwise specified by an overlay district or the Building Height Plan
Map.
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.060 AB-2 (AREAWIDE BUSINESS-2 DISTRICT).
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   The AB-2, Areawide Business-2, District is intended to:
         (a)   Encourage an economically healthy environment for high-impact
commercial uses; and
         (b)   Reduce traffic and parking congestion by providing locations for
operations that provide transportation-related goods and services.
      (2)   The regulations that apply within this district are designed to
protect residential neighborhoods from encroachment and impact of commercial
uses by providing locations for commercial operations that may have adverse
impacts on the quality of residential areas.
   (B)   Location. The AB-2 District is generally appropriate in areas adjacent
to arterial roads and designated as Community Scale Commercial, Town Scale
Commercial, and Business and Industry on the Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use
Map.
   (C)   Allowed uses. See
Subchapter C.
   (D)   Dimensional standards. Table 156.060-1 establishes dimensional
standards for the AB-2 District.
Table 156.060-1: AB-2 District
Dimensional Standards
Key: min = minimum required | max = maximum allowed | sf = square feet | ft =
feet | SFHA = Special Flood Hazard Area
Table 156.060-1: AB-2 District
Dimensional Standards
Key: min = minimum required | max = maximum allowed | sf = square feet | ft =
feet | SFHA = Special Flood Hazard Area
Setbacks (min.)1
Front             30 ft.
Rear              15 ft.
Side              10 ft.
Side (corner lot) 30 ft.
Height (max.)2
Outside SFHA      35 ft.
Inside SFHA       40 ft.
1 The required setback distance from a lot line adjacent to a street is
determined through the design review approval process, using a build-to line
of 20 to 30 feet. Additional setback distance may be required to meet minimum
bufferyard requirement.
2 Unless otherwise specified by an overlay district or the Building Height
Plan Map.
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.061 ED (ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT).
   (A)   Generally. The Economic Development District shall be developed and
reserved for purposes and uses that are compatible with the town's economic
development strategy.
   (B)   Purpose. The purpose of the ED, Economic Development, District is to
support the town’s vision for economic development that encourages economic
vitality, promotes fiscal integrity, and increases the local standards of
living while preserving and enhancing the quality of life in Mount Pleasant.
   (C)   Objectives. The regulations that apply within this district are
designed to achieve the town’s objectives to:
      (1)   Implement the most recently adopted economic development strategy;
      (2)   Establish Mount Pleasant’s reputation as a regionally competitive
and welcoming destination for economic development;
      (3)   Attract and retain high-quality, high-wage jobs in target clusters;
      (4)   Remove barriers to development within target clusters;
      (5)   Expand use of economic incentives; and,
      (6)   Prioritize quality of life initiatives to support local workforce
and residents.
   (D)   Location. The ED District is generally appropriate in areas designated
as Town Scale Commercial and Business and Industry on the Comprehensive Plan
Future Land Use Map.
   (E)   Allowed uses. See
Subchapter C.
   (F)   Dimensional standards. Table 156.061-1 establishes dimensional
standards for the ED District, which may be adjusted through the design review
process as specified in division (G) below.
Table 156.061-1: ED District
Dimensional Standards
Key: min. = minimum required | max. = maximum allowed | sf = square feet | ft
= feet | SFHA = Special Flood Hazard Area
Table 156.061-1: ED District
Dimensional Standards
Key: min. = minimum required | max. = maximum allowed | sf = square feet | ft
= feet | SFHA = Special Flood Hazard Area
Setbacks (min)1
Front             30 ft.
Rear              25 ft.
Side              15 ft.
Side (corner lot) 30 ft.
Height (max.)2
Outside SFHA      35 ft.
Inside SFHA       40 ft.
1 The required setback distance from a lot line adjacent to a street is
determined through the design review process, using a build-to line of 20 to
30 feet. Additional setback distance may be required to meet minimum
bufferyard requirement.
2 Unless otherwise specified by an overlay district or the Building Height
Plan Map.
 
   (G)   Variations to applicable dimensional standards.
      (1)   Applicability. This division (G) applies to all parcels zoned ED
District, including parcels that are zoned for economic development use within
a Planned Development District; provided, however, that the provisions shall
only apply to the economic development use as specified in the Use Table when
other permitted uses are also allowed on the parcel.
      (2)   Types of variations allowed. In general, all applicable off-street
parking, loading, bufferyard, and supplemental regulations apply to uses within
this district; provided, however, that variations may be made to such
provisions during the design review process as may be necessary to accomplish
unique operational requirements or characteristics inherent with individual
businesses. An example may be the allowance of additional paved parking for an
office use with a significant number of cubicles, sometimes referred to as a
“cube farm” that has higher daily parking demand, as opposed to a shopping
center’s desire for additional paved parking to accommodate sales on one or two
days a year.
      (3)   Setbacks. All setbacks may be adjusted during the design review
process.
      (4)   Justification in the record of approval/notations on plans.
         (a)   Justification for such variations from the normal development
standards shall be specified on the approved plans and/or elsewhere in the
approval record.
         (b)   Variations from the prescribed development standards shall only
be allowed if the appearance and form of improvements remain consistent, to the
maximum extent possible, with the general context of the area in which the use
is located to ensure an acceptable coexistence with the neighboring uses.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.062 LI (LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT).
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   The purpose of the LI, Light Industrial, District is to accommodate
industrial uses that involve extensive manufacturing, processing, or assembly
operations, and/or serve as large employment centers.
      (2)   The regulations that apply within this district are designed to:
         (a)   Encourage the formation and continuance of a compatible
environment for industries;
         (b)   Protect and reserve undeveloped areas in the town suitable for
such industries; and
         (c)   Discourage any encroachment by residential, commercial, or other
uses capable of adversely affecting the basic industrial character of the
district.
   (B)   Location. The LI District is generally appropriate in areas designated
as Business and Industry and Marine/Waterfront on the Comprehensive Plan Future
Land Use Map.
   (C)   Allowed uses. See Subchapter C.
   (D)   Dimensional standards. Table 156.062-1 establishes dimensional
standards for the LI District.
Table 156.062-1: LI District
Dimensional Standards
Table 156.062-1: LI District
Dimensional Standards
Key: min = minimum required | max = maximum allowed | sf = square feet | ft =
feet | SFHA = Special Flood Hazard Area
Setbacks (min.)1
Front             35 ft.
Rear              25 ft.
Side              15 ft.
Side (corner lot) 35 ft.
Height (max.)2
Outside SFHA      35 ft.
Inside SFHA       40 ft.
1 The required setback distance from a lot line adjacent to a street is
determined through the design review approval process, using a build-to line
of 20 to 30 feet.
2 Unless otherwise specified by an overlay district or the Building Height
Plan Map.
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.063 THROUGH 156.079 RESERVED.
SUBPART 2.3: CL (CULTURAL  LANDSCAPE DISTRICT)
§ 156.080 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of the CL, Cultural Landscape, District is to implement
the recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan by:
      (1)   Recognizing and conserving existing agricultural and other
traditional landscapes in their historic form and/or their historic uses;
      (2)   Preserving and enhancing these traditional landscapes; and
      (3)   Increasing access to and interpretation of these landscapes to
residents and visitors;
   (B)   The district is intended to:
      (1)   Perpetuate rural character;
      (2)   Preserve and protect natural and cultural resources, sensitive
areas, historic sites, and agriculturally significant lands;
      (3)   Promote agricultural pursuits; and
      (4)   Balance the urban environment.
   (C)   As part of the nationally-recognized Gullah Geechee Heritage Corridor,
this area should serve as a focus of low impact tourist activity for the town
with an interconnected system of trails and public access to the water where
available.
   (D)   Development should complement and be compatible with existing land
uses and so should occur in a sensitive way that minimizes the visual impact on
traditional landscapes and is compatible with low intensity development forms.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.081 LOCATION.
   This zoning district classification is available for implementation on
parcels that were designated for Cultural Landscape land uses in the 2009-2019
Comprehensive Plan, as illustrated in Figure 156.081: Parcels Designated for CL
District.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12929.png]
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.082 ALLOWED USES AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   Allowed uses. See Subchapter C.
   (B)   Dimensional standards.
      (1)   Table 156.082-1 establishes dimensional standards for the CL
District.
      (2)   Dimensional standards for detached houses apply to non-residential
lots and structures.
Table 156.082-1: CL District
Dimensional Standards
Key: min. = minimum required | max. = maximum allowed | sf = square feet | ft
= feet | SFHA = Special Flood Hazard Area | du/ac = dwelling units per acre
 Dwelling Type
 Detached House Townhouse, Duplex
Table 156.082-1: CL District
Dimensional Standards
Key: min. = minimum required | max. = maximum allowed | sf = square feet | ft
= feet | SFHA = Special Flood Hazard Area | du/ac = dwelling units per acre
                          Dwelling Type
                          Detached House Townhouse, Duplex
Lot Dimensions (min.)
Lot area                  10,000 sf      None
Lot width                 80 ft.         None
Lot depth                 110 ft.        None
Setbacks (min.)
Front                     30 ft.         5 ft.
Rear                      30 ft.         5 ft.
Side (individual)         10 ft.         5 ft.1
Side (combined)           25 ft.         N/A
Building coverage (max.)2 35%            35%
Height (max.)3
Outside SFHA              35 ft.         35 ft.
Inside SFHA               40 ft.         40 ft.
Density (max.)            3 du/ac        3 du/ac
1 For townhouses, the side setback only applies between an end unit and its
side lot line.
2 Building coverage does not apply in cluster developments.
3 Unless otherwise specified by an overlay district or the Building Height
Plan Map.
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.083 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Bufferyard requirements. Minimum bufferyard requirements are set forth
in
Subchapter D: Buffers and Screening; however, crop production and horticultural
uses do not require a buffer but all other farm uses do require a buffer.
   (B)   Parking requirements. Minimum parking requirements are set forth in
Subchapter F; however, parking areas may be constructed of pervious materials
as approved by the Town Engineer.
   (C)   Pedestrian facilities.
      (1)   All developments containing six or more dwelling units shall
incorporate a pedestrian and bicycle trail system that connects residential
areas with open space areas, neighborhood amenities, transportation routes,
and, where feasible, adjacent properties.
      (2)   Subject to Planning Commission approval through the sketch plan
process, such trail system may consist of a roadside sidewalk or a path outside
of the right-of- way, or a combination of both.
      (3)   Non-residential developments are required to incorporate new
pedestrian facilities and connect to existing pedestrian facilities.
      (4)   Where appropriate, the trail system may be constructed of pervious
materials or asphalt or similar material.
      (5)   Pedestrian amenities, such as benches and trash cans, shall be
provided where feasible.
      (6)   The trail system shall be improved and maintained by the property
owner.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.084 THROUGH 156.089 RESERVED.
SUBPART 2.4: SCW (SHEM CREEK  WATERFRONT DISTRICTS)
§ 156.090 SCW PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the SCW, Shem Creek Waterfront, Districts is
to implement the 2019 Shem Creek Area Management Plan by retaining and
protecting the town's:
      (1)   Working waterfront such that the important industries of commercial
fishing and historic water-based recreational uses remain part of the town's
heritage, economy, and quality of life;
      (2)   Waterfront entertainment, dining, and other hospitality venues
along with other supportive water-based commercial operations, including
excursions, vessel rentals, and seafood sales; and
      (3)   Historic, locally-based office and commercial uses in a manner
compatible with the historic character of Shem Creek with nearby marshlands and
wetland habitats.
   (B)   Findings.
      (1)   The 2019 Shem Creek Area Management Plan recommended preserving the
unique history, nature, and economy of Shem Creek and its character as a
working waterfront and destination for town residents, employees, and visitors.
      (2)   Since the 1930s, Shem Creek has been home to commercial scale
water-dependent commercial activities, including fishing, shrimping,
recreational boating, and fuel dispensing, among others. Since the 1960s, these
uses have diminished along the creek but remain viable along the creek today.
      (3)   In the 1960s, Shem Creek began its recent history of restaurants,
recreational boating opportunities, and other new uses available to town
residents and visitors, and as a source of local employment opportunities.
      (4)   Shem Creek's distinguished history has included limited, but
compatible, land uses that provide investment and employment opportunities to
town residents, including small offices and restaurants with opportunities to
view and experience the town's unique marsh environments and habitats.
      (5)   Maintaining the historic design features and scale of the built
environment along Shem Creek is critical to facilitating the objectives and
goals of the Shem Creek Area Management Plan.
      (6)   The Area Management Plan further found that incompatible land uses
have encroached upon working waterfront areas of Shem Creek, to the point where
its use and viability as a working waterfront is in peril.
      (7)   Based on the findings and objectives of the Shem Creek Area
Management Plan, it is important to preserve and provide opportunities for
compatible historic land uses like restaurants, water-based recreational
activities, and other compatible supporting land uses.
      (8)   Based on the findings and objectives of the Area Management Plan,
it is important to preserve and provide opportunities for improving locally-
based non-residential uses that are compatible with nearby marshland habitats
and environmental resources.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.091 DISTRICT BOUNDARY.
   (A)   This subpart establishes three Shem Creek Waterfront Districts:
      (1)   SCW-W (Shem Creek Waterfront– Working District);
      (2)   SCW-H (Shem Creek Waterfront– Hospitality District); and
      (3)   SCW-N (Shem Creek Waterfront– Natural District).
   (B)   The boundaries of the three SCW Districts are based on and consistent
with the findings and recommendations of the 2019 Shem Creek Area Management
Plan.
   ( C)    The lands included in the SCW-W , SCW-H, and SCW-N Districts are
illustrated in Figure 156.091-1: SCW District Boundary and are depicted on the
Zoning Map.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12931.png]
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.092 ALLOWED USES.
   See
Subchapter C.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.093 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   Dimensional standards. Table 156.093-1 establishes dimensional
standards for the SCW Districts.
Table 156.093-1: SCW Districts
Dimensional Standards
Table 156.093-1: SCW Districts
Dimensional Standards
Key: min. = minimum required | max. = maximum allowed | sf = square feet | ft =
feet | GFA = gross floor area
Lot area, width, depth (min.)   None
Front/shoreline setback (min.)1 The greater of: 15 ft. from OCRM Critical Line,
                                or 10 ft. from property boundary
Front/shoreline setback (max.)1 Same as applicable minimum setback plus 15 ft.
Rear, side setbacks             Determined through design review process
GFA (min.)                      None
Building coverage (max.)        None
Height (max.)2
Buildings and structures        40 ft.
Façades3                       25 ft from grade
1 See division (C) below.
2 Unless otherwise specified by an overlay district or the Building Height Plan
Map.
3 Does not apply in the SCW-W District.
 
   (B)   Critical area buffer. Subchapter D, Part 3 does not apply within the
SCW Districts.
   (C)   Front/shoreline setbacks. Shoreline setback applicability is as
follows and as is illustrated in Figure 156.093-1: Shoreline Setback:
      (1)   The front/shoreline setback applies to the portions of a property
within the required minimum and maximum shoreline setbacks specified in Table
156.093-1 above, whether immediately adjacent to Shem Creek or not. In these
areas of the district, shoreline setback requirements apply, notwithstanding
other generally-applicable front, rear, or side setback requirements.
      (2)   Subject to division (C)(3) below:
         (a)   Pedestrian paths, decks for outdoor dining, balconies, steps,
open shade structures, and structures used to provide access from upper
building levels and between properties may be placed within setbacks required
along Shem Creek frontage;
         (b)   Retail activities, outdoor displays or storage, and other uses
or structures that do not serve to facilitate interconnected passage along the
creek or to the primary land use are not permitted within setbacks required
along Shem Creek frontage.
      (3)   In areas between the OCRM critical line and the mean high water
line, decks and structures subject to division (C)(2) above must be built on
piers to minimize environmental impacts.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12933.png]
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.094 DESIGN STANDARDS.
   All development in the SCW Districts is subject to Subchapter H, including
the Special Design Subarea standards in Subpart 4.4.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.095 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Public access. The applicant may propose a means and legal framework
for maintaining at least a ten-foot pedestrian trail allowing public access
along Shem Creek.
   (B)   Flood damage prevention. Land uses and structures below design flood
elevation, as defined by §
152.04, are subject to the requirements of
Chapter 152.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.096 THROUGH 156.104 RESERVED.
SUBPART 2.5: WG-C (WATERFRONT  GATEWAY–COOPER RIVER DISTRICT)
§ 156.105 PURPOSE AND GOALS.
   (A)   The purpose and intent of the WG-C, Waterfront Gateway–Cooper River,
District is to provide a mechanism for achieving a cohesive, vibrant, active,
and lively waterfront gathering place that acts as a destination for residents
and visitors alike, providing opportunities for employment, housing, lodging,
entertainment, shopping, and dining.
   (B)   The following goals are hereby stated to accomplish the purpose and
intent of the district.
      (1)   This district should seek to take optimum advantage of the town's
waterfront as an opportunity for place making, cultural district, and a tourist
destination. This district will better connect Memorial Waterfront Park with
Patriot's Point and its attractions, as well as connecting back to Coleman and
Johnnie Dodds Boulevards. The Waterfront Gateway District should be an
integrated district with a network of pedestrian paths and streetscapes,
including walks along the waterfront. Land uses should be mixed, including
hotels and lodging facilities, tourist attractions, recreational and marine
facilities, restaurants, and entertainment venues. The creation of public
spaces and outdoor retail environments is encouraged, and events should be
programmed to help keep the district active and lively. Developments should
promote internal trip capture and alternative means of transportation, as this
area has limited transportation access. Land use in this Waterfront Gateway
District will be evaluated based upon transportation impacts. Also, as the term
"Gateway" implies, the appearance of the Waterfront Gateway District must
present an attractive image for the Mount Pleasant community and avoid any
monolithic or out-of-scale structures.
      (2)   The Waterfront Gateway District should be a destination for
tourism, business conventions, events, culture, and arts for Mount Pleasant to
increase the attractiveness of the community for all ages.
      (3)   A high priority for town residents is to expand public access to
the water. This concept includes increasing public access to and views of
natural waterways; creating opportunities for boating, fishing, and other
recreation; and integrating first-class public spaces near natural waterways.
It involves preserving existing view corridors of surrounding water and marsh
from public streets and other public places and developing new and improved
public parks and gathering places along waterfront locations by providing
additional facilities and potential new locations for water access.
      (4)   Promote a "Park Once" policy in the district. Circulation within
the area should be primarily on foot or bicycle, though use of trolleys or
other transit services is encouraged. Development of intermodal transportation
facilities, to include both land-based and water-based transportation options,
is also encouraged. While many people will arrive at the district by car, once
they arrive they should be able to park their vehicles and leave them in one
location. Another advantage of a Park Once Policy is that it encourages shared
parking arrangements, reducing the amount of land needed for parking and
freeing up land for quality, compact, mixed use development.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.106 LOCATION.
   (A)   This zoning district classification is available for implementation on
parcels located west of Magrath Darby Boulevard and all properties located
along Patriots Point and Harry M. Hallman, Jr. Boulevards.
   (B)   These parcels are illustrated in Figure 156.106-1: Parcels Designated
for WG-C District.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12935.png]
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.107 USE MIXING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Generally. In order to create a district that is successful and
dynamic, an appropriate mix of complementary uses located in relatively close
proximity to each other is required.
   (B)   Horizontal or vertical mixed use. Uses may be horizontally or
vertically mixed. In order to facilitate the mixture of commercial and
residential uses in the same building, residential uses may occur on the street
level or any building level containing commercial uses.
   (C)   Proximity of different uses. In order to accomplish the goal of mixed
use in a horizontally mixed use development, different uses should, to the
greatest extent possible, be located one-quarter mile or less from each other.
   (D)   Land use groups. The required mixture of uses shall include uses from
the following four land use groups, as specified in Table 156.107-1: WG-C Use
Mixing Requirements and as allowed by
Subchapter C:
      (1)   Group 1. Restaurant, entertainment, recreation, and civic uses;
      (2)   Group 2. Retail uses;
      (3)   Group 3. Office and hotel uses; and
      (4)   Group 4. Residential uses.
   (E)   Parcels one acre or less in size. The mixed use requirement shall not
apply on parcels one acre or less in size where a mixture of uses is not
feasible. However, aggregation of multiple smaller parcels is highly encouraged
in order to promote a more effective utilization of land in creating well-
designed projects, connected and unified in design and function. The maximum
benefit allowed by the provisions of this district will result from such
aggregation of properties.
   (F)   Subdivision. Subdivision of property in order to subvert the use
mixing requirement is prohibited.
   (G)   Phasing requirements.
      (1)   Since a goal of this district is to achieve a variety of uses that
will create a vibrancy and attractiveness of use by the public, it is important
for the first phase of a mixed use development to include uses from at least
two land use groups specified in division (D) above.
      (2)   In consideration that market factors may make this provision
difficult to achieve, a phasing plan shall be submitted for approval in
conjunction with a concept plan or sketch plan, as applicable, for any
development proposing not to include two or more uses in the first phase of
construction.
Table 156.107-1: WG-C Use Mixing Requirements
Key: ac = acres | GFA = gross floor area | min. = minimum required | max. =
maximum allowed
                             Tracts With 1.0 ac to    Tracts With More Than
               Tracts With   10.0 ac of High Ground   10.0 acres of High Ground
               Less Than 1.0 (Must include uses from  (Must include uses from
Land Use Group ac of High    Group 1 and at least one Group 1 and at least two
               Ground        other land use group)    other land use groups)
                             % of GFA  % of GFA       % of GFA  % of GFA
                             (min.)1   (max.)1        (min.)1   (max.)1
Table 156.107-1: WG-C Use Mixing Requirements
Key: ac = acres | GFA = gross floor area | min. = minimum required | max. =
maximum allowed
                              Tracts With 1.0 ac to    Tracts With More Than
                              10.0 ac of High Ground   10.0 acres of High
               Tracts With    (Must include uses from  Ground
Land Use Group Less Than 1.0  Group 1 and at least one (Must include uses from
               ac of High     other land use group)    Group 1 and at least two
               Ground                                  other land use groups)
                              % of GFA  % of GFA       % of GFA  % of GFA
                              (min.)1   (max.)1        (min.)1   (max.)1
Group 1:
Restaurant,
entertainment,                10%       95%            20%       80%
recreation,    No mixing
and civic uses requirement.
Group 2:       Developments   5%        90%            10%       70%
Retail uses    may consist of
Group 3:       one or many
Office and     uses.          5%        90%            10%       70%
hotel uses
Group 4:
Residential                   0%        30%            0%        30%
uses2
1 Open venues for entertainment, recreation, and civic uses, such as but not
limited to, playing fields, amphitheaters, or concert lawns, shall include the
open area square footage.
2 Residential uses are further limited to a maximum density of 12 dwelling
units per acre.
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.108 DEVELOPMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   High quality public realm. In this district, form is as important as
use and a high quality public realm is critical in successfully creating an
environment in which people want to live, work, and play. Primary entrances to
buildings shall be located near the public realm streetscape. An emphasis
should be placed upon a high degree of design quality for the building façade
and a strong interaction between the buildings and the public realm. Public
spaces, such as plazas, should be integrated with surrounding development.
   (B)   Design review required. All development within the WG-C is subject to
the design review process as provided in this chapter. However, in order to
achieve the goals of the WG-C, when in conflict, the site development
requirements as set forth in this subpart take precedence over those found
within other subchapters.
   (C)   Siting and design of buildings and parking areas. Siting and design of
buildings and parking areas shall be closely evaluated to ensure avoidance of
the "silo effect" of buildings surrounded by asphalt parking lots with no
meaningful relationship to adjacent developments.
   (D)   Civic uses. Because of the nature of their uses, build-to lines,
setbacks, and other design elements for civic uses shall be determined through
the design review process.
   (E)   Interconnectivity.
      (1)   Streets should be interconnected where possible. Site plans should
provide opportunities for future interconnectivity if such cannot be
accomplished at the time of development.
      (2)   Cul-de-sacs or dead end streets are not permitted unless they have
a terminal vista of the waterfront.
   (F)   Alternative modes of transportation.
      (1)   A development shall accommodate a variety of modes of
transportation.
      (2)   A pedestrian/bicycle system and related amenities shall be provided
in strategic locations, and shall be interconnected both within the development
and to other adjacent developments.
      (3)   Provision of a shuttle service is highly encouraged. Such service
should be coordinated with surrounding properties, and all developments should
include an area designated for shuttle access.
      (4)   Provision of bus shelters is highly encouraged and will require
coordination with CARTA early in the development process. Bus shelter location
and design shall be subject to approval through the design review process.
   (G)   Terminal vistas.
      (1)   Properties that terminate views down streets shall be identified
during the design review process, and will be held to a higher architectural
standard along this visible façade.
      (2)   Such identified properties are those that are located across from
side streets that intersect the primary street and terminate or intersect and
continue at a different angle. Properties that are at the end of a straightaway
on a primary street shall also meet this requirement.
   (H)   Avian habitats. As the Cooper River Waterfront Gateway District area
is an important stopover site for migratory birds, required landscaping shall
incorporate bird-friendly plants with an intention to create or augment habitat
areas.
   (I)   Open space. A minimum of 10% of the total project area shall be
reserved as contiguous open space. A portion of this open space is encouraged
to be natural open space in order to serve as wildlife corridors/conservation
areas.
   (J)   Public realm. An engaging public realm is critical to the success of
this district and its importance cannot be overstated. To this end, a high
degree of design and material quality is expected. The various public realm
components are subject to approval through the design review process, but shall
generally adhere to the specifications listed below.
      (1)   Waterfront public walkways and pedestrian waterfront connections.
Recognizing the importance of public access to the waterfront, construction and
dedication of a public walkway is required for properties adjacent to the
river/marsh. The walkway shall be constructed and dedicated prior to approval
of a final plat for any portion of the proposed development. If a final plat is
not required, the walkway shall be constructed and dedicated prior to issuance
of a certificate of occupancy for any portion of the proposed development. A
strong emphasis shall also be placed on areas that connect pedestrians from the
street to the waterfront. Such pedestrian waterfront connections are required
for properties adjacent to the river/marsh. Generally, these areas shall
consist of the following elements:
         (a)   Dimensions and location of waterfront public walkways.
Waterfront public walkways shall be generally located parallel to the shoreline
and shall include an open area with a minimum width of ten feet and an average
width of 40 feet measured landward from the critical line, which may include
the critical line buffer where such buffer is required. Waterfront public
walkways shall include a primary path or boardwalk with a minimum clear width
of ten feet, located to the greatest extent possible adjacent to the shoreline.
The primary path may be located within the required critical line buffer.
Secondary paths may be provided and shall be at least six feet in width.
         (b)   Dimensions and location of pedestrian waterfront connections.
Pedestrian waterfront connections shall be generally located perpendicular to
the shoreline, shall include an open area with a minimum width of 30 feet, and
shall include a primary path with a minimum clear width of eight feet. The
number and location of pedestrian waterfront connections shall be determined
through the design review process.
         (c)   Landscaping. Public walkways and waterfront connections shall be
planted with high quality native or naturalized coastal vegetation, to include
of a minimum of one 2.5-inch caliper canopy tree for approximately every 100
linear feet of area in addition to other appropriate landscaping, to include
understory trees, shrubs, and grasses. Lawn area may be used but it must remain
accessible.
         (d)   Acreage to count towards open space requirements. Waterfront
public walkways may satisfy all or a portion of the open space requirements of
this section.
      (2)   Streetscape. As another critical component of the public realm, a
strong emphasis shall be placed on the appearance of the streetscape.
Generally, this area shall consist of the following elements:
         (a)   Landscaping. Three canopy trees of a minimum four-inch caliper
shall be required for each 100 linear feet of street frontage using species
approved during the design review process. Such tree types shall be consistent
with each block and evenly spaced, with exceptions made for curb cuts,
utilities, and other obstructions. Planters shall be required as a design
element to soften the building exterior and enhance the streetscape appearance.
         (b)   Relationship of buildings to the street. Changes in elevation
between the building front and the street shall be avoided to the fullest
extent possible. Stairs abutting the sidewalk may be utilized to accommodate a
change in grade elevation. Stair design shall be integrated into the overall
streetscape design.
         (c)   Sidewalks. There shall be a public sidewalk at least ten feet in
width located on both sides of all streets within the WG-C, either within the
right-of-way or within a pedestrian easement on private property.
      (3)   Site furnishings.
         (a)   To ensure consistency throughout the WG-C, site furnishings
should be similar to the current styles used at the Memorial Waterfront Park,
as illustrated in Figure 156.108-1: WG-C Site Furnishings.
         (b)   Permanent or temporary design features shall not impede
pedestrian access on the public sidewalk.
         (c)   Benches shall be located in visible and convenient locations.
The public realm should also include trash receptacles at sufficient intervals,
as well as strategically placed bicycle parking facilities.
         (d)   All site furnishings shall be installed at the time of
construction.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12937.png]
 
      ( 4)   Lighting. At a minimum, safety lighting shall be provided along
the length of the walkways and waterfront connections and shall be installed at
the time of construction. To ensure consistency throughout the Waterfront
Gateway District, the streetscape shall include light fixtures similar to those
currently existing in the area, as illustrated in Figure 156.108-2: WG-C Light
Fixtures.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12939.png]
 
      (5)   Signs. Standard wayfinding signs shall be placed in strategic
locations throughout the public realm. Wayfinding signs are intended to convey
navigational directions to pedestrians and bicyclists.
      (6)   Maintenance responsibility. The waterfront public walkways and
pedestrian waterfront connections shall be established within a recorded public
access easement. The waterfront public walkways and pedestrian waterfront
connections, as well as all site furnishings/public amenities, shall be
installed and maintained by the property owner.
   (K)   Bufferyards. In general, bufferyard requirements on individual parcels
are specified in Subchapter D; except that front bufferyards are not required
in lieu of the streetscape requirements contained in this subpart. However,
contingent upon approval through the design review process, developments
providing opportunities for interconnectivity with adjacent parcels may forgo
side and rear bufferyards along parcel lines.
   (L)   Density. The maximum residential density is 12 dwelling units per
acre.
   (M)   Side yard setback. A minimum side yard setback is not required.
   (N)   Rear yard setback. The minimum rear yard setback is 15 feet, except as
provided below:
      (1)   Contingent upon approval through the design review process,
development utilizing an integrated site plan involving multiple parcels may
forgo rear yard setbacks along parcel lines.
      (2)   Setbacks for civic uses shall be in accordance with the provisions
of division (D), above.
   (O)   Elevated buildings.
      (1)   Buildings in flood zones.
         (a)   In order to project a pedestrian-friendly streetscape, it is
highly recommended that alternatives to elevating non-residential and mixed use
buildings located in "A" flood zones be pursued. This may be accomplished by
floodproofing or altering the elevation of the finished floor inside the
building.
         (b)   However, in the event that these techniques are not feasible and
the building must be elevated, such elevation may not exceed the minimum
elevation required, which includes two feet of additional freeboard. To the
greatest extent possible, elevating the building shall not compromise the width
and integrity of the public realm.
      (2)   Buildings elevated for parking. Buildings may be elevated to
accommodate grade-level parking, pursuant to the provisions of §
156.109(F).
   (P)   Gated access. Gated access to a development is prohibited, although
gated access to parking areas may be permitted subject to the design review
process if access to open space is not impeded.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.109 PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Shared parking requirements for mixed use developments. Because one of
the primary functions of the district is to provide a pedestrian-oriented
experience and an overabundance of parking areas would detract from this goal,
parking within a mixed-use development shall be shared for all uses.
   (B)   Parking for non-residential uses. Required parking is calculated
utilizing the shared parking standards established by the Urban Land Institute
(ULI). ULI parking standards must meet a Level of Service (LOS) A or B for
walking distance. If shared parking standards cannot be achieved, the ratios
specified in Subchapter F, Part 2 apply.
   (C)   Parking for residential uses. Parking spaces for residential uses is
limited to a range of a minimum of 1.5 spaces and a maximum of 2.0 spaces per
dwelling unit.
   (D)   On-street parking.
      (1)   On-street parking is allowed within the district if it is depicted
on an on-street parking plan map, submitted with the development site plan, and
approved through the design review process.
      (2)   The on-street parking plan shall include detailed design guidelines
for the spaces, specifying items such as paving materials and the manner in
which the spaces shall be identified.
   (E)   Design of parking lots and loading areas. All parking lots and
exterior loading areas shall be buffered from any adjacent pedestrian way by
planting street trees and providing a landscaped area with a continuous row of
high shrubs, or a fence or seating wall.
   (F)   Parking structures.
      (1)   Screening required. All parking structures that front primary
streets or relate to the public realm shall be screened. Screening may include
residences, retail storefronts, other nonresidential uses, landscaping, or
other appropriate architectural features as determined through the design
review process.
      (2)   Sloping floors. Sloping floors shall not be visible from primary
streets.
      (3)   Vehicular access. Wherever possible, vehicular access to parking
structures shall be from side streets or alleys and not directly from the
primary street.
      (4)   Incentive for parking structures. There is no maximum parking limit
for non-residential uses if a parking structure is utilized on site.
   (G)   Parking for outdoor dining uses. Parking for outdoor dining uses shall
be as provided in Subchapter F, Part 2 for restaurant use and not based upon
square footage of the outdoor use area.
   (H)   Parking for streetside dining uses. Additional parking is not required
for streetside dining uses.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.110 THROUGH 156.114 RESERVED.
SUBPART 2.6: CONSERVATION AND  RECREATION DISTRICTS
§ 156.115 CO (CONSERVATION-OPEN SPACE DISTRICT).
   (A)   Purpose. The purposes of the CO, Conservation-Open Space, District are
to:
      (1)   Lessen the hazards and loss of property, life, and the reduction of
health and safety due to periodic inundation of flood waters, by restricting or
prohibiting uses in these areas;
      (2)   Ensure the preservation of significant natural amenities against
incompatible development;
      (3)   Provide for opportunities for improved public recreation
activities; a community-wide recreational network of public paths,
watercourses, buffer zones, and recreation spaces; and a scenic easement where
important views and vistas that could preserve the community heritage could be
maintained for the public good; and
      (4)   Provide for, and permit, an appropriate valuation by the tax
assessor and/or land appraiser that reflects the conservation and/or open space
use of land.
   (B)   Location. The CO District is generally appropriate in areas designated
as Conservation Open Space and Agricultural/Forested on the Comprehensive Plan
Future Land Use Map.
   (C)   Allowed uses. See
Subchapter C.
   (D)   Dimensional standards. Table 156.115-1 establishes dimensional
standards for the CO District.
 
Table 156.115-1: CO District
Dimensional Standards
Key: min. = minimum required | max. = maximum allowed | sf = square feet | ft
= feet | SFHA = Special Flood Hazard Area
Setbacks (min.) None
Height (max.)1  40 ft.
Outside SFHA    35 ft.
Inside SFHA     40 ft.
1 Unless otherwise specified by an overlay district or the Building Height
Plan Map.
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.116 CRO (CONSERVATION- RECREATION-OPEN SPACE DISTRICT).
   (A)   Purpose. The purposes of the CRO, Conservation-Recreation-Open Space,
District are to:
      (1)   Provide opportunities for improved public and/or private recreation
activities; and to provide for a community-wide network of open space, buffer
zones, and recreation spaces;
      (2)   Ensure the preservation of conservation, recreation and/or open
space use of land against undesirable development;
      (3)   Lessen the hazards and loss of property, life, and the reduction of
health and safety due to periodic inundation of flood waters, by restricting or
prohibiting uses in these areas; and
      (4)   Provide for, and permit, an appropriate valuation by the tax
assessor and/or land appraiser that reflects the conservation, recreation and/
or open space use of land.
   (B)   Location. The CRO District is generally appropriate in areas
designated as Conservation Open Space and Recreational Open Space on the
Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map.
   (C)   Allowed uses. See
Subchapter C.
   (D)   Dimensional standards. Table 156.116-1 establishes dimensional
standards for the CRO District.
 
Table 156.116-1: CRO District
Dimensional Standards
Key: min. = minimum required | max. = maximum allowed | ft = feet | SFHA =
Special Flood Hazard Area
Setbacks (min.) None
Height (max.)1  40 ft.
Outside SFHA    35 ft.
Inside SFHA     40 ft.
1 Unless otherwise specified by an overlay district or the Building Height
Plan Map.
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.117 THROUGH 156.124 RESERVED.
SUBPART 2.7: PUBLIC-INSTITUTIONAL  DISTRICTS
§ 156.125 PURPOSE.
   This subpart recognizes that certain public, civic, and institutional
support uses and activities are necessary and proper for the conduct of a
civilized society and that, in the proper context, such uses may coexist with
little harm to other neighboring uses. This subpart establishes two districts
that accommodate public and institutional uses of varying intensities.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.126 SITE AND ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN IN PUBLIC-INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   The appearance and form of improvements with respect to site and
architectural design shall be consistent with the general theme of the area in
which the use is located. This requirement will be based upon a site-specific
analysis (site plan review) and may necessitate such reasonable additional
requirements as may be judged prudent to achieve the desired results of
acceptable coexistence with neighboring uses.
   (B) Special considerations may be given to such site-specific design
elements as may be required to accommodate operational or other unique
characteristics of the individual uses, which may enhance or relax the minimum
standards prescribed herein, with specific written justification for the same
noted on the plans.
   (C)   All lights or lighting arrangements used for purposes of advertising
or night operations shall be directed away from adjoining or nearby residential
properties, and further meet the requirements in
Subchapter H, Part 3, Subpart 3.4.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.127 PI-1 (PUBLIC-INSTITUTIONAL-1 DISTRICT).
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the PI-1, Public-Institutional 1, District is
intended to accommodate certain public, civic, and institutional support uses
and activities of a generally low level of intensity, such as schools,
libraries, police and fire stations, religious facilities, judicial centers and
governmental or public utility administration buildings and uses, pump
stations, and the like.
   (B)   Location. The PI-1 District is generally appropriate in areas
designated as Community Facilities, and Recreational Open Space on the
Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map.
   (C)   Allowed uses. See
Subchapter C.
   (D)   General conditions of use.
      (1)   Uses allowed in PI-1 are limited to those uses of a generally
comparable level of intensity with respect to size, scale, and vehicle-trip
generation in relation to surrounding uses, with the obvious exception to
certain large-scale uses listed.
      (2)   PI-1 uses are characterized by a higher level of site and building
design and materials, resulting in an orderly arrangement of parking and
storage in designated areas that are properly surfaced and landscaped with an
integrated drainage plan.
      (3)   Buildings and sites shall be designed and constructed in a manner
that blends in with adjoining residential character of the area, if applicable.
   (E)   Dimensional standards. Table 156.127-1 establishes dimensional
standards for the PI-1 District.
Table 156.127-1: PI-1 District
Dimensional Standards
Table 156.127-1: PI-1 District
Dimensional Standards
Key: min. = minimum required | max. = maximum allowed | sf = square feet | ft
= feet | SFHA = Special Flood Hazard Area
Setbacks (min.)1
Front             30 ft.
Rear              15 ft.
Side              10 ft.
Side (corner lot) 30 ft.
Height (max.)1    40 ft.
Outside SFHA      35 ft.
Inside SFHA       40 ft.
1 Unless otherwise specified by an overlay district or the Building Height
Plan Map.
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.128 PI-2 (PUBLIC-INSTITUTIONAL-2 DISTRICT).
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the PI-2, Public-Institutional 2, District is
intended to accommodate certain public, civic, and institutional support uses
and activities of a generally high level of intensity, such uses being
characterized as more industrial in nature and consisting of public works and
sanitation sites and facilities, treatment facilities, lay-down yards and open
lot storage of materials, heavy equipment and vehicles, and the like.
   (B)   Location. The PI-2 District is generally appropriate in areas
designated as Community Facilities on the Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use
Map.
   (C)   Allowed uses. See
Subchapter C.
   (D)   General conditions of use.
      (1)   Uses allowed in PI-2 may be those of a generally higher level of
intensity with respect to size, scale, and vehicle-trip generation in relation
to surrounding uses.
      (2)   These uses may be characterized by higher level of service-vehicle-
trip generation and conditions that result in a generally more offensive visual
display of site utilization. However, every effort shall be made to maintain an
orderly arrangement of parking and storage in designated areas that are
properly surfaced and landscaped with an integrated drainage plan.
      (3)   Buildings and sites shall be designed and constructed in a manner
that blends in with adjoining character of the area to the extent possible,
utilizing such techniques as larger lots, and more intensive screening and
buffering requirements to shield unattractive elements from view.
      (4)   Lighting standards may reflect the need for security, but must also
recognize the need to minimize sky glow and light pollution, and adverse impact
on adjoining properties.
   (E)   Dimensional standards. Table 156.128-1 establishes dimensional
standards for the PI-2 District.
Table 156.128-1: PI-2 District
Dimensional Standards
Table 156.128-1: PI-2 District
Dimensional Standards
Key: min. = minimum required | max. = maximum allowed | sf = square feet | ft
= feet | SFHA = Special Flood Hazard Area
Setbacks (min.)1
Front             30 ft.
Rear              15 ft.
Side              10 ft.
Side (corner lot) 30 ft.
Height (max.)1    40 ft.
Outside SFHA      35 ft.
Inside SFHA       40 ft.
1 Unless otherwise specified by an overlay district or the Building Height
Plan Map.
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.129 THROUGH 156.159 RESERVED.
PART 3: PLANNED DISTRICTS
SUBPART 3.1: PD (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT)
§ 156.160 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of the PD, Planned Development, District is to:
      (1)   Achieve the objectives of the Comprehensive Plan by allowing
flexibility in development that will result in improved design, character, and
quality of new mixed use developments that also preserve natural and scenic
features of open spaces as a design component;
      (2)   Encourage flexibility in the development of land in order to
promote its most appropriate use;
      (3)   Improve the design, character, and quality of new development;
      (4)   Facilitate the provision of streets and utilities; and
      (5)   Preserve the natural and scenic features of open areas.
   (B)   The PD District provisions must exhibit innovative site planning for a
mixture of residential and non-residential uses as reflected in the PD District
map, which becomes the zoning district map for the property.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.161 LOCATION AND APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The PD District is available for implementation:
      (1)   Throughout the town or in conjunction with an annexation of
property into the town; and
      (2)   On sites at least three acres in size.
   (B)   Any area may be zoned as a Planned Development District if:
      (1)   The proposed development meets the requirements of §§ 6-29-720(C)
(4) and 6-29-740 of the South Carolina Local Government Comprehensive Planning
Enabling Act of 1994, as amended;
      (2)   Two or more principal dwelling types and at least one commercial
use are proposed for development on a single parcel or on multiple contiguous
parcels; and
      (3)   The proposed development cannot be accomplished under a standard
base zoning district.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.162 ALLOWED USES.
   (A)   Any use proposed by the developer and considered by the Planning
Commission and Town Council as being compatible with other nearby uses within
and beyond the district may be allowed in a PD District.
   (B)   A list of allowed uses within a particular PD District shall be
adopted as part of the regulations applying to that district.
   (C)   Thereafter, the uses allowed in the district shall be restricted to
those listed, approved, and adopted.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.163 DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Generally. Overall site design shall be harmonious in terms of
landscaping, enclosure of principal and accessory uses, size of structures,
street patterns, and use relationships. Variety in building types, heights,
facades, setbacks, and size of open spaces is encouraged.
   (B)   Variations from Zoning Code regulations.
      (1)   A PD District may provide for variations from the regulations of
the other established zoning districts concerning use, setbacks, lot size,
density, bulk, and other requirements to accommodate flexibility in the
arrangement of uses for the general purpose of promoting and protecting the
public health, safety, and general welfare.
      (2)   The permitted uses and development standards must be specifically
enumerated in the planned development ordinance. To the extent not specifically
modified by the PD ordinance, all other applicable provisions of this chapter
apply to the development and use of the property.
      (3)   When a proposed PD District is located within the boundary of an
overlay district, the proposed PD design and development standards will be
considered in context with the purpose of the overlay district.
      (4)   PD Districts, whether existing or proposed, that do not establish
minimum yard requirements, shall utilize R-1 District minimum yard
requirements. This provision shall apply to minimum yard requirements only and
not to minimum lot requirements or density.
   (C)   Bufferyards. Bufferyards are required along the periphery of a PD. The
type of bufferyard depends on the proposed peripheral use and the adjacent land
use, in accordance with Subchapter D: Buffers and Screening.
   (D)   Off-street parking and loading. Areas designated for parking and
loading or for traffic ways shall be physically separated from public streets
by suitable barriers against the unchanneled ingress and egress of motor
vehicles.
      (1)   Commercial, industrial, institutional, and apartment complex uses
shall have not more than two access points to any one public street, unless
unusual circumstances dictate otherwise.
      (2)   All uses shall be located at least 100 feet from the intersection
of any street lines, and shall be designed in a manner conducive to safe
ingress and egress.
   (E)   Open space. A minimum of 10% of total land area must be reserved for
open space, which may be in the form of urban parks or squares.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.164 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT MAP.
   (A)   The rezoning application must contain a map depicting the allowed
location(s) for the land uses allowed in the district.
   (B)   Upon approval of the rezoning application, the PD District map becomes
the zoning map for the subject property.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.165 THROUGH 156.179 RESERVED.
PART 4: OVERLAY DISTRICTS
SUBPART 4.1: MIXED USE CENTERS OVERLAY DISTRICT
§ 156.180 PURPOSE.
   (A)   This subpart is intended to implement the 2019-2029 Town of Mount
Pleasant Comprehensive Plan by shifting from high-intensity linear development
to the creation of more compact community-building centers of activity through
the redevelopment of mixed-use centers.
   (B)   This subpart defines mixed-use centers by their location, situation,
and function within the town.
      (1)   The neighborhood and community mixed use centers are local mixed-
use centers at the neighborhood and community scale. Their main purpose is the
support of surrounding neighborhoods and creation of community space.
      (2)   The redevelopment centers are typically older commercial and multi-
family areas that may be approaching the end of their development cycle. The
goal is that redevelopment in these areas captures the essence of the community
mixed use centers, but at a larger scale, providing community spaces along with
businesses, attainable and senior housing, and employment opportunities.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.181 DISTRICT BOUNDARY.
   (A)   The Mixed Use Centers Overlay District, depicted in Figure 156.181-1,
is comprised of three subdistricts:
      (1)   NMU-OD (Neighborhood Mixed Use Overlay District);
      (2)   CMU-OD (Community Mixed Use Overlay District); and
      (3)   RC-OD (Redevelopment Center Overlay District).
   (B)   Each subdistrict regulates development in at least two geographic
areas.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12941.png]
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.182 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The overlay district applies to all lots, except those zoned PI-1 or
PI-2, located within each geographic subdistrict area, as illustrated on the
maps in this Subpart.
   (B)   The use regulations in the Mixed Use Centers Overlay District apply to
all lots subject to the overlay.
   (C)   All other provisions of the Mixed Use Centers Overlay District apply
to:
      (1)   The establishment of a new use on a previously undeveloped lot;
      (2)   A change in use of a developed lot;
      (3)   The construction of any new building or structure and its
associated site improvements, if all project costs exceed $250,000; and
      (4)   The renovation, repair, alteration, or other improvement of an
existing structure that exceeds the lesser of:
         (a)   $250,000 in total project costs; or
         (b)   50% of its replacement value at the time of renovation, repair,
or alteration. Replacement value of existing principal structures is determined
using the taxable/use value of improvement established by the Charleston County
Assessor’s Office.
   (D)   The thresholds in division (C)(4) above apply cumulatively, rather
than for individual improvements. PLAN Department staff tracks improvements to
existing structures to ensure compliance with these provisions.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.183 DESIGN REVIEW REQUIRED.
   All development within the Mixed Use Centers Overlay District is subject to
Subchapter H and requires design review approval in accordance with
Subchapter I, Part 12.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.184 HIERARCHY OF STANDARDS.
   (A)   The Mixed Use Centers Overlay District specifies certain development
standards. Where not modified by this overlay district, the development
standards applicable to the base zoning district apply.
   (B)   Where conflicts arise, applicable standards are determined using the
following hierarchy:
      (1)   First in application are standards specified in existing, in force
development agreements;
      (2)   Second in application are standards specified in existing Planned
Development District ordinances;
      (3)   Third in application are standards specified in the Mixed Use
Centers Overlay District;
      (4)   Fourth in application are standards specified in
Subchapter H; and
      (5)   Fifth in application are the underlying base zoning district or
other applicable zoning district standards and land development regulations.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.185 BUFFERYARDS.
   (A)   Exterior bufferyards. 
Subchapter D, Part 2 applies along the exterior boundaries of a development
site.
   (B)   Interior bufferyards. On the interior of a site, developments must
include at least three street trees per 100 linear feet.
   (C)   Parking lot bufferyards. In addition to the right-of-way bufferyard
required by
Subchapter D, Part 2, the street frontage of surface parking areas must be
screened in accordance with §
156.186(C)(2).
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.186 PARKING.
   (A)   Generally. Parking spaces must be provided in accordance with
Subchapter F, unless otherwise specified in this subpart.
   (B)   Location of parking spaces.
      (1)   In all subdistricts, parking spaces may be located:
         (a)   In off-street surface parking areas, which may be shared in
accordance with §
156.774; and
         (b)   On-street, in accordance with §
156.773. In the CMU-OD and RC-OD, on-street parking spaces shall be located
only on private streets.
      (2)   In the RC-OD, parking spaces may also be located in parking
structures.
   (C)   Surface parking areas. Surface parking areas:
      (1)   Shall not occupy more than one-third of a lot’s frontage along the
primary street, except when the surface parking area is the principal use of
the lot; and
      (2)   Shall be buffered from all adjacent streets by:
         (a)   A landscaped area with a continuous row of high shrubs; or
         (b)   A masonry wall that is three feet to four feet in height.
      (3)   This division does not apply to parking spaces for individual
townhouse dwelling units, if provided on the same lot as the dwelling unit.
   (D)   Parking structures.
      (1)   Retail storefronts or other commercial uses must comprise at least
60% of the ground floor street frontage of a parking structure.
      (2)   Vehicular access to a parking structure shall be from side streets
or alleys and not directly from the primary street.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.187 NMU-OD (NEIGHBORHOOD MIXED USE OVERLAY DISTRICT).
   (A)   Location. The NMU-OD (Neighborhood Mixed Use Overlay District) applies
to areas specifically designated as Neighborhood Scale Hub on the 2019-2029
Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map, which are depicted on the maps in
Figures 156.187-1 through 156.187-6.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12943.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12945.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12947.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12949.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12951.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12954.png]
 
   (B)   Allowed uses. Allowed uses are all those permitted, conditional, and
special exception principal, accessory, and temporary uses allowed in the OP-
1 and NC-1 Districts, subject to their applicable approval processes.
   (C)   Height. The maximum height of all structures is two stories or 40
feet, whichever is less.
   (D)   Open space.
      (1)   Applicability. This division does not apply to developments with a
site area less than 0.25 acres.
      (2)   Amount and type of open space required. At least one pocket park is
required for every two acres, or fraction thereof, in a development.
      (3)   Minimum area. A pocket park is at least 500 square feet in area,
with minimum dimensions of 20 feet by 25 feet.
      (4)   Location. A pocket park must be functional and useable, and it
should be well integrated with the buildings in a development.
      (5)   Landscaping and seating area required. A pocket park must include
landscaping and a seating area.
      (6)   Low impact development. Developments that are subject to the
environmental guidelines for land development (see § 155.054(B)) should
incorporate low impact development features into the required pocket park(s).
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.188 CMU-OD (COMMUNITY MIXED USE OVERLAY DISTRICT).
   (A)   Location. The CMU-OD (Community Mixed Use Overlay District) applies to
areas specifically designated as Community Scale Hub on the 2019-2029
Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map, which are depicted on the maps in
Figures 156.188-1 through 156.188-9.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12956.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12958.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12960.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12962.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12964.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12966.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12968.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12970.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12972.png]
 
   (B)   Residential uses.
      (1)   PD District required.
         (a)   New townhouse dwellings and new mixed use buildings are allowed
only if approved through a Planned Development District ordinance (see
Subchapter B, Subpart 3.1 and
Subchapter I, Part 6). The three-acre minimum site area for a PD District does
not apply.
         (b)   All other new residential uses are prohibited, except when
allowed by an existing PD District.
      (2)   Density. Dwelling units may comprise up to 20% of the square
footage of the proposed development, unless the development provides attainable
housing in accordance with division (B)(3), below.
      (3)    Attainable housing incentives . If at least 30% of the proposed
dwelling units in a developm ent are deed restricted for at least 75 years to
limit occupancy to households earning less than 120% of the median family
income for the Charleston-North Charleston MSA, as published annually by the
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development and adjusted for household
size, then:
         (a)   Housing may comprise up to 50% of the square footage of the
proposed development;
         (b)   The development may provide parking for the deed restricted
dwelling units at the highest average parking rate specified in the latest
edition of the ITE Parking Generation Manual for Land Use 223: Affordable
Housing; and
         (c)   The town will waive the building permit plan review fees for the
deed restricted dwelling units.
   (C)   Non-residential uses. Allowed non-residential uses are limited to:
      (1)   All non-residential uses allowed in the base zoning district,
subject to their applicable approval processes;
      (2)   Parks and plazas;
      (3)   Sports complexes;
      (4)   Event venues;
      (5)   Restaurants;
      (6)   Theaters;
      (7)   All uses in the healthcare use category in §
156.338;
      (8)   Boutique hotels;
      (9)   Places of worship;
      (10)   Grocery stores, with a maximum gross floor area of 40,000 square
feet; and
      (11)   Retail stores, with a maximum gross floor area of 40,000 square
feet.
   (D)   Accessory and temporary uses. Accessory and temporary uses are allowed
in accordance with the regulations applicable to the base district.
   (E)   Height.
      (1)   The height of structures along public streets and along any lot
line that adjoins a residential zoning district located outside the CMU-OD or a
lot containing only dwelling units located outside the CMU-OD is limited to
three stories or 45 feet, whichever is less.
      (2)   Where the Building Height Plan Map allows for a structure more than
three stories or 45 feet in height, a “step-back” building design is required
in accordance with §
156.892.
   (F)   Open space.
      (1)   Amount and type of open space required. At least one activity zone
or plaza is required for each development.
      (2)   Minimum area. An activity zone or plaza must comprise at least 5%
of the total area of the development.
      (3)   Location and design.
         (a)   Activity zones. When a proposed building is not located adjacent
to a street right-of-way, the activity zone is located adjacent to the building
where it is usable and easily accessible by the building occupants.
         (b)   Plazas. A plaza is centrally located within a proposed
development where it is easily accessible by the development’s occupants. The
design review process establishes the appropriate location for a plaza.
      (4)   Parking. Activity zones and plazas do not require additional
parking spaces.
      (5)   Low impact development. Developments that are subject to the
Environmental Guidelines for Land Development (see §
155.054(B)) should incorporate low impact development features into the
required open space.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.189 RC-OD (REDEVELOPMENT CENTER OVERLAY DISTRICT).
   (A)   Location. The RC-OD (Redevelopment Center Overlay District) applies to
areas specifically designated as Redevelopment Centers on the 2019-2029
Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map, which are depicted on the maps in
Figures 156.189-1 and 156.189-2.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12974.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12976.png]
   (B)   Residential uses.
      (1)   PD District required.
         (a)   New townhouse dwellings and new mixed use buildings are allowed
only if approved through a Planned Development District ordinance (see
Subchapter B, Subpart 3.1 and
Subchapter I, Part 6). The three-acre minimum site area for a PD District does
not apply.
         (b)   All other new residential uses are prohibited, except when
allowed by an existing PD District.
      (2)   Density. Residential density is limited to two dwelling units per
acre, except as provided in division (B)(3) below.
      (3)   Attainable housing incentives.
         (a)   If at least 30% of the proposed residential dwelling units in a
development are deed restricted for at least 75 years to limit occupancy to
households earning less than 120% of the median family income for the
Charleston-North Charleston MSA, as published annually by the U.S. Department
of Housing and Urban Development and adjusted for household size, then:
            1.   The maximum density for the development is four dwelling units
per acre;
            2.   The development may provide parking for the deed restricted
dwelling units at the highest average parking rate specified in the latest
edition of the ITE Parking Generation Manual for Land Use 223: Affordable
Housing; and
            3.   The town will waive the building permit plan review fees for
the deed restricted dwelling units.
         (b)   In addition, the total number of parking spaces required for the
market rate dwelling units may be reduced by up to 20% if:
            1.   At least 50% of the proposed residential dwelling units in a
development are deed restricted as specified in division (B)(3)(a) above; and
            2.   The development includes a new transit stop; or
            3.   The primary entrance to the development is located within one-
quarter mile of a transit stop.
   (C)   Non-residential uses.
      (1)   Non-residential uses allowed in the RC-OD are limited to:
         (a)   All non-residential uses allowed in the NMU-OD and CMU-OD;
         (b)   Hotels;
         (c)   Retail sales, with no limit on building size;
         (d)   Personal and business support services;
         (e)   All uses in the business, scientific, and technical use category
in §
156.338;
         (f)   All uses in the government facilities use category in §
156.338, except lay-down yards and maintenance facilities with open lot storage
of materials, vehicles, and equipment; ports; and recycling and waste-related
facilities; and
         (g)   Transportation terminals for public transit.
   (D)   Accessory and temporary uses. Accessory and temporary uses are allowed
in accordance with the regulations applicable to the base district.
   (E)   Height.
      (1)   The height of structures within the RC-OD along public streets and
along any lot line that adjoins a residential zoning district located outside
the RC-OD or a lot containing only dwelling units located outside the RC-OD is
limited to three stories or 45 feet, whichever is less.
      (2)   Where the Building Height Plan Map allows for a structure more than
three stories, a “step-back” building design is required in accordance with §
156.892.
   (F)   Open space.
      (1)   Amount and type of open space required. At least one activity zone
or plaza is required for each development.
      (2)   Minimum area. An activity zone or plaza must comprise at least 10%
of the total area of the development.
      (3)   Location and design.
         (a)   Activity zones. When a proposed building is not located adjacent
to a street right-of-way, the activity zone is located adjacent to the building
where it is usable and easily accessible by the building occupants.
         (b)   Plazas. A plaza is centrally located within a proposed
development where it is easily accessible by the development’s occupants. The
design review process establishes the appropriate location for a plaza.
      (4)   Low impact development. Developments that are subject to the
Environmental Guidelines for Land Development (see §
155.054(B)) should incorporate low impact development features into the
required open space.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.190 THROUGH 156.199 RESERVED.
SUBPART 4.2: NP-OD (NEIGHBORHOOD CHARACTER PRESERVATION OVERLAY DISTRICT)
§ 156.200 PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the NP-OD, Neighborhood Character Preservation
Overlay District, is to:
      (1)   Acknowledge the inherent attributes of older, established
neighborhoods and their associated characteristics of walkable development
patterns, urban design, streetscape, and architecture that contribute to the
identity of Mount Pleasant;
      (2)   Allow for the continued construction, addition to, and renovation
of homes located in these older neighborhoods of Mount Pleasant, nearest to
Coleman Boulevard, Shem Creek, and the Historic District, by creating a special
overlay zoning classification with flexible development standards that allow
for the continuation of the distinctive and identifiable attributes of a given
neighborhood; and
      (3)   Provide protection for persons and property within this district
against flooding and improve drainage.
   (B)   Findings. In furtherance of the stated purpose, Town Council finds and
declares the following.
      (1)   This district is in the older part of the town developed before the
current ordinances were enacted. Subsequently, many of the lots and structures
are nonconforming.
      (2)   The homes located in this area are considerably smaller than new
homes being built on similarly zoned lots elsewhere in the town.
      (3)   Creating a special overlay district will enable homeowners to add
porches and increased unenclosed living areas to homes that are currently at or
over the front yard setback required.
      (4)   The area where the impervious surface limit applies is largely
developed and is in an older and traditional part of town that is naturally
prone to flooding. The impervious surface limit will serve to reduce flooding
and improve drainage in this described area.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.201 DISTRICT BOUNDARY.
   (A)   The boundaries of this district encompass several neighborhoods along
Coleman Boulevard, including:
      (1)   Old Mount Pleasant, as bounded by lots on the southwest by the
northeast side of Whilden Street/Royall Avenue, on the north by Coleman-Ben
Sawyer Boulevard, and on the southeast by marsh areas along the Intracoastal
Waterway and Jeanette Creek;
      (2)   The Groves, including lots fronting Lansing Drive, Tall Pine Road,
Cliffwood Drive, Groves Manor Court, Lakeview Drive, Palm Street, Shannon
Drive, and Japonica Road;
      (3)   Cooper Estates, including lots fronting Cottingham Drive, Pelzer
Drive, Pawley Road, Trowman Lane, Cummings Circle, Searle Court, Meader Lane,
and Noble Lane, and lots on the south side of Williamson Drive;
      (4)   Shemwood, including lots fronting Vincent Drive, Ellen Avenue,
Pearl Avenue, Joyce Avenue, Shem Drive, Bose Court, Elizabeth Court, Camelia
Drive, Toler Drive, Armsway Street, North Shem Drive, South Shem Drive, and
Charlotte Lane; and
      (5)   Bayview Acres, including lots fronting Bayview Drive, Garland Road,
Harborgate Drive, Queens Court, Hawthorne Street, Quince Street, and Palm
Street.
   (B)   Figure 156.201-1 depicts the boundary of the NP-OD.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12978.png]
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.202 APPLICABILITY.
   The NP-OD standards apply within the district boundary to lots with the
following base zoning districts:
   (A)   R-1;
   (B)   R-2;
   (C)   R-3;
   (D)   R-4, for impervious coverage standards only; and
   (E)   PD, for impervious coverage standards only.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.203 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   Dimensional standards for lots subject to this subpart shall be in
accordance with those specified in Subchapter B, Part 2 for the underlying
district, except as modified in this section.
      (2)   When in conflict, the standards in this subpart take precedence
over the standards for the village scale pedestrian area. (See Subchapter H)
   (B)   Front yard setback.
      (1)   The following front yard setbacks are allowed for porches,
balconies, stoops, and other similar unenclosed architectural features that may
or may not have a roof. Other building elements are subject to the generally
applicable front yard setback for the underlying zoning district.
      (2)   Nonconforming lots in this overlay shall not receive the additional
20% reduction on front yard setbacks as provided in Subchapter K.
Table 156.203-1: Minimum Front Yard Setback for Unenclosed Architectural
Features
             Underlying Zoning District
Neighborhood R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 PD
Table 156.203-1: Minimum Front Yard Setback for Unenclosed Architectural
Features
                   Underlying Zoning District
Neighborhood       R-1    R-2    R-3    R-4 PD
Old Mount Pleasant 20 ft. 15 ft. 10 ft. N/A N/A
The Groves         20 ft. N/A    N/A    N/A N/A
Cooper Estates     20 ft. N/A    10 ft. N/A N/A
Shemwood           20 ft. 15 ft. 10 ft. N/A N/A
Bayview Acres      20 ft. N/A    10 ft. N/A N/A
 
   (C)   Height.
      (1)   Principal buildings. The maximum building height for all principal
buildings on lots in all residential zoning districts shall not exceed two and
one-half stories or the maximum height for the base zoning district, whichever
is less.
      (2)   Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings are subject to the height
limits specified in
Subchapter C, Part 4.
   (D)   Impervious surface coverage. Table 156.203-2 specifies the maximum
percentage of impervious surface allowed on a lot. Where not specified in this
table, the building coverage limits for the base zoning district apply.
 
Table 156.203-2: Maximum Impervious Surface Area
                   Zoning District
Neighborhood       R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 PD
Old Mount Pleasant 40% 40% 40% 40% 40%
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.204 THROUGH 156.214 RESERVED.
SUBPART 4.3: OV-HD (OLD VILLAGE  HISTORIC DISTRICT)
§ 156.215 PURPOSE.
   The intent of the OV-HD is to:
   (A)   Protect, preserve, and enhance the architecture of the Old Village;
   (B)   Promote the economic and general welfare of the residents of the Old
Village and the town;
   (C)   Foster civic pride;
   (D)   Encourage harmonious growth and development within the Old Village
Historic District; and
   (E)   Promote the use and preservation of the historic district for the
education and welfare of the residents of the town.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.216 DISTRICT BOUNDARY.
   (A)   Old Village Historic District.
      (1)   The boundaries encompassed by the OV-HD are described as:
         (a)   On the north beginning at the intersection of Whilden and Live
Oak Streets and running generally southeasterly following the western side of
Whilden Street, however, including the property on the east side of Whilden
Street located at 440 Whilden Street know as St. Andrews Episcopal Church, and
continuing on as Whilden Street becomes Royall Avenue to the common corporate
municipal limit line of the town and the Town of Sullivan's Island;
         (b)   Then running generally southwesterly to the town corporate
municipal boundary line in Charleston Harbor;
         (c)   Then generally northwesterly to a point at the centerline of the
mouth of Shem Creek from the northern extended side property line of the
residentially zoned lot at the foot of Haddrell Street, following the same
generally southwesterly and extending east back to the intersection of Whilden
and Live Oak Streets, including only the residentially zoned lots abutting
Haddrell Street, Magwood Lane, Live Oak Street, and Church Street, saving and
excepting therefrom the residential house lots on the south side of Shem Creek
in the development known as The Boatyard.
      (2)   These boundaries are represented in Figure 156.216-1 with the black
outline.
   (B)   National Register of Historic Places Historic District.
      (1)   Partially within the boundaries of the locally designated historic
district is a 30-block area listed on the National Register of Historic Places
(NRHP) on March 30, 1973; the boundaries of which are as follows:
         (a)   On the north by Shem Creek;
         (b)   On the east by the western edge of Whilden Street and Royal
Avenue (with the exception of the lot on the east side of the street containing
the Mount Pleasant (St. Andrews) Episcopal Church);
         (c)   On the south by McCants Drive; and
         (d)   On the west by Charleston Harbor.
      (2)   These boundaries are represented in Figure 156.216-1 with the red-
colored hatch.
      (3)   This subpart does not apply to lots located in the NRHP historic
district but outside the OV-HD boundary.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12980.png]
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.217 PROHIBITED USES.
   (A)   Short-term rental of any residentially-zoned parcel is prohibited. A
short-term rental is the rental or lease of a residential dwelling unit for a
duration of less than 30 consecutive days.
   (B)   Roofs and roofed structures on docks are prohibited.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.218 LOT DIMENSIONAL, FRONTAGE, COVERAGE, YARD, AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. The minimum dimensional requirements described
in the underlying zoning district apply to all residential lots, except as
otherwise expressly provided herein.
   (B)   Minimum lot frontage. Lots shall have at least 60 feet of frontage on
a public street.
   (C)   Impervious surface coverage. No more than 40% of a lot may be covered
by impervious surfaces as defined in Subchapter N.
   (D)   Yard requirements. For properties located within the Old Village
Historic District, principal structure setback distances shall be determined
during the certificate of appropriateness review process. Justification for
setback distances shall be based on the established pattern of historic
principal structures on adjacent lots and the block with respect to the overall
character of the streetscape and district by citing the specific historic
principal structures and setback used to determine the setback for new
construction, additions, or alterations.
   (E)   Accessory structure height. Accessory structures, including detached
accessory dwelling units, are limited to the maximum height specified in §
156.424 or the height of the principal structure, whichever is less.
   (F)   Accessory structure location.
      (1)   Single-frontage and corner lots. For parcels abutting one right-of-
way or two rights-of-way intersecting one another, accessory structures shall
be sited to the rear of the primary structure as shown in Figure 156.218-1:
Accessory Structures on Single-Frontage and Corner Lots in the OV-HD.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12982.png]
 
      (2)   Double frontage lots.
         (a)   For parcels abutting non-intersecting rights-of-way, accessory
structures shall be sited to the interior of the parcels as shown in Figure
156.218-2: Accessory Structures on Double-Frontage Lots in the OV-HD except as
provided in division (F)(2)(b) below.
         (b)   For parcels abutting wetlands/marsh or harbor, an accessory pool
or spa may be placed in closer proximity to the wetland/marsh or harbor.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12984.png]
 
         (c)   Historic designated accessory structures shall be considered
conforming regardless of location on the lot.
         (d)   The harbor, marsh, and any street or alley shall be considered
rights-of-way for the purposes of siting accessory buildings.
         (e)   The Historic District Preservation Commission may not reduce the
setbacks for accessory structures.
   (G)   Additional development requirements.
      (1)   Design guidelines. New construction, exterior remodeling, and
demolition of any building is subject to the Old Village Historic District
Guidelines.
      (2)   Construction on public property.
         (a)   The HDPC shall not approve any porches, steps, posts, fences,
walks, or other appurtenances extending over, on, or within a public sidewalk,
alleyway, or street right-of-way, unless the particular item is necessary for
the authentic restoration or maintenance of the particular project and will not
impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic or constitute a public safety hazard.
The preceding shall not allow approval of on-street parking located in the
public right-of-way.
         (b)   Any area restored or maintained on, over, or within a public
sidewalk or public alley under the authority hereof shall be the responsibility
of the owner.
         (c)   The owner's restoration, reconstruction, or maintenance of any
such item within such area shall constitute the owner's agreement to protect
and hold the town harmless against any and all liability, cost, damage, or
expense suffered or sustained by the town, as a result of, or growing out of,
the restoration, reconstruction, or maintenance.
      (3)   Maintenance and repair.
         (a)   Nothing in this subpart shall be construed to prevent the
ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature that does
not involve a change in design, material, color, or outer appearance thereof.
         (b)   Nor shall it be construed to prevent the construction,
reconstruction, alteration, restoration, or demolition of any such feature that
the Building Official or similar official certifies is required by the public
safety because of an unsafe or dangerous condition.
      (4)   Building area ratio (BAR) requirement.
         (a)   New construction of residential dwellings, including additions
and their accessory use buildings, are subject to a building area ratio (BAR).
         (b)   The BAR is calculated by ascertaining the total of number of
square feet of building areas taken on a horizontal plane, specifically
including any cantilevered areas, of the principal building and all accessory
buildings (except those less than 144 square feet in area), exclusive of
uncovered porches (decks), terraces, and steps.
            1.   Building area in two-story rooms (i.e., cathedral ceilings) is
counted twice.
            2.   Building area in a crawl space is not counted.
            3.   Garage area is counted, regardless of whether it is located
underneath a house or in an accessory building.
         (c)   The BAR shall not comprise more than 50% of the lot size.
However, a minimum house size of 2,500 square feet is allowed regardless of lot
size, if 40% lot coverage is not exceeded.
            1.   The maximum building area, including accessory structures, is
5,500 square feet regardless of lot size.
            2.   For lots containing tidally influenced saltwater wetlands/
marsh or open water beyond the delineated DHEC-OCRM critical line, BAR shall be
calculated using only the "high ground" of the lots and specifically excluding
the wetlands/ marsh or open water.
         (d)   At least 10% of the BAR must be comprised of porches.
         (e)   Exceptions.
            1.   The BAR shall not apply to garage space located under a house
when the house is required to be elevated a minimum of eight feet above
finished grade in order to comply with FEMA regulations.
            2.   The BAR shall not apply to basement space where a sub-grade
basement can be accommodated without the use of fill.
            3.   The BAR shall not apply to alterations that do not change the
massing of a structure. Examples include, but are not limited to, finished
space in an attic or under an elevated structure.
      (5)   Historic buildings.
         (a)   Historic buildings located on historic properties, as defined
herein, may be considered conforming with respect to any height, setback, yard,
area, or other dimension found by the HDPC to be of historic significance.
         (b)   In this regard, these existing conditions may supersede any
conflicting standard set forth in the zoning district in which the building is
located, and may be applied to the building and the site in making future
determinations of conformity as to the existing building or any changes
consistent with an approved certificate of appropriateness.
      (6)   Parking requirements. Notwithstanding other provisions found
elsewhere in this chapter, these parking requirements shall apply to all
residential use properties located within the OVHD.
         (a)   A minimum of two off-street parking spaces per residence is
required.
         (b)   Additional spaces for homes over 2,500 square feet of BAR are
required at the rate of one space per every 1,000 square feet, or portion
thereof, of BAR over 2,5000 square feet of BAR.
         (c)   Required off-street parking shall be allowed to be parked in
tandem and encroach within required yard requirements.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.219 THROUGH 156.229 RESERVED.
SUBPART 4.4: SB-OD (SWEETGRASS  BASKET OVERLAY DISTRICT)
§ 156.230 PURPOSE.
   (A)   Generally. The SB-OD, Sweetgrass Basket Overlay District, is intended
to:
      (1)   Provide development regulations consistent with those of Charleston
County;
      (2)   Protect the sweetgrass basket-making culture by allowing their sale
through traditional roadside stands;
      (3)   Preserve the rural character of the community;
      (4)   Provide interconnectivity between and within developments; and
      (5)   Provide an access management plan for safe and efficient traffic
flow.
   (B)   Residential Area. The Residential Area is intended to maintain the
large-lot development that has been the tradition and is characteristic of lots
in the area at the time of original adoption of the SBOD.
   (C)   Old Georgetown Road Loop Office Area. This area is intended solely for
low-intensity professional office uses having minimal impact on adjacent
residences due to limited hours of operation and traffic generated primarily by
automobiles rather than delivery trucks, but also fulfilling the intent for
access management by encouraging access from Old Georgetown Road and shared
access if from U.S. Highway 17 North.
   (D)   Village Commercial Area, from Old Georgetown Road to Hamlin Road. This
area is intended to allow low-intensity commercial uses, and to provide safe,
convenient, and efficient traffic movement by utilizing secondary roads and
creating interconnectivity among developed parcels, thereby reducing the need
for traffic trips onto U.S. Highway 17 North.
   (E)   Village Commercial Area, from Hamlin Road to Porchers Bluff Road. This
area is intended to allow appropriate commercial uses in conjunction with the
existing residential uses and to provide safe, convenient, and efficient
traffic movement by implementing an appropriate access management plan, thereby
reducing the need for vehicle trips onto U.S. Highway 17 North.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.231 DISTRICT BOUNDARY.
   (A)   The lots subject to the SB-OD regulations are all those within the
area generally bounded by a portion of the Isle of Palms Connector, U.S.
Highway 17 North, Porchers Bluff Road, and Rifle Range Road, as more accurately
depicted on the Zoning Map.
   (B)   The SB-OD is further distinguished by a Residential Area, an Old
Georgetown Road Loop Area, and two Village Commercial Areas, which are more
fully described below and depicted on
Figure 156.231-1: SB-OD Subareas.
      (1)   Residential Area. Properties included in the Residential Area are
all those not included in the Old Georgetown Road Loop Area or in the Village
Commercial Area.
      (2)   Old Georgetown Road Loop Office Area. Properties included in the
Old Georgetown Road Loop office area are those located between U.S. Highway 17
North and Old Georgetown Road.
      (3)   Village Commercial Area, from Old Georgetown Road to Hamlin Road.
This Village Commercial Area applies to the area 400 feet in depth from the
edge of the right-of-way on properties having frontage on U.S. Highway 17
North.
      (4)   Village Commercial Area, from Hamlin Road to Porchers Bluff Road.
This Village Commercial Area applies to the area 400 feet in depth, from the
edge of the right-of-way on properties having frontage on U.S. Highway 17
North.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12986.png]
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.232 ALLOWED USES.
   (A)   Sweetgrass basket stands. Sweetgrass basket stands are allowed on all
lots and within all buffers and rights-of-way if:
      (1)   The entity having jurisdiction over encroachments to the right-of-
way extends permission;
      (2)   All sweetgrass basket stands utilize safe ingress and egress; and
      (3)   Parking for sweetgrass basket stands is located in an area furthest
from the roadway.
   (B)   Residential uses.
      (1)   Uses in the Residential Area shall be all those as provided in the
CC, Community Conservation District, including accessory, conditional, and
special exception uses, subject to their respective approval processes; and
      (2)   Lots in the Old Georgetown Road Loop Office Area or Village
Commercial Areas may utilize uses provided in the CC, Community Conservation
District, including accessory, conditional and special exception uses, subject
to those approval processes.
   (C)   Commercial uses.
      (1)   In order to maintain the intent of the Old Georgetown Road Loop
Office Area, commercial uses shall be limited to those permitted in the OP-1,
Office Professional-1, zoning district, including accessory, conditional, and
special exception uses, subject to those approval processes;
      (2)   Hours of operation for uses located within the Old Georgetown Road
Loop Office Area shall be limited to between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.;
      (3)   In the Village Commercial areas, properties with frontage on
Highway 17 may have commercial uses within 400 feet of the highway right-of-way
consistent with NC-2, Neighborhood Commercial-2, zoning district, including
accessory, conditional, and special exception uses, subject to those approval
processes. If the property extends beyond that depth, the remainder of the
property shall be considered to be in the Residential Area, with those allowed
uses;
      (4)   Except for hotels, hours of operation for uses located within the
Village Commercial Areas shall be limited to between 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.;
and
      (5)   Any use involving the sale or dispensing of fuel requires special
exception approval pursuant to Subchapter I: Procedures.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.233 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS.
   Table 156.233-1: SB-OD Dimensional Standards specifies lot, yard, coverage,
and building size requirements for the Sweetgrass Basket Overlay District.
 
Table 156.233-1: SB-OD Dimensional Standards
Key: min. = minimum required | max. = maximum allowed | ft = feet | sf = square
feet |
GFA = gross floor area
 SB-OD Area
                                 Village Commercial Area
 Residential Old Georgetown Road Old Georgetown Road to Hamlin Road to Porchers
             Loop Office Area    Hamlin Road            Bluff Road
Table 156.233-1: SB-OD Dimensional Standards
Key: min. = minimum required | max. = maximum allowed | ft = feet | sf =
square feet |
GFA = gross floor area
                SB-OD Area
                                             Village Commercial Area
                            Old Georgetown   Old Georgetown Hamlin Road to
                Residential Road Loop Office Road to Hamlin Porchers Bluff
                            Area             Road           Road
Lot Dimensions (min.)
Lot area2       12,500 sf   None             None           None
Lot width       80 ft.      None             75 ft.         75 ft.
Lot depth       110 ft.     None             None           None
Building Size (max.)
Per building    None        3,000 sf GFA     10,000 sf      15,000 sf
Per developable None        None             10,000 sf      15,000 sf
acre
   Table 156.233-1: SB-OD Dimensional Standards (Cont’d)
                SB-OD Area
                                             Village Commercial Area
                            Old Georgetown   Old Georgetown Hamlin Road to
                Residential Road Loop Office Road to Hamlin Porchers Bluff
                            Area             Road           Road
Setbacks (min.)
Front           30 ft.
Rear            30 ft.      Equivalent to    Equivalent to  Equivalent to
Side            10 ft.      required         required       required buffers1
(individual)                buffers1         buffers1
Side (combined) 25 ft.
Building        35%         None             None           None
coverage (max.)
1 The required setback distance from a lot line adjacent to a street is
determined through the design review process, using a build-to line of 20 to
30 feet.
2 Within the SB-OD, whenever residential development occurs, the minimum lot
size shall be 12,500 square feet.
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.234 BUFFERYARD REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Planting of sweetgrass encouraged. To help fulfill preservation of the
sweetgrass basketmaking craft, planting and cultivation of all grasses used in
their making is encouraged.
   (B)   Old Georgetown Road Loop Office Area and Village Commercial Area, from
Old Georgetown Road to Hamlin Road. Buffers are required in accordance with
Subchapter D.
   (C)   Village Commercial Area, from Hamlin Road to Porchers Bluff Road. All
bufferyards shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Subchapter
D; provided, however, that the width of these bufferyards may be reduced by a
maximum of one-third of the required width, if the area of all required
bufferyards exceeds 30% of the area of the site. Bufferyards adjacent to
residentially zoned properties may not be reduced.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.235 COMMERCIAL SITE DESIGN STANDARDS
   (A)   Village Commercial Area, from Old Georgetown Road to Hamlin Road.
      (1)   Site design of one parcel shall include interconnectivity for
parking and access with the adjoining parcels, if possible.
      (2)   Stub-out connections for future shared parking and access are
required if such interconnectivity cannot be achieved in the current design.
   (B)   Village Commercial Area, from Hamlin Road to Porchers Bluff Road.
      (1)   A more rural visual context. The design guidelines in Subchapter H
shall generally be followed with the emphasis and exceptions provided herein.
The intent of the design requirements for the SB-OD is to reflect a more rural
visual context rather than a suburban or urban look.
         (a)   Therefore, building materials should consist of cementitious
siding to give the appearance of wood siding rather than brick or adorned
masonry siding, pitched roofs are preferred over flat roofs, and the use of
porches are encouraged.
      (b)   Corrugated metal and unadorned masonry may be acceptable as siding
material in the proper context.
      (c)   Figure 156.235-1 shows examples of the desired treatment.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12990.png]
 
      (2)   Buildings on corner lots. Notwithstanding the provisions of §
156.891, buildings located on a corner lot may be set back from U.S. Highway 17
North and designed to address the side street as the primary street, if
continuous, interconnecting access is provided through the adjoining parcels of
the block between side streets.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.236 THROUGH 156.249 RESERVED.
SUBPART 4.5: VSP-OD (VILLAGE-SCALE  PEDESTRIAN OVERLAY DISTRICT)
§ 156.250 PURPOSE.
   The VSP-OD, Village-Scale Pedestrian Overlay District, is intended to:
   (A)   Foster an active, pedestrian-oriented form of development where the
form is as important as use, with buildings and primary entrances located near
the public realm and high-quality pedestrian streetscapes in front;
   (B)   Encourage a high degree of design quality for the building façade and
a strong interaction between the buildings and the public realm; and
   (C)   Emphasize the importance of the public realm and integrate public
spaces, such as plazas, with surrounding development.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.251 DISTRICT BOUNDARY.
   (A)   The lots subject to the VSP-OD regulations are generally described as
those properties abutting:
      (1)   Johnnie Dodds Boulevard;
      (2)   Coleman Boulevard;
      (3)   Ben Sawyer Boulevard, between its intersection with Coleman
Boulevard and Chuck Dawley Boulevard and the western side only of its
intersection with Rifle Range Road;
      (4)   Chuck Dawley Boulevard; and
      (5)   Bowman Road, west of Stuart Engals Boulevard and terminating at
Mathis Ferry Road.
   (B)   This triangular-shaped area, which is bounded on the west by the
Ravenel Bridge and on the east by I-526, represents the core of the southern
end of town.
   (C)   Figure 156.251-1: Village Scale Pedestrian Overlay District Boundary
generally depicts the VSPOD boundary. Boundaries are most accurately depicted
on the Zoning Map.
Figure 156.251-1: Village Scale Pedestrian Overlay District Boundary
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12992.png]
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.252 DESIGN REVIEW REQUIRED.
   All lots in the VSP-OD are subject to
Subchapter H, including Part 4, and to the design review process (See
Subchapter I).
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.253 OPEN SPACE AND PARKS.
   (A)   For any development containing residential dwelling units, at least 8%
of the development acreage, excluding the activity zone (see §
156.1036), shall be designed and utilized as open space and/or parks in the
form of active and passive parks, plazas, or public gathering spaces.
   (B)   The location and design of the open space or park area is subject to
Planning Commission or Design Review Board approval, as applicable for the
proposed development.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.254 COLEMAN BOULEVARD DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Applicability. This section applies to lots in the VSP-OD that
generally abut Coleman Boulevard and Ben Sawyer Boulevard, between the
intersections of Magrath Darby Boulevard on the north and Patriot's Point
Boulevard on the south and the west side of the intersection of Ben Sawyer
Boulevard and Rifle Range Road, specifically excluding lots located within the
Shem Creek Waterfront District and the residential subdivision of Bayview
Acres, as shown on
Figure 156.251-1: Village Scale Pedestrian Overlay District Boundary.
   (B)   Generally. 
Table 156.254-1: Coleman Boulevard Development Standards specifies building
height, build-to lines, and setbacks for all lots in the VSP-OD along Coleman,
West Coleman, and Ben Sawyer Boulevards based on the lot’s location (“area”) as
shown on
Figure 156.254-1: Coleman Boulevard Area Map.
   (C)   Building height.
      (1)   All structures shall have at least two floors, with a maximum of
three floors allowed. The two-floor minimum only applies to buildings fronting
the boulevard.
      (2)   Where indicated on
Table 156.254-1: Coleman Boulevard Development Standards as 45 feet/55 feet,
the maximum building height along all streets is 45 feet. A maximum building
height of 55 feet is allowed on the interior portion of the development site.
      (3)   Any portion of a building exceeding 45 feet in height must be set
back from all right-of-way lines, at a distance to be determined through the
design review process.
      (4)   Any portion of a building exceeding 45 feet in height shall have a
maximum of four floors. In cases where buildings utilize a flat roof, the
maximum height is measured to the top of the roof structure.
      (5)   Areas above the maximum height or maximum number of stories:
         (a)   Shall not be used to create an extra floor of living area or
enclosed commercial space;
         (b)   Shall not be used for open decks, multi-level decks, or rooftop
restaurants; and
         (c)   May be used for storage.
   (D)   Build-to lines/setbacks for civic uses. The build-to line or setback
for civic uses is determined through the design review process.
   (E)   Building footprint limitations. Because "big box" retail development
is inconsistent with the purpose of the VSP-OD, the building footprint of any
individual structure is limited to 50,000 square feet.
Figure 156.254-1: Coleman Boulevard Area Map
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12994.png]
 
Table 156.254-1: Coleman Boulevard Development Standards
Key: max. = maximum allowed | ft = feet | SB = setback | BT = build-to | N/A =
not applicable
                                     Front or Side               Internal Side
Area Building Height Front Build-To  Setback or    Rear Setback2 and Rear (Non-
     (max.)1         Line on Coleman Build-to on                 street)
                                     Other Streets               Buffers3
Table 156.254-1: Coleman Boulevard Development Standards
Key: max. = maximum allowed | ft = feet | SB = setback | BT = build-to | N/
A = not applicable
                                        Front or              Internal Side
                 Building  Front Build- Side Setback Rear     and Rear
Area             Height    To Line on   or Build-to  Setback2 (Non-street)
                 (max.)1   Coleman      on Other              Buffers3
                                        Streets
A1               45 ft.    20 ft. to 30 20 ft. SB    5 ft.    5 ft.
                           ft.
A2               45 ft.    20 ft. to 30 20 ft. to 30 5 ft.    5 ft.
                           ft.          ft. BT
B1               45 ft.    20 ft. to 30 20 ft. SB    10 ft.   5 ft.
                           ft.
B2a – Broadway 45 ft./55 20 ft. to 30 10 ft. to 20 10 ft.   5 ft.
Loop             ft.4      ft.          ft. BT
B2a – Broadway 45 ft.    20 ft. to 30 10 ft. to 20 10 ft.   5 ft.
Perimeter                  ft.          ft. BT
C1               45 ft.    20 ft. to 30 20 ft. SB5   5 ft.    5 ft.
                           ft.
C2               45 ft.    20 ft. to 30 20 ft. SB6   5 ft.    5 ft.
                           ft.
C3               45 ft.    N/A          20 ft. SB    5 ft.    5 ft.
C4               45 ft.    N/A          20 ft. SB    5 ft.    5 ft.
C5               45 ft.    20 ft. to 30 20 ft. to 30 5 ft.    5 ft.
                           ft.          ft. BT
C6               45 ft.    20 ft. to 30 20 ft. to 30 5 ft.    5 ft.
                           ft.          ft. BT
D1–The Boulevar45 ft.    20 ft. to 30 10 ft. to 20 N/A      5 ft.
                           ft.          ft. BT
D2–Moultrie    45 ft./55 20 ft. to 30 10 ft. to 20 N/A      5 ft.
Plaza            ft.7      ft.          ft. BT
D2               45 ft.    20 ft. to 30 10 ft. SB    10 ft.   5 ft.
                           ft.
D3               45 ft.    20 ft. to 30 20 ft. SB    10 ft.   5 ft.
                           ft.
E1               45 ft.    N/A          10 ft. SB    5 ft.    5 ft.
E2               45 ft.    20 ft. to 30 20 ft. SB    10 ft.   5 ft.
                           ft.
E3               45 ft./55 20 ft. to 30 10 ft. to 20 N/A      5 ft.
                 ft.7      ft.          ft. BT
1 The maximum height for buildings located within 50 feet of an abutting
residential property line, or an abutting street right-of-way adjoining
residential property if that residential property is located outside the
VSP-OD, is 40 feet or three stories, whichever is less. This height is
measured from grade to roof ridge.
2 Where rear or side property lines abut residential properties lying
outside the VSP-OD, a minimum 15-foot setback is required, within which a
minimum 10-foot type "C" bufferyard with an F3 fence is also required (see
§
156.604).
3 Common wall construction to adjacent properties spanning property lines
may be utilized in accordance with applicable Building and Fire Code
requirements. Bufferyards are not required where interconnectivity between
parcels is provided or shown on the plan for future connection, or when
common wall construction to adjacent properties spanning property lines is
utilized. Where interconnectivity or common wall construction is not
provided, the plant material required for a Type "A" bufferyard is required
(see §
156.604).
4 The height of all buildings in this subarea is measured from the
elevation of the top of the curb on Coleman Boulevard. The 45-foot building
height limit applies to the façade of any building located along and
parallel to Coleman Boulevard or a façade on those portions of Broadway
Street that are perpendicular to Coleman Boulevard. To achieve the maximum
allowed height of 55 feet, all portions of a building above the height of
perimeter façades must be set back away from a street and be contained
within a building envelope established using a 1:4 slope beginning at the
top of the facade on Coleman Boulevard or a facade on those portions of
Broadway Street that are perpendicular to Coleman Boulevard. A height step-
back is not required for facades that front on the remainder of Broadway
Street.
5 The 20-foot setback applies to all side streets except Mill Street, where
a 20 to 30 ft. build-to is required.
6 The 20-foot setback applies to all side streets except Simmons Street,
where a 20 to 30 ft. build-to is required.
7 The 45-foot building height limit shall apply to those portions of a
building immediately located along a street frontage. Portions of a
building between 45 feet and 55 feet must be set back from the right-of-
way, at a distance to be determined through the design review process.
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.255 JOHNNIE DODDS BOULEVARD DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Applicability. This section applies to lots generally located between
Magrath Darby Boulevard on the southwest and Interstate 526 on the northeast,
as shown on
Figure 156.251-1: Village Scale Pedestrian Overlay District Boundary. This
includes lots:
      (1)   That generally abut Houston Northcutt Boulevard, Bowman Road, and
Johnnie Dodds Boulevard or its frontage roads, specifically excluding portions
of the Groves residential subdivision;
      (2)   Located between Johnnie Dodds Boulevard and Mathis Ferry Road,
specifically excluding the residential subdivisions of Queens Row and Parish
Place; and
      (3)   Located between Stuart Engals Boulevard and Interstate 526.
   (B)   Number of stories.
      (1)   Buildings fronting on the frontage road shall be at least two
stories.
      (2)   Buildings fronting on side streets (non-frontage roads) and
buildings located at the intersections between the frontage road and Johnnie
Dodds Boulevard may utilize a single story.
   (C)   Front build-to line.
      (1)   The front build-to line for buildings fronting on the frontage road
is 20 to 30 feet, with a minimum eight-foot sidewalk.
      (2)   The front build-to line for buildings fronting on side streets
(non-frontage roads) and for intersection properties is 20 to 30 feet, with a
minimum five-foot sidewalk. For properties where the Mathis Ferry Road buffer
applies, the build-to line is determined through the design review process.
   (D)   Rear yard setback. The rear yard setback is 15 feet.
   (E)   Exceptions. Contingent upon approval through the design review
process, development utilizing an integrated site plan involving multiple
parcels may forgo rear yard setbacks along parcel lines, except when commercial
uses abut residential uses lying outside the district boundaries. In the latter
case, a minimum 15-foot setback is required.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.256 CHUCK DAWLEY BOULEVARD DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Applicability. This section applies to lots in the VSP-OD that
generally abut Chuck Dawley Boulevard, specifically excluding most
residentially-zoned lots, as shown on
Figure 156.251-1: Village Scale Pedestrian Overlay District Boundary.
   (B)   Front yard build-to line. The front yard build-to line is 20 to 30
feet, which includes an eight-foot sidewalk only when an activity zone is
included as part of the development plan. Otherwise, the existing sidewalk is
sufficient to meet the intent of this section, unless no sidewalk exists in
which case installation of a five-foot sidewalk is required.
   (C)   Rear yard setback. The rear yard setback is 15 feet.
   (D)   Exceptions. Contingent upon approval through the design review
process, development utilizing an integrated site plan involving multiple
parcels may forgo rear yard setbacks along lot lines, except when commercial
uses abut residential uses lying outside the district boundaries. In the latter
case, a 15-foot setback is required.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.257 THROUGH 156.299 RESERVED.
SUBCHAPTER C: USE REGULATIONS
PART 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.300 PURPOSE.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   The purpose of this subchapter is to:
         (a)   Promote the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare;
and
         (b)   Protect and preserve places and areas of environmental,
historical, cultural, and architectural importance and significance.
      (2)   These regulations are adopted in accordance with the Comprehensive
Plan and are designed to:
         (a)   Distribute land uses to meet the physical, social, cultural,
economic, and energy needs of present and future populations;
         (b)   Ensure that new development is compatible with surrounding
development in use, character, and scale;
         (c)   Protect natural, historical, and cultural resources;
         (d)   Provide for land uses that serve important public needs, such as
affordable housing and employment generators;
         (e)   Integrate civic uses into neighborhoods;
         (f)   Promote infill housing and residential development;
         (g)   Promote mixed use districts and neighborhoods that allow
residents to access daily needs and services via multiple modes of
transportation; and
         (h)   Promote retail, office, and other commercial development in
appropriate locations.
   (B)   Regulation of land use. In accordance with the purposes described in
division (A) above, this subchapter:
      (1)   Establishes the land uses allowed in each zoning district;
      (2)   Establishes supplemental regulations for conditional and certain
special exception uses, which have unique operational characteristics or
impacts; and
      (3)   Establishes regulations for accessory and temporary uses.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.301 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This subchapter regulates the use of land throughout the Town of Mount
Pleasant.
   (B)   Part 3: Principal Uses and Structures applies to all principal uses
and structures.
   (C)   Part 4: Accessory Uses and Structures applies to all accessory uses
and structures.
   (D)   Part 5: Temporary Uses and Structures applies to all temporary uses
and structures, including interim and part-time uses and structures.
   (E)   Part 6: Short-Term Rentals applies to all short-term rental uses.
   (F)   Part 7: Small Wireless Facilities and Telecommunications Towers
applies to all small wireless facilities in the right-of-way and all
telecommunications towers.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.302 ZONING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   Pursuant to
Subchapter I, Part 7, zoning permit approval is required prior to the:
         (a)   Clearing, excavation, or filling of any lot for any site
improvements;
         (b)   Commencement of construction or demolition of any building; or
         (c)   Moving or alteration of any building.
      (2)   Zoning permits are also required prior to the establishment of
principal uses and structures, certain accessory uses and structures, and
certain temporary uses and structures.
   (B)   Principal uses and structures.
      (1)   Prior to the establishment of a new principal use or structure or a
change from one principal use to another, an applicant must receive a zoning
permit.
      (2)   Special exception uses and structures require approval by the Board
of Zoning Appeals (see Subchapter I, Part 9). If approved by the Board of
Zoning Appeals, a special exception use also requires a zoning permit prior to
establishment of the use.
   (C)   Accessory uses and structures.
      (1)   Prior to the establishment of an accessory use or structure, an
applicant must receive a zoning permit if required by §
156.436.
      (2)   Accessory uses or structures that do not require a zoning permit
must comply with all applicable provisions of
Subchapter C, Part 4.
   (D)   Temporary uses and structures.
      (1)   Prior to the establishment of a temporary use, an applicant must
receive a zoning permit if required by §
156.487.
      (2)   Temporary uses that do not require a zoning permit must comply with
all applicable provisions of
Subchapter C, Part 5.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.303 REPLACEMENT OF AN EXISTING DETACHED HOUSE DWELLING.
   (A)   The Zoning Administrator may issue a conditional zoning permit for the
construction of a detached house dwelling to replace an existing detached house
dwelling. This conditional zoning permit allows the lot owner to live in the
existing detached house dwelling during the construction of another detached
house dwelling located on the same lot.
   (B)   The lot owner shall apply for and receive a demolition permit for the
existing detached house dwelling prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for the new dwelling.
   (C)   The lot owner must complete the demolition and removal of the existing
dwelling within 90 days of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the
new dwelling. The Zoning Administrator may approve up to three 90-day
extensions upon a showing of good cause. Examples of good cause include events
and conditions beyond the lot owner’s reasonable control, such as:
      (1)   Natural disasters, such as hurricanes and fires;
      (2)   Significant illness or family emergency;
      (3)   Military deployment;
      (4)   An inability to obtain sufficient project financing due to economic
and market conditions; or
      (5)   Scarcity of labor or materials.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.304 CRITICAL FACILITIES IN SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
   (A)   As specified in §
152.20(M), new critical facilities are prohibited from the 500-year floodplain.
   (B)   “Critical facilities” have the meaning specified in §
152.04.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.305 OUTDOOR STORAGE OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   Commercial vehicles in residential areas.
      (1)   In residential areas, up to one commercial vehicle may be parked or
stored outside of an enclosed building. Acceptable commercial vehicles include
standard size vans, sport utility vehicles, and pick-up trucks.
      (2)   Other commercial vehicles, including dump trucks; wreckers; utility
trucks; tractor-trailer rigs; field service trucks; delivery trucks; open or
enclosed trailers with a principal purpose to store or haul tools, materials,
or equipment of a commercial and/or business nature; and the like are
prohibited in residential areas.
   (B)   Exterior storage of vehicles.
      (1)   Except as otherwise specifically allowed in this subchapter, it is
unlawful to keep, store, or otherwise maintain, indoors or outdoors, for a
period in excess of 48 hours, any motor vehicle that meets any of the following
criteria:
         (a)   Has been damaged to such an extent that the cost of repairs
would exceed the cost of the repaired vehicle;
         (b)   Does not have a current motor vehicle license;
         (c)   Does not have a current inspection sticker; or
         (d)   Is inoperable.
      (2)   This division does not prohibit the restoration of licensed antique
automobiles or other motor vehicles of special value.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.306 THROUGH 156.314 RESERVED.
PART 2: ATTAINABLE HOUSING
§ 156.315 GENERALLY.
   Where
Subchapter B or
Subchapter C requires attainable housing, the requirements in this part apply.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.316 ATTAINABLE HOUSING UNITS DEFINED.
   (A)   Owner-occupied attainable housing units.
      (1)   Attainable homeownership dwelling units are owner-occupied units
where the monthly mortgage payment (including principal, interest, property
taxes, homeowners’ insurance, private mortgage insurance, and property owners'
association fees) does not exceed 30% of the owner household’s gross monthly
income.
      (2)   Attainable homeownership dwelling units are occupied by households
earning up to 120% of the Median Family Income (MFI) for the Charleston-North
Charleston, SC Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA), as published annually by
the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and adjusted for
household size.
   (B)   Rental attainable housing units.
      (1)   Attainable rental dwelling units are renter-occupied units where
the monthly rental rate plus the cost of all major utilities (excluding
telephone, cable or satellite television, and internet service) does not exceed
the fair market rent (FMR) for the Charleston-North Charleston, SC MSA, as
published annually by HUD and adjusted for the number of bedrooms in the
dwelling unit.
      (2)   Attainable rental dwelling units are occupied by households earning
up to 80% of the median family income (MFI) for the Charleston-North
Charleston, SC MSA, as published annually by HUD and adjusted for household
size.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.317 ELIGIBILITY.
   (A)   Owner-occupied attainable housing units.
      (1)   Primary residence. The attainable housing unit shall serve as the
owner's primary residence for the duration of ownership or until the deed
restrictions required by this part have expired.
      (2)   Initial eligibility determination process.
         (a)   Prospective buyers of new attainable housing units shall be
screened and determined eligible by the developer, or their designee, prior to
occupancy.
         (b)   Prior to closing on a new attainable housing unit, the developer
shall submit an affidavit to the town that verifies the unit will be occupied
by a household qualified pursuant to the requirements of this subpart.
      (3)   Increase in household income or change in employment during
occupancy.
         (a)   A household is not required to vacate an attainable housing unit
if:
            1.   The household's income increases to an amount above 120% of
the median family income; or
            2.   The household’s employment situation changes such that no
member of the household is employed at a business located within the town.
         (b)   Upon vacating the premises naturally, the unit shall be sold to
a qualifying household pursuant to the requirements of this part if the deed
restrictions required by §
156.318 are still in effect.
   (B)   Renter-occupied attainable housing units.
      (1)   Primary residence. The attainable housing unit shall serve as the
owner's primary residence for the duration of the lease or until the deed
restrictions required by this part have expired.
      (2)   Eligibility determination process. Prospective renters of
attainable housing units shall be screened and determined eligible by the
property owner, or their designee, prior to occupancy. Both of the following
requirements are applicable and subject to final approval by the town:
         (a)   The owner shall provide proof to the town, upon initial
occupancy and anytime the lease is renewed thereafter, that the current tenants
meet the necessary qualifications.
         (b)   Any time a new tenant occupies an attainable housing unit, the
owner shall submit an affidavit to the town that verifies the unit will be
occupied by a household qualified pursuant to the requirements of this subpart.
      (3)   Minimum lease term. A minimum lease term of six months is required
for all attainable housing units.
      (4)   Increase in household income or change in employment during
occupancy.
         (a)   A household is not required to vacate an attainable housing unit
if:
            1.   The household's income increases to an amount above 80% of the
median family income; or
            2.   The household’s employment situation changes such that no
member of the household is employed at a business located within the town.
         (b)   The tenant may renew the lease for one additional term, not to
exceed two years. Upon vacating the premises, the unit shall be rented to a
qualifying household pursuant to the requirements of this part if the deed
restrictions required by §
156.318 are still in effect.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.318 DEED RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   The applicant must submit draft deed restrictions for review by the
Town Attorney in conjunction with any application required to establish the
proposed use or development.
   (B)   The deed restrictions shall limit the resale or occupancy of an
attainable housing unit to a household eligible, as described in this part, for
a period of at least 30 years after issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
   (C)   The deed restrictions shall be recorded prior to issuance of a
building permit for any portion of the development.
   (D)   The deed restrictions shall include, at a minimum, the following
elements:
      (1)   Duration;
      (2)   Occupancy requirement and restrictions against leasing/subleasing;
      (3)   Restriction on resale;
      (4)   Requirement to notify the town in the case of conveyance (for
owner-occupied units), lease renewal (for rental units), or establishment of a
new rental contract (for rental units), and provide verification that the
purchaser or tenant is qualified pursuant to the requirements of this part;
      (5)   Right of first refusal, if applicable;
      (6)   Distribution of gross sales proceeds, if applicable; and
      (7)   Procedure in the case of foreclosure (for owner-occupied units
only).
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.319 DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Exterior appearance of dwellings. Attainable housing units shall be
indistinguishable from market-rate units. External building materials and
finishes for attainable housing units shall be the same in type and quality as
the market-rate units.
   (B)   Interior features of dwelling units. Interior features of attainable
housing units shall be functionally equivalent to the market-rate units, though
the finishes and materials need not be identical.
   (C)   Energy efficiency improvements. Attainable housing units shall be
comparable to the market-rate units in terms of improvements related to energy
efficiency, which include but are not limited to, mechanical equipment and
plumbing, insulation, windows, and heating and cooling systems.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.320 ATTAINABLE HOUSING PLAN.
   (A)   The associated application must include a preliminary attainable
housing plan that contains, at a minimum, the following information:
      (1)   A general description of the development, including whether the
development will contain owner-occupied or rental units, or both;
      (2)   The total number and type of market-rate units and attainable
housing units in the development; and
      (3)   The number of bedrooms in each market-rate unit and in each
attainable unit.
   (B)   Prior to the issuance of building permits for any portion of the
development, a finalized attainable housing plan must be submitted to the town
that includes the information specified in division (A) above as well as the
address and parcel identification number of each attainable housing unit.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.321 THROUGH 156.324 RESERVED.
PART 3: PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES
SUBPART 3.1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.325 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This part applies to all principal uses and structures. These
standards supplement the other requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Principal uses are allowed within the base zoning districts in
accordance with §
156.338.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.326 MULTIPLE PRINCIPAL USES ON A SINGLE PARCEL.
   (A)   Non-residential uses and mixed use developments. Where multiple
principal uses are proposed to be located on a single parcel, all applicable
conditions must be met for each proposed use. For example, if the proposed use
is a gas station with a convenience store and a car wash, all requirements and
conditions for gas station, car wash, and retail sales uses must be met.
   (B)   Residential uses. No more than one principal dwelling may be located
on a single parcel, except in the case of apartment complexes.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.327 THROUGH 156.334 RESERVED.
SUBPART 3.2: PRINCIPAL USE TABLE
§ 156.335 INTRODUCTION.
   (A)   Generally. §
156.338 establishes the categories of uses specified in
Table 156.335-1: Categories of Uses for all of the base zoning districts and
floating zoning districts.
   (B)   Cumulative zoning. All uses allowed in the OP-1, OP-2, NC-1, and NC-
2 Districts are allowed in the AB-1 District. All uses allowed in the AB-
1 District are allowed in the AB-2 District.
   (C)   Allowed uses in planned districts. Allowed uses in a Planned
Development District are specified in the rezoning ordinance that established
the PD District and any amendments thereto.
   (D)   Explanation of use table. The top row of the use table contains the
zoning districts and left side of the table contains various uses. The uses
listed in the use table are allowed or prohibited in each zoning district
according to the letter coding described in Table 156.335-1: Categories of
Uses.
 
Table 156.335-1: Categories of Uses
Notation     Category              Description
                                   The use is allowed by-right in the
P            Permitted use         respective zoning district, if the use
                                   complies with all other applicable
                                   provisions of this chapter.
                                   The use is allowed only when it complies
                                   with the applicable conditions in Subchapter
                                   C, Subpart 3.3, in addition to all other
C            Conditional use       applicable provisions of this chapter. The
                                   last column in the use table references the
                                   section containing the applicable use
                                   conditions.
                                   The use is allowed only if reviewed and
                                   approved in accordance with Subchapter I,
                                   Part 9 and complies with the applicable
S            Special exception use conditions in Subchapter C, Subpart 3.3, in
                                   addition to all other applicable provisions
                                   of this chapter. The last column in the use
                                   table references section containing the
                                   applicable use conditions.
[blank cell] Prohibited use        A blank cell indicates that a use is not
                                   allowed in the respective zoning district.
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.336 CLASSIFICATION OF NEW AND UNLISTED PRINCIPAL USES.
   (A)   The Zoning Administrator may determine that an unlisted use is:
      (1)   Allowed in one or more zoning districts as a permitted use,
conditional use, or special exception use if sufficiently similar in nature and
impact to a permitted, conditional, or special exception use listed in §
156.338; or
      (2)   Prohibited in all zoning districts.
   (B)   In making this determination, the Zoning Administrator may refer to
any of the following factors as guidance:
      (1)   The definitions contained in Subchapter N;
      (2)   Whether the use is consistent with the purpose of the zoning
district in which it would be allowed;
      (3)   Whether the use has visual, traffic, environmental, or other
impacts similar to an expressly listed use. The Zoning Administrator may refer
to empirical studies or generally accepted planning or engineering sources in
making this determination; and
      (4)   Whether the use is within the same industry classification as
another allowed use. In making this determination, the Zoning Administrator may
refer to the most recent edition of the North American Industry Classification
Manual (“NAICS”) and/or the American Planning Association’s Land-Based
Classification Standards (LBCS) Tables.
   (C)   The burden is on the applicant to establish that the unlisted proposed
use is similar to the expressly listed use. The applicant shall submit
verification that shows the proposed use is similar to another permitted,
conditional, or special exception use and could be allowed.
   (D)   The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether a proposed use is
similar to another permitted, conditional, or special exception use in the
zoning district and could be allowed or is not similar and therefore
prohibited. If the Zoning Administrator determines that:
      (1)   The proposed use is sufficiently similar in nature and impact to a
permitted use, the applicant may proceed with any application necessary to
establish the use;
      (2)   The proposed use is sufficiently similar in nature and impact to a
conditional use, the applicant may submit a zoning permit application (see
Subchapter I, Part 7) demonstrating compliance with the applicable conditions
specified in
Subchapter C, Subpart 3.3;
      (3)   The proposed use is sufficiently similar in nature and impact to a
special exception use, the applicant may submit a special exception application
(see
Subchapter I, Part 9); or
      (4)   The proposed use is not sufficiently similar in nature and impact
to a permitted use, conditional use, or special exception use, then the
proposed use shall be denied and the applicant notified in writing.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.337 PREEMPTION.
   Uses regulated by the State of South Carolina and exempt from local control
are permitted subject to state regulations.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.338 PRINCIPAL USE TABLE.
Table 156.338-1: Principal Use Table
Use                                                                 Use
Category/ Zoning District                                           Conditions
Use
              R R                 P P O O N N A A       S S
          C C C C R C R R R R T R I I P P C C B B E L C C C S C W G
          O R - - R C - - - - H M - - - - - - - - D I L W W W - - C
            O 1 2     1 2 3 4     1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2       - - N
                                                        W H
Table 156.338-1: Principal Use Table
Use Category/  Zoning District                                       Use
Use                                                                  Conditions
                   R R                 P P O O N N A A       S S S W
               C C C C R C R R R R T R I I P P C C B B E L C C C C G
               O R - - R C - - - - H M - - - - - - - - D I L W W W -
                 O 1 2     1 2 3 4     1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2       - - - C
                                                             W H N
ACCOMMODATIONS LODGING, AND GROUP LIVING USES
Boutique hotel                  C C C       C   
or inn                                                               156.356
Group living,
including
group care
dwellings,
rooming                   P       P P       P  
houses,
dormitories,
and fraternity
and sorority
housing
Hotel/motel/                     C C C      C   
extended stay                                                        156.365
Short-term       C C C C C C C C C C   C C C C C C   C   C C Subchapter
rental                                                               C, Part 6
AGRICULTURE, HORTICULTURE, AND LOCAL FOOD PRODUCTION USES
Agricultural
sales, produce   C C  C           C C C P   C C C C    
stand, or                                                            156.347
seafood stand
Agricultural     P P                  P C       
storage                                                              156.348
Animal           P P  P                 P      
husbandry
Apiculture       C C                   C       
                                                                     156.353
Aquaculture
and              P P  P                P P P  S   
mariculture
Brewery,                                                               
distillery, or   S S               P P P P S  S S P 156.357
winery
Community      P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P   P P  
garden
Crop,
greenhouse,
horticultural,   P P  P            P P P  P P      
or hydroponic
production
Equestrian      C P P                   C       
facility                                                             156.363
Forestry
operation,       P P                         
bona fide
Nursery                                                                
operation,       C C  C            C C C  P C     156.372
commercial
Sweetgrass     C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C   
basket stand                                                         156.380
Wild game
processing       P P                         
facility
BUSINESS, SCIENTIFIC, AND TECHNICAL USES
Architectural
and                           P  P P P P        
engineering
services
Banks, credit
unions,
savings and
loans                         P  P P P         
(excluding
alternative
lending
institutions)
Computing
infrastructure
providers,
data                              P P P       
processing,
web hosting,
and related
services
Financial
investment                    P  P P P P        
services
Flex space                       P P P P       
Information
technology and                P  P P P P P       
services
Marketing,
design, and                   P  P P P P        
publishing
services
Office,
general
(unless                      P P  P P P      P P  
otherwise
listed)
Production                                                           Subchapter
studio, with                              C, Subpart
transmission                                                         7.2
tower
Production
studio,
without                       P   P P P P     P  
transmission
tower
Research and
development                   P   P P P P     P  
facility
Testing
laboratories                  P   P P P P       
and services
CIVIC, EDUCATIONAL, AND COMMUNITY USES
Church,
synagogue, or    P P P P S S S   S P P  P  P P P        Subchapter
other place of                                                       I, Part 9
worship
Club, lodge,                                                         Subchapter
or fraternal     P P S S S S     P P    P P P   P    P I, Part 9
organization
College/                   P P  P   P P P      P  
university
Community                                                              
service          C C C C S S S   S P P  P  P P P   P    P 156.360
facility
Crematory                           P       
Cultural       C  C C C C C C     P P     P P   C    P   
facility                                                             156.361
Cultural                                                               
facility,      C  C C C C C C     P P     P P   C S S P  156.361
water-related
Funeral home                                                         Subchapter
or mortuary      S S S S S S        P  P P P        I, Part 9
chapel
Interment
uses, such as                                                        Subchapter
cemetery,        S S S S S S     P P         P    P I, Part 9
columbarium,
or mausoleum
Personal
improvement                   P  P P P       P  
education
Personal
improvement
education,                    P  P P P    P P P P  
water-
dependent
Pre-school/
educational      C C  C       P P  P P P P P   P    P   
nursery/day                                                          156.374
care
School,                                                                
primary or       C C C C C C C   C P P  P  P P P   P    P 156.377
secondary
School, trade/             P P  P  P P P P P P    P  
vocational
School, trade/
vocational,                P P  P  P P P P P P P   P  
water-related
COMMERCIAL USES
Adult uses                          C        
                                                                     156.345
Alternative
lending                          P P         
services
Animal
boarding                                                               
facility, day    C C              S C P  P S     156.352
care, or
shelter
Art gallery                    P P P P   P    P  
Artisan
workshop or
artist studio,                 P P P P     P P P  
with retail
sales
Artisan
workshop or                                                            
artist studio,   P P  C           P P P P  P C  P P P 156.354
without retail
sales
Bar,
nightclub, or                    P P       P  
lounge
Bookstore,                     P P P P       P  
newsstand
Boutique                          P P P       
manufacturing
Brewpub                         P P P       P  
Commercial
kitchen,
caterer and                      P P  P     P  
banquet
services
Event venue                      P P      S P  
Florist,                       P P P P       P  
flower shop
Grocery store                   P P P       P  
Medical,
dental, and
hospital
equipment and
supplies                         C P P P        
merchant                                                             156.384
wholesalers,
ophthalmic
goods merchant
wholesalers
Neighborhood                                                           
gathering         C  C                   C C  156.370
place
Personal and
business                      P P P P P       P  
support
services
Pet care                       P P P P       P  
service
Pet supply                     P P P P       P  
store
Pharmacy                       P P P P       P  
Restaurant                     P P P P     P P P  
Restaurant,
with drive-                      P P       P  
thru
Retail sales
(unless                          P P       P  
otherwise
listed)
Retail sales,                          P P   
water-related
Self-service                                                           
storage                           C  P      156.378
facility
Specialty food                 P P P P         
store
Tattoo or body                                                         
piercing                            S      156.381
studio
Veterinary       P P            P  P P P  P     P  
clinic
Wholesale
sales, unless                    C P  P        
otherwise                                                            156.384
listed
GOVERNMENT FACILITIES
Administrative             P P P P  P P P  P P   P P  
office
Farmers market             P P     P P   P      
Fuel storage                P        P       
and dispensing
Judicial                   P P               
center
Law
enforcement or
firefighting                P        P       
training
facility
Lay-down yard,
maintenance
facility with
open lot                    P        P       
storage of
materials,
vehicles, and
equipment
Police, fire,
or EMS         P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P    P  
facility
Port                        P       P P       
Recycling and                                                        Subchapter
waste-related               P        S      I, Part 9
facility
Transportation              P               
terminal
HEALTHCARE USES
Assisted
living                    P      P P P         
facility or
nursing home
Continuing
care                      P       P P         
retirement
community
Convalescent
home or
physical                        P P P         
rehabilitation
facility
Hospice care              P      P P P P        
facility
Hospital or                P P     P P P        
medical campus
Medical
laboratory,                   P  P P P P        
diagnostic
imaging center
Medical office                P  P P P       P  
Residential                                                          Subchapter
treatment        S S        P       P P        I, Part 9
facility
MARINE-RELATED AND WATER-DEPENDENT USES
Dock for
commercial       P                 P  P  P P    
fishing vessel
(s)
Marine salvage                        P S S  Subchapter
operation                                                            I, Part 9
Marine                            P  P  P S    
warehousing
Marina or dry
stack                               P  P   P  
watercraft
storage
Seafood                           P  P  P     
processing
Water taxi or
other charter                       P  P P P P  
boat facility
Watercraft or
marine                                                                 
equipment                         S  P  C S S  156.383
service or
repair
Watercraft
rentals or
sales
(excluding                             P P   
rentals or
sales of
personal
watercraft)
Watercraft
rental or                        P P  P       
sales
MIXED USES
Live-work unit               P P P P P P      P P  
Mixed use                     C  C C C   C    C   
building                                                             156.367
RECREATION AND ENTERTAINMENT USES
Amusement                         S          
center                                                               156.351
Boat launch or P P P P P P C C     P P     P P   P P C C P   
dock                                                                 156.355
Boat launch or
dock,          P P P P P P P P P P P P       P P   P    P  
neighborhood
Campground or  P P P P P        C C         P       
campsite                                                             156.358
Commercial
recreation and                  P P P       P  
entertainment
Community          P P P P     P P         P    P  
recreation
Community
recreation,        P P P P     P P         P  S S P  
water-
dependent
Community
recreation,                                                          Subchapter
with lighted       S S S S     S S         S    S I, Part 9
outdoor
facilities
Golf course     P                         P  
High-impact                      S C       P   
entertainment                                                        156.364
High-impact                      S C          
recreation                                                           156.364
Neighborhood   C P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P   P    P   
recreation                                                           156.371
Neighborhood
recreation,    C P P P P P P P P P P P P P  P P P P P   P   C P   
water-                                                               156.371
dependent
Open space,    P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P  
natural
Pedestrian     P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P  
trails
Recreational   P                            
vehicle park
Shooting                          C  C        
range, indoor                                                        156.379
Sports complex             P P             P  
Sports
complex, with                                                        Subchapter
lighted                    S              S I, Part 9
outdoor
facilities
Theater                          P P       P  
RESIDENTIAL USES
Amenity
building and/                                                          
or facility in C C P P P P P P P P P P           P    P 156.350
a residential
development
Apartment                 P               P  
complex
Community      P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P  
residence
Duplex                 P C P P           C       
dwelling                                                             156.362
Manufactured     P P P P                 P      
housing unit
Multiplex                 P               P  
dwelling
Quadplex                 P P                 
dwelling
Rural compound   C C  C                 C       
                                                                     156.376
Detached house   P P P P P P P P  P   P        P    C  
dwelling
Townhouse                P P           C    P   
dwelling                                                             156.382
Triplex                  P P                 
dwelling
Zero lot line           P  P                 
dwelling
SPECIAL INDUSTRY USES
Cold storage                      P  P       
Cold storage,                     P  P  P S S   
water-related
Fuel storage
and dispensing                      P       
facility
Fuel storage
and dispensing
facility,                           P  P S S   
water-
dependent
Ice
manufacturing                     P  P       
and sales
Ice
manufacturing                     P  P  P     
and sales,
water-related
Manufacturing                    S C P P        
and production                                                       156.366
Recycling and                                                        Subchapter
waste-related                       S      I, Part 9
facility
Resource         S S                  S      Subchapter
extraction                                                           I, Part 9
Resource
processing and   P P                         
storage
Warehousing                       P  P       
facility
 
 
Table 156.338-1: Principal Use Table (Cont'd)
Use                                                                 Use
Category/ Zoning District                                           Conditions
Use
              R R                 P P O O N N A A       S S
          C C C C R C R R R R T R I I P P C C B B E L C C C S C W G
          O R - - R C - - - - H M - - - - - - - - D I L W W W - - C
            O 1 2     1 2 3 4     1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2       - - N
                                                        W H
Table 156.338-1: Principal Use Table (Cont'd)
Use Category/Use  Zoning District                                       Use
                                                                        Conditions
                      R R                 P P O O N N A A       S S S W
                  C C C C R C R R R R T R I I P P C C B B E L C C C C G
                  O R - - R C - - - - H M - - - - - - - - D I L W W W -
                    O 1 2     1 2 3 4     1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2       - - - C
                                                                W H N
TRANSPORTATION AND VEHICLE-RELATED USES
Airport or                     C       P P        
aviation facility                                                       156.349
Car wash                            C P          
                                                                        156.359
Distribution                          P P       
terminal
Gas station                         S P  P     S  
Motor vehicle
rental or sales,                                                          
without outdoor                     P P  C      156.368
storage and/or
display
Motor vehicle                        S  P        
service or repair                                                       156.369
Parking lot or                C C  C  C C C C C  C C C C   
structure                                                               156.373
Port                                  P P       
Transportation                        P P       
terminal
UTILITY USES
Lay-down yard,
maintenance
facility with
open lot storage               P        P       
of materials,
vehicles and
equipment
Lay-down yard,
maintenance
facility with
open lot storage               P        P  S     
of materials,
vehicles and
equipment, water-
related
Public utility                 P        P       
substation
Pump station      C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C   
                                                                        156.375
Small wireless       See                                              
facility          Subchapter C, Part 7, Subpart 7.1
Telecommunication    See                                              
tower             Subchapter C, Part 7, Subpart 7.2
Water and
wastewater
treatment and                  P        P       
distribution
systems and
facilities
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.339 THROUGH 156.344 RESERVED.
SUBPART 3.3: PRINCIPAL USE CONDITIONS
§ 156.345 APPLICABILITY.
   The conditions specified in this subpart apply to uses listed as
“conditional” or “special exception” in §
156.338. Special exception uses are also subject to the conditions specified in
Subchapter I, Part 9.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.346 ADULT USES.
   The parcel on which the use will occur is not located within 1,500 feet of a
place of worship, school, day care, playground, public or private recreation
facility, property zoned to allow residential uses, or property with existing
residential uses.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.347 AGRICULTURAL, PRODUCE, OR SEAFOOD STAND.
   (A)   Dimensional standards.
      (1)   Maximum size. Stands shall not exceed 2,000 square feet in area,
either under a roof or around the perimeter of the structure without a roof.
      (2)   Setbacks. Stands shall be located at least ten feet from all
property lines.
   (B)   Development standards.
      (1)   Off-street parking areas. Parking areas are not subject to the
paving requirements of
Subchapter F.
      (2)   Signs. Signs for such uses are limited to one non-illuminated free-
standing sign, not to exceed ten square feet in area and eight feet in height,
or one non-illuminated sign attached to the structure, not to exceed ten square
feet in area. Materials and illumination shall comply with
Subchapter G.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.348 AGRICULTURAL STORAGE.
   All storage areas shall be screened by fencing, landscaping, and/or other
appropriate materials so as not to be visible from adjacent public streets.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.349 AIRPORT OR AVIATION FACILITY.
   When located in the PI-2 District, the facility shall be owned by a public
or quasi-public organization.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.350 AMENITY BUILDING AND/OR FACILITY IN A RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   Such uses shall not be illuminated.
   (B)   Any buildings shall be primarily open-air.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.351 AMUSEMENT CENTER.
   (A)   The parcel on which the use will occur shall not be located within
1,500 feet of a place of worship, school, daycare, playground, or public or
private recreation facility.
   (B)   Hours of operation are limited from 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.352 ANIMAL BOARDING FACILITY, DAY CARE, OR SHELTER.
   (A)   Overnight kennels must be located indoors.
   (B)   Where located adjacent to residential properties, outdoor areas shall
be fenced or walled with an acoustic fence or other sound-absorbing materials;
except that this condition does not apply in the RC-1 and RC-2 Districts.
   (C)   In the RC-1 and RC-2 Districts, outdoor areas shall be located at
least 100 feet from all property lines.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.353 APICULTURE.
   (A) There is no minimum parcel size for beekeeping; however, the maximum
density is two colonies per one-quarter acre.
   (B)   Hives shall be located at least 20 feet from all property lines. The
opening of the hive shall be oriented away from adjoining properties.
   (C)   For colonies located within 25 feet of a property boundary, a flyway
barrier at least six feet in height consisting of a solid wall, fence, or dense
hedge parallel to the property line and extending ten feet beyond the apiary in
each direction is required.
   (D)   A constant supply of fresh water is required. It shall be readily
accessible to the bees and to allow them to access water by landing on a hard
surface. A water supply is not required during winter and other inactive
months.
   (E)   Hives not being actively maintained shall be removed.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.354 ARTISAN WORKSHOP OR ARTIST STUDIO WITHOUT RETAIL SALES.
   (A)   All structures associated with such use are limited to a maximum gross
floor area of 3,000 square feet.
   (B)   All structures associated with such use shall appear more residential
in character and shall not detract from the residential character of the
surrounding area.
   (C)   Outdoor storage of materials or equipment is prohibited.
   (D)   Setback requirements for detached house dwellings apply.
   (E)   No traffic shall be generated by such use in greater volumes than
would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for
parking generated by the conduct of such use shall be met off the street and
other than in a required front yard.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.355 BOAT LAUNCH OR DOCK.
   (A)   Within the SCW-W District, boat launches and docks are appropriate for
any lawful commercial, personal, or public purpose. However, within the SCW-
H and SCW-N Districts boat launches and docks are appropriate for any lawful
commercial or public purpose, but not for personal use.
   (B)   In all other districts, the boat launch or dock shall be owned and/or
operated by a public or quasi-public organization.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.356 BOUTIQUE HOTEL OR INN.
   Such uses shall only be located on properties designated as:
   (A)   Community Scale Commercial in the 2019 Comprehensive Plan, including:
      (1)   Belle Hall Hub, as shown in
Figure 156.356-1;
      (2)   Seaside Hub, as shown in
Figure 156.356-2;
      (3)   Sea Island Hub, as shown in
Figure 156.356-3;
      (4)   Highway 41 Hub, as shown in
Figure 156.356-4;
      (5)   Shelmore Village Hub, as shown in
Figure 156.356-5;
      (6)   Six Mile Market Place Hub, as shown in
Figure 156.356-6;
   (B)   Waterfront District on Highway 41; or
   (C)   Properties designated as Town Scale Commercial or Waterfront District
(Patriots Point) in the 2019 Comprehensive Plan.
Figure 156.356-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13169.png]
 
Figure 156.356-2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13171.png]
 
Figure 156.356-3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13173.png]
 
Figure 156.356-4
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13175.png]
 
Figure 156.356-5
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13177.png]
 
Figure 156.356-6
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13179.png]
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.357 BREWERY, WINERY, OR DISTILLERY.
   (A)   All manufacturing activities and storage shall take place within an
enclosed building.
   (B)   Structures related to manufacturing and/or storage of components and/
or finished product shall be located at least 100 feet from all side and rear
property lines.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.358 CAMPGROUND OR CAMPSITE.
   In the PI-1 and PI-2 Districts, the campgro und or campsite shall be owned
and/or operated by a public or quasi-public organization.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.359 CAR WASH.
   (A)    Where such use is located adjacent to residenti ally-zoned property
or property used for residential purposes:
      (1)   A Type E buffer with a full masonry wall is required; and
      (2)   Hours of operation are limited to between 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
   (B)   Noise-generating activities shall be oriented away from residential
areas, and the location of such activities on the site shall be determined
through the design review process. If determined to be necessary through this
process, sound mitigation techniques shall be utilized in order to reduce noise
impacts on surrounding properties.
   (C)   When operational changes are made to add noise-generating activities,
such as blowers/dryers, to existing facilities, the location of such activities
on the site shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator through the zoning
permit approval process (see
Subchapter I, Part 7).
      (1)   If determined to be necessary through this process, sound
mitigation techniques shall be utilized in order to reduce noise impacts on
surrounding properties.
      (2)   In such cases, the limitation on hours of operation specified above
shall apply.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.360 COMMUNITY SERVICE FACILITY.
   Community service facilities are subject to the design review process (see
Subchapter I, Part 12) to ensure the site and any structures are designed and
constructed in a manner that blends in with the character of the area.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.361 CULTURAL FACILITY.
   (A)   Cultural facilities are subject to the design review process (see
Subchapter I, Part 12) to ensure the site and any structures are designed and
constructed in a manner that blends in with the character of the area.
   (B)   When located in the CO District, any buildings associated with such
facilities shall be primarily open-air and shall not be illuminated.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.362 DUPLEX DWELLING.
   (A)   Duplex dwellings located in the R-4 District.
      (1)   Duplex dwellings shall be located on a corner lot.
      (2)   The dimensional standards are the same as those specified in
Table 156.039-1: R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 Districts Dimensional Standards for
detached houses.
      (3)   The front setback for the district shall be met along both street
frontages.
      (4)   If the duplex dwelling includes separate entrances for each
dwelling unit, each entrance must face a different street.
   (B)   Duplex dwellings located in the CL District.
      (1)   Duplex dwellings may be constructed in the CL District only when
the cluster development subdivision design technique is utilized (see
Chapter 155); and
      (2)   When located in the CL District, the total number of duplex
dwelling units shall comprise no more than 20% of the total number of dwelling
units allowed in the development.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.363 EQUESTRIAN FACILITY.
   (A)   Any outdoor lighting shall be oriented to minimize spillover or glare
on surrounding properties or rights-of-way; and
   (B)   Structures, storage areas, and parking areas shall be located at least
50 feet from any external property line.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.364 HIGH-IMPACT ENTERTAINMENT AND HIGH IMPACT RECREATION.
   (A)   Such uses shall generally be located on a major road in a
predominantly commercial area.
   (B)   In instances where an impact assessment is not required, a traffic
analysis may be required to analyze the level of service during events in order
for the Zoning Administrator, in consultation with the Town Director of
Engineering and Development Services, to determine whether traffic improvements
or controls shall be required.
   (C)   Where such uses are not located within a completely enclosed building,
the following conditions shall also apply:
      (1)   Hours of operation are limited to 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.;
      (2)   Noise-generating activities shall be oriented away from residential
areas and the location of such activities on the site shall be determined
through the design review process;
      (3)   If determined necessary through the design review process, sound
mitigation techniques shall be utilized in order to reduce noise impacts on
surrounding properties; and
      (4)   Where such uses are located adjacent to residential properties, a
Type E buffer with a full masonry wall is required.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.365 HOTEL, MOTEL, OR EXTENDED STAY.
   Such uses shall only be located on properties designated:
   (A)   As Town Scale Commercial or Waterfront District (Patriots Point and
Highway 41) in the 2019 Comprehensive Plan; or
   (B)   For AB-1, Areawide Business-1 District, uses and ED, Economic
Development District, uses that are located within the Oakland Plantation
Planned Development District.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.366 MANUFACTURING AND PRODUCTION.
   (A)   The use shall be conducted within a fully enclosed building.
   (B)   No obnoxious light, vibrations, smoke, gas, fume, odor, or dust, or
other objectionable effects shall be perceptible beyond the lot line.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.367 MIXED USE BUILDING.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   Residential uses shall not be located on any building level that
contains non-residential uses.
      (2)   All dwelling units shall have direct access to the street level.
      (3)   Non-residential uses in a mixed use building are limited to those
allowed in the zoning district in which the mixed use building is located.
   (B)   Density. Density shall not exceed four units per acre. However,
density may be increased to eight units per acre if the additional units are
dedicated to attainable housing, as defined in
Subchapter C, Part 2.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.368 MOTOR VEHICLE RENTAL OR SALES.
   Sales are limited to heavy equipment or machinery such as, but not limited
to, tandem-axle dump trucks, backhoes, tractors, cranes, and the like.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.369 MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE OR REPAIR.
   (A)   All service and repair operations are conducted within a fully
enclosed building or buildings.
   (B)   Any outdoor storage meets the conditions of §
156.452.
   (C)   No obnoxious vibration, fume, light, or electrical disturbance created
as a result of such repair or service operation shall be perceptible beyond the
lot line.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.370 NEIGHBORHOOD GATHERING PLACE.
   (A)   Maximum size. All structures shall have a gross floor area less than
or equal to 3,000 square feet.
   (B)   Location. A neighborhood gathering place shall be located on a
collector street or thoroughfare or be located at a major intersection within
the community.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.371 NEIGHBORHOOD RECREATION.
   (A)   Such uses shall not be illuminated.
   (B)   Any buildings associated with such use shall be primarily open-air.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.372 NURSERY OPERATION, COMMERCIAL.
   (A)   Ancillary items, such as mulch, sand, gravel or similar materials, and
seasonal items, such as Christmas trees and pumpkins, may be sold in addition
to plants, but must clearly be incidental to the primary use as a wholesale or
retail landscape plant nursery.
   (B)   Aggregate materials, such as mulch, sand, gravel, or similar
materials, are kept inside a building or, if outside, in bins or sufficiently
screened from view of adjoining properties or public roads by way of fencing or
landscaping.
   (C)   Large vehicles, equipment, and machinery are housed inside a building
or sufficiently screened from view of adjoining properties or public roads by
way of fencing or landscaping.
   (D)   Accessory uses or structures, such as but not limited to, dumpsters,
refuse containers, portable bathroom facilities and the like, are sufficiently
screened from view of adjoining properties or public roads by way of fencing or
landscaping.
   (E)   Plants and other merchandise or materials are kept in a neat and
orderly fashion on the premises, either outdoors or inside a building.
   (F)   Permanent and temporary buildings or structures are approved through
the design review process.
   (G)   The requirements specified in divisions (A) through (F) above, shall
be indicated on a site plan for the property approved through the design review
process; with such process having discretion in the location and arrangement of
the various site components to minimize any negative impacts associated with
the use of the property.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.373 PARKING LOT OR STRUCTURE.
   (A)   Overnight parking of tractor trailers and/or truck cabs is prohibited.
   (B)   A parking lot or structure located in the PI-1 or PI-2 District shall
be available for use by the general public for no charge or for a nominal fee,
or shall serve an adjacent PI District use.
   (C)   A parking lot or structure located in the ED District shall serve an
adjacent ED District use.
   (D)   Within the SCW-W, SCW-H, and SCW-N Districts, a maximum of 10% of
surface parking areas shall be covered by impervious surfaces.
   (E)   Parking structures are prohibited in the SCW Districts.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.374 PRE-SCHOOL, EDUCATIONAL NURSERY, OR DAY CARE.
   Such facilities are subject to the design review process (see
Subchapter I, Part 12) to ensure the site and any structures are designed and
constructed in a manner that blends in with the character of the area.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.375 PUMP STATION.
   (A)   Applicability.
      (1)   This section applies to all pump stations regardless of the
parcel’s zoning or the existing land use on adjacent property.
      (2)   Existing pump stations proposed to be improved shall conform with
the requirements in this section to the maximum degree possible based on site
conditions. Those with existing buffers greater than required by this section
shall maintain the established buffer to the greatest extent possible.
   (B)   Setbacks. Pump stations shall be set back at least seven feet from all
property lines.
   (C)   Buffers.
      (1)   Pump stations shall have a seven-foot buffer with a minimum six-
foot tall wood fence or wall of similar materials at the same height.
      (2)   Plantings in the buffer shall include one evergreen tree species
per seven linear feet calculated from the exterior of the subject parcel. The
evergreen trees shall be at least as tall as the height of the fence at the
time of planting.
      (3)   This buffer is not required where an access gate to the pump
station is located or within two and one-half feet of either side of any
underground utility in the buffer. However, access gates must have a primary
façade constructed of wood or comparable material. Underground utilities shall
be located within the access gate to the greatest extent possible.
   (D)   Tree protection. Any protected, significant, or historic trees that
will need to be removed for construction shall be mitigated pursuant to the
requirements of the town's tree protection ordinances. Replacement trees are
not required to be planted on the pump station property.
   (E)   Site plan review required. All pump station site designs require
review and approval through the design review process (see
Subchapter I, Part 12).
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.376 RURAL COMPOUND.
   (A)   On lots containing one acre or less, a maximum of three principal
dwelling units is allowed, if all applicable lot area and setback requirements
are met for all dwellings as if they were established on individual lots.
   (B)   On lots containing more than one acre, the maximum number of principal
dwelling units allowed is limited by density and lot area and dimensional
requirements, not to exceed a total of five dwelling units.
   (C)   Lots shall be arranged to ensure public street access in the event the
property on which the dwellings are located is subsequently subdivided for sale
or transfer. Such public street access may be direct, or may be provided
through an access easement of sufficient width, design, and material so as to
accommodate fire apparatus and other emergency and service vehicles.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.377 SCHOOL, PRIMARY AND SCHOOL, SECONDARY.
   (A)   The appearance and form of improvements with respect to site and
architectural design shall be consistent with the general theme of the area in
which the use is located. This requirement will be based upon a site-specific
analysis (site plan review) and may necessitate such reasonable additional
requirements as may be judged prudent to achieve the desired results of
acceptable coexistence with neighboring uses.
   (B)   Special considerations may be given to such site-specific design
elements as may be required to accommodate operational or other unique
characteristics of the individual uses, which may enhance or relax the minimum
standards prescribed herein, with specific written justification for the same
noted on the plans.
   (C)   All lights or lighting arrangements used shall be directed away from
adjoining or nearby residential properties, and further meet the requirements
in
Subchapter H, Part 3, Subpart 3.4.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.378 SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY.
   (A)   Neither commercial nor personal sale of any goods, product, or service
shall be performed in individual units, though the facility ownership may sell
or rent incidental items including moving and packing supplies or moving
trucks. The facility ownership may also hold on-site auctions to sell the
contents of a unit or units as a result of non-payment of fees.
   (B)   Any outdoor storage area shall be designated as such on the submitted
site plan, and shall not be visible from any existing street or right-of-way.
No outdoor storage is allowed in other areas.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.379 SHOOTING RANGE, INDOOR.
   (A)   A total ambient noise level of no more than 67 decibels (dBA) is
created at all external lot lines adjacent to residential zoning districts, or
72 decibels at all external lot lines adjacent to non-residential zoning
districts.
   (B)   A total vibration level of no more than 65 velocity decibels (VdB) is
created at any internal lot line.
   (C)   Glare is less than 50 foot lamberts or one-half of a foot candle on
land within residential zoning districts, when measured at the lot line.
   (D)   Proof of all permits and approvals required by any state or federal
governmental entity are secured in advance, including providing assurance that
South Carolina state air pollution control regulations are met.
   (E)   Demonstration that the proposed use meets the above standards must be
submitted by the property owner in conjunction with the zoning permit
application.
      (1)   The Zoning Administrator may require the property owner to conduct
periodic monitoring to ensure the standards are continuously met or may
undertake such on its own.
      (2)   Equipment used for measurement must meet the standards of the
American National Standards Institute.
      (3)   All costs associated with such measurements shall be the
responsibility of the property owner.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.380 SWEETGRASS BASKET STAND.
   (A)   Location. Sweetgrass basket stands:
      (1)   Are allowed on lots located between Venning Road and the town's
northern corporate limits, as well as in historic settlement communities;
      (2)   Shall be located outside the right-of-way; and
      (3)   May be located within a roadside buffer.
   (B)   Use of stand. A sweetgrass basket stand may only be used as a place
where sweetgrass baskets are made and/or sold.
   (C)   Maximum size. Sweetgrass basket stands are limited to 250 square feet
in area (two-dimensional horizontal plane).
   (D)   Location. Sweetgrass basket stands must be located outside the right-
of-way and required buffers, unless unique site conditions identified as part
of site plan review demonstrate that encroachment into the buffer is warranted.
   (E)   Parking.
      (1)   All sweetgrass basket stands shall utilize safe ingress and egress.
Access to the stand is approved in accordance with Subchapter H.
      (2)   Parking for sweetgrass basket stands shall be located in an area
furthest from the roadway.
      (3)   When the sweetgrass basket stand is established as an accessory
use:
         (a)   No additional parking is required for the stand; and
         (b)   Provision shall be made for sweetgrass vendors and their patrons
to share access to the stand and parking with the lot upon which the sweetgrass
basket stand is accessory.
   (F)   Design. The design of the stand shall be consistent with the photos
shown in
Figure 156.380-1: Sweetgrass Basket Stand Design.
   (G)   Signs.
      (1)   Signs for sweetgrass basket stands are limited to:
         (a)   One non-illuminated free-standing sign, not to exceed ten square
feet in area and eight feet in height; or
         (b)   One non-illuminated sign attached to the structure, not to
exceed ten square feet in area.
      (2)   Materials shall comply with the
Subchapter G.
      (3)   Off-premises signs are prohibited.
Figure 156.380-1: Sweetgrass Basket Stand Design
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13167.png]
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.381 TATTOO OR BODY PIERCING STUDIO.
   (A)   The proposed location of a tattoo or body piercing studio shall not be
closer than 1,000 feet to a place of worship; school; day care; playground;
public or private recreation facility; property zoned to allow residential
uses; or property in any zoning district with existing residential uses.
   (B)   A copy of the DHEC operating permit must be provided to the town.
   (C)   Mobile units are prohibited.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.382 TOWNHOUSE DWELLING.
   (A)   Townhouse dwellings may be constructed in the CL District only when
the cluster development    subdivision design technique is utilized.
   (B)   When located in the CL District, townhouse dwelling units may comprise
no more than 20% of the total number of dwelling units allowed in the
development.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.383 WATERCRAFT OR MARINE EQUIPMENT SERVICE OR REPAIR.
   (A)   All service and repair operations shall be conducted within a fully
enclosed building or buildings.
   (B)   Any outdoor storage shall meet the conditions of §
156.452.
   (C)   Outdoor storage of wrecked vehicles, dismantled parts, or supplies is
prohibited.
   (D)   No obnoxious sound, vibration, fume, light, or electrical disturbance
created as a result of such repair or service operation is perceptible beyond
the premises.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.384 WHOLESALE SALES.
   In the AB-1 District, such use may only be conducted in conjunction with a
permitted retail sales use.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.385 THROUGH 156.419 RESERVED.
PART 4: ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
SUBPART 4.1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.420 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This part applies to any subordinate use of a building or other
structure, or use of land that is:
      (1)   Conducted on the same lot as the principal use to which it is
related; and
      (2)   Clearly incidental to, and customarily found in connection with,
the principal use or structure.
   (B)   Where a principal use or structure is allowed by §
156.338, such use includes customary accessory uses and structures subject to
this part.
   (C)   Major accessory uses and structures in a PD District must be expressly
allowed by the PD District rezoning ordinance.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.421 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER REGULATIONS.
   (A)   All accessory uses and structures must comply with the provisions of
this part, as well as any other applicable town codes and ordinances and state
and federal statutes and regulations.
      (1)   The applicant for a new accessory use or structure shall obtain a
building permit, if required by the Building Code.
      (2)   Accessory uses and structures located in zoning districts subject
to the design review process must receive design review approval prior to
construction.
   (B)   As specified in §
156.1100, when a proposed accessory use or structure requires approval by
another local, state, or federal agency, the applicant must provide proof of
such approval (or pending approval) in conjunction with the zoning permit
application.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.422 ESTABLISHMENT OF ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Permitted accessory uses and structures. Accessory uses and structures
that are subordinate and incidental to and customarily associated with the
principal use or structure and that are located on the same lot with the
principal use are generally allowed, subject to the limitations of this
chapter.
   (B)   Conditional accessory uses and structures. Certain accessory uses and
structures are subject to additional use-specific conditions, which are
specified in
Subchapter C, Part 4, Subpart 4.3.
   (C)   Use must be accessory and located on same lot as principal use.
      (1)   Accessory structures and uses, except for docks, shall not be
constructed or established without an associated principal structure or use. An
accessory structure or use may only be located on the same lot as the principal
structure or use that it serves.
      (2)   An accessory building or use established on a vacant lot is
considered the principal use of the lot and may only be established if allowed
by §
156.338.
      (3)   An accessory structure may be constructed at the same time as the
principal structure. However, a certificate of occupancy for the accessory
structure shall not be issued prior to the certificate of occupancy for the
associated principal structure.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.423 MAJOR AND MINOR ACCESSORY STRUCTURES DEFINED.
   (A)   Generally. For the purposes of this part, accessory uses and
structures are categorized as major or minor depending on their
characteristics.
   (B)   Major accessory uses and structures.
      (1)   Major accessory uses and structures are substantial uses and
structures that are generally obvious from outside the parcel and vary by
district.
      (2)   Examples of major residential accessory buildings include detached
garages and carports, storage sheds, workshops, utility buildings, gazebos,
stables, and private kennels.
      (3)   Examples of major residential accessory uses and structures include
tennis courts; swimming pools; patios; barns and stables; parking or overnight
storage of recreational vehicles including but not limited to watercraft, tow-
behind trailers, and campers; satellite dishes; and antennas (ham radio, CB,
TV).
      (4)   Examples of major commercial and industrial accessory buildings
include detached garages, storage buildings, and utility buildings.
      (5)   Examples of major commercial and industrial accessory uses and
structures include garbage dumpster surrounds and pads, loading docks, and
storage tanks.
   (C)   Minor accessory uses and structures.
      (1)   Minor accessory uses and structures include uses and structures
that are not unique to a particular land use.
      (2)   Examples include mailboxes; flagpoles; fences; landscape features;
fruit, vegetable, and ornamental gardens; driveways; parking areas; swing sets,
play houses, and play equipment, including basketball goals; and retaining
walls less than four feet in height.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.424 SETBACKS, HEIGHT, AND SIZE OF ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Setbacks and height for accessory uses and structures.
      (1)   
Table 156.424-1: Setbacks and Height for Accessory Uses and Structures
specifies the minimum distance an accessory structure or use must be located
from the lot line.
      (2)   Accessory structures and uses may be attached to or detached from
the principal structure. Accessory structures connected to the principal
structure by conditioned space or that share a common wall, roof, or foundation
with the principal structure or that are otherwise connected to the principal
structure (such as a deck) are considered part of the principal structure and
must meet the setback requirements of the zoning district.
Table 156.424-1: Setbacks and Height for Accessory Uses and Structures
Key: min. = minimum required | max. = maximum allowed | ft = feet
                 Setbacks (min.)
Accessory Use or Front Side (Internal) Side (Corner Lot) Rear Height (max.)
Structure
Table 156.424-1: Setbacks and Height for Accessory Uses and Structures
Key: min. = minimum required | max. = maximum allowed | ft = feet
               Setbacks (min.)
Accessory Use  Front          Side (Internal) Side (Corner  Rear  Height (max.)
or Structure                                  Lot)
Major          Same as zoning
residential    district (see  6 ft.           Same as front 6 ft. 25 ft.
accessory uses Subchapter B)
and structures
Major
commercial and Same as zoning district (see
industrial     Subchapter B)
accessory uses
and structures
Minor
accessory uses 0 ft.          0 ft.           0 ft.         0 ft. 15 ft.
and structures
Retaining      Same as zoning district (see
walls greater  Subchapter B), except where a critical area buffer applies (see
than four feet §
in height      156.623)
 
   (B)   Size of accessory buildings. Table 156.424-2: Maximum Footprint of
Accessory Buildings specifies the maximum allowable footprint for accessory
buildings. This table does not apply to accessory structures that do not meet
the definition of building (see
Subchapter N).
 
Table 156.424-2: Maximum Footprint of Accessory Buildings
Key: min. = minimum required | max. = maximum allowed | sf = square feet | N/
A = not applicable
                 Building Footprint (max.)
Accessory        RC-1, RC-2,      CC, R-1,      R-3, R-4, TH, All Other
Building Type    RR Districts     R-2 Districts RM Districts  Districts (except
                                                              PD)1
Major            No maximum, if
residential      maximum building 850 sf        600 sf        850 sf
accessory        coverage is not
buildings        exceeded
Major commercial
and industrial   No maximum, if maximum building coverage is not exceeded1
accessory
buildings
1 In a PD District, if not specified in the PD ordinance, the maximum accessory
building footprint is the same as specified in this table for the zoning
district with lot sizes most comparable to those in the PD District.
2 If the zoning district specifies a maximum building footprint, that limit
applies to both principal and accessory structures and takes precedence over
the standard in this table.
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.425 THROUGH 156.434 RESERVED.
SUBPART 4.2: ACCESSORY USE TABLE
§ 156.435 INTRODUCTION.
   Accessory uses and structures are allowed in the locations specified in §
156.436, if the use complies with all applicable use conditions in
Subchapter C, Part 4, Subpart 4.3 and other provisions of this part.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.436 ACCESSORY USE TABLE.
Table 156.436-1: Accessory Use Table
Accessory Use or Accessory Use                        Allowed Districts/
Structure        Conditions    Zoning Permit Required Locations and/or
                                                      Associated Principal Use
Table 156.436-1: Accessory Use Table
                                                                                           Allowed
                                                                                           Districts/
                                                                       Accessory  Zoning   Locations
Accessory Use or Structure                                             Use        Permit   and/or
                                                                       Conditions Required Associated
                                                                                           Principal
                                                                                           Use
Major accessory uses and structures (as defined in § 156.423), unless None       Yes      All
otherwise listed                                                                           districts
Minor accessory uses and structures (as defined in § 156.423), unless None       No       All
otherwise listed                                                                           districts
                                                                       §                  Detached
Accessory dwelling unit                                                156.445    Yes      house
                                                                                           dwelling
                                                                                           Retail,
                                                                       §                  commercial
Accessory manufacturing or repair facility                             156.446    Yes      or
                                                                                           industrial
                                                                                           facilities
Apiculture                                                             §         Yes      All
                                                                       156.353             districts
                                                                                           RM, OP-1,
Canteen                                                                None       No       OP-2, AB-1,
                                                                                           AB-2, ED,
                                                                                           LI, WG-C
                                                                                           OP-2, AB-1,
                                                                                           AB-2, WG-C,
                                                                                           PI-1, PI-2,
                                                                       §                  school,
Clothing and home goods donation bin                                   156.447    Yes      place of
                                                                                           worship,
                                                                                           library,
                                                                                           other civic
                                                                                           uses
Community garden                                                       None       No       All
                                                                                           districts
Driveways                                                              None       Yes      All
                                                                                           districts
Fences                                                                 §         Yes1     All
                                                                       156.448             districts
                                                                                           Retail,
                                                                       §                  commercial
Gasoline or fuel oil pump and storage tank                             156.447    Yes      or
                                                                                           industrial
                                                                                           facility
Home-based business—home office                                      §         No       Dwelling
                                                                       156.450
Home-based business—limited home-based business                      §         Yes      Dwelling
                                                                       156.450
Home-based business—home day care                                    §         Yes      Dwelling
                                                                       156.450
                                                                       §                  NC-2, OP-2,
Outdoor retail display                                                 156.451    Yes      AB-1, AB-2,
                                                                                           LI, WG-C
Outdoor storage                                                        §         Yes      AB-2, ED, LI
                                                                       156.452
                                                                       §                  AB-2, ED,
Outdoor storage, water-related                                         156.452    Yes      LI, SCW-W,
                                                                                           SCW-H, SCW-N
Private kennel for not more than three dogs                            None       Yes      Dwelling
Recreational vehicle park with spaces/hook-ups for a maximum of 12     None       Yes      Campground
vehicles
Retaining wall (greater than 4 feet in height)                         None       Yes      All
                                                                                           districts
                                                                                           Allowed
                                                                                           Districts/
                                                                       Accessory  Zoning   Locations
Accessory Use or Structure                                             Use        Permit   and/or
                                                                       Conditions Required Associated
                                                                                           Principal
                                                                                           Use
Seafood processing, indoor                                             None       No       SCW-H, SCW-N
Shipping container                                                     §         Yes      AB-2, LI
                                                                       156.453
Short-term rental                                                      Part 6     Yes      Dwelling
Stable                                                                 None       Yes      RC-1, RC-2,
                                                                                           RR, R-1
Structures designed and used for purpose of shelter in the event of    None       Yes      Dwelling
humanmade or natural catastrophe
                                                                                           Lots located
                                                                                           between
                                                                                           Venning Road
                                                                                           and the
                                                                                           town's
                                                                                           northern
Sweetgrass basket stand                                                §         Yes      corporate
                                                                       156.380             limits; lots
                                                                                           located in
                                                                                           historic
                                                                                           settlement
                                                                                           communities;
                                                                                           SCW-W, SCW-
                                                                                           H, SCW-N
1 A zoning permit is not required for a fence that is seven feet in height or less, unless it is
constructed of brick, stone, or concrete; or is located on a corner lot along one or more lot lines
adjacent to a street right-of-way.
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.437 THROUGH 156.444 RESERVED.
SUBPART 4.3: ACCESSORY USE CONDITIONS
§ 156.445 ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT.
   (A)   Purpose. This section is intended to encourage accessory dwelling
units (ADUs) as an alternative housing choice.
   (B)   Maximum number of accessory dwelling units per lot. A maximum of one
ADU per lot is allowed, subject to building coverage requirements.
   (C)   Maximum size.
      (1)   Detached ADUs are subject to the maximum building footprint
specified in
Table 156.424-2: Maximum Footprint of Accessory Buildings.
      (2)   Attached ADUs and ADUs located within a principal structure are
limited to a maximum of 850 square feet in gross floor area.
   (D)   Parking.
      (1)   One private, off-street parking space is required for use by
occupants of each accessory dwelling unit, in addition to any and all spaces
required for the principal structure.
      (2)   The location of this dedicated off-street parking space must be
clearly indicated on the site plan.
      (3)   Tandem parking is not permitted unless the tandem spaces serve only
the accessory dwelling unit.
   (E)   Recorded covenant required. The following conditions shall be
memorialized in a recorded covenant to run with the property:
      (1)   Either the principal structure or the accessory dwelling unit must
be owner-occupied and serve as the owner's primary residence;
      (2)   Occupancy of the accessory dwelling unit shall be limited to no
more than three persons; and
      (3)   Under no circumstances shall the property be converted to a
horizontal ownership regime.
   (F)   Zoning permit submittal requirements. In addition to the requirements
in
Subchapter I, Part 7, a zoning permit application for an ADU shall include a
scaled site plan that shows all information listed on the Accessory Dwelling
Unit Site Plan Checklist provided by the Department of Planning, Land Use, and
Neighborhoods, as may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.446 ACCESSORY MANUFACTURING OR REPAIR FACILITY.
   Dust, odor, smoke, noise, vibration, heat, or glare produced as a result of
such manufacturing or repair operation shall not be perceptible from any
boundary line of the lot on which the principal and accessory uses are located.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.447 CLOTHING AND HOME GOODS DONATION BIN.
   (A)   Donation boxes shall not be located within a buffer, tree island,
landscaped area, ADA accessible route, required parking space, or right-of-way.
   (B)   The owner or operator shall regularly empty donation boxes to prevent
overflow, and ensure they are maintained in good condition.
   (C)   In districts subject to the design review process, the location and
appearance of clothing and home goods donation bins are subject to approval by
the Design Review Board.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.448 FENCES.
   (A)   The finished side of the fence must face outward, toward adjacent lots
or the street, as applicable.
   (B)   On corner lots, a fence located along one or more lot lines adjacent
to a street right-of-way shall not interfere with required intersection sight
distance, as specified in §
155.048(A)(12).
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.449 GASOLINE OR FUEL OIL PUMP AND STORAGE TANK.
   (A)   A maximum of 500 gallons of gasoline may be stored above ground.
   (B)   Storage of more than 40,000 gallons of petroleum products on a site is
prohibited.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.450 HOME-BASED BUSINESS.
   (A)   Applicability. This section establishes and applies to three types of
home-based businesses:
      (1)   Home offices;
      (2)   Limited home-based businesses;
      (3)   Home-based day cares; and
      (4)   Outdoor instructional swimming lessons.
   (B)   Exemptions. Product sales associated with private social events (e.g.,
direct sales home parties) and yard sales are exempt from this section, but are
subject to
Subchapter C, Part 5.
   (C)   General conditions. The following conditions apply to all four types
of home-based businesses:
      (1)   No merchandise or articles are displayed for advertising purposes,
nor are displayed in such a way as to be visible from outside the dwelling, nor
are stored other than inside a building;
      (2)   There is no alteration of the residential character of the building
or premises;
      (3)   Any regular deliveries to the home-based business are provided by
carriers that typically deliver to residential dwellings, such as Federal
Express, UPS, or DHL; and
      (4)   The occupation, profession, or trade is licensed by the town and
any other applicable regulatory agency.
   (D)   Home office. A home office is a type of home-based business with no
employees working on the premises other than the resident(s) of the dwelling
unit and no customers or clients that visit the site. A home office is
permitted in all zoning districts where residential dwellings are allowed.
   (E)   Limited home-based business.
      (1)   A limited home-based business is a type of home-based business with
no employees working on the premises other than the resident(s) of the dwelling
unit, and that may have occasional customers or clients.
      (2)   A limited home-based business is allowed in all zoning districts
where residential dwellings are permitted, except the MF, Multi-Family
Residential District, if the following conditions are met:
         (a)   No traffic is generated by the limited home-based business in
greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential district;
         (b)   Any need for parking generated by the conduct of the limited
home-based business is met off the street; and
         (c)   A maximum of 30% of the floor area of the principal building is
used for the conduct of the limited home-based business; however, up to 100% of
the floor area of an accessory building may be used for the conduct of the
limited home-based business, if no part of the principal building is used for
the conduct of the limited home-based business. Outdoor areas may be used if
essential to the conduct of the limited home-based business (e.g., for
horseback riding instruction, swimming lessons, or sports instruction).
   (F)   Home-based day care.
      (1)   A home-based day care is a type of home-based business where
children or adults are provided care, protection, and supervision on a regular
basis for less than 24 hours per day. While the use occurs primarily within the
principal building or an accessory building, an outdoor area may be provided.
      (2)   Home-based day cares are allowed in the RC-1, RC-2, RR, CC, R-1,
and R-2 zoning districts, if the following conditions are met:
         (a)   Not more than one employee, other than the resident(s) of the
dwelling unit, works on the premises;
         (b)   Any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home-based
day care is met off the street;
         (c)   Not more than six children and/or adults are cared for at any
given time, including those children and/or adults residing in the home and
those children and/or adults related to either the resident(s) of the dwelling
unit or the non-resident employee;
         (d)   Not more than 30% of the floor area of the principal building is
used for the conduct of the home-based day care; however, up to 100% of the
floor area of an accessory building may be used for the conduct of the home-
based day care, if no part of the principal building is used for the conduct of
the home-based day care; and
         (e)   The home-base day care is licensed by the appropriate state
agency.
      (3)   Home-based day cares located in an R-1 or R-2 zoning district
require special exception use approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals. The
conditions specified both in this section and in
Subchapter I, Part 9 apply.
   (G)   Outdoor instructional swimming lessons.
      (1)   Swimming instructions are limited to two students at a time;
      (2)   Any need for parking generated by the conduct of such activity
shall be met off the street;
      (3)   Parcels located on corner lots shall locate all swimming
instructional activity to the rear of the principal structure; and
      (4)   Any property that has an approved short term rental (STR) permit
shall not have this type of home-based business.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.451 OUTDOOR RETAIL DISPLAYS.
   (A)   Location. Outdoor retail displays shall not be located within an ADA
accessible route, landscaped area, right-of-way, or required parking space.
   (B)   Calculation of parking. The square footage of the outdoor retail
display area shall count towards the total building square footage in the
calculation of the required number of off-street parking spaces, if the outdoor
retail display area is not located under the building roof or awning.
   (C)   Design review required.
      (1)   Outdoor retail display areas are subject to the design review
process.
      (2)   An outdoor retail display area shall be designated as such on the
site plan. No outdoor retail display is allowed in other areas.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.452 OUTDOOR STORAGE.
   (A)   The outdoor storage area shall be designated as such on the submitted
site plan. No outdoor storage is allowed in other areas.
   (B)   Elevated display of vehicles or equipment is prohibited.
   (C)   Any outdoor storage of wrecked vehicles, dismantled parts, supplies,
or similar materials shall be screened with an opaque fence or wall.
   (D)   No outdoor loudspeakers shall be installed or utilized if the property
is within 300 feet of residentially zoned property.
   (E)   Except in the LI, Light Industrial District, storage or display of
heavy equipment or machinery such as, but not limited to, tandem-axle dump
trucks, backhoes, tractors, cranes, and the like, is prohibited.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.453 SHIPPING CONTAINER.
   (A)   Setbacks and buffers required. Accessory shipping containers shall not
encroach into a required setback or buffer.
   (B)   Maximum number of containers allowed. The number of containers allowed
on a site is determined by acreage and intensity of development (number of
businesses) as follows:
      (1)   Properties of zero through three acres are limited to one
container, regardless of the number of businesses located on the property or
within the development;
      (2)   Properties greater than three acres to nine acres are limited to
one container per business; however, the total number of containers on the
property shall not exceed three, regardless of the number of businesses;
      (3)   Properties greater than nine acres are limited to one container per
business; however, the total number of containers on the property shall not
exceed six, regardless of the number of businesses;
      (4)   If a unified development project has been subdivided into separate
tracts, the requirements listed above shall apply to the development as a whole
and not per tract within the development.
   (C)   Location.
      (1)   Containers shall not displace required parking.
      (2)   The container must be located on the site where it can be
adequately screened from view from any public right-of-way or other properties
and, in all cases, shall be located to the rear of any building, unless
prohibited by site constraints.
   (D)   Screening.
      (1)   The goal of screening is to limit the visibility of the container
from the public right-of-way and other properties.
      (2)   Staff approval of appropriate screening is required through the
zoning permit process.
      (3)   Site plans with landscaping and fencing detail must be submitted
for approval.
      (4)   Appropriate screening will depend upon the location of the
container on the site and requirements may vary.
      (5)   Screening will largely be achieved through heavy landscaping;
however, in some instances, lattice fences with landscaping, masonry fences, or
walls may also be required.
      (6)   Painting of containers may also be required.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.454 THROUGH 156.469 RESERVED.
PART 5: TEMPORARY USES  AND STRUCTURES
SUBPART 5.1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.470 PURPOSE.
   Temporary uses and structures are allowed in accordance with the provisions
of this part, which are intended to minimize or mitigate potential negative
impacts of such uses and structures on the surrounding area and to provide safe
and convenient access to permitted temporary uses and structures.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.471 APPLICABILITY.
   This part applies to temporary uses in all districts, except PD Districts.
Temporary uses and structures in a PD District must be expressly allowed by the
PD District rezoning ordinance.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.472 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The following uses are exempt from the requirements of this part:
      (1)   Lawful picketing and demonstrations; and
      (2)   Weddings, receptions, parties, and similar private, non-commercial
events held on private property.
   (B)   Special events are exempt from the requirements of this part, but are
subject to the provisions of
Chapter 116 and
Chapter 97. However, notwithstanding the provisions of
Chapter 116, there is no limit on the number of cultural festivals and events
that occur on a particular property in the CL, SCW, or WG-C Districts within a
calendar year because the purpose of the districts in which this use may be
allowed is to serve as destinations for events, culture, arts, and tourist
activity.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.473 SITE PLAN REQUIRED.
   (A)   All temporary uses. In addition to the requirements of
Subchapter I, Part 7, zoning permit applications for temporary uses shall be
accompanied by a site plan depicting, at a minimum, the following items as
applicable:
      (1)   Site location, boundaries, and relevant site features;
      (2)   Location of the temporary use and associated temporary structures;
      (3)   Location of permanent structures on the lot;
      (4)   Location and number of parking spaces;
      (5)   Location of vehicular access(es) to the site;
      (6)   Type, size, and location of all temporary signs associated with the
temporary use;
      (7)   Location and description of all temporary lighting;
      (8)   Location of restroom facilities; and
      (9)   Method of solid waste disposal.
   (B)   Interim and part-time uses.
      (1)   The zoning permit for an interim or part-time use is valid for a
one-year period divided into 90-day intervals, where the permit may be
automatically renewed for each interval unless revoked in accordance with §
156.1579.
      (2)   In addition to the requirements specified in division (A) above,
zoning permit applications for interim and part-time uses shall specify:
         (a)   The initial duration of the use and any provision for extension
or renewal; and
         (b)   Any special conditions or limitations pertaining to the use
including, but not limited to:
            1.   Access and the need for its control;
            2.   Signs;
            3.   Hours of operation;
            4.   The provision of sanitary facilities;
            5.   Food and beverage service;
            6.   Proximity to residential uses;
            7.   Sound or noise control; and
            8.   Light, glare, odor, or other components that may have an
effect on adjoining properties.
   (C)   Temporary uses with minimal impact. For temporary uses where the
applicant anticipates minimal or no resulting impact on surrounding properties,
the Zoning Administrator may waive any or all of the site plan submittal
requirements. In making this determination, the Zoning Administrator shall
consider the factors listed below and shall provide a written notice of
decision identifying the basis of the decision:
      (1)   Nature of the proposed temporary use;
      (2)   Location of the proposed site;
      (3)   Use of surrounding properties;
      (4)   Capacity of the transportation network to adequately serve the
proposed temporary use; and
      (5)   Public safety.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.474 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER REGULATIONS.
   (A)   All temporary uses and structures must comply with the provisions of
this part, as well as any other applicable town codes and ordinances and state
and federal statutes and regulations. The applicant for a temporary use or
structure shall obtain a building permit, if required by the Building Code.
   (B)   As specified in §
156.1100, when a proposed temporary use or structure requires approval by
another local, state, or federal agency, the applicant must provide proof of
such approval (or pending approval) in conjunction with the zoning permit
application.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.475 PROPERTY OWNER CONSENT REQUIRED.
   (A)   The applicant proposing a temporary use shall obtain permission from
the property owner or their authorized representative to operate at the
proposed location.
   (B)   For temporary uses that require a zoning permit, the applicant shall
provide with the zoning permit application written permission from the property
owner to operate at the proposed location.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.476 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Parking.
      (1)   For all temporary uses and structures that require a zoning permit,
the Zoning Administrator shall determine the appropriate number of required
parking spaces based on the operational characteristics of the proposed
temporary use or structure and any parking generation data for the proposed use
from the applicant.
      (2)   Parking may be located on the same site as the temporary use or
structure, or may be located off-site if:
         (a)   The off-site parking area provides safe pedestrian access to the
site on which the temporary use or structure is located; and
         (b)   The property owner provides written permission.
   (B)   Outdoor lighting. Outdoor lighting associated with a temporary use or
structure shall be shielded or directed away from adjoining properties and
streets in order to minimize light trespass and glare.
   (C)   Signs. Signs associated with a temporary use or structure are subject
to the provisions of Subchapter G as applicable.
   (D)   Temporary structures. Temporary structures shall:
      (1)   Meet all applicable principal structure setback requirements for
the zoning district in which the temporary structure is located;
      (2)   Not be located within a required bufferyard; and
      (3)   Meet all applicable Building and Fire Code requirements.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.477 THROUGH 156.484 RESERVED.
SUBPART 5.2: TEMPORARY USE TABLE
§ 156.485 INTRODUCTION.
   Temporary uses and structures are allowed for the length of time and in the
locations specified in §
156.487, if the use complies with all applicable use conditions in
Subchapter C, Part 5, Subpart 5.3 and other provisions of this part.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.486 CLASSIFICATION OF NEW AND UNLISTED TEMPORARY USES.
   (A)   The Zoning Administrator may determine that an unlisted temporary use
is allowed as a permitted use or conditional use, if sufficiently similar in
nature and impact to a permitted or conditional temporary use listed in §
156.487.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator shall use the following criteria to make this
determination:
      (1)   Whether the temporary use or structure:
         (a)   Meets the purpose and intent of the zoning district in which it
is proposed to be located;
         (b)   Is allowed as a principal use in the zoning district in which it
is proposed to be located;
         (c)   Is prohibited by other town codes or ordinances;
         (d)   Is compatible with other uses allowed in the zoning district in
which it is proposed to be located;
      (2)   Whether similar temporary uses or structures are allowed in the
same zoning district; and
      (3)   Whether similar temporary uses or structures have use conditions
that should be applied to the proposed use.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.487 TEMPORARY USE TABLE.
Table 156.487-1: Temporary Use Table
Temporary Use or Temporary Use Zoning Permit Maximum Duration
Structure        Conditions    Required      of Use (per      Allowed Districts
                                             site, per year)
Table 156.487-1: Temporary Use Table
                                                       Maximum
                               Temporary  Zoning       Duration of  Allowed
Temporary Use or Structure     Use        Permit       Use (per     Districts
                               Conditions Required     site, per
                                                       year)
                                                       60 days or
                                                       the duration
                                                       of
                                                       construction
                                                       under a
                                                       valid
                                                       building
Commercial-type dumpster       §         No           permit       All
                               156.495                 Must be      districts
                                                       removed
                                                       within 14
                                                       days of
                                                       issuance of
                                                       a final
                                                       certificate
                                                       of occupancy
                                                                    All
                                                       No maximum,  districts,
                                                       if the       if the use
                                                       associated   is located
                                                       construction on or
                                                       has an       adjacent to
                                          Yes, if the  active       the
                                          use is not   building     associated
Construction-relate d office              located on   permit       construction
or storage unit                None       the same     Must be      site
                                          site as the  removed      AB-1, AB-2,
                                          associated   within 30    LI, if the
                                          construction days of      use is not
                                                       issuance of  located on
                                                       a final      or adjacent
                                                       certificate  to the
                                                       of occupancy associated
                                                                    construction
                                                                    site
                                                                    RC-1, RC-2,
                                                                    CC, OP-1,
                                                                    OP-2, NC-1,
                                                                    NC-2, AB-1,
                                                                    AB-2, ED,
                               §                      Up to 2 days PI-1, PI-2,
Farmers’ market              156.496    No           per week     CL, SCW-W,
                                                                    SCW-H, SCW-
                                                                    N, WG-C,
                                                                    commercial
                                                                    districts
                                                                    within PD
                                                                    Districts
                                                       No maximum,
                                                       unless
Interim and part-time uses and §         Yes          specified by All
structures                     156.497                 an approved  districts
                                                       zoning
                                                       permit
                                                       No maximum,  All
                                                       if the       districts,
                                                       associated   if the use
                                                       construction is located
                                                       is active    on or
                                                       Must be      adjacent to
                                          Yes, if the  removed      the
                                          use is not   within 30    associated
                                          located on   days of      construction
Laydown area                   None       the same     issuance of  site
                                          site as the  a final      AB-1, AB-2,
                                          associated   certificate  LI, if the
                                          construction of occupancy use is not
                                                       or           located on
                                                       completion   or adjacent
                                                       of the       to the
                                                       utility or   associated
                                                       road project construction
                                                                    site
                                                                    NC-2, AB-1,
                                                       No maximum,  AB-2, ED,
                                                       but mobile   SCW-W, SCW-
Mobile food vending units and  §                      vending      H, SCW-N,
mobile food pushcarts          156.498    Yes          units shall  WG-C,
                                                       not remain   commercial
                                                       on-site      districts
                                                       overnight    within PD
                                                                    Districts
                                                       No maximum,  NC-2, AB-1,
                                                       but mobile   AB-2, SCW-H,
                               §                      vending      SCW-N, WG-C,
Mobile retail vending units    156.498    Yes          units shall  commercial
                                                       not remain   districts
                                                       on-site      within PD
                                                       overnight    Districts
                                                       No maximum
                                                       Must be
                                                       converted to
                                                       a permanent  All
                                                       use once     districts
Model home                     None       Yes          100% of      that allow
                                                       dwelling     dwelling
                                                       units in the units
                                                       development
                                                       have
                                                       initially
                                                       sold
                                                                    All
                                                                    districts,
                                                       Same as      if the
Parking areas                  §         No           associated   parking area
                               156.476(A)              temporary    serves an
                                                       use          allowed
                                                                    temporary
                                                                    use
                                                       1 year, with
Portable office unit (other                            annual       PI-1, PI-2,
than a construction-relate d   None       Yes          renewals     OP-2, AB-1,
or real estate sales office)                           upon a       AB-2, ED, LI
                                                       showing of
                                                       good cause
                                                       60 days or
                                                       the duration
                                                       of
Portable storage unit          §         No           construction All
                               156.499                 under a      districts
                                                       valid
                                                       building
                                                       permit
                                                                    All
                                                       4 days per   districts,
Product sales associated with                          sale; up to  if the lot
a private social event (e.g.,  None       No           4 sales per  contains an
direct sales home party)                               calendar     occupied
                                                       year         dwelling
                                                                    unit
                                                                    All
                                                                    districts,
                                                       1 year, with if the sales
                                                       annual       office is
Real estate sales office       None       Yes          renewals     located in
                                                       upon a       the same
                                                       showing of   development
                                                       good cause   as the units
                                                                    offered for
                                                                    sale
                                                                    NC-2, OP-2,
                                                       30           AB-1, AB-2,
                                                       cumulative   LI,
Seasonal sales—fireworks     None       Yes          days per     commercial
                                                       calendar     districts
                                                       year         within PD
                                                                    Districts
                                                                    NC-2, OP-2,
                                                       45           AB-1, AB-2,
Seasonal sales—local artisan                         cumulative   LI,
market                         None       Yes          days per     commercial
                                                       calendar     districts
                                                       year         within PD
                                                                    Districts
                                                                    NC-2, OP-2,
                                                       45           AB-1, AB-2,
                                                       cumulative   LI, PI-1,
Seasonal sales—pumpkins or   None       Yes          days per     PI-2,
trees                                                  calendar     commercial
                                                       year         districts
                                                                    within PD
                                                                    Districts
                                                       Maximum
                               Temporary  Zoning       Duration of  Allowed
Temporary Use or Structure     Use        Permit       Use (per     Districts
                               Conditions Required     site, per
                                                       year)
                                                                    All
                                                       4 days per   districts,
                                                       sale; up to  if the lot
Yard sale                      None       No           4 sales per  contains an
                                                       calendar     occupied
                                                       year         dwelling
                                                                    unit
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.488 THROUGH 156.494 RESERVED.
SUBPART 5.3: TEMPORARY USE CONDITIONS
§ 156.495 COMMERCIAL-TYPE DUMPSTER.
   All commercial-type dumpsters shall be located outside a public right-of-
way.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.496 FARMERS’ MARKET.
   (A)   Market manager required. All temporary farmers’ markets shall have a
market manager authorized to direct the operations of all vendors participating
in the market on the site of the market during all hours of operation.
   (B)   Parking. All temporary farmers’ markets shall provide at least three
off-street parking spaces for each vendor stall.
   (C)   Trash and recycling receptacles. A temporary farmers’ market shall:
      (1)   Provide trash and recycling receptacles for patron use; and
      (2)   Remove all trash and recycling from the site each day.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.497 INTERIM AND PART-TIME USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   The purpose of providing for uses that operate on an interim or
part-time basis is two-fold:
         (a)   The first is to allow the utilization of property intended for
the highest and best use of the property in stages without full compliance with
all development regulations for a limited amount of time under strict permit
requirements. This could involve such development standards as paved parking
and required landscaping or bufferyard plantings.
         (b)   The second is to allow the utilization of property for such uses
that do not represent the highest and best use of a property, but provide an
opportunity to utilize the same as a revenue source or interim use for either
an existing principal use or vacant land.
      (2)   Examples of such uses are a drive-in movie theater utilizing an
inflatable screen located in an existing parking lot or vacant lot, utilization
of a vacant lot or parking lot for outdoor dining or other uses that would
normally not be allowed, or tents or other structures or spaces for classrooms,
offices, religious services, and the like.
   (B)   Findings.
      (1)   This part and
Chapter 116 allow for temporary uses and special events for certain uses of
limited occurrences and duration;
      (2)   Even under normal circumstances there exists an additional need for
the allowance of such activities and uses as described in this part that are
not provided in the current temporary use or special event regulations; and
      (3)   Under a public health emergency or other event that disrupts normal
operations, many of the highest and best uses of properties are no longer
allowed or feasible, such as indoor dining or open-lot retail and similar uses.
   (C)   Types of interim and part-time uses.
      (1)   Any principal, accessory, or other temporary use allowed in a
particular zoning district may be allowed as an interim or part-time use.
      (2)   An unlisted use may be allowed as an interim or part-time use in
accordance with the provisions in §
156.486.
   (D)   Parking lots. When a parking lot is established as an interim use, the
applicant shall provide perimeter and right-of-way screening in accordance with
Subchapter D, Part 2.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.498 MOBILE VENDING.
   (A)   Applicability. This section applies to mobile food vending units,
mobile food pushcarts, and mobile retail vending units.
   (B)   Zoning permit must be displayed. As specified in §
156.473, all mobile vending uses require issuance of a zoning permit prior to
setting up or selling merchandise. Permit certificates shall be attached to the
mobile vending unit where they are readily visible, and shall include the
current name, mailing address, and valid phone number of the mobile vending
unit owner.
   (C)   Business license required. All mobile vendors must obtain from the
town an appropriate, current business license.
   (D)   Allowed merchandise.
      (1)   Mobile food vending units and mobile food pushcarts. Allowed
merchandise is limited to edibles, hot and cold beverages containing no
alcohol, and items related to such merchandise.
      (2)   Mobile retail vending units. Allowed merchandise is limited to non-
perishable, non-food retail goods.
   (E)   Maximum number of mobile vendors per lot. No more than one mobile
vendor is allowed on any given lot at the same time without first obtaining a
special events permit, except that there is no limit on the number of pushcart
vendors occupying a particular lot, nor is there a limit on the number of
pushcart vendors or vendors with small, tow-behind carts occupying a shopping
center.
   (F)   Parking.
      (1)   Required parking for the primary business(es) on the lot shall be
minimally affected.
      (2)   Parking for the mobile vending unit shall not interfere with any
public roads or ingress or egress thereto.
   (G)   Signs. Temporary signs associated with a mobile vending unit are
allowed subject to
Subchapter G.
   (H)   Garbage and recycling. Garbage and recycling receptacles must be made
available for patron use and removed from the site daily by the mobile vendor.
   (I)   Compliance with state regulations.
      (1)   Mobile food vendors shall meet all applicable South Carolina
Department of Agriculture (SCDA) regulations for mobile food units and possess
a valid SCDA permit where applicable.
      (2)   Any mobile food vendor or mobile food vending unit that has been
issued a notice of health violation by any department of the State of South
Carolina that remains uncorrected upon a subsequent inspection shall have its
mobile food vendor permit revoked.
   (J)   Prohibitions. A mobile vendor shall not:
      (1)   Leave any mobile vending unit unattended;
      (2)   Conduct sales on any public road, street, highway, or right-of-way,
except that pushcart vendors may operate on a sidewalk located in a right-of-
way if the sidewalk is at least eight feet in width;
      (3)   Store, park, or leave any mobile vending unit overnight on any
street or sidewalk;
      (4)   Leave from any location without first picking up, removing, and
disposing of all trash or refuse remaining from sales made by the vendor;
      (5)   Solicit or conduct business with persons in motor vehicles;
      (6)   Sell anything other than that for which a license to vend has been
issued;
      (7)   Sound or permit the sounding of any device that produces a loud and
raucous noise, or use or operate any loudspeaker, public address system, radio,
sound amplifier, or similar device to attract the attention of the public;
      (8)   Allow any item relating to the operation of the vending business to
lean against or hang from any building or other structure lawfully placed on
public property;
      (9)   Engage in open-lot or outdoor display of products or merchandise;
      (10)   Change vending locations without first notifying the Department of
Planning, Land Use, and Neighborhoods and submitting the required application
and site plan; or
      (11)   Discharge fat, oil, grease, or wastewater into the sanitary sewer
system. All waste shall be properly stored and disposed of at a properly
designated disposal location.
   (K)   Exemptions. Catered events and special events with a special event
permit are exempt from the requirements of this part.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.499 PORTABLE STORAGE UNIT.
   (A)   Maximum number and unit size. There shall be no more than one portable
storage unit per site no larger than eight feet wide, 16 feet long, and eight
feet high.
   (B)   Maximum duration. A portable storage unit may remain on a site for the
duration of construction under a valid building permit, but not more than 60
days in any calendar year without the same.
   (C)   Location in residential districts. In residential districts, portable
storage units shall only be placed in a driveway, unless the rear of the site
is readily accessible. If the Zoning Administrator determines there is no
driveway available for placement of a portable storage unit and the rear of the
site is not readily accessible, then the portable storage unit may be placed in
a front yard, as long as the location does not obstruct the free, convenient,
and normal use of any easement dedicated for use by the public rights-of-way.
   (D)   Displacement of required parking. Portable storage units shall not
displace required parking spaces in either commercial or residential districts.
   (E)   Emergency conditions. Notwithstanding the time limitations set forth
herein, upon the issuance of a hurricane watch by a recognized government
agency, all portable storage units shall be immediately removed or secured to
withstand winds in excess of 100 miles per hour.. The removal or securing of a
portable storage unit during a hurricane watch is the responsibility of the
owner/operator of the portable storage unit.
   (F)   Maintenance.
      (1)   The owner or operator of any site on which a portable storage unit
is placed shall be responsible to ensure that the portable storage unit is in
good condition, free from evidence of deterioration, weathering,
discolorations, rust, ripping, tearing, or other holes or breaks.
      (2)   When not in use, the portable storage unit shall be kept locked.
      (3)   The owner or operator of any site on which a portable storage unit
is placed shall also be responsible that no hazardous substances shall be
stored or kept within the portable storage unit.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.500 THROUGH 156.514 RESERVED.
PART 6: SHORT-TERM RENTALS
§ 156.515 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this part is to regulate the use of residential dwelling
units as short term rentals (STR) in order to:
   (A)   Protect the integrity of the residential character of the town's
existing neighborhoods and the quality of life of its citizens;
   (B)   Establish a system to track and manage STR inventory in the town; and
   (C)   Protect the health and safety of occupants of STR units.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.516 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This part applies to all short-term rentals, as defined in §
156.517, below.
   (B)   This part and its requirements applies to any and all businesses that
qualified as a bed and breakfast under previous town ordinances.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.517 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this part, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT. A building or portion of a building arranged or
designed to provide complete independent living facilities for one or more
persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking,
and sanitation.
   SHORT-TERM RENTAL.
      (1)   The rental or lease for valuable consideration of a residential
dwelling unit, or portion thereof, for a duration of less than 30 consecutive
days;
      (2)   Home-based businesses and tourist accommodations, including hotels
(includes motels and extended stay accommodations), boutique hotels (includes
inns), and similar accommodations located on property in a commercial zoning
district are excluded from the definition of SHORT TERM RENTALS and thus are
not subject to this part.
   STR OPERATOR. Any property owner who receives payment for operating a
residential dwelling unit, or portion thereof, as a short-term rental.
For the purposes of this part, OPERATOR may be interpreted to mean property
owner.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.518 MAXIMUM NUMBER ALLOWED.
   At no time shall the maximum number of residential dwelling units used as
STRs exceed 400 (the “cap”), except as otherwise set forth in §
156.519(A)(2).
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.519 SHORT-TERM RENTAL PERMIT.
   (A)   To operate each STR, one must obtain an STR permit, which must be
applied for on an annual basis as follows:
      (1)   STR permit requirements. The following requirements must be met
prior to issuance of an STR permit:
         (a)   The approved STR application;
         (b)   Payment of STR permit application fees; and
         (c)   Payment of business license fees for STR permits held during the
previous year.
      (2)   Annual registration.
         (a)   The STR permit application and registration fees shall be paid
at the time the application is submitted. Any outstanding penalty fees must be
paid prior to an application being reviewed. For current STR operators,
applications must be submitted and associated fees paid, starting November 15
and ending midnight December 15. Current STR operators that submit an
application by the December 15 deadline, and are able to provide proof that all
requirements were met during the previous operating year, shall not be subject
to the cap, as set forth in §
156.518. Applications received from current STR operators after December 15
will be subject to the cap, as set forth in §
156.518, and will be treated as a new STR operator application.
         (b)   Beginning January 1, STR applications may be considered,
starting with the waitlist, for issuance of an STR permit if the cap has not
been reached after current STR operators have completed their applications. Any
application received for an STR that was illegally operating the prior year
will be assessed a penalty fee of $500 in addition to the standard permit fees.
If an application is found to be incomplete, the primary contact will be
notified, and will have ten business days to submit missing information. If not
received within ten business days of notification, the application will be
denied.
      (3)   Change in registered owner information. STR permits shall not
transfer upon conveyance of the property. A new owner of a residential dwelling
unit, formerly registered as an STR under the previous owner, shall be required
to submit a new STR application and review fee. Upon approval pursuant to the
provisions of this part, an STR permit can be issued to the new owner of the
residential dwelling unit. However, if the residential dwelling unit operating
as a short-term rental is owned as joint tenants with right of survivorship,
the STR permit can be transferred to another joint tenant of the residential
dwelling unit, upon the death of the short-term rental permit holder. In order
for the STR permit to be transferred under this division, the joint tenant must
be an immediate family member and must submit the information listed in
divisions (A)(3)(a) through (d) below for review. For purposes of this
division, an IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER is a spouse, parent, sibling, or child of
the short-term rental permit holder.
         (a)   A copy of the certified death certificate for the short-term
rental permit holder;
         (b)   A copy of the deed for the residential dwelling unit operating
as a short-term rental, indicating that the applicant is a joint tenant with
right of survivorship for the residential dwelling unit;
         (c)   Proof that the applicant has satisfied all requirements under
divisions (B) and (D) below; and
         (d)   A non-refundable review fee of $100 is required in conjunction
with a request to transfer the STR permit.
      (4)   Inaccurate or incomplete registration information. It is a
violation of this part for an owner to intentionally provide inaccurate
information for the registration of a residential dwelling unit used as an STR,
or to fail to provide information required by the application form.
      (5)   Designation of local agent.
         (a)   The owner of a residential dwelling unit used as an STR shall
designate a local agent who shall be responsible for operating the STR in
compliance with the law. Official notices may be served on the designated local
agent and/or the STR operator; however, any notice served on the designated
local agent shall be deemed to have been served upon the STR operator of
record.
         (b)   Nothing shall prevent the STR operator from designating
themself, or a properly formed and registered business entity, as the agent.
The agent must be able to physically respond to the site within 60 minutes in
case of emergency.
      (6)   More than one property owner or ownership by entity.
         (a)   Where more than one person has an ownership interest in a
property used as an STR, the required information shall be provided for each
owner.
         (b)   In cases where the property owner is not a person, the
information required for the applicant shall be provided for the organization
owning the STR and for the president, general manager, or other chief executive
officer of the organization.
   (B)   Annual renewal requirements. An application must be submitted annually
to the Department of Planning, Land Use, and Neighborhoods.
      (1)   Information required. The STR application shall contain the
following information:
         (a)   The address of the residential dwelling unit;
         (b)   The total number of individual residential dwelling units. For
the purposes of this part, an individual residential dwelling unit applies to
the three scenarios listed in divisions (B)(1)(b)1. through (b)3. below. One
"entity" or "guest" refers to a single contractual agreement.
            1.   An STR operator may rent their residential dwelling unit, in
its entirety, to one "guest" or "entity”;
            2.   An STR operator may reside in their residential dwelling unit,
while renting one bedroom, and up to six bedrooms, to separate "guests" or
"entities," in the fashion of a traditional bed and breakfast; or
            3.   Where there is a legally established accessory dwelling unit,
an STR operator may rent their accessory dwelling unit, in its entirety, to one
"guest" or "entity," or an STR operator may rent their principal residential
dwelling unit, in its entirety, to one "guest" or "entity.” If the owner does
not live on site, in no case shall the ADU and principal residential dwelling
unit be rented separately. Occupancy of an accessory dwelling unit is limited
to no more than three persons;
         (c)   The number of bedrooms in each STR residential dwelling unit;
         (d)   The number of parking spaces provided on site. At least one
additional off-street parking space is required for each residential dwelling
unit rented as an STR. The STR operator must designate and assign a maximum
allowable number of STR renter vehicle parking spaces on site during any rental
period, and submit a photo of designated parking spaces with the STR
application. Further, the STR operator must disclose in their advertisement, as
well as notify all renters of, the maximum number of vehicles permitted at one
time on the STR property;
         (e)   The maximum overnight occupancy, which shall not exceed two
persons per bedroom, plus two additional people for a whole-house rental;
         (f)   The names, mailing addresses, business phone numbers, personal
phone numbers, and business addresses of each STR operator and designated local
agent, if managed through an outside agency;
         (g)   The address of the primary residence where the STR operator and
designated local agent will accept notices and orders from the town;
         (h)   An affidavit signed by the STR operator certifying the property
complies with all town fire and building ordinances and neighborhood covenants
and restrictions, if any;
         (i)   Certification that the STR operator has read applicable town and
state regulations including, but not limited to, those regarding taxes, noise,
trash, parking, alcohol, animals, litter, and golf carts;
         (j)   Certification that the STR operator has prominently posted
within the property a summary of applicable town regulations including, but not
limited to, those regarding noise, trash, parking, alcohol, animals, litter,
and golf carts;
         (k)   Certification that the STR operator is aware that penalties may
be assessed for violations by tenants as detailed in §
156.522;
         (l)   Copy of general liability insurance;
         (m)   Copy of neighborhood covenants and restrictions, if any; and
         (n)   Proof of minimum rental requirement of 24 nights and four
separate bookings.
   (C)   Permit application fee. At the time of the application, a non-
refundable application fee of $250 shall be paid for owner-occupied STRs. In
the case of whole-house rentals and ADUs, a non-refundable application fee of
$500 shall be paid. These fees are established by Town Council and may be
changed from time to time.
   (D)   Business license required.
      (1)   Business licenses must be obtained by the STR operator and renewed
annually by the submittal of a business license application and tax as
established by the town in
Chapter 110.
      (2)   A business license will only be issued after the STR permit has
been issued.
      (3)   The business license number and the maximum occupancy for each STR
must be prominently displayed in the STR.
   (E)   Other taxes. STR operators are subject to local, county, and state
taxes including, but not limited to property, sales, use, and accommodations
taxes, and are liable for the payment thereof as established by state law and
this Code.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.520 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR SHORT-TERM RENTALS.
   (A)   All STR operators and/or designated local agents responsible for the
leasing of STRs are required to maintain the following:
      (1)   The name, address, and other contact information of each signatory
included on the rental agreement;
      (2)   A document signed by the STR operator and/or designated local agent
responsible for renting the STR certifying the number of persons intended to
occupy the dwelling; and
      (3)   The STR operator and/or designated local agent shall update the
information required by this division for each rental to different tenants or
occupants.
   (B)   The STR operator and/or designated local agent shall provide the
following to each person signing a rental agreement as a responsible party for
an STR:
      (1)   The address of the STR and emergency contact numbers;
      (2)   The name and contact information for the STR operator or designated
local agent; and
      (3)   A copy of the town's rules and regulations including, but not
limited to, regarding noise, trash, parking, litter, maximum occupancy, and
state golf cart regulations.
   (C)   The number of STR permits issued to one permitholder is limited to
two.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division, a PERMITHOLDER is defined as the
owner or owners of any real property seeking to operate as an STR.
      (2)   If a property is owned by an individual or individuals, the
permitholder is the individual owner or owners of the property.
      (3)   If the property is owned by a legal entity, the permitholder is the
registered agent or other legal representative of the legal entity.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.521 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   The use of any structure as an STR that does not meet the definition
of a residential dwelling unit is prohibited.
   (B)   STRs are prohibited within any neighborhood that specifically
prohibits short-term rental activity by way of their enforceable covenants and
restrictions.
   (C)   The use of any structure as an STR that is defined per Subchapter N as
a triplex, quadplex, or multiplex dwelling is prohibited.
   (D)   The hosting of events such as, but not limited to, weddings, parties,
or similar gatherings, consisting of more than the maximum overnight occupancy
of each STR, which shall not exceed two persons per bedroom plus two additional
people per rental dwelling, are prohibited.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.522 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Violations. It is a violation of this part to:
      (1)   Operate an STR without complying with the requirements of this part
and the Town Code;
      (2)   Expand the allowable occupancy of an STR without obtaining a new
permit;
      (3)   Advertise, hold out, offer, or otherwise make available, a property
as being available as an STR without first complying with the requirements of
this part, including the following:
         (a)   Advertise an STR as being available for more overnight occupants
than are permitted pursuant to this part;
         (b)   Advertise more STRs on a property than are permitted pursuant to
this part; and
         (c)   Advertise a property as an STR, "special event" house or similar
use for events or parties exceeding the maximum overnight occupancy of each
rental dwelling;
      (4)   Operate an STR that has received four or more notifications by the
town of occupant or guest violations including, but not limited to, the town's
noise ordinance, excessive trash or debris, or exceeding maximum occupancy
during any rolling one-year period.
         (a)   Conveyance of the residential dwelling unit to a new owner shall
cause the rolling one-year period to restart, unless the new owner retains some
common ownership interest with the prior owner.
         (b)   For the purpose of determining the total number of notifications
to the STR operator, all written warnings and violations occurring within a
single rental contract period shall be considered one violation.
   (B)   Penalties.
      (1)   No permit may be issued or approved unless the requirements of this
chapter, or any ordinance adopted pursuant to it, have been met.
      (2)   A violation of this part may result in a penalty pursuant to the
general penalty provisions of §
10.99, revocation or suspension of a business license pursuant to §
110.15, or the non-renewal of the license.
         (a)   The STR operator shall be subject to graduated penalties as the
STR operator receives notifications as provided in this section.
         (b)   The permittee may respond within ten days of receiving the
certified notice, with evidence that demonstrates that the notice was issued in
error, and town staff may reconsider and withdraw the notice. Final decisions
shall be made by the Zoning Administrator in writing and shall be provided to
the permittee, or their agent, within 30 days of the permittee's request. The
notice of violation shall be rescinded should the town fail to respond within
the proscribed time period.
         (c)   The graduated penalties are:
            1.   First violation. A description sent to the STR operator of the
violation and a warning that progressive action shall be taken by the town in
the case of further violations.
            2.   Second violation. A description sent to the STR operator of
the violation and a second warning that progressive action shall be taken by
the town in the case of further violations.
            3.   Third violation. A description sent to the STR operator of the
violation, a penalty of $500, and a third warning that progressive action shall
be taken by the town in the case of further violations.
            4.   Fourth violation. A description sent to the STR operator of
the violation, notice of the STR permit revocation, and initiation of business
license revocation procedures pursuant to §
110.15, or notice that the license will not be renewed.
   (C)   The owner of a residential dwelling unit operating as a short-term
rental without a valid permit shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not
to exceed $500, or imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both, and/or
shall be subject to a civil penalty that shall not exceed $1,000, not including
attorney's fees and costs to collect and enforce the civil penalty, including,
but not limited to, any proceedings to create a lien on any property owned by
the owner of the residential dwelling unit for any unpaid civil penalties.
Further, the owner of a residential dwelling unit operating as a short-term
rental without a valid permit cannot apply for any STR permit within one year
from the date of conviction and/or date of assessment of civil penalty.
   (D)   Administrative revocation.
      (1)   Notwithstanding the general penalty provisions of §
10.99, the Zoning Administrator may revoke an STR permit if the STR has
violated the provisions of this part on three or more occasions during a
rolling one-year period.
      (2)   Provided, however, an STR permit may be immediately revoked if the
Planning Director determines:
         (a)   The STR has Building Code violations;
         (b)   There is no business license for the STR;
         (c)   The STR is being used in a manner not consistent with the permit
issued for the STR use; or
         (d)   The advertisement for the STR does not include the town-issued
permit number and business license number.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.523 APPEALS.
   If a permit is administratively revoked or an application is
administratively denied, an STR operator may appeal the Zoning Administrator's
administrative decision revoking or denying the permit to the Board of Zoning
Appeals within 30 calendar days from the date of the denial or revocation. All
appeals shall be addressed in accordance with the appeal procedures of
Subchapter I, Part 17.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.524 SUBSEQUENT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Once a town-issued permit and/or a business license for STR use has
been revoked, no new permit and/or business license for an STR use shall be
issued to the same STR operator for a period of one year from the date of
revocation.
   (B)   Upon expiration of the revocation period, a new permit application for
an STR use must be submitted in accordance with this part.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.525 THROUGH 156.534 RESERVED.
PART 7: SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS
SUBPART 7.1: SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES WITHIN THE RIGHT-OF-WAY
§ 156.535 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   The purpose of this subpart is to establish procedures and standards,
consistent with all applicable federal and state, laws, for the consideration,
permitting, siting, construction, installation, collocation, modification,
operation, regulation, and removal of small wireless facilities (“SWF”) in the
right-of-way of streets and roads.
   (B)   The intent of this subpart is to:
      (1)   Establish basic criteria for applications to install and/or
collocate SWF in the right-of-way and authorize the Department of Planning,
Land Use, and Neighborhoods to develop, publish, and, from time to time, amend
application forms and other associated materials to provide clear guidance to
applicants and staff;
      (2)   Ensure that SWF are appropriately designed, constructed, modified,
maintained, and removed when no longer in use in conformance with all
applicable health and safety regulations;
      (3)   Preserve the character of the Town of Mount Pleasant by minimizing
the potentially adverse visual impact of SWF through careful design, siting,
landscaping, and camouflaging techniques to blend these facilities into their
environment to the maximum extent practicable;
      (4)   Establish an application process and structure for payment of fees
and charges to be uniformly applied to all applicants, operators, and owners of
SWF for such facilities;
      (5)   Comply with, and not conflict with or preempt, all applicable state
and federal laws including ,without limitation, Section 101(a) and Section 704
of the Telecommunications Act, Pub. L. 104-104,101 Stats. 56, 70 (Feb. 8, 1996)
(codified as 47 U.S.C. §§ 253(a), 332(c)(7)), as may be amended or superseded,
and Section 6409(a) of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act, Pub.
L. 112-96, 126 Stat. 156 (Feb. 22,2012) (codified as 47 U.S.C. § 1455(a)), as
may be amended or superseded, and all FCC rules and regulations to interpret
and implement applicable federal statutes.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.536 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Subject to the South Carolina State Code and approval of an
application under this subpart, an operator may locate and/or collocate a SWF
and construct, maintain, modify, operate, or replace wireless support
structures in, along, across, upon, and under the town right-of-way.
   (B)   An operator shall comply with this subpart and any rules, regulations,
and design guidelines adopted by the town that are consistent with this subpart
for the installation and/or collocation of a SWF and construction, maintenance,
modification, operation, or replacement of wireless support structures in,
along, across, upon, and under the town right-of-way, unless otherwise
prohibited by state or federal law.
   (C)   All SWF shall be constructed and maintained so as not to impede or
impair public safety or the legal use of the right-of-way by the town, the
traveling public, or other public utilities.
   (D)   Nothing in this subpart precludes the town from applying its generally
applicable health, safety, and welfare regulations when acting on an
application for a permit for a SWF in the town right-of-way.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.537 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General use of terms.
      (1)   The terms, phrases, words, and their derivations used below shall
have the meanings given in this section.
      (2)   All terms used in the definition of any other term shall have their
meaning as otherwise defined in this section.
      (3)   The words “shall” and “will” are mandatory and “may” is permissive.
      (4)   Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.
   (B)   Defined terms.
      CABLE, COMMUNICATIONS, FIBER, OR ELECTRIC EASEMENT. An easement, granted
to a cable or video service provider, a communications service provider
(including without limitation a telephone utility), a fiber optics cable
services provider, or an electric services provider created or authorized by
state law to provide such services, that runs parallel to and abuts or within a
rights-of-way and is occupied by existing utility poles or wireless support
structures carrying electric distribution lines, wires, cable, conduit, fiber
optic cable for telecommunications, cable or electric service or supporting
municipal street lights, or security lights. The term CABLE, COMMUNICATIONS,
FIBER, OR ELECTRIC EASEMENT excludes easements for service drops or lines
connecting the customer's premises to the cable, communications, fiber, or
electrical provider.
      COLLOCATION OR COLLOCATE. The placement of aerials and other facilities
belonging to two or more communication service providers on a single wireless
support structure.
      COVERED AREAS. Means the surface of, and the space above and below, any
public “rights-of-way,” “ROW,” “town rights-of-way,” “public rights-of-way,”
and/or “cable, communications, fiber or electric easement” as those terms are
defined herein.
      DECORATIVE POLE OR STRUCTURE. A pole, arch, or structure placed in the
public way specifically designed and placed for aesthetic purposes and on which
no appurtenances or attachments have been placed or are permitted to be placed
in accordance with nondiscriminatory town practices except for any of the
following:
         (a)   Electric lighting;
         (b)   Specially designed informational or directional signage;
         (c)   Temporary holiday or special event attachments; or
         (d)   Small wireless facilities.
      DESIGN GUIDELINES. Those detailed design guidelines, specifications, and
examples promulgated, after public notice, by the Planning, Land Use, and
Neighborhoods Department or Commercial Design Review Board, or the Old Village
Historic District Commission that address, on a nondiscriminatory basis, the
design and installation of facilities in the public rights-of-way, insofar as
they do not conflict with any federal or state law, rule, or regulation,
including this subpart.
      HISTORIC DISTRICT. An area that is zoned or otherwise designated as a
historic district under municipal, state, or federal law and for which the town
maintains and enforces in on a uniform and nondiscriminatory basis with regard
to all users of the public ROW pursuant to this subchapter.
      LOCATE. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace SWF.
      RIGHT-OF-WAY. The surface of and the space above and below the paved or
unpaved portions of any public street, public road, public highway, public
freeway, public lane, public path, public bike path, public way, public alley,
public court, public sidewalk, public boulevard, public parkway, public drive
and any other land dedicated or otherwise designated for the same now or
hereafter held by the town. RIGHT-OF-WAY shall not include private easements.
      SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY (SWF). An antenna, its wireless support
structure, and any associated ancillary equipment, including electric meter,
concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based
enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and
vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services.
      TOWN-OWNED POLE.
         (a)   A utility pole owned or operated by the town in covered areas,
including a utility pole that provides lighting or traffic control functions,
or other law enforcement functions, including light poles, traffic signals, and
structures for signage, and
         (b)   A pole or similar structure owned or operated by the town in a
covered area that supports only wireless facilities.
      TRANSMISSION POLE. A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or
in part to carry electric transmission (as opposed to distribution) lines.
      UTILITY POLE. A pole or similar structure that is designed or used for
carrying electric distribution lines or for carrying cables or wires for
electric, cable, or telecommunications service or for lighting, traffic
control, or directional signage.
      WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A freestanding structure, including a
monopole, decorative pole, town-owned pole, transmission pole, and utility
pole, or other existing or proposed structure designed to support or capable of
supporting SWF.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.538 APPLICATION PROCESS.
   (A)   Application required.
      (1)   In accordance with federal and state law and town code, an operator
must apply to the town to locate a new SWT and/or collocate any portion of a
SWF on an existing wireless support structure or to construct, maintain,
modify, operate, or replace wireless support structures in, along, across,
upon, and under the town rights-of-way.
      (2)   Anyone seeking to perform any of these actions shall first duly
file a written application with the town, in accordance with the requirements
in this subpart and additional requirements set forth in any design guidelines
as modified from time to time by the town.
   (B)   Consent and permit required.
      (1)   No person shall occupy or use the right-of-way without first
obtaining, under this chapter or state law, any requisite consent of and permit
from the town. Before placing SWF in the right-of-way, an operator must apply
for and receive a general right-of-way permit.
      (2)   This provision shall not be construed to waive any application fees
or any other construction or work permit necessary for work in the town.
      (3)   While notice to the town is required, a permit from the town shall
not be required for routine maintenance of wireless facilities.
   (C)   Required application materials. Unless otherwise required by state or
federal law, all applicants shall submit to the town all materials and
information associated with each application as outlined below for the
application to be considered complete:
      (1)   The applicant’s name, address, telephone number and e-mail address;
      (2)   Facility owner’s name, address, telephone number and email address,
if different from applicant;
      (3)   The names, addresses, telephone numbers, and e-mail addresses of
all consultants, if any, acting on behalf of the applicant with respect to the
filing of the application;
      (4)   A general description of the proposed scope of work for the
location or collocation of the SWF. The scope and detail of such description
shall be appropriate to the nature and character of the work to be performed,
with special emphasis on those matters, including but not limited to sub-
surface utilities, likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
      (5)   Identification of any consultant that is acting on behalf of the
applicant and that is authorized to speak with the town, or a designee of the
town, on the area of consultation for the applicant even if the applicant
cannot be available;
      (6)   Verification from an appropriate representative of the applicant
that the SWF shall comply with this subpart, including without implication all
applicable design guidelines;
      (7)   Verification of payment of the annual municipal consent or
administrative fee for telecommunications companies to use public rights-of-
ways pursuant to S.C. Code § 58-9-2230 and acknowledgment of its continuing
annual obligation;
      (8)   Verification of municipal business license, if applicable;
      (9)   Evidence the applicant is duly authorized to do business in South
Carolina;
      (10)   Evidence the applicant has received any necessary certificate of
public convenience and necessity or other required authority from the South
Carolina Public Service Commission or the Federal Communications Commission or
evidence that it is not required;
      (11)   A copy of an approved South Carolina Department of Transportation
encroachment permit and all documents required by SCDOT as part of the
encroachment permit application, if the proposed location is within a SCDOT
right-of-way; and
      (12)   If the proposed location is outside of a SCDOT right-of-way, the
applicant must provide a statement that the applicant has a lease, attachment
agreement or other authorization from the owner of the utility pole or
structure proposed for collocation.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.539 FEES AND COSTS.
   (A)   Franchise fees. Pursuant to S.C. Code § 58-9-2230, each individual
applicant will be subject to an annual franchise or consent fee.
   (B)   Application processing costs. Unless otherwise provided by law,
including without limitation S.C. Code § 58-9-2230, all applications for
permits pursuant to this subpart shall be accompanied by an application
processing cost of $100. Application costs for small wireless facilities
addressed in a consolidated application shall be $100 each for the first five
small wireless facilities and $50 for each additional small wireless facility,
up to a maximum of 20 small wireless facilities.
   (C)   Compensation. In addition to the applicable fee as specified above,
every permit shall include as a condition the applicant’s agreement to pay such
lawful franchise fees, business license taxes, administrative fees, and consent
fees as are permitted under applicable South Carolina and federal law in
addition to all applicable ad valorem taxes, service fees, sales taxes, or
other taxes and fees as may now or hereafter be lawfully imposed on other
businesses within the town.
   (D)   Cease payment. A wireless services provider is authorized to remove
its facilities at any time from a town-owned pole in covered areas and cease
paying the annual rate to the town as of the next due date for payment
following the removal, provided; however, the provider pay its pro-rata share
of the remaining term and expenses, if any.
   (E)   Make-ready. For town-owned utility poles in covered areas, the
applicant shall reimburse the town for expenses for any reasonable make-ready
work, if any are required. The town shall provide a good faith estimate for any
make-ready work necessary to enable the pole to support the requested SWF,
including pole replacement if necessary, within 30 days after receipt of a
completed request. Make-ready work including any pole replacement shall be
completed within 60 days of written acceptance of the good faith estimate by
the wireless services provider.
   (F)   Tax liabilities and assessments not applicable. Placement of SWF in
the right-of-way or attachment of any portion of a SWF to a wireless support
structure and any fees associated therewith shall not subject the town to any
state or local tax liabilities or assessments.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.540 APPLICATION REVIEW TIMEFRAMES.
   (A)   Permit application review timeframes.
      (1)   Collocation of SWF. Absent an agreement to the contrary between the
town and the applicant that is confirmed by email or other writing, the town
shall grant or deny an application to collocate, or to replace or modify any
portion of a SWF on, or associated with, an existing wireless support structure
not later than 75 days after the date of filing by an entity of a completed
application.
      (2)   Installation of New SWF. Absent an agreement to the contrary
between the town and the applicant that is confirmed by email or other writing,
the town shall grant or deny an application for a SWF within the right-of-way
not later than 90 days after the date of filing by an entity of a completed
application.
      (3)   Removal of SWF. The town shall act on requests to remove wireless
support structures associated with SWF from the right-of-way typical to the
review timeframes for the general right-of-way permit required for this
activity.
      (4)   Eligible facilities request. The town shall act on an eligible
facilities request in accordance with 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001 not later than 60
days after the date of filing by an entity of a complete application.
      (5)   Completeness. Within ten business days of receiving an application,
the town will determine and notify the applicant whether the application is
complete; or if an application is incomplete, the town must specifically
identify the missing information.
   (B)   Application denials.
      (1)   The town shall not unreasonably withhold or deny an application for
a permit to place a SWF within the right-of-way.
      (2)   If an application is denied, the town will provide in writing its
reasons for denying the request, including, if applicable, specific references
to any applicable law supporting the denial.
      (3)   Notwithstanding an initial denial, the applicant may cure the
deficiencies identified by the town and resubmit the application within 30 days
of the denial, and the town will approve or deny the revised application within
30 days of receipt of it, unless additional deficiencies are discovered.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.541 CONSOLIDATED APPLICATION FOR MULTIPLE SWF.
   Applicants seeking to construct, modify, collocate, or replace more than one
SWF, may file, at the applicant’s discretion, a consolidated application for up
to 20 requests in a single application and receive a single permit for the
construction, modification, collocation, or replacement of the SWF subject to
the following:
   (A)   This single application may be filed for multiple SWF only if they are
of substantially the same type;
   (B)   The town must separately address SWF for which incomplete information
has been received or which are denied and it must grant a permit for any and
all sites in a single application that it does not deny subject to the
requirements of this subpart; and
   (C)   In the case of a consolidated application, the fees may be cumulative.
However, the town, at its discretion may opt to reduce such fees to encourage
consolidated application submittals.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.542 APPEARANCE, MAXIMUM HEIGHT, AND PROXIMITY OF SWF IN COVERED AREAS.
   (A)   Maximum height. For the purposes described herein, maximum height
includes the total height of the support structure and the small wireless
facility combined. The maximum height, of a newly installed or a collocated SWF
is limited to:
      (1)   Maximum height of existing street light poles or 40 feet (where no
street light poles exist) in any area zoned exclusively for single-family
residential use or subject to any requirements imposed by the town’s Zoning
Code or an overlay district;
      (2)   Applicant may collocate on existing, conforming street light poles
where already existing or replace with new support structure or pole with the
same appearance and materials as existing, conforming poles;
      (3)   Fifty feet in any other area, subject to any restrictions imposed
by the town’s Zoning Code, overlay district, design guidelines, or neighborhood
restrictions; or
      (4)   Where there are no existing street light poles, SWF must include
the same or substantially similar materials and appearance as those of approved
street light poles in commercial corridors.
   (B)   The town may require a proposed wireless facility be designed to not
be significantly more readily apparent or plainly visible (to a reasonable
person of ordinary sensibilities) from covered areas than existing utility
structures, poles, and equipment located within 500 linear feet on the same
covered area as the subject utility pole or single-pole support structure.
   (C)   Where small wireless facilities are determined to be appropriate, the
use of reasonable concealment treatments, low profile equipment and control
boxes, and screening may be required to avoid significant negative impacts on
the character and visual aesthetics of the area; provided, however, such
requirements may be waived by the town upon a showing that the particular
location of a SWF does not warrant such treatment.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.543 APPLICABLE DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The Town Planning, Land Use, and Neighborhoods Department shall, after
public notice, promulgate detailed design guidelines with objective,
technically feasible criteria applied in a nondiscriminatory manner that
reasonably match the aesthetics and character of the immediate area regarding
all of the following, which the town shall consider in reviewing an
application:
      (1)   The location of any ground-mounted SWF;
      (2)   The location of a SWF on a wireless support structure;
      (3)   The appearance and concealment of SWF, including those relating to
materials used for arranging, screening, and landscaping; and
      (4)   The design and appearance of a wireless support structure.
   (B)   The design guidelines will provide examples of SWF preferences
including visual depictions.
   (C)   The provisions in this subpart shall not limit or prohibit the Town
Planning, Land Use, and Neighborhoods Department’s discretion to promulgate and
make publicly available other information, materials, or requirements in
addition to, and separate from, design guidelines so long as the information,
materials, or requirements do not conflict with state or federal law.
   (D)   The Town Planning, Land Use, and Neighborhoods Department shall have
authority to update or supplement the design guidelines to address relevant
changes in law, technology, or administrative processes. In the event of any
conflict between the design guidelines and the standards articulated in this
Code of Ordinances, the ordinance shall take precedence over the language of
the design guidelines.
   (E)   Wireless support structure design standards.
      (1)   Aesthetic approaches can vary depending on type of facility (i.e.,
freestanding, town-owned, transmission, utility, and the like). However,
general design guidance and examples are provided below. In recognition of the
different features and locations where SWF are placed, these guidelines must be
met to the maximum extent practicable as determined by the Director of
Planning, Land Use, and Neighborhoods.
      (2)   General guidance.
         (a)   SWF equipment must be indistinguishable from the support pole or
structure to the greatest degree possible using matching colors, textures, and
materials. The antennas and related equipment shall be in a color that will
provide the most camouflage.
         (b)   Enclosing all wires, antennas, and other small wireless facility
equipment.
         (c)   Screening and equipment enclosures shall blend with or enhance
the surrounding context in terms of scale, form, texture, materials, and color.
Equipment shall be concealed as much as possible by blending into the natural
and/or physical environment. All screening shall be at the discretion of the
town.
            1.   Ground based wireless facilities, shall be painted forest
green, unless determined otherwise by the Building Official. Alternatively,
ground-based facilities may be made more decorative using artwork that is
coordinated and approved by the Director of the Parks and Recreation Department
under the town’s public art program. When on a black pole, wireless facilities
shall be painted black.
            2.   When trees, bushes, rocks, and other forms of landscaping are
used for screening, such landscaping must match the predominant landscaping
form and species within one block of the facilities.
         (d)   Casing to enclose all wires, antennas, and other small wireless
facility equipment may be mounted on top of existing and new poles in a
cylinder shape to look like an extension of the pole.
         (e)   Brand logos and other signage are prohibited on all SWF except
signage required to warn of RF emissions, instructions for disabling the SWF,
contact information to be used by workers on or near the SWF, and as otherwise
required by federal or state law. Signage will be no larger than required to be
legible from street level.
      (3)   Types. The town’s order of preference for poles or support
structures is as follows:
         (a)   Monopole/town-owned pole;
         (b)   Decorative pole or structure;
         (c)   Existing or proposed structures designed to support or capable
of supporting small wireless facilities; and
         (d)   Existing wooden poles or their replacement.
      (4)   Examples. Figures 156.543-1, 156.543-2, and 156.543-3 illustrate
examples of SWF added to existing poles.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12996.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-12998.png]
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.544 HISTORIC AND DESIGN DISTRICTS.
   (A)   This section may not be construed to limit a municipality’s authority
to enforce historic preservation zoning regulations consistent with the
preservation of local zoning authority under 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7), the
requirements for facility modifications under 47 U.S.C. § 1455(a), or the
National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 (54 U.S.C. §§ 300101 et seq.), and
the regulations adopted to implement those laws.
   (B)   As a condition for approval of new small wireless facilities or new
wireless support structure in the Old Village Historic District (OVHD) or the
districts subject to Subchapter H, the wireless services provider shall comply
with the design and aesthetic standards of the OVHD or
Subchapter H to minimize the negative impact to the aesthetics in those
districts.
   (C)   If design and concealment treatments are determine d on review by the
town to be insufficient to mitigate harm to the OVHD or the districts subject
to
Subchapter H, the application will be denied.
   (D)    Existing neighborh ood and supplemental review districts.
      (1)   Nothing in this subpart shall prohibit or otherwise limit the town
from establishing subsequent supplemental review districts, provided however,
that facilities and structures for which a permit was approved or deemed
approved pursuant to this subpart prior to the establishment of the
supplemental review district remain subject to the provisions of this subpart,
including routine maintenance and replacement of those facilities and
structures.
      (2)   If a wireless services provider or a wireless infrastructure
provider replaces such facilities in a manner that does not comply with this
subpart, or if a wireless services provider or a wireless infrastructure
provider relocates such facilities, such replacement or relocation is subject
to the then-existing provisions and requirements of the supplemental review
district.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.545 COVERED AREAS IN NEIGHBORHOODS ZONED FOR RESIDENTIAL USE.
   To the extent practicable, and subject to town overlay or historic districts
and town design guidelines, SWF installed in residential neighborhoods shall
utilize single pole support structures of like appearance, material, color, or
other distinguishing characteristic as existing neighborhood street light
fixtures. Total maximum height of the SWF, including all components shall be no
more than 40 feet.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.546 GENERAL CONDITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS OF PERMIT APPROVAL.
   (A)   Standard conditions of approval. SWF in rights-of-way shall be
considered a permitted use. Permission to site SWF in the right-of-way shall be
conditioned on compliance with the standard conditions of approval provided in
this subpart.
   (B)   Permit effect and duration. The town’s approval term for construction
of an attachment to a wireless support structure shall be for a period of nine
months. A permit from the town authorizes an applicant to undertake only
certain activities in accordance with this subpart, and does not create a
property right or grant any authority whatsoever to the applicant to impinge
upon the rights of others who may already have an interest in the covered area.
   (C)   Compliance with all applicable laws and Town Code.
      (1)   Permittee shall always maintain compliance with all applicable
federal, state, and local laws, regulations, ordinances, or other rules.
      (2)   If state or federal standards and regulations are amended, the
owners of any portion of SWF governed by this subpart shall bring any
facilities and/or structures into compliance with the revised standards and
regulations within the time mandated by such amendment or, if no time is
mandated, as soon as practicable under the circumstances, but no longer than 90
days.
      (3)   The town is not required to provide notice of any amendments in
order to trigger this responsibility.
      (4)   Failure to bring SWF into compliance with any revised standards and
regulations shall constitute grounds for removal at the owner’s expense.
   (D)   Inspections; emergencies.
      (1)   The town or its designee may inspect any portion of SWF in the
right-of-way upon reasonable notice to the permittee. The permittee shall
cooperate with all inspections.
      (2)   The town reserves the right to support, repair, disable, or remove
any elements of the facility in emergencies or when the facility threatens
imminent harm to persons or property.
      (3)   If circumstances permit, the town shall notify the wireless service
provider and provide the opportunity to move such facilities, poles, or support
structures prior to the town doing so, and the town shall notify the provider
after doing so.
   (E)   Relocation or adjustment as requested by town. If requested by the
town, in order to accomplish construction and maintenance activities directly
related to improvements for the health, safety, and welfare of the public, an
operator shall relocate or adjust its facilities within the right-of-way at no
cost to the town, as long as such request similarly binds all users in or on
such public way. Such relocation or adjustment shall be completed in accordance
with law.
   (F)   Contact information for responsible parties. Within ten days of any
changes to any of the contact information provided in the application, the
applicant shall provide notice of the change to the Director of the Planning,
Land Use, and Neighborhoods Department.
   (G)   Indemnification. Any entity who owns or operates SWF in the right-of-
way shall indemnify, protect, defend, and hold the town and its elected
officials, officers, employees, agents, and volunteers harmless against any and
all claims, lawsuits, judgments, costs, liens, losses, expenses, fees (to
include reasonable attorney fees), and costs of defense, proceedings, actions,
demands, causes of action, liability, and suits of any kind and nature,
including personal or bodily injury or death, property damage or other harm for
which recovery of damages is sought, to the extent that it is caused by the
negligence of the entity who owns or operates the SWF and wireless service in
the right-of-way, any agent, officer, director, representative, employee,
affiliate, or subcontractor of the operator, or their respective officers,
agents, employees, directors, or representatives while installing, repairing,
or maintaining facilities in the right-of-way.
   (H)   Good condition required. SWF shall at all times be kept and maintained
in good condition, order, and repair by qualified maintenance and construction
personnel, so that the same shall not menace or endanger the health, safety or
welfare of any person or property. All SWF shall be subject to generally
applicable property maintenance requirements and to visual inspection by code
enforcement officers.
   (I)   Relocation for public improvement projects. To the extent that the
town requires it to do so in the reasonable exercise of its police powers,
permittee shall remove and relocate the permitted SWF at permittee’s sole
expense to accommodate construction of a public improvement project by the
town.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.547 COVERED AREAS IN ANY ZONING DISTRICT IN WHICH OVERHEAD LINES HAVE
BEEN PLACED UNDERGROUND.
   (A)   The town is currently engaged in having certain overhead utility lines
placed underground for aesthetic and enhanced service reasons.
   (B)   Within 90 days following written notice from the town, any wireless
service provider shall, at its own expense, disconnect, remove, relocate,
change, or alter the position of any SWF within the rights-of-way whenever the
town, in the reasonable exercise of it police powers, has determined that such
removal, relocation, change, or alteration is reasonably necessary to meet the
objectives of having the overhead utility lines being placed underground and
will ensure public health, safety, and welfare. Subject to the above and upon a
determination by Planning staff, applicant may be allowed to replace any SWF
with a decorative style support structure, meeting decorative pole appearance,
materials, concealment, and underground support structure requirements in
compliance with this subpart.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.548 REMOVAL OF SWF IF USE DISCONTINUED OR ABANDONED.
   (A)   If a SWF is discontinued for a period of 60 days or is abandoned
without notice from the owner, it shall be considered abandoned and the town
may remove it at the owner’s expense to ensure the public health, safety, and
welfare if the town provides written notice of its intent to remove under this
section and, within 30 days after receipt of such written notice, the owner of
the SWF does not reply to the town in writing that the SWF continues to be in
operation.
   (B)   The town reserves the right to inspect and to request information from
the operator, which the operator shall provide following such request, as to
the continued use of the operator’s SWF(s) within the right-of-way.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.549 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Prevention of failures and accidents. Any person who owns or operates
a portion of a SWT sited in the right-of-way shall always employ ordinary and
reasonable care and install and maintain it using industry standard technology
for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injury,
or nuisance to the public.
   (B)   Compliance with fire safety and FCC regulations. All SWF, including,
but not limited to wires, cables, fixtures, and other equipment, shall be
installed and maintained in compliance with the requirements of the National
Electric Code, all FCC, state, and local regulations, and in such manner that
will not interfere with the use of other property or any existing public/
private utilities or public safety systems.
   (C)   Marker or insignia required. Each attachment of wireless facilities
should bear a marker or insignia legible at street level, identifying the owner
of the SWF and contact information.
   (D)   Surety bond or equivalent financial tool for cost of removal.
      (1)   All owners must procure and provide to the town a bond, or must
provide proof of an equivalent financial mechanism, to ensure compliance with
all provisions of this code. The bond or equivalent financial method must
specifically cover the cost of removal of unused or abandoned SWF or damage to
town property caused by an operator or its agent of each SWF in case the town
has to remove or pay for its removal.
      (2)   Acceptable alternatives to a bond include: a fund set-aside; a
letter of credit; and a demonstration that the owner has operated in the town
for at least the years and that the owner or its parent or affiliated companies
maintain a net worth of at least $300,000.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.550 APPEALS.
   Any determination rendered by the Planning, Land Use, and Neighborhoods
Department may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with
Subchapter I, Part 17.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.551 SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions of this subpart are severable. If any provision or division,
or the application of any provision or division to any person or circumstances
is held invalid, the remaining provisions, divisions, and applications of such
ordinance to other persons or circumstances shall not be made invalid as well.
It is declared to be the intent of this section that the remaining provisions
would have been adopted had such invalid provisions not been included in this
subpart when originally adopted by Council.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.552 PENALTIES.
   (A)   In addition to any other penalties set forth in this chapter, any
person or permittee violating any provision in this subpart shall be guilty of
a minor misdemeanor. Each day the violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
   (B)   Nothing herein shall prevent the town from taking any other lawful
action, including civil actions at law or equity, including temporary
restraining orders, preliminary injunctions and permanent injunctions, as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violations.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.553 THROUGH 156.559 RESERVED.
SUBPART 7.2: TELECOMMUNICATIONS  TOWERS
§ 156.560 TITLE.
   This subpart shall be known and may be cited as the Town of Mount Pleasant
telecommunications tower regulations.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.561 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of the telecommunications tower regulations is to ensure
that residents, public safety operations and businesses have reliable access to
wireless telecommunications networks and communications services, while
preserving the intrinsic aesthetic character of the community by regulating the
placement, construction, and modification of wireless communications
facilities.
   (B)   By enacting these telecommunications tower regulations, it is the
town's intent to:
      (1)   Ensure sufficient wireless infrastructure to support public safety
communications;
      (2)   Ensure access to reliable wireless communications throughout all
areas of the town;
      (3)   Encourage the use of existing structures for the location and
collocation of telecommunications facilities;
      (4)   Facilitate the responsible deployment of telecommunications
facilities in appropriate areas; and
      (5)   Ensure protection of the public health, safety, convenience, order,
appearance, prosperity and general welfare of the town.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.562 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of the telecommunications tower regulations, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
   CALF. A portable cell site that involves the temporary placement of
additional antennas on an existing telecommunications tower, with the ancillary
equipment located on a mobile platform or vehicle utilized to provide temporary
or emergency service.
   CARRIER ON WHEELS OR CELL ON WHEELS (COW). A portable self-contained cell
site that is normally vehicle-mounted and contains a telescoping boom as the
antenna support structure that can be moved to a location and set up to provide
wireless services on a temporary or emergency basis.
   COLLOCATION ON TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER. The placement of antennas on an
existing telecommunications tower without the need to construct a new support
structure or extend the height of the existing tower.
   MONOPOLE. A single, free-standing pole-type structure supporting one or more
antenna.
   STEALTH TECHNOLOGY. The treatment of telecommunications apparatus that
integrates the same into an architectural feature of an existing structure, or
is so designed that its purpose as a structure for providing wireless services
is not readily apparent to a casual observer.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER. A tower, pole, or similar vertical structure that
supports a telecommunications antenna and is utilized to provide wireless
transmission of voice, data, images, or other information.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.563 PERMITTED USE.
   (A)   The collocation of additional antennas for existing or new providers
on an existing telecommunications tower, located in any zoning district
regardless of conforming or compliant status, that do not increase the height
of the existing tower and only involves the installation of additional antennas
and ground-mounted equipment in the general vicinity of existing ground-mounted
equipment and within the setback area of the zoning district, is a permitted
use.
   (B)   The location or collocation of providers on existing buildings or
structures, such as water towers, electrical transmission or distribution
towers, and likewise, located in any zoning district, provided that the overall
height of the building or structure is not increased by more than 30 feet, is a
permitted use.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.564 CONDITIONAL USE.
   Monopole, stealth, free-standing, or guy-wire telecommunications towers are
allowed in the LI, Light Industrial District, subject to the following
conditions:
   (A)   The applicant must provide written verification that no feasible
alternative exists to the construction of a new tower, such as collocation on
an existing tower or structure;
   (B)   The tower owner must provide a written agreement acknowledging that
additional providers may collocate on the new tower at the prevailing market
rate, subject to the engineering capabilities of the structure;
   (C)   The minimum setback from the center of the tower to an adjacent
residentially zoned property is equal to the height of the tower, measured to
the closest property line;
   (D)   The minimum setback from the center of the tower to all other adjacent
non-residentially zoned property or street right-of-way is determined by the
fall zone, such that in the event of failure the fall zone shall prevent the
tower from encroaching onto adjoining properties of street rights-of-way; and
   (E)   In all cases the fall zone must remain inside the lot lines of the
property on which the tower is located.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.565 SPECIAL EXCEPTION USE.
   (A)   Telecommunications towers in the AB-1, Areawide Business-1 District,
and AB-2, Areawide Business-2 District, are allowed as a special exception,
subject to the provisions of
Subchapter I, Part 9 and the following provisions:
      (1)   The applicant must meet the requirements of §
156.564; and
      (2)   Monopole or stealth applications are preferred over lattice towers.
   (B)   Telecommunications towers for police, fire, public works, utility
companies, and other public or quasi-public service providers are allowed as a
special exception in the PI-1, Public Institutional-1, and PI-2, Public and
Institutional-2, Districts, subject to the provisions of Subchapter I, Part 9
and the following provisions:
      (1)   The applicant must meet the requirements of §
156.564;
      (2)   Monopole or stealth applications are preferred over lattice towers;
and
      (3)   They are provided only in conjunction with a primary facility and
not in a stand-alone capacity.
   (C)   Notwithstanding any contrary provisions of this chapter, including
those of §
156.546, collocations requiring an extension of an existing tower regardless of
zoning district classification may be allowed as a special exception pursuant
to the provisions of
Subchapter I, Part 9.
   (D)   In addition to satisfying the approval criteria listed herein, the
Board of Zoning Appeals must find that the design, location, and height of the
proposed tower will not substantially impact the aesthetic and residential
character of adjoining areas zoned residential, and intended to remain as such
pursuant to adopted land use plans.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.566 ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Location, collocation, and construction of new towers require the
issuance of a building permit demonstrating adherence to all applicable
building code requirements, including wind load and seismic requirements.
   (B)   Towers no longer used for communication purposes must be dismantled
and removed within 120 days of the date they are taken out of service.
   (C)   No advertising signage may be placed on any tower.
   (D)   Illumination is only allowed in accordance with the requirements of
the FCC, FAA, or other appropriate regulatory agencies.
   (E)   It is preferred that the color of the tower blend in with its
surroundings.
   (F)   The tower and associated structures are appropriately secured by means
of walls, fences (other than chain link material) or other devices, and are
appropriately screened using existing new evergreen shrubs and trees that will
reach a minimum height of six feet.
   (G)   The use of COWs and CALFs are allowed in any zoning district as
follows:
      (1)   With a special event permit pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 116;
      (2)   For a period not to exceed 120 days following a natural disaster or
local emergency as declared by competent official authority; and
      (3)   On location by broadcast media on a short-term basis covering an
event or story for the duration of the same.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.567 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Copy of lease or letter of authorization from the property owner
authorizing the application;
   (B)   Written description and scaled drawings, in plan and elevation view,
of the proposed tower structure, antennas, ground structure, landscape or
bufferyard plantings and fence plan;
   (C)   Graphic representation of the tower's fall zone and certification
letter from a state of South Carolina-licensed, professional engineer, bearing
original signature and seal;
   (D)   Line-of-sight diagram or photo simulation, showing the proposed tower
against the skyline, and viewed from at least four directions from within the
surrounding area;
   (E)   Written justification why location on an existing building or
structure or collocation on an existing tower without extension is not
feasible, to include:
      (1)   Such technical information and other justifications as are
necessary to document why location or collocation is not viable; and
      (2)   A list of all existing structures considered as alternatives to the
proposed location, and an explanation of why the alternatives were unacceptable
due to technical, physical, or financial reasons; and
      (3)   A written agreement acknowledging that additional providers may
collocate on the new tower at the prevailing market rate, subject to the
engineering capabilities of the structure.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.568 APPEALS.
   (A)   Appeals from an administrative decision may be pursued in accordance
with the provisions of
Subchapter I, Part 17.
   (B)   Appeals from the decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals regarding a
special exception application may be pursued in accordance with the provisions
of
Subchapter I, Part 9.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.569 THROUGH 156.579 RESERVED.
SUBCHAPTER D: BUFFERS AND SCREENING
PART 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.580 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This subchapter generally applies to all lots and regulates both
bufferyards and buffers.
   (B)   Overlay districts may establish different standards for perimeter and
right-of-way bufferyards (see
Subchapter B).
   (C)   
Subchapter C specifies perimeter and right-of-way bufferyard requirements for
certain land uses, such as car washes, that apply in addition to the standards
in this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.581 EXISTING VEGETATION PREFERRED.
   Existing vegetation is preferred over new plantings and may count toward
bufferyard requirements if it achieves the same purpose as the required
plantings and otherwise meets the requirements of this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.582 VEGETATION REMOVAL PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Removal of trees and natural vegetation, except invasive species,
occupying a special right-of-way bufferyard, a scenic highway bufferyard, a
critical area buffer, or an historical and cultural resources buffer is
prohibited.
   (B)   Removal of trees and natural vegetation occupying a perimeter or
right-of-way bufferyard (except a special right-of-way bufferyard or a scenic
highway bufferyard) may be allowed pursuant to §
156.609. Removal of invasive species is required as specified in §
156.583.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.583 INVASIVE SPECIES.
   (A)   Invasive exotic species listed on the South Carolina Exotic Pest
Council Invasive Plant List shall not be planted or used to fulfill any
planting requirements.
   (B)   Where invasive species exist on sites to be developed in part or in
full, they shall be removed by appropriate means so as not to damage desirable
species.
      (1)   Landscape, buffer, and/or site plans, as applicable, for proposed
development shall indicate the presence, if any, of invasive species.
      (2)   Herbicide treatments or other activities necessary to eradicate
invasive species shall begin during the first phase of development (e.g., the
clearing phase) to ensure adequate time for subsequent treatments and the
effective eradication of these species prior to completion and final inspection
of the development project (see A Management Guide for Invasive Plants in
Southern Forests, United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service,
Southern Research Station).
      (3)   Replacement is not required for removal of invasive species.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.584 MINIMUM PLANT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Minimum size. All planting materials required by this subchapter shall
conform to the minimum size or height standards in Table 156.584-1: Minimum
Plant Size at the time of planting.
   (B)   ANSI standards. All vegetation planted to fulfill the requirements of
this subchapter shall meet or exceed the latest version of American Standard
for Nursery Stock (ANSI Z-60.1).
   (C)   Quality. Planted trees shall be of good structure and high quality.
Table 156.584-1: Minimum Plant Size
Key: min. = minimum required | in. = inches |
ft. = feet
                    Size (min.)
Plant Material Type Planting in Bufferyards Abutting Vacant All Other Planting
                    Lands
Table 156.584-1: Minimum Plant Size
Key: min. = minimum required | in. = inches |
ft. = feet
                             Size (min.)
Plant Material Type          Planting in Bufferyards All Other Planting
                             Abutting Vacant Lands
Canopy trees, single-stem    2 in. (caliper)         2½ in. (caliper)
Canopy trees, multi-stem     8 ft. (height)          10 ft. (height)
Understory trees             6 ft. (height)          2 in. (caliper)
Shrubs, deciduous/ evergreen 15 in. (height)         24 in. (height)
Shrubs, evergreen/coni fer   5 ft. (height)          1½ in. (caliper)
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.585 PLANT SPECIES.
   (A)   Generally. 
Table 156.585-2: Plant Species List specifies the types of plants that may be
used to satisfy the requirements of this subchapter. Plants not listed may be
approved by staff. Examples of unlisted plants that may be approved include new
varieties of species already listed and species that may now survive in this
geographic area due to warmer temperatures.
   (B)   Native species required. To encourage a diversity in plantings, at
least 50% of the total quantity of canopy and understory trees and at least 25%
of shrubs used to fulfill the requirements of this subchapter shall be native
species.
Table 156.585-2: Plant Species List indicates native species in bold text.
   (C)   Species variety required.
      (1)   To avoid a monoculture and encourage diversity among plantings, a
variety of species are required based on the number of plantings as specified
in
Table 156.585-1: Species Variety.
      (2)   This applies for each type of planting (canopy trees, understory
trees, and shrubs). For example, if six canopy trees, 12 understory trees, and
25 shrubs are planted, the plantings must include at least two different
species of canopy trees, four different species of understory trees, and seven
different species of shrubs.
 
Table 156.585-1: Species Variety
Key: min. = minimum required
Number of Plantings Number of Species Required (min.)
5 to 10             2
11 to 20            4
21 to 100           7
More than 100       10
 
   (D)   Sabal palmettos. Sabal palmettos shall not be used to satisfy canopy
or understory tree planting requirements, except:
      (1)   In a critical area buffer; and
      (2)   Where existing conditions, such as the size of existing planter
islands or the presence of overhead power lines, constrain the type of tree
that can be used.
   (E)   Class IV trees. Class IV trees, as identified in
Table 156.702-1: Tree Mitigation Calculation, shall not count towards planting
requirements except in critical area buffers, special right-of-way buffers, and
scenic highway buffers.
Table 156.585-2: Plant Species List
Canopy Trees Understory Trees Shrubs
Table 156.585-2: Plant Species List
Canopy Trees            Understory Trees              Shrubs
American beech          American hop hornbeam         Abelia
American elm (Dutch elm American hornbeam             American beautyberry
disease-resistant)
American holly          Autumnalis cherry             Anise
American sycamore       Black cherry                  Assorted andromeda
Amur maple              Burford holly                 Assorted azaleas, native
Armstrong maple         Carolina No. 2 holly*         Assorted azaleas, Asian
Bald cypress            Carolina silverbell           Aucuba
Black gum               Chastetree                    Banana Shrub
Black walnut            Cherry laurel                 Barberry
Chinese elm             Chinese holly                 Blue hetzi juniper
Chinese evergreen oak   Chinese redbud                Blue pfitzer juniper
Chinese flame tree      Crabapple                     Blue point juniper
Chinese pistache        Crape myrtle (as accent only) Boxwood
Darlington oak          Dahoon Holly                  Burning Bush
Dawn redwood            Devilwood                     Camellia
Deodar cedar            East Palatka holly*           Carissa holly
Eastern red cedar       Eastern redbud                Chastetree
Florida flame red maple Emily Bruner holly            Chinese witch hazel
Florida/south ern sugar Florida anise                 Clethera
maple
Ginkgo                  Flowering dogwood             Coast leucothoe
Golden raintree         Foster No. 2 holly*           Common fig
Green ash               Franklinia                    Compact cherry laurel
Hackberry               Fringe tree                   Compact Japanese holly
Japanese evergreen oak  Groundsel bush                Compact mock orange
Japanese maple          Hollywood juniper Compact      
                        pfitzer juniper
Katsuratree             Hume No. 2 holly              Convex holly
Laurel oak              Japanese flowering cherry     Cotoneaster
Live oak                Kousa dogwood                 Dazzler holly
Loblolly pine1          Kwanzan cherry                Devilwood
London plane            Little Gem Magnolia           Dwarf burford holly
Long leaf pine1         Loblolly bay                  Dwarf Chinese holly
Mockernut hickory       Loquat                        Dwarf crape myrtle
Nuttall oak             Lusterleaf holly              Dwarf palmetto
October glory red maple Myrtle oak                    Dwarf yaupon holly
Overcup oak             Nellie R. Stevens holly       Euonymous, native
Pecan                   Okame cherry                  Euonymous, non-native
Pignut hickory          Persimmon                     European fan palm
Pin oak                 Photinia frasers              Fatsia
Pond cypress            Pindo palm                    Florida leucothoe
Post oak                Podocarpus                    Forsythia
Sawtooth oak            Possumhaw Holly               Fortune's osmanthus
Scarlet oak             Purple-leaf plum              Gardenia
Shag bark hickory       Red bay                       Heller's Japanese holly
Shumard oak             Red buckeye                   Hetzi Japanese holly
Southern magnolia       Sand live oak                 Hibiscus, native
Southern red oak        Sassafras                     Hibiscus, non-native
Summer red red maple    Saucer magnolia "Jane"        Hollywood Juniper
Swamp chestnut oak      Savannah holly*               Hydrangea, native
Swamp tupelo            Sourwood                      Hydrangea, non-native
Swamp white oak         Southern crabapple            Inkberry holly
Sweet gum1              Star magnolia                 Japanese anise
Sycamore                Sweetbay magnolia             Japanese cleyera
Trident maple           Turkey oak                    Leatherleaf mahonia
Tulip poplar            Wax myrtle                    Majestic beauty hawthorne
Water hickory           Weeping cherry                Needlepoint holly
Water oak               Weeping yaupon holly          Oleander
Water tupelo            Yaupon holly                  Oregon Holly Grape
White ash               Yoshino cherry                Otto Luyken laurel
White oak                                            Pineapple guava
Willow oak                                           Pink flowering quince
                                                    Pittosporum
                                                    Podocarpus
                                                    Pyracantha
                                                    Roundleaf holly
                                                    Sago palm
                                                    Saw palm
                                                    Sizzler holly
                                                    Skip laurel
                                                    Spirea
                                                    Stokes holly
                                                    Sweetshrub
                                                    Sweet tea olive
                                                    Walter’s viburnum
Canopy Trees            Understory Trees              Shrubs
                                                    Viburnum, non-native
                                                    Virginia sweetspire
                                                    Wax myrtle
                                                    White deutzia
                                                    Windmill palm
                                                    Witch hazel
                                                    Yaupon holly
1 These canopy trees shall not count towards planting requirements except in
critical area buffers, special right-of-way buffers, and scenic highway
buffers.
The species shown in bold text are considered native species.
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.586 REQUIRED VEGETATION IS PROTECTED.
   (A)   All vegetation required by this subchapter is protected and requires
prior approval for the alteration of bufferyard or buffer width or removal of
bufferyard or buffer vegetation.
   (B)   Mitigation for removal is required by replacement or through donation
to the town's tree bank in applicable situations.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.587 IMPACTS FROM AERIAL TRANSMISSION POWER LINES.
   (A)   Where protected trees are mutually considered danger trees by the
power provider and the Zoning Administrator:
      (1)   Their removal request shall be submitted in plan form and may be
granted, with replacement being required, as outlined in
Subchapter E, to be planted on the site of the requested removal. Where buffer
configuration, aerial power line conditions or other circumstances or
conditions do not permit canopy tree replacement, the largest size tree or tall
shrubs may be permitted, with replacement calculations based upon nursery
standards or an equivalent donation made to the tree bank as determined by Town
Council; and
      (2)   Such trees may be pruned only in accordance with town standards and
with the specifications provided in the latest version of ANSI A300. ANSI A300:
Standards for Tree Care Operations specifies acceptable alternatives to topping
that may be considered.
   (B)   Where power line maintenance operations cause violation of
Subchapter E by means such as excessive pruning, based upon pruning standards
referenced in §
156.706, the tree may be considered damaged and require removal and
replacement. Damage to bufferyard or buffer vegetation as a part of any
maintenance activity requires replacement in-kind.
   (C)   Where taller maturing species of trees exist directly under the power
lines, pruning practice would otherwise require a tree to be topped, resulting
in a standing stub without lateral limbs, they may be removed with Zoning
Administrator approval, and may require replacement with more power line-
compatible species.
   (D)   Regular line clearance pruning may be permitted on cyclical events, if
pruning is the minimum legally required.
   (E)   No portions of a bufferyard or buffer shall be maintained by clear
cutting or herbicide applications.
   (F)   Where existing aerial lines are to be placed underground, locations
for ground cabinets should first be sought outside of the bufferyard or buffer.
Where other options do not exist, minimal portions of the bufferyard or buffer
may be cleared to allow for the setting of ground cabinets, with Zoning
Administrator approval of the plans, and replanting required around the
cabinets to screen them and best reestablish all vegetative levels of the
bufferyard or buffer.
   (G)   Where road widening or other road improvements impact existing
bufferyards, a buffer width reduction may occur only when a full buffer width
cannot be accommodated with site adjustments. Where a full bufferyard width
cannot be provided through site adjustments but some additional width can be
accommodated, the width shall be increased to the maximum extent possible.
Required plant quantities, based upon the pre-road improvement buffer width
within impacted buffers, may only be reduced to the extent that plantings
cannot fit within the final approved bufferyard width. The potential to have
plantings within the right-of-way may be considered where plantings on private
property cannot be accommodated.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.588 IMPACTS FROM ROAD IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Where road widening or other road improvements impact existing
bufferyards or buffers, a width reduction may occur only when the full required
width cannot be accommodated with site adjustments.
   (B)   Where a full bufferyard or buffer width cannot be provided through
site adjustments but some additional width can be accommodated, the width shall
be increased to the maximum extent possible. Required plant quantities, based
upon the pre-road improvement buffer width within impacted buffers, may only be
reduced to the extent that plantings cannot fit within the final approved
bufferyard width. The potential to have plantings within the right-of-way may
be considered where plantings on private property cannot be accommodated.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.589 THROUGH 156.599 RESERVED.
PART 2: PERIMETER AND RIGHT-OF-WAY BUFFERYARDS
§ 156.600 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this part is to:
      (1)   Separate different land uses from each other, in order to:
         (a)   Eliminate or minimize potential nuisances, such as dirt, litter,
noise, glare of lights, signs, and unsightly buildings or parking areas; and
         (b)   Provide spacing to reduce adverse impacts of noise, odor, or
danger from fires or explosions;
      (2)   Improve air and water quality;
      (3)   Moderate climatic effects;
      (4)   Reduce flooding by slowing, stormwater runoff and increasing
infiltration;
      (5)   Stabilize soils; and
      (6)   Provide habitat for wildlife.
   (B)   Both the amount of land and the type and amount of planting specified
for each bufferyard required by this part are designed to ameliorate nuisances
between adjacent land uses or between a land use and a street. Perimeter and
right-of-way bufferyards are not intended for future location of water, sewer,
or other utility lines.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.601 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This part applies to
      (1)   All subdivisions subject to the sketch plan process (see §
155.021); and
      (2)   The following types of development in the RM, OP-1, OP-2, NC-1, NC-
2, AB-1, AB-2, ED, LI, WG-C, SCW-W, SCW-H, SCW-N, and PD Districts:
         (a)   All new non-residential developments and buildings;
         (b)   All new mixed use buildings;
         (c)   All new multiplex and apartment complex developments and
buildings;
         (d)   Any change of use from one non-residential use to another non-
residential use;
         (e)   Any change of use from a residential use to a non-residential
use;
         (f)   Any expansion of an existing building, structure, or vehicular
use area by more than 50% of its gross area; and
         (g)   Any renovation of a nonconforming structure or site feature
meeting the threshold in §
156.1538.
   (B)   This part does not apply to lots located in the Old Village Historic
District.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.602 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   For sites subject to the design review process (see
Subchapter I, Part 12) that include one or more separate lots within a larger
development (such as an "outparcel"), the necessity of whether a bufferyard is
required between the lots within the development, and the specific requirements
thereof, shall be determined during the design review process.
   (B)   Where two non-residential lots share two-way vehicular access (i.e., a
driveway) along a common side or rear lot line, the perimeter bufferyards may
be eliminated where this vehicular access occurs.
      (1)   If the two lots share a fully cohesive (shared), interconnected
parking lot, the perimeter bufferyard may be entirely eliminated along the
common lot line(s) where the parking lot connection exists.
      (2)   Portions of the lots not interconnected are required to provide the
perimeter bufferyard as normally required.
   (C)   Bufferyards do not apply to interior lot lines for lots subdivided
pursuant to the provisions of §
155.047(C)(1)(a). However, perimeter and right-of-way bufferyards are required
along the development perimeter or as prescribed by the design review process.
   (D)   Bufferyards do not apply to lots subdivided pursuant to the provisions
of §
155.047(C)(1)(b).
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.603 LOCATION OF PERIMETER AND RIGHT-OF-WAY BUFFERYARDS.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   Perimeter and right-of-way bufferyards are located along the outer
perimeter of a lot, extending to the lot line; and
      (2)   Are not located on any portion of an existing public or private
street or areas encumbered by a recorded easement, except as allowed in
division (E) below.
   (B)   Perimeter bufferyards. Perimeter bufferyards are located along all lot
lines that are not adjacent to a public or private right-of-way.
   (C)   Right-of-way bufferyards. Right-of-way bufferyards are located along
all lot lines that are adjacent to a public or private street right-of-way.
   (D)   Relationship to required setbacks. Where front, side, and rear
setbacks are required by this chapter, perimeter and right-of-way bufferyards
may be established within the setback area.
   (E)   Perimeter and right-of-way bufferyards along utility line easements.
Perimeter and right-of-way bufferyards installed along utility line easements
shall meet one of the following requirements:
      (1)   If utility lines run parallel or near parallel to a lot line that
requires a bufferyard, the required bufferyard must begin at the edge of the
utility easement closest to the proposed development; or
      (2)   The property owner shall obtain a written agreement from the
utility company having control of the easement authorizing the required
plantings to be placed within the easement and to remain within the easement in
perpetuity unless the bufferyard is no longer required. This agreement shall:
         (a)   Specify the agency or person responsible for the maintenance and
replacement of any removed, damaged, or diseased vegetation; and
         (b)   Be submitted with the zoning permit application or preliminary
plat application, as applicable.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.604 PERIMETER AND RIGHT-OF-WAY BUFFERYARD TYPES.
   (A)   Existing plant material. Any existing plant material that otherwise
satisfies the requirements of this part may be counted toward satisfying the
required bufferyard if they are identified on the development plans.
   (B)   Groundcover required. All bufferyard areas shall be covered with mulch
or suitable ground cover, except where other surfaces, such as sidewalks or
recreational trails, are allowed to occur within a bufferyard.
   (C)   Evergreen plant materials. When evergreen (or conifer) plant materials
are used in a perimeter or right-of-way bufferyard, they shall be planted in
clusters.
   (D)   Developments subject to design review. The type and height of the
required structure and exact placement of required plants shall be determined
through the design review process (see
Subchapter I, Part 12) based upon the proposed use of the subject property and
the uses of adjoining properties and, in the case of fence structures, the type
of materials utilized and maintenance issues.
   (E)   Developments subject to Planning Commission review.
      (1)   The type and height of the required structure (if any) and the
number and species of required plants shall be specified on the sketch plan
(see §
155.021). The Planning Commission may require changes based upon the proposed
use of the subject property and the uses of adjoining properties and, in the
case of fence structures, the type of materials utilized and maintenance
issues.
      (2)   The exact placement of required plants shall be determined through
the preliminary plat process (see §
155.023), based upon the proposed use of the subject property and the uses of
adjoining properties.
   (F)   All other developments. For all other developments subject only to the
zoning permit process (see
Subchapter I, Part 7), the applicant shall propose the number, species, and
placement of required plants. However, staff may require changes to help ensure
the plants thrive where planted and effectively buffer the subject property as
intended.
   (G)   Bufferyard illustrations. The illustrations in Figures 156.604-
1 through 156.604-7 graphically indicate the planting requirements for each
bufferyard type. Each illustration depicts the bufferyard to be provided on a
given property, which is a portion of the total bufferyard to be provided
between two adjoining properties or between the subject property and the right-
of-way.
      (1)   The illustrations specify the type and quantity of plant materials
required by each bufferyard type and each bufferyard option.
      (2)   The requirements are stated in terms of the bufferyard width and
the number of plants required per 100 linear feet of bufferyard.
      (3)   The requirements of a bufferyard may be satisfied by any one of the
options illustrated.
      (4)   The plant unit multiplier is a factor by which the basic number of
plant materials required for a given bufferyard is determined, given a change
in the width of that yard.
      (5)   Figure 156.604-7: Required Structures in Perimeter and Right-of-Way
Bufferyards provides specifications for the walls and fences required in
certain bufferyard types.
      (6)   When required, structure type F-1 shall be placed in a bufferyard
within four feet of the lot line, while structure types F-2, F-3, F-4, and F-
5 may be placed anywhere within a bufferyard.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13000.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13002.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13004.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13006.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13008.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13010.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13012.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13014.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13016.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13018.png]
 
(Ord. passed 1-14- 25)
§ 156.605 PERIMETER AND RIGHT-OF-WAY BUFFERYARD SPECIFICATIONS.
   ( A)    Generally. Table 156.605-1: Required Perimeter and Right-of-Way
Buffer Types by Land Use specifies the perimeter and right-of-way bufferyard
types required for proposed development based on land use.
   (B)    Determination of bufferyard requirements. To determine the bufferyard
required between two adjacent lots or between a lot and a street:
      (1)   In the leftmost column of the table, locate the row for the
proposed use of the lot on which development is proposed;
      (2)   For each lot line (or segment thereof), identify the adjacent land
use and locate the applicable column;
      (3)   The table cell where the row and column intersect specifies the
applicable bufferyard type (see §
156.604).
   (C)   Different bufferyard types along a single lot line. Where the required
bufferyard type changes along a lot line because of abutting land uses, the
applicable bufferyard width and plant schedule shall be provided adjacent to
each abutting land use.
Table 156.605-1: Required Perimeter and Right-of-Way Buffer Types by Land Use
         Existing Adjacent Land Use
                                      Apartm                   Religious,  Commerc
Proposed Detached  Duplex,    Quadpl  ent                      Education,  ial,
Land Use House,    Townhouse, ex,     Complex, Agricultu Mixed Recreation, Office,    Industri Vacant Street3 All
         Manufactu Triplex    Multipl Group    ral       Use   Day Care,   Institutio al1      Land 2         Other
         red House            ex      Living                   Nursing     nal
                                                               Home
Table 156.605-1: Required Perimeter and Right-of-Way Buffer Types by Land Use
              Existing Adjacent Land Use
                                           Apartm                   Religious,  Commerc
Proposed Land Detached  Duplex,    Quadpl  ent                      Education,  ial,
Use           House,    Townhouse, ex,     Complex, Agricultu Mixed Recreation, Office,    Industri Vacant Street3 All
              Manufactu Triplex    Multipl Group    ral       Use   Day Care,   Institutio al1      Land 2         Other
              red House            ex      Living                   Nursing     nal
                                                                    Home
Major
subdivision
with detached
house and/or  A         A          A       B        E         B     B           B          B        B/A    B       B
manufactured
house
dwellings4
Duplex,
townhouse,    C         A          A       B        E         B     B           B          B        B/A    B       B
triplex4
Quadplex,     C         A          A       B        E         B     B           B          B        B/A    B       B
multiplex4
Apartment
complex,      D         B          B       A        E         B     B           B          B        B/A    B       B
group living4
Mixed use     E         C          C       C        D         C     C           C          C        C/A    B       C
Religious,
education,
recreation,   D         D          D       C        B         B     B           B          C        B/A    B       B
day care,
nursing home
Commercial,
office,       E         D          D       D        B         A     B           A          B        C/A    B       B
institutional
Industrial1   F         F          F       E        D         D     E           D          D        D/A    B       D
All other
uses except
those for
which buffers E         D          D       D        B         B     B           A          B        C/A    A       B
are specified
elsewhere by
this chapter
1 Includes all uses allowed in the LI District.
2 The first letter designates the required buffer for vacant land with one of the following Comprehensive Plan Future
Land Use Map designations: Rural Residential, Conventional Residential Neighborhood, Traditional Residential
Neighborhood, Settlement Community, or Mixed Neighborhood. The second letter designates the required buffer for vacant
land with any other Future Land Use Map designation.
3 A special right-of-way bufferyard or scenic highway bufferyard may apply in lieu of the bufferyard type specified
here. See §
156.606 and §
156.607.
4 For purposes of this table, a major subdivision is one that requires review and approval of a sketch plan. The
required bufferyard shall be located on the exterior perimeter of the development project only, and does not apply to
individual buildings, driveway accesses, or streets within the interior of the development. Individual duplex dwellings
located in the R-1, R-2, and R-4 Districts do not require a perimeter or right-of-way bufferyard.
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.606 SPECIAL RIGHT-OF-WAY BUFFERYARDS.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   The purpose of this section is to provide enhanced screening along
the specified rights-of-way that helps to:
         (a)   Preserve tree canopy;
         (b)   Minimize the harmful impacts of noise, dust and other debris,
and motor vehicle headlight glare; and
         (c)   Reduce the visual impact of development along the specified
rights-of-way to maintain a more rural appearance.
      (2)   The special right-of-way bufferyard is intended to appear as a
wooded strip, with a mix of canopy and understory trees, shrubs, and
undergrowth.
   (B)   Applicability. This section applies along:
      (1)   Highway 17 North from its intersection with Long Point Road and
with Old Georgetown Road, north/northeast to the municipal boundary;
      (2)   Highway 41 from its intersection with Highway 17 North, north to
the Wando River; and
      (3)   Long Point Road from its intersection with Interstate 526 to its
intersection with Whipple Road and with Lillie and Rebecca Lane.
   (C)   Vegetation removal prohibited. Except as provided in division (F)
below, removal of trees and natural vegetation occupying a special right-of-way
bufferyard is prohibited.
   (D)   Natural, undisturbed bufferyard required.
      (1)   New developments, redevelopments, and lot subdivisions are required
to maintain or establish a bufferyard along each lot’s right-of-way frontage.
      (2)   If the property is vegetated prior to submittal of development
plans, the existing bufferyard shall remain natural and undisturbed, except
that select clearing is allowed as provided in division (F) below. If the
existing bufferyard does not contain at least the minimum plantings required by
Part 6: Lots Without an Existing Buffer, the applicant shall supplement the
existing buffer to meet the requirements of Part 6.
      (3)   If a natural, vegetated bufferyard does not exist on a lot at the
time of submittal of development plans, the applicant shall establish the
bufferyard during the development process as specified in Part 6. In such
cases, all new plantings shall be native species.
   (E)   Minimum bufferyard width. The minimum width for a special right-of-way
bufferyard is 50 feet.
   (F)   Select clearing allowed. Select clearing of trees measuring less than
three inches DBH is allowed in a special right-of-way bufferyard.
      (1)   All trees three inches DBH or greater shall be indicated on a tree
survey.
      (2)   Select pruning of limbs up to eight feet above ground level or half
the height of the tree, whichever is less, is allowed if it meets the pruning
standards as provided in the latest version of American National Standard for
Tree Care Operations – Tree, Shrub, and Other Woody Plant Management - Standard
Practices (Pruning) (ANSI A300).
   (G)   Invasive species. Invasive species shall be removed from a special
right-of-way bufferyard in accordance with §
156.583.
   (H)   Supplemental landscaping. A property owner may supplement existing
vegetation in a special right-of-way bufferyard if the additional landscaping
is comprised of native species and is approved by the Department of Planning,
Land Use and Neighborhoods.
   (I)   Irrigation. Irrigation systems are allowed in a special right-of-way
bufferyard if approved by the Department of Planning, Land Use and
Neighborhoods.
   (J)   Utilities.
      (1)   Cross-penetration of utilities in a special right-of-way bufferyard
is discouraged and, to the extent possible, shall be brought in at other
disturbed areas such as vehicular access points or sidewalk connections.
      (2)   Where cross-penetration of utilities in a special right-of-way
bufferyard is unavoidable, the property owner shall obtain a written agreement
from the utility company having control of the easement in accordance with §
156.603(E).
         (a)   Where a special right-of-way bufferyard is vegetated, utility
cross-penetrations shall be bored under existing vegetation to avoid any
disturbance to the buffer vegetation.
         (b)   In cases where no vegetation exists prior to development,
trenched utility penetrations may occur. However, maintenance or repairs to the
utility line that disturbs vegetation planted as a requirement of the
development process shall be replaced in accordance with §
156.603(E).
   (K)   Prohibited elements. The following elements are prohibited in a
special right-of-way bufferyard:
      (1)   Structures, including fences and walls, unless they are associated
with a use allowed by §
156.608;
      (2)   Amenity features such as tables, seating areas, and fire pits,
whether temporary or permanent; and
      (3)   Natural and synthetic turf grass.
   (L)   Development plans and construction activities.
      (1)   The boundaries of the special right-of-way bufferyard shall be
clearly delineated and identified on all development plans and plats submitted
for approval.
      (2)   Bufferyard limits shall be staked in the field prior to and
throughout construction activities. Bufferyard limits shall be marked with a
stake every 50 feet and at every point where the bufferyard limit pivots or
changes direction.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.607 SCENIC HIGHWAY BUFFERYARDS.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   The purpose of this section is to:
         (a)   Fulfill the intent of the Mathis Ferry Road and Long Point Road
Corridor Management Plans; and
         (b)   Conserve and enhance the natural tree canopy that helps support
the routes’ Scenic Highway designation.
      (2)   To this end, owners of all developed properties are encouraged to
plant trees along their Mathis Ferry Road or Long Point Road frontage to
maintain the tree canopy along these scenic highways.
   (B)   Applicability. This section applies along:
      (1)   Mathis Ferry Road, from its intersection with 7th Avenue to its
intersection with Whipple Road; and
      (2)   Long Point Road, from its intersection with Whipple Road to its
intersection with Highway 17 North.
   (C)   Vegetation removal prohibited. Except as provided in division (F)
below, removal of trees and natural vegetation occupying a special right-of-way
bufferyard is prohibited.
   (D)   Minimum bufferyard width. The minimum width for a scenic highway
bufferyard is based on the type of development proposed.
      (1)   When an existing detached house, duplex, or townhouse dwelling is
improved by 50% or more of its assessed value, a 25-foot bufferyard shall be
maintained or established in accordance with the planting requirements
specified in division (E) below.
      (2)   When an existing non-residential structure, triplex dwelling,
quadplex dwelling, multiplex dwelling, or an apartment complex is improved by
50% or more of its assessed value, a 50-foot bufferyard shall be maintained or
established in accordance with the planting requirements specified in division
(E) below.
      (3)   When an existing residentially-zoned lot is subdivided into two or
more lots, each at least 10,000 square feet in area, a 50-foot bufferyard shall
be maintained or established in accordance with the planting requirements
specified in division (E) below.
      (4)   When an existing residentially-zoned lot is subdivided into two or
more lots, each less than 10,000 square feet in area, a 25-foot bufferyard
shall be maintained or established in accordance with the planting requirements
specified in division (E) below.
      (5)   When an existing lot is developed with any non-residential use, a
triplex dwelling, a quadplex dwelling, a multiplex dwelling, or an apartment
complex, a 50-foot bufferyard shall be maintained or established in accordance
with the planting requirements specified in division (E) below.
      (6)   When an existing lot is developed with a detached house, duplex, or
townhouse dwelling, a 25-foot bufferyard shall be maintained or established in
accordance with the planting requirements specified in division (E) below.
   (E)   Natural, undisturbed bufferyard required.
      (1)   New developments, redevelopments, and lot subdivisions are required
to maintain or establish a bufferyard along each lot’s scenic highway frontage.
      (2)   If the property is vegetated prior to submittal of development
plans, the existing bufferyard shall remain natural and undisturbed, except
that the removal of invasive exotic species and vines is allowed as provided in
division (F) below.
      (3)   If a natural, vegetated bufferyard does not exist on a lot at the
time of submittal of development plans, the applicant shall establish the
bufferyard during the development process as follows:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided below, the applicant shall remove
existing turf grass, fences, walls, and any other structure located in the
scenic highway bufferyard.
         (b)   If the proposed use of the lot is a detached house dwelling, the
applicant shall replant the scenic highway bufferyard with one 2.5-inch caliper
live oak tree per 30 feet of frontage or portion thereof. Applicants are not
required to remove existing turf grass. If turf grass does not exist, the
applicant shall mulch the scenic highway bufferyard.
            1.   Any existing oak tree in good health located in the bufferyard
may be used to meet this requirement.
            2.   If the lot cannot physically accommodate the required tree(s),
the applicant may pay a fee-in-lieu as provided in §
156.702(M).
         (c)   For all other uses, the applicant shall:
            1.   Mulch and replant the scenic highway bufferyard with the
following number and type of plants for each 200 square feet of bufferyard
area:
               a.   Four three-gallon shrubs and four seven-gallon shrubs
comprised of at least three differing species, with near equal quantities of
each species; and
               b.   Two 1.5-inch caliper understory trees and one 2.5-inch
caliper canopy tree comprised of at least two differing species per tree type.
The result of this requirement is that there are at least two different species
of understory trees and at least two different species of canopy trees.;
            2.   Install plantings that are indigenous to the immediate area;
and
            3.   Arrange the plantings in a natural random pattern.
   (F)   Invasive exotic species and vines.
      (1)   All property owners may remove invasive exotic species and vines
from the scenic highway bufferyard.
      (2)   New construction, additions to existing construction, and
redevelopments are required as part of their construction plans to eradicate
invasive exotic species and vines from their scenic highway bufferyard area.
Herbicide treatments or other activities necessary to eradicate invasive
species shall begin during the first phase of development (e.g., the clearing
phase) to ensure adequate time for subsequent treatments and the effective
eradication of these species prior to completion and final inspection of the
development project (see A Management Guide for Invasive Plants in Southern
Forests, United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Southern
Research Station).
      (3)   Property owners along these scenic highway corridors are encouraged
to regularly monitor their buffer and take measures to control vine and
invasive exotic species growth to ensure a healthy, natural buffer.
   (G)   Prohibited elements. The following elements are prohibited in a scenic
highway bufferyard:
      (1)   Structures, including fences and walls, unless they are associated
with a use allowed by §
156.608;
      (2)   Amenity features such as tables, seating areas, and fire pits,
whether temporary or permanent; and
      (3)   Natural and synthetic turf grass.
   (H)   Development plans and construction activities.
      (1)   The boundaries of the scenic highway bufferyard shall be clearly
delineated and identified on all development plans and plats submitted for
approval.
      (2)   Bufferyard limits shall be staked in the field prior to and
throughout construction activities.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.608 USE OF PERIMETER AND RIGHT-OF-WAY BUFFERYARDS.
   (A)   Allowed uses. The uses specified below are the only uses allowed in a
perimeter or right-of-way bufferyard.
      (1)   Multi-use paths.
         (a)   A perimeter or right-of-way bufferyard may accommodate a
publicly accessible multi-use path, if the path:
            1.   Is part of the approved route for Mount Pleasant Way; or
            2.   Is identified as a recommended improvement in the town’s
Bicycle and Pedestrian Master Plan; or
            3.   Creates a new connection between existing disconnected paths
or sidewalks; and
            4.   Is sited in a manner that minimizes impacts to the bufferyard
vegetation; and
            5.   Is shown on the approved site plan for the development.
         (b)   A multi-use path may include boardwalks as well as amenities,
such as benches, bicycle repair stations, and trash cans.
         (c)   Every reasonable effort shall be made to accommodate displaced
plantings elsewhere within the bufferyard.
      (2)   Stormwater control measures. A perimeter or right-of-way bufferyard
may accommodate stormwater conveyance and infiltration, if the proposed
development achieves the Level 2 or Level 3 threshold specified in the town’s
Environmental Guidelines for Land Development.
      (3)   Signs. Freestanding signs are allowed in a perimeter or right-of-
way bufferyard if permitted in accordance with this chapter.
      (4)   Fences and walls. Fences and walls are allowed, and in some
instances are required, within a perimeter or right-of-way bufferyard.
      (5)   Utility ground cabinets. Utility ground cabinets are allowed within
a perimeter bufferyard, but should not be placed in a right-of-way bufferyard.
   (B)   Prohibited elements. The following elements are prohibited in a
perimeter or right-of-way bufferyard:
      (1)   Structures, excluding signs, fences, walls, and utility ground
cabinets, unless they are associated with a use allowed by this section; and
      (2)   Amenity features such as tables, seating areas, and fire pits,
whether temporary or permanent.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.609 ALTERNATIVE COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   Purpose. Project conditions associated with individual sites that are
subject to the Environmental Guidelines for Land Development (see §
155.054(B)) may justify approval of alternative methods of compliance.
Conditions may arise where normal compliance is impractical or impossible, or
where maximum achievement of the purpose and intent of this part can only be
obtained through alternative compliance.
   (B)   Applicability.
      (1)   This section allows alternative methods of meeting the requirements
of this part for perimeter and right-of-way bufferyards for developments that
are subject to the Environmental Guidelines for Land Development (see §
155.054(B)).
      (2)   Requests for alternative compliance review may be submitted in
conjunction with any application for a use or development to which the
perimeter and right-of-way bufferyard requirements apply, when one or more of
the following conditions are met:
         (a)   A higher level of opacity would result from alternative
compliance;
         (b)   Topography, soil, vegetation, drainage, or other site conditions
are such that full compliance is impractical;
         (c)   Existing plant material is unhealthy, invasive, or otherwise
undesirable;
         (d)   Spatial limitations, unusually shaped lots, prevalence of
overhead power lines, unusual servitude requirements, or prevailing practices
in the surrounding neighborhood justify alternative compliance;
         (e)   Public safety considerations make alternative compliance
appropriate; or
         (f)   Public improvement projects make alternative compliance
appropriate.
      (3)   Alternative compliance is not allowed as a way to provide less
landscape material than is otherwise required.
   (C)   Written and graphic documentation required.
      (1)   Requests for alternative compliance shall be accompanied by written
explanation and plan drawings to allow staff evaluation and decision.
      (2)   Documentation and plan drawings shall be prepared and stamped by a
State of South Carolina Registered Landscape Architect.
   (D)   Approval criteria. Staff may approve or approve with conditions an
alternative buffer plan if the proposed bufferyard plan:
      (1)   Is at least equivalent to one that complies with this part in terms
of aesthetics, innovation, and creativity;
      (2)   Incorporates existing vegetation, where present, and topographical
conditions;
      (3)   Functions to buffer different uses of adjacent lots where
appropriate; and
      (4)   Uses a variety of complementary species of trees and shrubs.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.610 THROUGH 156.619 RESERVED.
PART 3: CRITICAL AREA BUFFERS
§ 156.620 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   The purpose of the critical area buffer is to:
      (1)   Reduce stormwater pollutants;
      (2)   Improve water quality;
      (3)   Prevent and reduce erosion through undisturbed and stabilized
areas;
      (4)   Preserve wildlife corridors and natural habitats for important
species;
      (5)   Reduce flooding and subsequent damage to property; and
      (6)   Provide a natural privacy barrier.
   (B)   The intent of this part is to prohibit grassed, manicured lawns within
the buffer area.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.621 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This part applies to all lots located adjacent to the critical area,
as defined in S.C. Code § 48-39-10, or located within 35 feet of the critical
area line.
   (B)   Where a developed lot does not meet the critical area buffer
requirements, the buffer shall be established in accordance with this part if
the principal structure on the lot is improved by 50% or more of its assessed
value.
   (C)   Where a vacant lot does not meet the critical area buffer
requirements, the buffer shall be established in accordance with this part when
the lot is developed.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.622 CRITICAL AREA BUFFER REQUIRED.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   A vegetated buffer shall be maintained or established along areas
designated as the tidally influenced "critical area" by the South Carolina
Department of Environmental Services (SCDES) Bureau of Coastal Management
(BCM).
      (2)   The natural vegetation in the buffer shall remain undisturbed,
except as allowed by §
156.624 and §
156.626. In addition, invasive species shall be removed in accordance with §
156.583.
   (B)   Buffer location.
      (1)   The critical area buffer is located landward of the critical area
line.
      (2)   A critical area buffer is required whether or not the critical area
line is located on the subject lot.
      (3)   Critical areas by their very nature are dynamic systems, subject to
change over time. Because of this, the limits of the critical area buffer are
established by the final plat approved by the town and recorded with the
Charleston County ROD office.
         (a)   The buffer limits shall remain unchanged in perpetuity unless a
new subdivision occurs. At such time, the critical line must be validated by
SCDES-BCM, which will establish the current critical line location and thus the
new buffer area; provided, however, the new critical line location only applies
to the subject lot and not to adjoining lots.
         (b)   In areas where the critical area buffer has been averaged, the
new buffer area shall not result in a reduction in square footage of the former
buffer area previously established.
         (c)   It is the sole responsibility of the property owner to ensure
all construction activity occurs landward of the current SCDES-BCM critical
line, irrespective of the critical line location reflected on the most recent
recorded plat.
   (C)   Buffer width.
      (1)   The width of the critical area buffer is:
         (a)   An average of 35 feet; and
         (b)   A minimum of 20 feet.
      (2)   The minimum and average buffer widths apply to individual lots. The
average buffer width shall not be applied over adjacent lots.
   (D)   Natural, undisturbed buffer required.
      (1)   New developments, redevelopments, and lot subdivisions are required
to maintain any existing buffer in its natural state, except as provided in §
156.624, §
156.625, and §
156.626.
      (2)   If a natural, vegetated bufferyard does not exist on a lot at the
time of submittal of development plans, the applicant shall establish the
bufferyard during the development process as specified in
Subchapter D, Part 6.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.623 PROHIBITED ELEMENTS IN A CRITICAL AREA BUFFER.
   (A)   Impervious surfaces. Impervious surfaces are prohibited within the
critical area buffer, except as provided in §
156.624.
   (B)   Erosion control structures. Erosion control structures or portions of
these structures, such as retaining walls and rip rap, may be located on the
critical line but are prohibited within the critical area buffer.
   (C)   Fences and walls. Fences with masonry elements and walls are
prohibited within the critical area buffer. Fences without masonry elements are
allowed, if materials are brought in without the use of vehicles or heavy
equipment and they are constructed by hand.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.624 ALLOWED USES IN A CRITICAL AREA BUFFER.
   Only the following uses are allowed in the critical area buffer:
   (A)   A pedestrian trail, if the trail is:
      (1)   Publicly accessible;
      (2)   Constructed of pervious material; and
      (3)   Oriented parallel to the critical line;
   (B)   A pedestrian or vehicular boardwalk, if the boardwalk:
      (1)   Leads to a water-dependent use, such as a dock, pier, bridge, or
boat landing;
      (2)   Is elevated above grade to avoid channelization; and
      (3)   Is the minimum width necessary to provide access;
   (C)   Minimum utility line penetrations, as specifically and previously
approved on development plans; and
   (D)   Permitted freestanding signs and utility ground cabinets.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.625 STORMWATER CONTROL MEASURES.
   (A)   Existing lots.
      (1)   Where stormwater control measures must be placed within the
critical area buffer on an existing lot, the property owner shall use swales or
other means, rather than drainage pipes, to convey stormwater.
      (2)   The stormwater control measure(s) must be located within an
existing vision corridor. If a vision corridor does not exist, any clearing of
vegetation required for construction of the stormwater control measures must
meet the requirements in §
156.626.
   (B)   New subdivisions requiring sketch plan approval.
      (1)   Any new subdivision that is not exempt from sketch plan approval
pursuant to §
155.028: Exceptions may use drainage pipes to convey stormwater through the
critical area buffer.
      (2)   Vegetation removal is limited to the minimum required to
accommodate the drainage pipe(s).
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.626 VISION CORRIDORS.
   (A)   Generally. Vision corridors may be established through the critical
area buffer on any lot in accordance with this section.
   (B)   Vision corridor defined. A vision corridor is a vertical corridor cut
through the buffer, allowing a view through the critical area buffer. This area
is generally formed by two near perpendicular lines connecting the critical
area line to the upland boundary of the critical area buffer.
   (C)   Vision corridor area.
      (1)   The area of a vision corridor shall not exceed one-third (33%) of
the square footage of the total buffer area.
      (2)   The vision corridor shall be one single uniform unbroken portion,
except on lots where the buffer exceeds 5,250 square feet in area where it may
be broken into multiple vision corridors that each are at least 25 feet in
length.
   (D)   Vegetation removal and pruning.
      (1)   Within the vision corridor, trees of a protected size for the lot
(see Subchapter E) shall not be removed. Smaller trees may be pruned or cut
with hand tools, but the stump must remain in place.
      (2)   Grasses, shrubs, and other smaller vegetation may be pruned and
trimmed, but shall not be removed at the root.
      (3)   Pruning of any vegetation is limited to eight feet above the ground
and must be completed in accordance with the American National Standard for
Tree Care Operations – Tree, Shrub, and Other Woody Plant Management - Standard
Practices (Pruning) (ANSI A300).
      (4)   The use of heavy equipment and herbicides is prohibited in the
buffer.
      (5)   The intent of this division is to ensure the root mass remains
intact to stabilize the ground surface, which prevents soil erosion.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.627 CRITICAL AREA BUFFER AND VISION CORRIDOR DELINEATION AND RECORD.
   (A)   The boundaries of the critical area buffer shall be clearly delineated
and identified on all development plans and plats submitted for approval.
   (B)   If a vision corridor is intended to be established during the
development process, it shall be delineated on the final version of all design
plans.
      (1)   For developments subject to design review, the vision corridor
shall be delineated on the final design review plans.
      (2)   For all other developments, the vision corridor shall be delineated
on the building permit application.
      (3)   Once a building permit application is submitted for a particular
lot, a vision corridor may only be established through a plat revision or deed
restriction on the property on which it is located to act as a record of its
establishment.
      (4)   The distances from rear and side property lines must be shown on
final design plans and revised plats or specified in the deed restriction, as
applicable.
   (C)   Subsequent changes to an established buffer or vision corridor must be
re-approved and re-recorded, with restoration in accordance with Subchapter D,
Part 6 required for any previously disturbed buffer area, if necessary.
   (D)   Buffer and vision corridor limits shall be staked in the field prior
to and throughout construction activities. In addition, the vision corridor
shall have protective barricades (see Figure 156.705-3: Protective Barricade)
along its edges that are approximately perpendicular to the critical line.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.628 VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Violation of this part or failure to comply with any of the
requirements hereof shall be classified as a misdemeanor punishable by a fine
in the amount of up to $500, or imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or
both. However, no penalty shall exceed the penalty provided by state law for a
similar offense.
      (1)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed for:
         (a)   Each tree and/or separate plant or shrub that is removed; and
         (b)   Each day that the violation occurs or continues.
      (2)   Any person, firm, organization, society, association, partnership,
corporation, or like entity, or any agent or representative thereof, who
commits, participates in, or assists in such violation may each be found guilty
of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided.
   (B)   Full restoration to a condition comparable to that which was destroyed
shall be required within a specified period. If restoration is to be
accomplished by the offending party, it shall include posting an acceptable
financial guarantee with the town for the full amount of restoration required
until the same is completed.
   (C)   Failure to comply with the terms stated in this part shall also be
subject to enforcement in a circuit court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.629 THROUGH 156.639 RESERVED.
PART 4: WETLAND BUFFERS
§ 156.640 PURPOSE.
   This part establishes requirements for buffers adjacent to freshwater
wetlands to improve water quality, preserve natural habitat, and reduce
flooding.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.641 APPLICABILITY.
   This part applies to all lots that contain or are located adjacent to
freshwater wetlands delineated by an environmental/wetland professional.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.642 WETLAND BUFFER REQUIRED.
   (A)   Buffer width. A buffer at least 35 feet in width is required adjacent
to all freshwater wetlands delineated by an environmental/wetland professional.
   (B)   Natural, undisturbed buffer required.
      (1)   New developments, redevelopments, and lot subdivisions are required
to maintain any existing buffer in its natural state, except as provided in §
156.644 and §
156.645.
      (2)   If a natural, vegetated bufferyard does not exist on a lot at the
time of submittal of development plans, the applicant shall establish the
bufferyard during the development process as specified in Subchapter D, Part 6.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.643 IMPERVIOUS SURFACES IN A WETLAND BUFFER.
   Impervious surfaces are prohibited within a wetland buffer.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.644 REMOVAL OF INVASIVE SPECIES.
   (A)   The removal of invasive exotic species from a wetland buffer is
required.
   (B)   The use of heavy equipment and herbicides for vegetation removal is
prohibited.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.645 TRAIL SYSTEM.
   (A)   The only use allowed in a wetland buffer is a pervious pedestrian and
bicycle trail system, if no trees greater than three inches DBH are removed.
   (B)   The use of heavy equipment and herbicides for vegetation removal is
prohibited.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.646 THROUGH 156.649 RESERVED.
PART 5: HISTORICAL AND CULTURAL RESOURCES BUFFERS
§ 156.650 PURPOSE.
   This part establishes requirements for buffers intended to protect
historical, archaeological, and cultural resources.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.651 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This part applies to all lots that contain or are immediately adjacent
to an historical, archaeological, or cultural resource. This part does not
apply within the Old Village Historic District.
   (B)   New developments, redevelopments, and lot subdivisions are required to
maintain or establish a buffer adjacent to historical, archaeological, and
cultural resources that are:
      (1)   Individually listed in or eligible for listing in the National
Register of Historic Places;
      (2)   Resources contributing to listed or eligible historic districts;
      (3)   Resources contributing to individual historic properties such as
structures or archaeological sites; or
      (4)   Designated by Town Council or County Council as an historical,
archaeological, or cultural resource.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.652 HISTORICAL AND CULTURAL RESOURCES BUFFER REQUIRED.
   (A)   Buffer width. A buffer at least 40 feet in width is required adjacent
to all historically, archaeologically, or culturally significant areas.
   (B)   Natural, undisturbed buffer required.
      (1)   New developments, redevelopments, and lot subdivisions are required
to maintain any existing buffer in its natural state, except as provided in §
156.653 and §
156.654.
      (2)   If a natural, vegetated bufferyard does not exist on a lot at the
time of submittal of development plans, the applicant shall establish the
bufferyard during the development process as specified in
Subchapter D, Part 6.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.653 REMOVAL OF INVASIVE SPECIES.
   (A)   The removal of invasive exotic species from an historical and cultural
resources buffer is required.
   (B)   The use of heavy equipment and herbicides for vegetation removal is
prohibited.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.654 TRAIL SYSTEM.
   (A)   The only use allowed in an historical and cultural resources buffer is
a pervious pedestrian and bicycle trail system, if no trees greater than three
inches DBH are removed.
   (B)   The use of heavy equipment and herbicides for vegetation removal is
prohibited.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.655 THROUGH 156.659 RESERVED.
PART 6: LOTS WITHOUT  AN EXISTING BUFFER
§ 156.660 APPLICABILITY.
   This part applies to the buffers and bufferyards required by:
   (A)   §
156.606;
   (B)   
Subchapter D, Part 3;
   (C)   
Subchapter D, Part 4; and
   (D)   
Subchapter D, Part 5.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.661 PLANTING STANDARDS.
   When a buffer or bufferyard meeting the requirements of this subchapter does
not exist on a lot, the following provisions apply:
   (A)   For special right-of-way bufferyards, all prohibited elements shall be
removed, including impervious surfaces (other than trails and multi-use paths,
if allowed) and existing turf;
   (B)   The buffer or bufferyard shall be mulched and replanted as prescribed
below per 200 square feet:
      (1)   Four three-gallon shrubs and four seven-gallon shrubs comprised of
at least three differing species, with near equal quantities of each species;
and
      (2)   Two one and one-half inch understory trees and one two and one-half
inch caliper canopy tree comprised of at least two differing species per tree
type. The result of this requirement is that there are at least two different
species of understory trees and at least two different species of canopy trees.
   (C)   Plantings shall be:
      (1)   Indigenous to the immediate area;
      (2)   Arranged in a natural random pattern; and
      (3)   In a critical area buffer, selected from the list in Table 156.661-
1: Critical Area Buffer Vegetation List.
Table 156.661-1: Critical Area
Buffer Vegetation List
Canopy Trees Understory Trees Shrubs
Table 156.661-1: Critical Area
Buffer Vegetation List
Canopy Trees                Understory Trees        Shrubs
Vegetation Suitable for Areas Close to Salt Water/Salt Spray
Eastern red cedar           Cabbage palmetto (Sabal Dwarf palmetto (Sabal
(Juniperus virginiana)      palmetto)               minor)
Hackberry (Celtis           Wax myrtle (Myrica      Cabbage palmetto (Sabal
laevigata)                  cerifera)               palmetto)
Laurel oak (Quercus         Yaupon holly (Ilex      Salt myrtle (Baccharis
laurifolia)                 vomitoria)              halimifolia)
Live oak (Quercus                                  Wax myrtle (Myrica
virginiana)                                         cerifera)
Loblolly pine (Pinus taeda)                        Yaupon holly (Ilex
                                                    vomitoria)
Southern red cedar
(Juniperus virginiana var.                          
silicicola)
Water oak (Quercus nigra)                           
Additional Vegetation Suitable for More Protected Locations
American holly (Ilex opaca) Cherry laurel (Prunus   Adams needle yucca (Yucca
                            caroliniana)            filamentosa)
Southern magnolia (Magnolia Red buckeye (Aesculus   American beauty berry
grandiflora)                pavia)                  (Callicarpa americana)
Sweetgum (Liquidambar       Sparkleberry             
styraciflua)
(Vaccinium arboreum)        Summersweet Clethera     
                            (Clethra alnifolia)
                                                  Coral bean (Erythrina
                                                    herbacea)
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.662 THROUGH 156.669 RESERVED.
PART 7: MAINTENANCE
§ 156.670 APPLICABILITY.
   This part applies to landscaping required by
Subchapter H, Part 3, Subpart 3.5 and to bufferyards required by Part 2.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.671 MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY.
   The owner, occupant, tenant, and the respective agent of each, if any, are
jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping and
perimeter and right-of-way bufferyards.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.672 VEGETATION MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   All landscape and bufferyard areas shall be properly maintained so as
to ensure their survival and aesthetic value, and shall be provided with an
irrigation system or a readily available water supply. Failure to monitor such
areas is a violation of this Chapter and may be remedied in the manner
prescribed for other violations (see
Subchapter L).
   (B)   Landscaping shall be maintained in a good condition so as to present a
healthy, neat, and orderly appearance at least equal to the original
development, and shall be kept free of refuse, with dead vegetation promptly
replaced.
   (C)   Courtesy inspections may be coordinated by town staff to ensure proper
maintenance.
   (D)   Any pruning or maintenance that significantly limits a plant's ability
to obtain its natural form and fulfill the intent of the landscaping and
bufferyard requirements will result in the issuance of a citation and/or the
possible replacement of damaged material with replacement equal to or greater
than the damaged material. Replacement greater than the damaged material may be
required when portions of plants are removed or when the landscaping or
bufferyard is nonconforming. Pruning specifications as provided in the latest
version of ANSI A300 shall be used to determine compliance with this division.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.673 LANDSCAPING MAINTENANCE BOND.
   (A)   Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy or the recording of a
final plat, as applicable, the developer or subdivider shall post a landscaping
maintenance bond or other financial security to ensure the required plantings
survive in a healthy condition.
   (B)   The bond shall be equal to 20% of the cost of installation of all
required landscaping, including plants and labor, and shall be valid for at
least two years from the date of installation.
   (C)   The town will release the maintenance bond two years after
installation of the landscaping if the landscaping has been maintained in a
healthy growing condition and any dead or dying plants have been replaced.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.674 THROUGH 156.699 RESERVED.
SUBCHAPTER E: TREE PROTECTION
§ 156.700 AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   The citizens of the town recognize the importance of preserving the
natural landscape through the protection of existing trees to:
      (1)   Promote the public health, safety, and general welfare;
      (2)   Lessen air pollution;
      (3)   Increase dust filtration;
      (4)   Reduce noise, heat, and glare;
      (5)   Prevent soil erosion;
      (6)   Improve surface drainage and minimize flooding;
      (7)   Ensure that noise, glare, and other distractions of movement in one
area do not adversely affect activity within other adjacent areas;
      (8)   Beautify and enhance improved and undeveloped land;
      (9)   Preserve and protect both the natural and historic amenities within
the town;
      (10)   Ensure that excessive tree cutting does not reduce property
values; and
      (11)   Minimize the cost of construction and maintenance of drainage
systems necessitated by the increased flow and diversion of surface waters.
   (B)   In furtherance of the above purposes and pursuant to authority
conferred by the South Carolina Local Government Comprehensive Planning and
Enabling Act of 1994, as amended, the Town Council does ordain and enact into
law the following sections:
      (1)   Regulating and restricting the removal of trees from all developed
and undeveloped real property;
      (2)   Providing for replacement of trees;
      (3)   Establishing standards for tree protection during land clearing and
construction;
      (4)   Providing certain exceptions and exemptions;
      (5)   Establishing and defining the approval process, with respect to
these regulations, for developments subject to the design review procedure;
      (6)   Providing appeal procedures and remedies;
      (7)   Providing penalties for violations of this chapter;
      (8)   Providing proper methods for maintenance;
      (9)   Defining certain terms used herein; and
      (10)   For other purposes.
   (C)   The intent of this subchapter is to encourage the protection and
replacement of trees consistent with the economic and healthful enjoyment of
private property. The intent is not punitive, nor to cause hardship to any
individual, private firm, or public agency that uses every care and diligence
to protect trees within the town.
   (D)   The Zoning Administrator shall be an ISA Certified Arborist and shall
be responsible for administration of all provisions of this subchapter. Public
tree management and all aspects of maintenance (see §
156.708) shall be administered by the Public Services Department.
   (E)   No person, firm, organization, society, association, or corporation,
or any agent or representative thereof, shall directly or indirectly destroy or
remove any protected, significant, or historic tree, except as authorized under
the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.701 JURISDICTION AND APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This subchapter applies to all real property within the corporate
limits of the town.
   (B)   Protected, significant, or historic trees shall not be removed except
in accordance with this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.702 TREE REMOVAL AND REPLACEMENT.
   (A)   Tree removal permit required.
      (1)   Prior to removal of any protected, significant, or historic tree,
the applicant must obtain a tree removal permit issued by the Zoning
Administrator, an approved clearing and grading permit, or any other tree
removal permit, as appropriate.
      (2)   An application for tree removal must be submitted, along with
payment of the required fee. Pending staff review of the request, a replacement
plan may be required which must be submitted and approved prior to issuance of
the tree permit.
      (3)   Where full replacement cannot be accomplished by replanting on the
site, fee in lieu of replacement trees may be considered in accordance with
division (M) below. When fee in lieu of replacement trees is part of an
approved replacement plan, payment must be submitted prior to issuance of the
removal permit.
      (4)   On all properties, the removal of historic trees, except as
otherwise provided in this subchapter, requires approval as specified in this
section or in §
156.704, as applicable.
      (5)   In cases where removal is requested for a boundary tree, all owners
must agree through written consent on removal and replacement prior to approval
and issuance of a tree removal permit.
      (6)   Tree removal permits will not be issued on properties where
outstanding mitigation has not been satisfied.
   (B)   Display of permit. Any permit or document authorizing removal of a
tree shall be clearly displayed in an obvious and noticeable location, such as
a window or storm door, for review during the removal process. Failure to do so
is a violation of this chapter and subject to the provisions of §
156.709.
   (C)   Tree replacement.
      (1)   Removal of each protected, significant, or historic tree, except as
specified elsewhere in this chapter, requires replacement/mitigation in caliper
inches (see ANSI Z60.1 for measuring instructions). The total number of inches
removed from the site is measured as the diameter at breast height (DBH).
      (2)   In the case of developed sites:
         (a)   Tree replacement must be planted within a defined period of time
not to exceed six months from the date of permit issuance; and
         (b)   If the mitigation calculation is greater than or equal to 2.5
inches, one replacement tree of at least 2.5-inch caliper must be planted on-
site.
      (3)   In the case of new construction, replacement trees shall be
installed prior to final inspection of the project. This includes construction
of both principal and accessory structures.
      (4)   Replacement trees must:
         (a)   Be selected from
Table 156.702-1: Tree Mitigation Calculation and have an equal or higher point
value than the designated classification of the tree(s) removed;
         (b)   Be selected in accordance with §
156.585; and
         (c)   Meet the requirements in §
156.584.
      (5)   Replacement is not required for removal of invasive species.
      (6)   Replacement trees shall not conflict with any drainage or utility
features or be located within drainage or utility easements.
   (D)   Tree mitigation calculation. 
Table 156.702-1: Tree Mitigation Calculation will be used to determine the
amount of mitigation required for removal of existing trees.
      (1)   Quality rating. Many local canopy trees have been grouped by their
average quality rating found in July 2005's Southeastern U.S. Tree Species
Rating Guide. For species not listed, find the average quality rating for Zone
8 in this guide available through the Southern Chapter of ISA, and compare to
the quality rating point range in the table below.
      (2)   Health rating. Trees are great complex systems with many unique
characteristics and health concerns and, therefore, health is categorized
broadly.
         (a)   Good. 100% to 75% live crown ratio. Minimal structural defects.
         (b)   Fair. 75% to 50% live crown ratio. Minor or tolerable structural
defects that can be overcome through arborist intervention.
         (c)   Declining. Less than 50% live crown ratio. Severe structural
defects that would classify it as a hazard tree, including insufficient holding
wood.
Table 156.702-1: Tree Mitigation Calculation
Table 156.702-1: Tree Mitigation Calculation
   Key: min = minimum required | < = less than
                      Species           Percent Replacement (min.)1
               Class/ Included       Existing Residential Commercial/Other/
               Points (But Not       2                 New Residential
                      Limited To)                         Subdivision 2
                                     Good Fair Declining  Good Fair Declining
                      Live Oak, Bald
                      Cypress,
                      American
                      Beech, Ginko,
                      American
                      Holly,
                      Southern
                      Magnolia,
               I      Sweetbay
               80-100 Magnolia,      50   50   25         100  75   50
                      Tupelo,
                      Chinese
                      Pistache,
                      White Oak,
                      Willow Oak3,
                      Overcup Oak,
                      Chestnut Oak,
                      Eastern Red
                      Cedar3
                      Persimmon, Ash
                      species,
                      Hickory
                      species, Tulip
                     Poplar,
                     Sycamore,
Species        II     Swamp White    50   50   25         75   50   25
Quality Rating 60-79  Oak, Scarlet
                      Oak, Southern
                      Red Oak,
                      Shumard Oak,
                      Post Oak,
                      Laurel Oak3,
                      Pecan
                      Sugarberry3,
                      Hackberry3,
                      Willow
               III    species, Water 50   25   0          50   25   0
               < 60   Oak3, Black
                      Cherry,
                      American Elm,
                      Red Maple3
                      Pine species,
                      Sweet Gum,
                      Callary Pear
                      varieties,
                      River Birch,
                      Mimosa,
               IV4    Chinaberry,    0    0    0          0    0    0
                      Chinese
                      Tallow,
                      Camphor tree,
                      White Poplar,
                      Mulberry,
                      Leyland
                      Cypress
 
 
1 In the case of a hazard tree, as determined by an ISA TRAQ Certified
Arborist, the replacement requirement can be further reduced or eliminated.
2 Approval of an historic tree removal request (>24 inches DBH) may require
review by the Board of Zoning Appeals or Design Review Board and have other
replacement requirements.
3 Species with adjusted quality ratings that differ from the guide based on
local experience and expertise.
4 Species in this category are exempt from the requirements of this section,
except that Pine species and Sweet Gum shall be maintained in undisturbed
buffers and buffer areas requiring protection of all vegetation of a certain
size and may be approved for plantings in such buffers, and Pine species
greater than 24 inches DBH are considered historic trees and are protected as
such (see §
156.703(D)).
 
   (E)   Detached house lots.
      (1)   On individually platted lots for/with detached house dwellings, the
following criteria shall be used to evaluate requests for the removal of
historic and significant trees:
         (a)   The tree location in relation to property boundaries,
infrastructure, existing physical features;
         (b)   The condition of the canopy, overall health, and species;
         (c)   The nature of the request, justification, and reason for
removing the tree; and
         (d)   Whether practical alternatives have been vetted to preserve the
tree.
      (2)   Removal of Category I or II historic trees or pine trees greater
than 24 inches DBH classified as ‘good’ or ‘fair’ shall be decided by the Board
of Zoning Appeals, except as provided in §
156.704.
   (F)   Residential sketch plans.
      (1)   On sketch plans for residential subdivisions requiring approval by
the Planning Commission, trees 16 inches and greater are protected.
      (2)   A minimum of 160 caliper inches of protected trees per developable
acre shall be retained on the site. On sketch plans where the undeveloped
property has less than this amount of inches existing, caliper inches from
planted canopy trees may be used to meet this requirement. Further, each newly
platted lot shall have at least one 2.5-inch canopy tree retained or planted
on-site, preferably in the front yard.
      (3)   Developable acreage does not include wetlands, retention ponds, or
rights-of-way.
      (4)   Removal of historic trees requires replacement, as described
herein, in excess of 160 caliper-inch minimum.
      (5)   In general, lots and infrastructure should not be sited so as to
require the removal of protected trees 16 inches or greater, whenever possible.
However, the Planning Commission may authorize the removal of these protected
trees for that purpose at the time of sketch plan approval, when their
retention becomes inordinately burdensome in developing the property in a
reasonable fashion. The approval for removal shall be judiciously exercised in
consideration of the stated intent of this subchapter, and with due
consideration of the size, quality, and health rating of individual trees as
provided herein. In such cases when the Planning Commission approves removal,
the following standards apply:
         (a)   In the development of a residential subdivision, replacement
trees may be located as follows:
            1.   On homeowners’ association property, if reviewed and approved
by the Zoning Administrator. Trees between 2.5 and 16 inches DBH retained on
the homeowners' association property can count toward required replacement
inches, if surveyed and protected by a recorded covenant agreement; and/or
            2.   Within the public street right-of-way in accordance with an
approved design plan, as provided in §
155.048(F)(21).
         (b)   Replacement trees shall not conflict with any drainage or
utility features or be located within drainage or utility easements.
         (c)   Mitigation trees shall be selected from
Table 156.702-1: Tree Mitigation Calculation. Replacement species shall be
equal to or of higher point value than the designated classification of the
tree(s) removed.
         (d)   Prior to final plat approval, mitigation must be accomplished as
described above or by providing a cash bond for 200% of the tree replacement
cost in accordance with an approved mitigation plan. The cash bond will have a
maximum lifespan of two years from the date of issue; afterwards, the town may
plant the trees or forfeit the cash bond money into the Tree Bank Fund.
   (G)   Townhouse, triplex, quadplex, and multiplex developments. For
townhouse, triplex, quadplex, and multiplex developments, the following
standards apply:
      (1)   Removal of protected and significant tree(s) may be approved by the
Zoning Administrator, if replacement trees are selected from the canopy tree
list in §
156.585.
      (2)   Removal of Category I or II historic trees or pine trees greater
than 24 inches DBH classified as ‘good’ or ‘fair’ shall be decided by the Board
of Zoning Appeals, except as provided in §
156.704.
      (3)   A minimum of 160 caliper inches per acre shall be retained on the
site. On parcels with less than this amount, caliper inches from planted canopy
trees may be used to meet this requirement.
      (4)   Removal of historic trees requires replacement, as described
herein, in excess of the 160 caliper-inch minimum.
   (H)   Properties subject to design review. For properties subject to the
design review procedure (see
Subchapter I, Part 12), the removal of protected, significant, and historic
trees is at the discretion of the designated reviewing authority, exercised
through the site plan approval process.
      (1)   However, the project site design shall endeavor to retain
protected, significant, and historic trees whenever possible, consistent with
the design principles in
Subchapter H and effective utilization of the project site.
      (2)   The removal of protected, significant, and historic trees is not
intended to provide maximum utilization of the site area, but rather reasonable
use of the site based upon the factors stated above.
      (3)   In reviewing requests for removal of protected, significant, and
historic trees, the designated reviewing authority shall consider tree species,
size, and condition, and may require an independent assessment from an ISA
certified arborist to assist in the final determination.
      (4)   In cases where the removal of an historic tree is proposed, the
developer of the property shall be able to demonstrate that efforts to preserve
the tree(s) were made through site planning and that removal of the tree is
necessary to create the best, most cohesive site plan. This information may be
used by the DRB in making any decisions regarding the proposed removal of
historic tree(s).
      (5)   A minimum of 160 caliper inches per acre shall be retained on the
site. On parcels with less than this amount, caliper inches from planted canopy
trees may be used to meet this requirement.
      (6)   Removal of historic trees requires replacement, as described
herein, in excess of 160-caliper-inch minimum.
   (I)   All other land uses. For other land uses not subject to the design
review process, removal of protected, significant, and historic trees is
allowed with approval of the Zoning Administrator, if replacement trees are
selected from the canopy tree list in §
156.585.
      (1)   However, the project site design shall endeavor to retain
protected, significant, and historic trees whenever possible, consistent with
this subchapter’s stated tree protection principles and effective utilization
of the project site.
      (2)   The removal of protected, significant, and historic trees is not
intended to provide maximum utilization of the site area, but rather reasonable
use of the site based upon the factors stated above.
      (3)   In reviewing requests for removal of protected, significant, and
historic trees, the reviewing authority shall consider tree species, size, and
condition, and may require an independent assessment from an ISA certified
arborist to assist in the final determination.
      (4)   In cases where the removal of an historic tree is proposed, the
developer of the property shall be able to demonstrate that efforts to preserve
the tree(s) were made through site planning, and that removal of the tree is
necessary to create the best, most cohesive site plan. This information may be
used by the reviewing authority in making any decisions regarding the proposed
removal of historic tree(s).
      (5)   A minimum of 160 caliper inches per acre shall be retained on the
site. On parcels with less than this amount, caliper inches from planted canopy
trees may be used to meet this requirement.
      (6)   Removal of historic trees shall require replacement, as described
herein, in excess of 160-caliper-inch minimum.
   (J)   Submittal requirements for clearing and grading permit. Table 156.702-
2: Submittal Requirements outlines submittal requirements for obtaining a
clearing and grading permit.
   Table 156.702-2: Submittal Requirements
   Key: in. = inches | X = required | blank cell = not required
                                                    Tree       Design
Land DBH       Site Tree   Replacement Construction Assessment Review Planning
Use  Protected Plan Survey Schedule    Plans        Report     Appro  Commission
                                                               val
   Table 156.702-2: Submittal Requirements
   Key: in. = inches | X = required | blank cell = not required
                                                             Tree       Design
Land Use      DBH       Site Tree   Replacement Construction Assessment Review Planning
              Protected Plan Survey Schedule    Plans        Report     Appro  Commission
                                                                        val
Single-family
and townhouse 16+ in.   X    X      X
lots1
Single-family
and townhouse 16+ in.   X    X      X           X            X                 X
subdivisions2
Multi-family  8+ in.    X    X      X           X            X          X4
Commercial    8+ in.    X    X      X           X            X          X
Other land    8+ in.    X    X      X           X            X          X4
uses3
1 Submittal requirements may be waived by Zoning Administrator.
2 Detached house and townhouse subdivisions requiring preliminary plat approval fall into
this category.
3 This category includes uses such as places of worship; private, semi-private, and
public recreation facilities; and government and quasi-government facilities.
4 Only if required by the Board of Zoning Appeals, Planning Commission, or Town Council.
 
   (K)   Replacement for trees removed without permission.
      (1)   Replacement for trees protected by this subchapter that are removed
without permission shall be calculated by twice the number of inches removed.
      (2)   If the DBH inches of the removed tree cannot be determined,
replacement shall be based on the stump diameter. Where there is no stump to
calculate the diameter of the illegally removed tree, replacement shall be
calculated based on the tree having been 24 inches.
   (L)   Replanting schedule standards. To avoid a monoculture among plantings
and to encourage a diversity, at least 50% of the total quantity of replacement
trees shall be native species. The required planting diversity is based on the
number of replacement trees required.
      (1)   Five to ten trees. Minimum two types of trees to be planted;
      (2)   Ten to 20 trees. Minimum four types of trees to be planted;
      (3)   Twenty to 100 trees. Minimum seven types of trees to be planted;
      (4)   Greater than 100 trees. Minimum ten types of trees to be planted.
   (M)   Fee in lieu of replacement trees.
      (1)   In cases where any or all replacement trees cannot be adequately
accommodated on a site, the developer/owner may have the option of paying a fee
in lieu of replacement trees to the town. This fee shall be two times the
wholesale value per 2.5-inch caliper tree required for mitigation that is not
being planted on site.
      (2)   This money shall be put into the Tree Bank Fund to be used solely
for the planting and/or maintaining of trees for the public good, including the
placement of utility lines underground.
      (3)   The Zoning Administrator shall decide whether to accept the fee or
require the on-site placement of the trees.
   (N)   Relocation of a protected tree. Relocation is accomplished by moving
the protected tree elsewhere on the land to be developed pursuant to the same
development order and under the same ownership. The relocation of a protected
tree shall be coordinated with staff and require Zoning Administrator approval
of a detailed maintenance plan, as appropriate based upon size of relocated
tree.
   (O)   Inspection of protected, relocated, or replaced trees.
      (1)   All relocated or replaced trees shall be inspected by the Zoning
Administrator one year after their planting to ensure they are surviving in a
healthy condition.
      (2)   Trees planted pursuant to this subchapter that are found to be in
declining condition shall be replaced by the owner of the parcel within 30 days
of notification from the Zoning Administrator.
      (3)   If replacement is necessary, there shall be a re-inspection six
months after the replacement planting.
   (P)   Maintenance of protected, relocated, or replaced trees. The owner of
the parcel is responsible for the maintenance of all protected, relocated, or
replaced trees.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.703 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Commercial timber operations.
      (1)   Commercial timber operations are exempt from this subchapter where
management records of timber, in form and content satisfactory to the Zoning
Administrator, can be provided. This does not apply to clearing of unmanaged
natural woods.
      (2)   The town encourages and may enforce for the benefit of the public
health, safety, or welfare, the retention of a 50-foot buffer of existing trees
adjacent to all public rights-of-way on commercial timber operation property.
   (B)   Wetlands mitigation. The mitigation of wetlands pursuant to a permit
or approved plan from, and the requirements of, the South Carolina Department
of Environmental Services Bureau of Water or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
are exempt from this subchapter.
   (C)   Commercial tree operations. Trees grown specifically for sale by
commercial nurseries, while on the nursery site, are exempt from this
subchapter.
   (D)   Class IV trees. Trees categorized as Class IV in
Table 156.702-1: Tree Mitigation Calculation are exempt; however, pine trees
greater than 24 inches DBH shall be considered historic trees outside of a
protected buffer.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.704 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Tree conditions.
      (1)   In the event that any tree is determined to be severely damaged, of
inferior quality, or in a hazardous condition or location posing a danger to
private property, written authorization may be given by the Zoning
Administrator for tree removal with replacement as specified in this
subchapter. To assist in making the above-mentioned determination, the Zoning
Administrator may require a written assessment by an ISA certified arborist,
ISA TRAQ certified arborist, or registered engineer (in situations involving
actual or potential structural damage), as applicable, describing the condition
of the tree and/or other relevant factors in justification of removal.
      (2)   Should the Zoning Administrator disagree with the written
assessment, they may solicit a second opinion from an ISA certified arborist,
ISA TRAQ certified arborist, or registered engineer (in situations involving
actual or potential structural damage). The administrative decision of the
Zoning Administrator is final, subject to appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals
in accordance with
Subchapter I, Part 17.
   (B)   Emergencies. During the period of an emergency, such as a tornado,
hurricane, ice storm, flood, or any other act of nature, Town Council or its
assignee may waive the requirements of this subchapter. In such case, the
cutting and removal of fallen and severely damaged trees is permitted until
such time as Town Council deems it necessary.
   (C)   Utility, public service, and transportation projects provided for the
public good, such as water, sewer, stormwater, roadways, multi-purpose trails,
and power installations.
      (1)   Historic trees. In all instances, attempts should be made to
preserve good quality historic trees. If their removal for public projects is
unavoidable due to the requirements of the particular project, historic trees
may be removed in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.
      (2)   Transportation projects. Tree removal or relocation for
transportation projects, including the removal or relocation of infrastructure
resulting from said transportation projects, sponsored by the town, Charleston
County, or the South Carolina Department of Transportation in contravention to
the provisions of this subchapter is allowed, if the trees proposed for removal
are identified on plans approved by Town Council and the tree removal is
necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. Replacement
is required in accordance with this subchapter.
      (3)   Aerial power line/buffer impacts; danger trees.
         (a)   Where protected trees located in a required natural buffer or
planted landscaped buffer or otherwise are mutually considered danger trees by
the power provider and the Zoning Administrator, their removal request shall be
submitted in plan form and may be granted with replacement being required, in
accordance with this subchapter, to be planted on the site of the requested
tree removal.
         (b)   Where buffer configuration, aerial power line conditions, or
other circumstances or conditions do not permit canopy tree replacement,
mitigation may be achieved with one of the following methods:
            1.   The largest size tree or tall shrubs may be permitted, with
replacement calculations based upon nursery standards;
            2.   An equivalent donation made to the Tree Bank Fund, as
determined by Town Council; or
            3.   As may be approved in accordance with division (C)(5) below.
         (c)   Where power line maintenance operations cause violation of this
subchapter by means such as excessive pruning, based upon pruning standards
referenced in §
156.706, the tree may be considered damaged and require removal and
replacement. Damage to buffer vegetation as a part of any maintenance activity
requires replacement in-kind.
      (4)   Public projects, maintenance, repair, and installation by the Town
of Mount Pleasant and Mount Pleasant Waterworks.
         (a)   Tree removal for approved projects including town public
infrastructure projects and Mount Pleasant Waterworks projects, including
protected trees located in a required natural buffer or planted landscaped
buffer, is allowed in contravention of the provisions of this subchapter, if:
            1.   The proposed trees to be removed are identified on project
plans approved by the respective governing bodies; and
            2.   A finding is made by the applicable governing body that the
tree removal is necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the
public.
         (b)   Replacement is required in accordance with this subchapter.
Where buffer configuration or other conditions or circumstances do not permit
canopy tree replacement, mitigation may be achieved with one of the following
methods:
            1.   The largest size tree or tall shrubs may be permitted, with
replacement calculations based upon nursery standards;
            2.   An equivalent donation made to the Tree Bank Fund, as
determined by Town Council; or
            3.   As may be approved in accordance with division (C)(5) below.
         (c)   Tree removal, canopy pruning, and root pruning of trees within
boundaries of existing Town or Mount Pleasant Waterworks infrastructure,
easements, and rights-of-way is permitted with approval of the Zoning
Administrator, upon receipt of a written request from the Town Director of
Public Services, the Town Director of Engineering and Development Services, or
the General Manager of Mount Pleasant Waterworks, if the tree is causing damage
or interference with operation, maintenance, or rehabilitation of Town or Mount
Pleasant Waterworks infrastructure or facilities, and where no other corrective
options are determined feasible to protect or access the infrastructure or
facilities. The Zoning Administrator may approve removal and/or pruning with
replacement required in accordance with this subchapter.
      (5)   Tree replacement not otherwise specified under this division.
         (a)   Utility infrastructure providers, including the town and Mount
Pleasant Waterworks, may be entitled to a reduction or alteration of mitigation
requirements by the Town Administrator should the following conditions be met:
            1.   A request is made to the Town Administrator in a manner and
format acceptable to the Town Administrator;
            2.   The request is made by a public or private utility company,
the town, or Mount Pleasant Waterworks;
            3.   Tree removal is necessary for the installation or protection
of utilities; and
            4.   Mitigation is required.
         (b)   The Town Administrator may, at their discretion, elect to reduce
or alter mitigation requirements if the alteration or reduction is in the best
interests of the public. Reduction or alteration of mitigation requirements
shall be based on the value and nature of resources donated to the town by the
utility company. Examples of donated resources include, but are not limited to,
parks, trails, easements, or storage space. The amount or degree of any
reductions or alterations are within the discretion of the Town Administrator.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.705 TREE PROTECTION ZONES (TPZ).
   (A)   Minimum tree protection zone.
      (1)   During the development approval process, a tree protection zone
shall be established around all trees to be saved in accordance with this
subchapter and erected prior to the start of construction.
      (2)   The tree protection zone shall consist of a circular area centered
around the tree, the radius of which is equal to one foot for each inch of DBH
measurement (except as may be modified by division (B) below).
      (3)   The area within the tree protection zone shall remain free of all
building materials, dirt, or other construction materials, debris, vehicles,
and development activities, except as allowed by division (C) below.
      (4)   Impervious surface materials, building foundations, and other
subgrade building elements are prohibited within the tree protection zone.
      (5)   The tree protection zone shall be shown on all site plans,
construction plans, sketch plans, preliminary plats, final plats, and
subsequent recorded plats.
      (6)   Such depiction shall also include an explanation in the appropriate
"note" section of the documents of the treatments.
   (B)   Modifications to tree protection zones. In situations where strict
adherence to the tree protection zone, as defined above, is impossible or
unrealistic (due to site conditions, other town requirements, overlapping tree
protection zones, size or shape of a tree, and the like), the PLAN Department,
through field determination and consultation, may allow or require
modifications to this zone with potential conditions. Particular consideration
should be given to the installation of utilities.
   (C)   Development activities. Development activities within the tree
protection zone shall be in accordance with the following procedures:
      (1)   Grade changes.
         (a)   Moderate fill may be allowed, upon prior approval of the PLAN
Department and with the prior installation of an aeration system.
         (b)   A decrease in grade is prohibited.
         (c)   The grade outside the tree protection zone shall be decreased
only with the use of approved retaining walls or terracing plans. See Figure
156.705-1: Grade Changes.
         (d)   Drainage shall be addressed where grade changes occur around
trees.
Figure 156.705-1: Grade Changes
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13020.png]
 
      (2)   Utility installation.
         (a)   The installation of utilities, by boring and tunneling through
the tree protection zone, may be allowed with prior approval. See Figure
156.705-2: Utility Installation.
         (b)   Trenching is prohibited within the tree protection zone.
Figure 156.705-2: Utility Installation
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13022.png]
 
   (D)   Protective barricades.
      (1)   Protective barricades shall be placed at the perimeter of the tree
protection zone (see
Figure 156.705-3: Protective Barricade) and shall remain in place until
construction activities are complete.
      (2)   Chain link barricades are required in all instances for trees 24
inches and greater (see
Figure 156.705-4: Chain Link Protective Barricade).
      (3)   All tree protection must be accompanied by “Keep Out” or “Tree
Protection Area” signs.
Figure 156.705-3: Protective Barricade
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13024.png]
Figure 156.705-4: Chain Link Protective Barricade
   (E)   Passive tree protection for remote areas. Areas remote from active
land disturbance shall utilize passive forms of tree protection during
development activities.
      (1)   These areas must be completely surrounded with continuous rope or
flagging (heavy mill, minimum two inches wide). See
Figure 156.705-5: Passive Tree Protection.
      (2)   All passive tree protection must be accompanied by "Keep Out" or
"Tree Protection Area" signs.
Figure 156.705-5: Passive Tree Protection
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13026.png]
 
   (F)   Clearing within tree protection zone. Clearing within the tree
protection zone is allowed, if it is done by hand tools or gas-powered, push-
type or walk-behind equipment designed for brush or undergrowth clearing.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.706 REMEDIAL PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Conditions that require remedial procedures.
      (1)   Remedial site reclamation and tree care procedures shall be
implemented when development activities have caused damage to either the tree
or the tree's growing site and that damage is repairable.
      (2)   If encroachment into tree protection zones is anticipated or has
happened, the following practices shall be employed to improve survivability.
   (B)   Canopy pruning.
      (1)   A tree that has suffered root damage becomes stressed as that root
system no longer provides sufficient water and nutrients for the existing
crown.
         (a)   This stress becomes evident with the appearance of "staghorns"
or deadwood within the tree's crown.
         (b)   Once a tree has had construction damage, it is advisable to
delay pruning for one to three years until the deadwood becomes evident.
Pruning for deadwood removal is then recommended.
      (2)   The removal of live plant tissue from a construction-damaged tree
can accelerate the tree's decline.
      (3)   Trees that have not been affected by construction activities can be
pruned for maintenance of the tree's health, appearance, and safety, utilizing
accepted arboricultural practices.
      (4)   Pruning specifications as provided in the latest version of ANSI
A300 shall be used in all pruning cases.
      (5)   The pruning of specimen trees may be subject to PLAN Department
approval.
      (6)   All cabling work and other structural support supplemental systems
shall be installed in accordance with the latest edition of ANSI A300 American
National Standard for Tree Care Operations - Trees, Brush, and Other Woody
Plant Maintenance - Standard Practices on Support Systems and Cabling.
      (7)   Any lightning rod protection shall be installed in accordance with
ANSI A300 American National Standard for Tree Care Operations - Trees, Brush
and Other Woody Plant Maintenance - Standard Practices on Lightning Protection.
   (C)   Root pruning. All roots outside of the protective barricade to be
removed during the development shall be cleanly severed and a two-inch layer of
mulch shall be applied over the surface of exposed roots during development.
   (D)   Fertilization.
      (1)   Fertilizer applications will enhance the vigor of trees stressed by
site disturbances, thereby promoting root development.
      (2)   Information regarding appropriate fertilizers and application rates
may be obtained in the latest edition of ANSI A300 American National Standard
for Tree Care Operations - Trees, Brush and Other Woody Plant Maintenance -
Standard Practices on Fertilization.
   (E)   Soil aeration.
      (1)   A tree's ability for adequate root development, and ultimately its
chances for survival, are improved with reclamation of the growing site.
      (2)   Wherever possible, the soil should be brought back to its natural
grade.
         (a)   Unnecessary fill, compaction, erosion sedimentation, concrete
washout, and construction debris should be removed.
         (b)   When machinery is required for site improvement, it is
recommended that a "Bobcat" or similar lightweight, rubber-tired vehicle be
used so as to minimize soil compaction.
      (3)   Compacted soil within the tree protection zone should be aerated
(see Figure 156.705-6: Soil Aeration).
         (a)   A compressed air gun is used to cut narrow trenches in a spoke
pattern away from the trunk, to a depth of eight to 12 inches or greater if the
soil grade has been raised.
         (b)   Trenches should begin four to six feet from the trunk to avoid
cutting any major support roots and should extend to the dripline.
         (c)   Trenches are then backfilled with topsoil or compost. The air
exchange, nutrient, and water-holding capacities of soils can be improved with
soil amendments. This is best accomplished by backfilling with mineral
amendments such as perlite, vermiculite, isolite, and the like.
Figure 156.705-6: Soil Aeration
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13028.png]
 
   (F)   Mulching. A four- to six-inch layer of mulch material, such as pine
straw, pine bark, or wood chips, spread within the tree protection zone of
trees on construction sites is extremely beneficial.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.707 IRREPARABLE DAMAGE IN TREE PROTECTION ZONES.
   Where the Planning, Land Use, and Neighborhoods (PLAN) Department determines
that irreparable damage has occurred to trees within the tree protection zones,
the trees must be removed and replaced in accordance with the requirements of §
156.702(K).
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.708 PUBLIC TREES.
   (A)   Public trees within the town are considered to be a valuable public
resource. In order to appropriately care for and maintain these public
resources, the town shall create inventories and develop work plans as
described in this section.
   (B)   Maintain a current inventory of all public trees. The inventory data
gathered and recorded for each tree shall include, at a minimum, the following
informati on:
      (1)    Location (address or latitude/l ongitude coordinat es);
      (2)   Tree species;
      (3)   DBH;
      (4)   Condition; and
      (5)   Maintenance needs.
   (C)   Develop an annual work plan for the management of public trees
utilizing the tree inventory information. The work plan shall contain the
following plans and schedules:
      (1)   Tree planting;
      (2)   New tree maintenance, including mulching, irrigation, and young
tree training pruning;
      (3)   Tree pruning;
      (4)   Tree mulching; and
      (5)   Tree removal.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.709 NOTICE OF VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
   (A)   If the Zoning Administrator finds that any of the provisions of this
subchapter are being violated, they may issue a stop work order and shall, in
writing, notify the owner of the property and the general building contractor,
if applicable. In order to enforce this subchapter, town staff have the
authority to access private property to investigate and make determinations of
fact related to this section.
      (1)   Written notification shall indicate the nature of the violation and
the action necessary to correct the violation.
      (2)   Such remedial action shall be in accordance with §§
156.700 through
156.707.
   (B)   The issuance of a clearing and grading permit, tree removal permit, or
letter authorizing tree removal, and the failure to substantially erect
building improvements within 12 months that has resulted in tree removal
without replacement shall be deemed violations of this subchapter. Each tree
removed shall be identified as a separate offense.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the penalties designated above, violation of §§
156.700 through
156.707, or failure to comply with any of the requirements hereof, shall be
classified as a misdemeanor punishable by a maximum $500 fine and/or a maximum
of 30 days imprisonment, and/or shall be subject to a civil penalty that shall
not exceed $1,000 not including attorney’s fees and costs to collect and
enforce the civil penalty including, but not limited to, any proceedings to
create a lien on any property owned by the owner of the property for any unpaid
civil penalties.
      (1)   However, no penalty shall exceed the penalty provided by state law
for similar offenses.
      (2)   Each tree removed or destroyed in violation of this subchapter
represents a separate offense.
      (3)   Each day of violation also represents a separate offense.
      (4)   Any person, firm, organization, society, association, or
corporation, or any agent or representative thereof, who commits, participates,
or assists in such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and
be subject to the penalties in this section.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.710 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOUNDARY TREE. A tree located on a property line and, therefore, jointly
owned.
   CALIPER. The diameter of the trunk of a proposed, purchased, or newly-
planted tree, measured six inches above the ground for trees up to four inches
and 12 inches above the ground for trees larger than four inches.
   CANOPY TREE. A woody perennial typically capable of achieving heights
exceeding 30 feet at maturity.
   CONIFER. A tree that produces cones. Typically an evergreen species,
although some deciduous species exist.
   DAMAGE or ABUSE (to vegetation). Any intentional or negligent act that
endangers survivability of a tree or other plant material including, but not
limited to, damage inflicted upon the root system of a tree by application of
toxic substances, the operation of machinery, the change of natural grade by
excavation or filling above the root system or around the trunk of a tree,
pruning, damages from injury or fire inflicted on trees that result in or
permit pest infestation, or actual cutting of the tree.
   DANGER TREE. A live, dead, or structurally compromised tree that could
endanger or interfere with an existing aerial power line. This is linked to
federal regulations pertaining to transmission power lines, generally equal to
or exceeding 100 kV.
   DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT (DBH). The diameter of a tree, measured at breast
height (4.5 feet) above the ground. If a tree trunk splits at ground level and
does not share a common base, each trunk shall be measured as a separate tree.
If a multi-trunk tree splits below the 4.5-foot mark, all trunks six inches or
larger in diameter at 4.5 feet shall be measured separately and count as one
tree.
   DRIP LINE. An imaginary vertical line that extends downward from the
outermost branches of a tree to the ground.
   EVERGREEN. A plant that keeps its leaves or needles year round for more than
one growing season.
   HAZARD TREE. A tree identified as a likely source of harm.
   HISTORIC TREE. Any tree with diameter breast height (DBH) of 24 inches or
larger, with the following exceptions:
      (1)   Exempt trees, including invasive species, as provided herein; and
      (2)   For the purpose only of requiring a variance for removal of
historic trees or historic tree replacement requirements, non-exempt tree
species (with the exception of live oak trees) containing three or more
separate trunks are considered a significant tree, subject to the applicable
removal and replacement requirements of significant trees. Live oak tree
species with a DBH of 24 inches or larger are considered HISTORIC TREES under
all circumstances.
   INVASIVE EXOTIC. A non-native plant that regularly reproduces in our area
and outcompetes native species. These species are not protected by this
chapter. Includes the term INVASIVE SPECIES.
   ISA CERTIFIED ARBORIST. A professional, certified by the International
Society of Arboriculture, who possesses the technical competence gained through
experience and related training to provide for or supervise the management of
trees and other woody plants in residential, commercial, and public landscapes.
   ISA TRAQ CERTIFIED ARBORIST. A certified arborist who has completed the
International Society of Arboriculture Tree Risk Assessment Qualification
program. This qualification promotes the safety of people and property by
providing a standardized and systematic process for assessing tree risk.
   MITIGATION PLAN. A plan describing the intended mitigation for tree removal.
This can include a planting plan, payment based upon mitigation inches
required, or a combination of the two.
   MITIGATION TREE. See PROTECTED TREE.
   PROTECTED TREE. Any tree with a diameter breast height (DBH) of eight inches
or greater, and any smaller trees protected through special zones or buffers or
as a condition of approval by any of the town’s boards or commissions. This
term also includes trees planted as mitigation.
   PROTECTIVE BARRICADE. A physical structure at least four feet in height,
composed of wood, chain link fencing, or other durable material, limiting
access to protected, significant, and historic trees and their tree protection
zones (TPZ) during the development process, as more fully defined in §
156.705.
   PUBLIC TREE. A tree that grows on town-owned property within the street
right-of-way, parks, public facilities, or other town-owned properties.
   REPLACEMENT TREE. Any tree that is planted in order to replace an existing
tree that has been or will be removed. Replacement trees must be canopy
species, have a minimum size of 2.5 inches in caliper, and meet ANSI Standard
Z60.1. REPLACEMENT TREE includes the terms MITIGATION TREE and REPLACED TREE.
   SHRUB. Typically a woody perennial that does not achieve tree proportions at
maturity. Where referenced for requirements, some herbaceous species such as
ornamental grasses may be counted to fulfill this requirement where they
provide a similar screening purpose.
   SIGNIFICANT TREE. Any tree with a diameter breast height (DBH) of 16 inches
or larger.
   TREE. Any living, self-supporting, woody perennial plant, usually having one
dominant trunk and a mature height greater than 16 feet.
   TREE ASSESSMENT. Information on a site plan that confirms tree species from
the survey critical to the application of this subchapter, grades the
conditions of trees to aid in retaining quality trees, identifies invasive
exotic species on site for removal, confirms the tree survey is complete,
identifies any unique features of trees such as leans or lower canopy heights,
identifies trees just off site that may require design considerations, and
ultimately makes the designer more aware of the site and its character. This
analysis shall be performed by either an ISA certified arborist or a registered
South Carolina landscape architect and submitted with all development
submittals.
   TREE BANK FUND. A special account to be used solely for the beautification
of public lands.
   TREE REMOVAL PERMIT. A permit issued by the town, after review of a
requested tree removal, that defines required mitigation and confers approval
to remove the specified tree.
   TREE REPLACEMENT SCHEDULE. A plan showing the location, species, and size of
all replacement trees; and a table listing removed protected, significant, and
historic trees with total replacement caliper inches required.
   TREE RISK ASSESSMENT. A systematic process used to identify, analyze, and
evaluate tree risk. Performed by an ISA TRAQ certified arborist.
   TREE SURVEY. A survey completed by a registered land surveyor showing the
location, size, and species of all protected trees, including their tree
protection zone. These are required to be no more than one year old for any
formal submittals.
   UNDERSTORY TREE. A woody perennial with a smaller size at maturity than
canopy species, typically with a size between 16 feet and 30 feet at maturity.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.711 THROUGH 156.729 RESERVED.
SUBCHAPTER F: PARKING AND LOADING
PART 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.730 PURPOSE.
   This subchapter sets minimum standards for off-street parking requirements
for new construction and expansion of or changes to existing uses and
structures to:
   (A)   Ensure uses have a minimum level of off-street parking to avoid
congestion on surrounding streets without creating excessive parking; and
   (B)   Provide flexibility to accommodate alternative parking solutions.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.731 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This subchapter applies:
      (1)   At the time of initial construction of any principal building;
      (2)   At the time of establishment of a principal use, whether a new use
on a previously undeveloped lot or a change in use of a developed lot;
      (3)   Any time a structural alteration or other addition to a principal
building produces an increase in parking demand;
      (4)   Any time the useable seating area of a restaurant or brewpub is
increased; and
      (5)   Any time a use is enlarged to occupy additional floor area or is
altered in another manner that produces an increase in parking demand.
   (B)   Required off-street parking provided for one use shall not be included
as part or all of the required off-street parking for another use, unless
authorized through a shared parking plan (see §
156.774).
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.732 LOCATION OF REQUIRED PARKING SPACES.
   (A)   Unless otherwise approved through an alternative parking plan (see
Part 4), all required off-street parking spaces shall:
      (1)   Be located on the same lot with the principal building or use or
uses served;
      (2)   Have direct access to a street or alley; and
      (3)   Be developed and maintained in accordance with
Subchapter F, Part 3 and with
Subchapter H, Part 3, if applicable.
   (B)   On-street parking may be allowed as provided in §
156.773.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.733 THROUGH 156.739 RESERVED.
PART 2: PARKING RATIOS
§ 156.740 MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING RATIOS.
   (A)   Minimum number of off-street parking spaces required. §
156.741 establishes the minimum number of off-street parking spaces required
for the land uses listed in
Subchapter C, Part 3, Subpart 3.2.
   (B)   Fractional computations. If the final calculation of the minimum
required number of off-street parking spaces includes a fractional space, the
number of required parking spaces is rounded up to the next highest whole
number regardless of the fraction.
   (C)   Requirements for uses not specifically listed. When the parking space
requirements for a particular use are not listed in §
156.741, the applicant shall submit a parking demand study that complies with §
156.775 to establish the number of parking spaces required.
   (D)   Parking demand studies. When an applicant believes the minimum number
of required parking spaces specified in §
156.741 exceeds the number needed for the proposed use, the applicant may
submit a parking demand study that complies with §
156.775 to establish the number of parking spaces required.
   (E)   Parking spaces for alternative fuel vehicles. Parking spaces for
alternative fuel vehicles, including spaces with electric vehicle charging
stations, count towards the required number of parking spaces for a use, unless
the space is exclusively available for alternative fuel vehicles (through the
use of a sign or other marking).
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.741 OFF-STREET PARKING TABLE.
   (A)   The minimum number of required parking spaces shall be calculated on
the basis of the use of the land or principal structure on a lot, according to
the requirements indicated in
Table 156.741-1: Off-Street Parking Table, unless otherwise specified in this
chapter.
   (B)   In the OP-1, OP-2, NC-1, NC-2, AB-1, AB-2, ED, LI, and WG-C zoning
districts, all parking spaces provided above the minimum amount required,
except spaces for alternative fuel vehicles, shall be surfaced with pervious
materials approved by the Zoning Administrator in consultation with the Town
Engineer. The applicant shall provide manufacturer specifications and
construction details for the proposed materials.
Table 156.741-1: Off-Street Parking Table
Key: min. = minimum required | sf = square feet
Use Category Use Spaces Required (min.)1 Unit of Measure Notes
Table 156.741-1: Off-Street Parking Table
Key: min. = minimum required | sf = square feet
                            Spaces       Unit of
Use Category Use            Required     Measure      Notes
                            (min.)1
             Church or                   100 sf of    For simultaneous uses,
             place of       3 to 5       main         parking requirements for
             public                      assembly     each use may be
             assembly                                 separately applied.
             Government     Parking
             facility       demand study  
                            required2
             School:
            middle,
Civic        primary, pre-
             school,        2 to 10      Classroom
             educational
             nursery, day
             care, and
             similar uses
             School:                     Classroom,   Whichever is greater at
             secondary/high 5 to 10, or  or 100 sf of initial construction and
             school/        1 to 2       main         any future alterations.
             technical                   assembly
   Key: min. = minimum required | sf = square feet
                                                      If more than 4 guest
                                                      rooms in a guest suite,
                                                      1 additional space per 2
                                                      guest rooms is required.
                            1            Guest room   Employee parking is
                                                      required at 2 spaces
             Accommodations                           (total) for boutique
             and lodging                              hotels and 3 spaces
                                                      (total) for hotels and
                                                      extended stay hotels.
                            Commercial
                            and retail                200 to 300
                            (excluding   1            sf          
                            shopping
                            centers)
                                                      For warehouse uses only,
             Office and                               the office portion is
             warehouse,                  200 to 300   subject to the parking
             including      1            sf           requirement. Fleet
             medical office                           parking may require
                                                     additional spaces at
                                                     staff discretion.
            Personal and
Commercial   business
             support                                  Fleet parking may
             services,      1            200 to 300   require additional
             including                   sf           spaces at staff
             personal                                 discretion.
             improvement
             education
             Restaurant,
             bar,
             nightclub,
             lounge,
             including      1 to 2       100 sf
             associated
             decks, plazas,
             and other
             outdoor areas
             Shopping       1            250 sf
             center
                            Assisted                             Plus 1 space
                            living or    1            3 beds     per employee
                            nursing home
Continuing
care
retirement                                            Plus 1 space per
community                   1            3 beds       employee
(CCRC) -      
dependent    Healthcare
living units
CCRC -
independent                              Dwelling
living                      1.5 to 3     unit
dwelling
units
Hospital                    1 to 4       Room
                                         Dwelling     Plus all spaces required
Mixed uses   Live-work unit 1            unit         for the non-residential
                                                      use
             Park and all   Parking
             other sports-  demand study  
             related uses   required2
             Sports complex
             - with fixed
             seats (such as 1            3 to 5 seats
Recreation   a field or
             gym)
             Sports complex
             - without      Parking
             fixed seats    demand study  
             (such as a     required2
             field or pool)
             Duplex,                                  For multiplex dwellings,
             triplex,                    Dwelling     private garage spaces do
             quadplex, or   1.5 to 3     unit         not count toward the
             multiplex                                requirement.
             dwelling
            Detached house              Dwelling     Private garage spaces
Residential  dwelling       1            unit         may count toward the
                                                      requirement.
                                                      Private garage spaces
             Townhouse      2            Dwelling     may count toward the
             dwelling                    unit         requirement. Tandem
                                                      parking is allowed.
                            Parking
Other        All other uses demand study  
                            required2
1 Unless otherwise specified in this chapter.
2 See §
156.775.
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.742 BICYCLE PARKING.
   (A)   Applicability. Bicycle parking and storage is required for multiplex
dwellings, apartment complexes, and commercial developments at the time of the
initial construction of any principal building or when a structural alteration
or other addition to a principal building produces an increase in parking
demand.
   (B)   Minimum number of spaces required.
      (1)   Multiplex dwellings and apartment complexes. Multiplex dwellings
and apartment complexes that contain more than ten dwelling units shall provide
enough secure bicycle parking to accommodate 10% of the units at one space per
unit.
      (2)   Commercial developments. Commercial developments and redevelopments
of 6,000 square feet or more shall provide secure bicycle parking in accordance
with Table 156.742-1: Bicycle Parking for Commercial Developments.
 
Table 156.742-1: Bicycle Parking for Commercial Developments
   Key: min. = minimum required | sf = square feet
Gross Floor Area   Required Number of Bicycle Parking Spaces (min.)
0 to 6,000 sf      1
6,001 to 10,000 sf 2
Over 10,000 sf     1 per each additional 10,000 sf
 
   (C)   Vehicular parking reduction for commercial developments.
      (1)   The required number of off-street vehicular parking spaces for a
commercial development may be reduced by up to 10% if the development provides
indoor bicycle accommodations, in addition to the required number of bicycle
parking spaces.
      (2)   Examples of accommodations include enclosed bicycle lockers,
personal lockers, employee shower facilities, and dressing areas. Examples of
indoor bicycle accommodations are shown in Figure 156.742-1.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13030.png]
 
   (D)   Design and location.
      (1)   The design and location of all bicycle parking is subject to
approval through the design review process.
      (2)   Required bicycle parking shall:
         (a)   Consist of racks or lockers of theft-resistant construction,
which shall be anchored so they cannot be easily removed;
         (b)   Allow both the bicycle frame and the wheels to be locked using a
standard U-lock;
         (c)   Be designed so as not to cause damage to the bicycle;
         (d)   Facilitate easy locking without interference from or to adjacent
bicycles;
         (e)   Be located in convenient, visible, well-lighted areas that are
close to entrances and do not interfere with pedestrian movements;
         (f)   Where provided for residential developments, be protected from
the elements (see Figure 156.742-2: Examples of Protected Bicycle Parking for
Residential Developments); and
         (g)   Where located in commercial parking lots, utilize a paving
material or surface different from the adjacent parking areas and shall include
some means of protection of bicyclists and the bicycle facility from vehicular
conflicts.
      (3)   Figure 156.742-3 provides examples of outdoor bicycle parking for
commercial developments.
Figure 156.742-2: Examples of Protected Bicycle Parking for Residential
Developments
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13034.png]
Figure 156.742-3
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.743 THROUGH 156.754 RESERVED.
PART 3: OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE AND LOT DESIGN
§ 156.755 APPLICABILITY.
   This part applies to all uses subject to this subchapter except where
otherwise indicated.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.756 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Tandem parking. Tandem parking is prohibited, unless specifically
allowed elsewhere in this chapter.
   (B)   Stop signs. Stop signs shall be provided at the transition from a
surface parking area to the public right-of-way.
   (C)   Wheel stops. Wheel stops shall be provided wherever an angled parking
space abuts a curb or sidewalk.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.757 SURFACING.
   (A)   All parking spaces shall be surfaced with a suitable paving material
such as asphalt, concrete, specialty pavers, or pea gravel (but not other types
of gravel or similar material), except as provided in §
156.741(B) and division (B) below.
   (B)   Parking spaces located in the SCW-W, SCW-H, SCW-N Districts and
parking spaces serving detached house dwellings, duplex dwellings, and any
other use that requires or provides six or fewer parking spaces may be surfaced
with other suitable paving material approved by the Zoning Administrator in
consultation with the Town Engineer. The applicant shall provide manufacturer
specifications and construction details for the proposed materials.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.758 PARKING SPACE AND TRAVEL AISLE DIMENSIONS.
   (A)   Parking spaces oriented 90 degrees to the travel aisle shall be at
least nine feet in width and 18 feet in length. However, where parking spaces
abut landscaped areas not required by this chapter, the paved length of the
parking stall may be reduced to 17 feet if curbing or anchored concrete wheel
stops are furnished at the edge of paving to allow the vehicle to overhang the
landscape area.
   (B)   Angled parking spaces positioned at other than 90 degrees to the
travel aisle, parallel parking spaces, and one-way travel aisles shall be
dimensioned in accordance with recognized standard criteria, such as time-saver
standards.
   (C)   The minimum dimensions for a parking space exclude aisles, maneuvering
space, turnaround space, and drives.
   (D)   All two-way travel aisles shall be a minimum of 24 feet in width.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.759 DRIVE-THROUGHS.
   For businesses with drive-through access, parking spaces and travel aisles
shall be arranged in a manner that provides sufficient stacking area from the
public access driveway to prevent vehicles from backing up into the adjacent
roadway.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.760 DESIGN REGULATIONS FOR COMMERCIAL, INSTITUTIONAL, AND APARTMENT
COMPLEX PARKING LOTS.
   (A)   Applicability. This section applies for commercial, institutional, and
apartment complex parking lots located in any zoning district.
   (B)   Lighting. Parking lots and vehicular use areas shall be lighted in
accordance with
Subchapter H, Part 3, Subpart 3.4.
   (C)   Screening. All parking lots and vehicular use areas shall be screened
from all abutting properties and rights-of-way by the minimum requirements of
Subchapter D, Part 2.
   (D)   Parking lot landscaping.
      (1)   Planter islands. Surface parking lots shall contain planter islands
located so as to best relieve the expanse of paving.
         (a)   The end of each parking row shall terminate in a planter island,
outlined by curb and gutter or concrete wheel stops.
            1.   A maximum of 12 parking spaces in a row is allowed without a
planter island.
            2.   However, this requirement may be modified by the Zoning
Administrator when strict application will seriously limit the function of an
area.
         (b)   Planter islands shall have a minimum area of 150 square feet.
            1.   Planter islands shall contain at least one 2.5-inch-caliper
canopy tree with a minimum clean trunk of five feet and a minimum overall
height of eight feet at the time of planting. “Minimum clean trunk” means the
tree does not have limbs or leaves between the ground and the specified height,
which helps maintain a clear line of sight for drivers and pedestrians.
            2.   The remainder shall be landscaped with understory trees,
shrubs, or ground cover.
            3.   As it presents considerable root competition for trees, the
use of lawn within an island should be limited.
            4.   Planter islands with a minimum area less than 250 square feet
shall not include light poles, fire hydrants, manholes, curb inlets/drain
boxes, transformers, and the like.
         (c)   Depth of termination area and height of landscaping shall be
determined by preserving a sight triangle within the parking area formed by a
long leg of 50 feet and a height of eye of three and one-half feet.
      (2)   Planted borders.
         (a)   Where a parking area is not located immediately adjacent to a
perimeter or right-of-way bufferyard, the parking area shall have planted
borders at least five feet in width located parallel to lot lines and rights-
of-way.
         (b)   Planted borders are intended to supplement, not replace,
required bufferyards.
         (c)   Planted border areas shall contain at least one 2.5-inch-caliper
canopy tree, with a minimum clear trunk of five feet and a minimum height of
eight feet, for each 30 linear feet of the border area. The remainder shall be
landscaped with shrubs, lawn, ground cover, or other approved materials.
         (d)   Planted border areas may be interrupted to provide:
            1.   Ingress and egress drives for the property; and
            2.   Sidewalks that are generally perpendicular to the border area
and that are used to connect the parking area to a building.
   (E)   Existing plant material.
      (1)   The natural landscape shall be preserved according to the
provisions of §
156.991.
      (2)   Wherever healthy plant material exists on a site, the standards in
division (D) above may be adjusted to allow credit for such plant material, if
the existing plant material meets the standards in this section.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.761 THROUGH 156.769 RESERVED.
PART 4: ALTERNATIVE PARKING PLANS
§ 156.770 PURPOSE.
   The minimum off-street parking ratios are intended to encourage development
that is economically viable and environmentally sensitive. The standards in
this subchapter are not intended to be so rigid as to require significantly
more parking spaces than a particular use demands, or to inhibit creative
development. Project conditions associated with individual sites may justify
the use of alternative parking plans as provided in this part.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.771 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Alternative parking plans may be submitted in conjunction with any
application, subject to the requirements in the applicable section of this
part.
   (B)   Alternative parking plans may modify the provisions of §
156.732 or §
156.741, but shall not modify any other provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.772 OFF-SITE PARKING.
   (A)   Applicability. Off-site parking may be provided for any use, subject
to the provisions in this section.
   (B)   Location.
      (1)   The off-site parking area shall be located no more than 600 feet
from the primary pedestrian entrance of the use(s) served. This distance is
measured from the nearest point of the off-site parking area to the primary
pedestrian entrance of the use served along the shortest designated pedestrian
route.
      (2)   The off-site parking spaces shall not be separated from the use(s)
served by a street right-of-way greater than 80 feet in width.
   (C)   Availability of off-site parking spaces. Off-site parking spaces used
to meet minimum parking requirements must be exclusively available to the users
of the use served by the off-site parking spaces during the duration of use.
   (D)   Off-site parking agreement required. The owner of the lot on which the
off-site parking is located must relinquish, through a covenant agreement with
the town, their development rights over the property until such time as parking
space is provided elsewhere or on the same premises as the principal use or
uses.
      (1)   An agreement ensuring the use of the off-site parking area by the
associated use shall be submitted in conjunction with the application.
      (2)   If an off-site parking agreement is revoked by the parties to the
agreement, off-street parking shall be provided in another location in
accordance with the requirements of this subchapter.
   (E)   Off-site parking in the TH District.
      (1)   In the TH District, required parking may be provided in a community
parking lot or garage, the title to which and/or easement for the use of which
runs with and/or is appurtenant to the title of townhouse.
      (2)   Any such parking lot or garage shall be located 200 feet or less
from the dwelling(s) it serves.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.773 ON-STREET PARKING.
   (A)   Applicability.
      (1)   On-street parking is allowed in Planned Development Districts, if
expressly authorized by the associated rezoning ordinance.
      (2)   On-street parking may be allowed in zoning overlay districts (see
Subchapter B).
      (3)   On-street parking may be provided in any zoning district that is
subject to Subchapter H, if approved through the design review process.
   (B)   Location.
      (1)   Public streets.
         (a)   On-street parking may be located on town-owned rights-of-way.
         (b)   On-street parking on state rights-of-way is subject to review
and approval by the South Carolina Department of Transportation.
         (c)   On-street parking is publicly available and may not be reserved
for private use.
         (d)   On-street parking may not be used for required off-street
parking.
      (2)   Private streets. On-street parking may be located on private
rights-of-way.
      (3)   Access drives. On-street parking may be located on private drives
if the drive is constructed to look like a street. Figure 156.773-1 provides
examples of drives constructed to look like a street.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13036.png]
   (C)   Design.
      (1)   On-street parking spaces. On-street parking spaces shall be:
         (a)   Oriented parallel to the travel lanes, except on private streets
and access drives where they may be parallel or angled;
         (b)   Dimensioned in accordance with recognized standard criteria,
such as time-saver standards;
         (c)   Located at least 50 feet from any street intersection, as
measured from the closest edge of the parking space to the center of the
intersection;
         (d)   Located at least 30 feet from any intersection of two access
drives or an access drive and a street, as measured from the closest edge of
the parking space to the center of the intersection; and
         (e)   Marked in accordance with the latest edition of the Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
      (2)   Curb and gutter. Curb and gutter shall be provided.
      (3)   Curb extensions.
         (a)   Curb extensions (or “bulb-outs”) shall be provided between at
least every six on-street parking spaces.
         (b)   A curb extension shall have at least the same dimensions as the
on-street parking spaces.
         (c)   Curb extensions shall be landscaped with trees, shrubs,
groundcover, or a combination of these elements. For developments subject to
the Environmental Guidelines for Land Development (see §
155.054(B)) curb extensions on:
            1.   Private streets or access drives may accommodate low impact
development stormwater control measures; and
            2.   Public streets may accommodate low impact development
stormwater control measures, if approved by the Town Engineer.
   (D)   New on-street parking may constitute up to 50% of required parking.
      (1)   Unless otherwise specified in a PD District ordinance or zoning
overlay district regulations, newly constructed on-street parking spaces may be
used to satisfy up to 50% of the parking spaces required for any use if the on-
street parking is located within:
         (a)   250 feet of any building entrance for a residential use; and
         (b)   600 feet of the primary building entrance for a non-residential
use.
      (2)   All required accessible parking spaces shall be provided off-
street.
   (E)   On-street parking map required.
      (1)   If on-street parking spaces are used to satisfy any portion of the
minimum parking requirement, the applicant shall provide a key map allocating
the provided on-street parking to the lot or tenant utilizing the spaces.
However, on-street parking spaces for a specific use shall not be reserved
exclusively by that use, but must be available for general public use at all
times. Signs or action limiting general public use of on-street spaces is
prohibited.
      (2)   The overlapping of the same on-street parking space(s) for multiple
uses is prohibited.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.774 SHARED PARKING.
   (A)   Applicability. Shared parking may be provided for any two or more
uses, subject to the provisions in this section.
   (B)   Generally.
      (1)   Off-street parking spaces may be shared among more than one use,
whether the uses are on the same lot or on separate lots, if the total number
of off-street parking spaces is at least equal to the sum of the individual
off-street parking space requirements for each use specified in §
156.741, except as provided in division (D) below.
      (2)   Shared parking spaces must be available on an equal basis for all
users. Parking spaces shall not be designated solely for certain uses through
the use of signs or other elements, except that shared parking spaces provided
pursuant to division (D) below may be restricted to specific users during
certain hours.
   (C)   Shared parking agreement required.
      (1)   When off-street parking spaces are shared among more than one use,
a legally sufficient agreement, approved by the Town Attorney prior to
execution, ensuring the perpetual joint usage and maintenance of the shared
parking area(s) shall be recorded with the Charleston County Register of Deeds.
      (2)   The agreement must include provisions for written notice to the
Zoning Administrator prior to expiration, termination, or an amendment to the
agreement.
      (3)   An executed shared parking agreement shall be submitted to the
Zoning Administrator prior to technical review and code compliance or zoning
permit approval, as applicable, and recorded within 30 days of approval.
      (4)   If a shared parking agreement expires, terminates, or is amended in
a manner contrary to this section, off-street parking shall be provided in
another location in accordance with the requirements of this subchapter within
60 days of such action. Unless remediating steps are taken that bring the
property into compliance with parking requirements, the property may be
considered in violation of this chapter.
   (D)   Reduction in required number of off-street parking spaces.
      (1)   Where off-street parking spaces are shared among two or more uses
that have different hours of operation or peak parking demand hours, the Zoning
Administrator may allow a reduction in the total number of required parking
spaces.
      (2)   The reduction shall be based on a shared parking analysis prepared
by a professional engineer or transportation planner that clearly demonstrates
the feasibility of shared parking.
      (3)   In the shared parking analysis, the professional engineer or
transportation planner shall assess:
         (a)   Site-specific elements, including the size and type of the
proposed development and the composition of uses or tenants; and
         (b)   The anticipated rate of parking turnover and the anticipated
peak parking and traffic loads for all uses, using:
            1.   Actual parking counts for uses or combinations of uses that
are the same or comparable to the proposed use(s) in terms of density, scale,
bulk, area, type of activity, and location; and/or
            2.   Relevant data from the Institute of Transportation Engineers
(ITE), Urban Land Institute (ULI) meeting a Level of Service A or B for walking
distances from parking to entrance, or another generally accepted resource for
parking demand data; and/or
            3.   The availability of current or planned public transportation
routes, greenways, and other pedestrian and bicycle connections.
      (4)   If one or more uses change, a new shared parking analysis is
required to demonstrate whether the parking reduction continues to accommodate
the parking demand for each use. If the number of parking spaces provided no
longer accommodates the parking demand generated by each use, parking shall be
provided in accordance with this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.775 PARKING DEMAND STUDIES.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of a parking demand study is to demonstrate the
appropriate off-street parking ratio for a proposed use, based on operational
characteristics of the particular use and relevant site-specific factors.
   (B)   Applicability.
      (1)   The applicant for any use where §
156.741 specifies that the minimum number of off-street parking spaces is
established via a parking demand study, or for any use not listed in the table,
shall submit a parking demand study in conjunction with the relevant
application.
      (2)   The applicant for any use may submit a parking demand study in
conjunction with the relevant application if the applicant believes the parking
ratio specified in §
156.741 exceeds the number needed for the proposed use.
   (C)   Documentation of parking demand required.
      (1)   The parking demand study shall be prepared by a professional
engineer or transportation planner.
      (2)   The professional engineer or transportation planner shall provide
documentation verifying parking demand based on:
         (a)   Relevant data for the proposed use, if available, such as number
of employees, hours of operation, and number and frequency of customer or
client visits; and/or
         (b)   Actual parking counts for uses or combinations of uses that are
the same or comparable to the proposed use(s) in terms of density, scale, bulk,
area, type of activity, and location; and/or
         (c)   Data from the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE), Urban
Land Institute (ULI) meeting a Level of Service A or B for walking distances
from parking to entrance, or another generally accepted resource for parking
demand data.
      (3)   The parking demand study shall consider the availability of current
or planned public transportation routes, greenways, and other pedestrian and
bicycle connections.
   (D)   Total number of parking spaces required. The approved parking demand
study shall establish the minimum number of parking spaces required for the
use.
   (E)   Changes affecting the number of parking spaces needed.
      (1)   If changes occur that affect the number of parking spaces needed
for the use, such as building additions, changes to operational characteristics
of the use, or adjustments to hours of operation, then either:
         (a)   A new parking demand study shall be submitted to demonstrate
whether the number of existing parking spaces continues to accommodate the
parking demand for the use; or
         (b)   Parking shall be provided in accordance with the applicable
ratio specified in
Subchapter F, Part 2.
      (2)   If the new parking demand study demonstrates that the number of
existing parking spaces no longer accommodates the parking demand generated by
the use, parking shall be provided in accordance with the new parking demand
study or with the applicable ratio specified in
Subchapter F, Part 2.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.776 THROUGH 156.784 RESERVED.
PART 5: OFF-STREET LOADING
§ 156.785 APPLICABILITY.
   This part applies to:
   (A)   Any building or structure that will be occupied by a use that requires
the receipt or distribution of material or merchandise, but that is not large
enough to necessitate the inclusion of one or more loading docks in the
building or structure design; and
   (B)   Any multi-tenant retail or office building.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.786 OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE REQUIRED.
   (A)   At least one off-street loading space shall be constructed at the time
of the initial construction or alteration or conversion of any building or
structure subject to this part. For multi-tenant buildings, at least one off-
street loading space shall be constructed for every three tenant spaces.
   (B)   Vehicles being loaded or unloaded in connection with normal operations
shall not project into a street or sidewalk.
   (C)   Each loading space shall be at least ten feet in width and 20 feet in
length.
   (D)   Off-street loading spaces do not count towards the minimum parking
required by §
156.740.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.787 THROUGH 156.809 RESERVED.
SUBCHAPTER G: SIGNS
PART 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.810 PURPOSE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purposes of this subchapter are to regulate signs as
follows:
      (1)   To enhance the aesthetics and visual appeal of the town by:
         (a)   Encouraging signs that are of a quality design, pleasing in
appearance, and are appropriate in location, size, materials, and illumination
for the type of activity to which they pertain;
         (b)   Encouraging signs that are compatible with the architectural
style, characteristics, and scale of the building to which they are attached
and encouraging signs that are compatible with adjacent buildings, businesses,
and residents;
         (c)   Preserving and enhancing the natural scenic beauty or aesthetic
features of natural areas visible from highways, streets, and adjacent areas;
and
         (d)   Discouraging signs that contribute to the visual clutter of the
streetscape, such as off-premises signs, oversized signs, and excessive
temporary signs;
      (2)   To promote traffic safety by:
         (a)   Preventing or limiting unreasonable distraction of operators of
motor vehicles;
         (b)   Preventing the obstruction of the vision of operators of motor
vehicles;
         (c)   Discouraging signs that cause traffic hazards or interfere with
ingress/egress; and
         (d)   Preventing confusion with regard to traffic lights, signs, or
signals;
      (3)   To prevent property damage caused by signs improperly constructed
or anchored in times of hurricanes or other storms;
      (4)   To protect citizens’ state and federal constitutional rights to
free speech by:
         (a)   Providing ample opportunities for expression through signs;
         (b)   Avoiding regulatory triggers or distinctions based on a sign's
content; and
         (c)   Providing clear standards for approval of signs.
      (5)   To promote the prosperity, economic well-being, and general welfare
of the town and to preserve property values;
      (6)   To promote safety, convenience, and enjoyment of travel and
protection of the public investment in highways and streets within the town;
      (7)   To ensure light, air, and open space; and
      (8)   To implement the goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan.
   (B)   Findings. The Town Council finds that the sign regulations in this
subchapter are necessary to preserve aesthetic values, promote traffic safety,
and accomplish the other purposes set out above.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.811 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This subchapter applies to new and existing signs within the town,
except for the signs exempted from the applicability of this subchapter in §
156.812.
   (B)   This subchapter does not prohibit signs required by local, state, or
federal law and does not authorize signs prohibited by state or federal law.
   (C)   A person may not construct, install, operate, display, change the sign
copy, or otherwise use any sign this subchapter prohibits.
   (D)   A person may not construct, install, operate, display, change the sign
copy, or otherwise use any sign at a time, place, or manner that this
subchapter prohibits.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.812 EXEMPT SIGNS.
   (A)   Government signs. This subchapter does not apply to signs erected,
maintained, or displayed by the state, federal, Charleston County, or town
governments. Government uses in all zoning districts may include signs.
   (B)   Traffic control devices. This subchapter does not apply to traffic
control devices on public or private property that the Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices adopted in this state requires.
   (C)   Required signs. This subchapter does not apply to any sign or device
the state, federal, or county government requires a person to erect, maintain,
or display.
   (D)   Indoor signs. This subchapter does not apply to signs within a
structure that are not visible from any perspective outside of the structure.
   (E)   Signs in an enclosed facility. This subchapter does not apply to signs
in an enclosed facility, such as a fenced or restricted access facility, that
are not visible from any point outside the facility.
   (F)   Signs smaller than one square foot. This subchapter does not apply to
signs with an area of less than one square foot that are located on a platted
lot. Such signs may not be placed in the right-of-way of any public street.
However, multiple small signs that effectively function together as a larger
sign must comply with the standards of this subchapter.
   (G)   Non-residential light pole banners. This subchapter does not apply to
temporary banners affixed to light poles in multi-tenant developments that are
displayed for a period not to exceed 90 days.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.813 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   The following signs are hereby expressly prohibited unless specifically
otherwise allowed.
   (A)   Off-premises signs. Off-premises signs are prohibited, except as
provided in §
156.828.
   (B)   Signs that move. Signs or portions of signs that move by any means, or
signs that give the appearance of movement in any manner, including feather
signs, except for flags as allowed in this subchapter.
   (C)   Signs on parked vehicles. A vehicle, including trailers or other non-
motorized wheeled vehicles carrying or displaying signs, may not be parked so
that it functions primarily as a sign.
      (1)   Factors. The following factors determine whether a vehicle is used
primarily as a sign:
         (a)   The vehicle is parked at a prominent location on the lot;
         (b)   The vehicle is parked at the same or similar locations for more
than eight consecutive hours during the same day or for more than three
consecutive days during the same week; and
         (c)   A viewer in the right-of-way can read the sign copy.
      (2)   Presumption of use as a sign. While other factors may also
establish a violation of the prohibition of vehicle signs, a vehicle
presumptively violates this provision if the vehicle satisfies the three
factors, and the owner of the vehicle does not provide a compelling reason to
justify the parking location as opposed to another less conspicuous location.
   (D)   Signs that emit sound, odor, or visible matter, such as smoke or
vapor.
   (E)   Any sign or sign structure that obstructs the view of, or may be
confused with, a traffic/directional safety sign.
   (F)   Signs in the right-of-way. Signs may not be located within a state or
county-maintained street, highway, or right-of-way or within any street or
right-of-way that is maintained by the town.
   (G)   Any sign painted on or affixed to trees or other natural features,
utility poles, benches, or other street furniture, such as waste receptacles,
bike racks, drinking fountains, public telephones, and the like.
   (H)   Any sign located on any land subject to periodic inundation by tidal
saltwater.
   (I)   A sign towed behind a vehicle, watercraft, or aircraft.
   (J)   Any sign exhibiting statements, words, or pictures that are of an
obscene or pornographic nature.
   (K)   Inflatable signs or balloons of any type.
   (L)   Banners, flags (except as specifically permitted in this subchapter),
pennants, streamers, balloons, and other gas-filled figures, except as allowed
in
Chapter 116.
   (M)   Marquees.
   (N)   Electronic readerboard signs. However, interactive digital kiosks and
displays are not considered signs.
   (O)   Portable signs, except for A-frame signs, as specifically permitted in
this subchapter.
   (P)   Any other sign not expressly authorized by this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.814 CONTENT NEUTRALITY AND SUBSTITUTION.
   (A)   Content neutrality. Despite any other provision of this subchapter,
the content of a sign’s message does not limit its permissibility under this
subchapter. However, location-based standards such as off-premises sign
regulations do not regulate content and do apply to signs.
   (B)   Substitution allowed. Any sign allowed with a commercial message may
contain any non-commercial message. Any sign with a non-commercial message may
contain any other non-commercial message.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.815 CLASSIFICATION OF SIGN USERS AND INTERPRETATION OF TABLES.
   (A)   Generally. This subchapter classifies sign users in a series of tables
to provide different allowances for area, height, and other features for signs
based on the use and to ensure that the same sign standards apply to similarly
situated users and in cohesive areas.
   (B)   Classifications. For the purposes of the subchapter, the following use
classifications apply:
      (1)   Residential uses. These are the principal uses listed in §
156.338, category for residential uses;
      (2)   Non-residential uses. These are all other principal uses not listed
in §
156.338, category for residential uses and any other non-listed uses, including
mixed-use buildings; and
      (3)   Multi-tenant developments. Where applicable, these are a building
or group of buildings developed for multiple non-residential users or mixed-
uses occupying one development site, such as a shopping center, retail center,
office park, multi-story multi-tenant building, planned development, mixed-use
building, or comprehensive development projects. Exclusively residential
developments are not considered a multi-tenant development.
   (C)   Interpretation of tables. This subchapter presents the allowed
specifications for signs in a series of tables. The subjects addressed by the
tables are described below. Each of the tables is a summary of the dimensional
allowances and features, and additional standards and requirements are included
in the substantive section for each sign type. The tables include the following
standards.
      (1)   Allowed. States whether the sign type is allowed for the use.
      (2)   Permit required. States whether this subchapter requires a permit
for the sign type and use.
      (3)   Sign setback. The distance from any property line that a sign may
be placed, in linear feet.
      (4)   Number. The maximum number of the particular sign on a platted lot
for the use.
      (5)   Sign area. The maximum area allowed for the sign face for the use,
in square feet.
      (6)   Height. The maximum height allowed for sign for the use, in linear
feet.
      (7)   Illumination. States whether illumination is allowed for the sign
type and use.
      (8)   Readerboard. States whether a readerboard is allowed for the sign
type and use.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.816 SIGN FEATURES.
   (A)   Illumination.
      (1)   General standards.
         (a)   Illuminated signs located adjacent to any residential area shall
be controlled by a rheostat, or another acceptable method, so as not to create
excessive glare to properties within the residential district.
         (b)   No illumination-simulating traffic control devices or emergency
vehicles shall be used.
         (c)   All illumination must be from a steady, stationary light source.
      (2)   Internal illumination.
         (a)   Internally illuminated signs must be constructed with opaque
backgrounds so that only letters, numbers, and/or logos are illuminated.
         (b)   Signs shall not have light-reflecting backgrounds or letters.
         (c)   All finishes shall be a matte finish.
      (3)   External illumination.
         (a)   Illumination shall be a steady, stationary light source,
shielded and directed solely at the sign.
         (b)   Light sources to illuminate signs shall neither be visible from
any street right-of-way, nor cause glare hazardous to pedestrians or vehicle
drivers, or so as to create a nuisance to adjacent properties.
         (c)   The intensity of light shall not exceed 20 footcandles at any
point on the sign face.
         (d)   The color of light sources to illuminate signs shall be white.
         (e)   Signs shall not have light-reflecting backgrounds or letters.
   (B)   Readerboards. Readerboards:
      (1)   Must be incorporated into the overall design of the sign;
      (2)   Shall not exceed 25 square feet, which is included in the total
sign square footage;
      (3)   Must have letters that are a minimum of four inches and a maximum
of eight inches in height; and
      (4)   If illuminated, must be constructed with opaque backgrounds so that
only letters, numbers, and/or logos are illuminated.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.817 THROUGH 156.824 RESERVED.
PART 2: SIGN STANDARDS
SUBPART 2.1: NON-RESIDENTIAL SIGNS
§ 156.825 FREESTANDING SIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Definition. A freestanding sign is a permanent on-premises sign
supported by a sign structure secured in the ground, wholly independent of any
other support.
   (B)   In general.
      (1)   Sign allowances. All non-residential uses must comply with the
freestanding sign allowances listed in Table 156.825-1.
Table 156.825-1: Freestanding Sign Allowances
                     Multi-Tenant   Multi-Tenant
Standard General Use Development <  Development 40,000 US 17/IOP Connector2
                     40,000 sq. ft. sq. ft.
Table 156.825-1: Freestanding Sign Allowances
                            Multi-Tenant   Multi-Tenant       US 17/IOP
Standard        General Use Development <  Development 40,000 Connector2
                            40,000 sq. ft. sq. ft.
Allowed         Yes         Yes            Yes                Yes
Permit required Yes         Yes            Yes                Yes
Setback         10 ft.      10 ft.         10 ft.             10 ft.
Number          11          11             21                 11
Sign area       35 sq. ft.  50 sq. ft.     150 sq. ft.        50 sq. ft.2
Height          8 ft.       10 ft.         20 ft.             20 ft.2
Illumination    Yes         Yes            Yes                Yes
Readerboard     Yes         Yes            Yes                Yes
Notes
1 Refer to §
156.825(C) for the allowances for lots with multiple street frontages.
2 Special standards apply to signs on parcels adjacent to U.S. Highway 17/
Johnnie Dodds Boulevard/Isle of Palms Connector. Refer to §
156.825(D).
 
      (2)   General allowance for all uses. Where
Table 156.825-1 indicates an allowance for general use, that allowance applies
to all uses unless a more specific standard for a particular use or location
applies.
   (C)   Number.
      (1)   Lots with multiple frontages.
         (a)   Properties with a street frontage on two opposing parallel
streets may display one sign per street frontage. One sign shall meet the
standards of
Table 156.825-1. The sign on the secondary frontage shall not exceed 35 sq. ft.
in area and eight feet in height.
         (b)   This additional sign allowance does not apply to corner lots or
lots located at frontage road intersections.
      (2)   Multi-tenant developments.
         (a)   Multi-tenant developments may display the number and size for
freestanding signs as provided in
Table 156.825-1 for the entire development.
         (b)   Each tenant or occupant of a multi-tenant development shall not
display a separate freestanding sign.
   (D)   U.S. Highway 17/Johnnie Dodds Boulevard/Isle of Palms Connector. Non-
residential uses located on lots adjacent to Johnnie Dodds Boulevard or U.S.
Highway 17 and the Isle of Palms Connector (S.C. 517, Clyde Moultrie
Dangerfield Highway) must comply with the special sign allowances set out in
Table 156.825-1.
   (E)   Multi-tenant developments. All multi-tenant developments require a
master sign program approved by the Design Review Board as provided in §
156.861.
   (F)   Pole signs prohibited. All permanent freestanding signs must be
monument signs. Pole signs shall not be used as permanent freestanding signs.
   (G)   Setbacks.
      (1)   Signs must be located on the subject property, must have a minimum
setback of ten feet from the curb and/or street right-of-way, and in no case be
installed within the street right-of-way or project into the vertical plane of
the street right-of- way.
      (2)   Additionally, all sign locations must conform to the State
Department of Transportation's Access and Roadside Management Standards Sight
Distance Formula.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.826 ATTACHED SIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Definition. An attached sign is an on-premises sign that is
permanently affixed to a building or structure, including wall signs,
projecting signs, awning and canopy signs, roof signs, and window signs.
   (B)   Sign allowances.
      (1)   All non-residential uses must comply with the attached sign
allowances listed in Table 156.826-1.
Table 156.826-1: Attached Sign Allowances
Standard Freestanding Buildings Occupant 30 ft. Frontage Occupant > 30 ft.
         and Anchor Tenants                              Frontage
Table 156.826-1: Attached Sign Allowances
Standard        Freestanding Buildings Occupant 30 ft. Occupant > 30 ft.
                and Anchor Tenants     Frontage        Frontage
Allowed         Yes                    Yes             Yes
Permit required Yes                    Yes             Yes
Number          N/A                    N/A             N/A
Sign area1      1 sq. ft. per 1 ft. of 30 sq. ft.      1 sq. ft. per 1 ft. of
                frontage                               frontage
Illuminati on   Yes                    Yes             Yes
Readerbo ard    No                     No              No
Notes
1 The non-residential use attached sign area allowance applies cumulatively
for all attached signs. Additional rules and limitations in this section
apply.
 
      (2)   Calculation of sign allowances.
         (a)   The sign allowance for attached signs is determined by the width
of the building frontage for the primary building façade for occupants with a
public entrance at ground level.
         (b)   Buildings with more than one street frontage or where the
building is adjacent to the street with no parking or vehicular access between
the building and street, may qualify for an additional allowance for attached
signs not to exceed 50 square feet, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
         (c)   Occupants in a multi-tenant development with more than one
street frontage, corner units, or where the buildings are situated along the
street with the development's parking to the rear, may also qualify for
additional attached signs up to an additional 100% of their attached sign
allowance.
         (d)   Regardless of the building façade width, a single sign user may
not exceed 150 square feet of internally illuminated signage per façade.
   (C)   Signs and building types.
      (1)   Freestanding buildings.
         (a)   Freestanding buildings may use any combination of attached sign
types to meet the attached sign allowance.
         (b)   All attached signs must be appropriately scaled to the building
or property as determined by the Commercial Design Review Board or Zoning
Administrator.
      (2)   Multi-tenant developments.
         (a)   All multi-tenant developments require a master sign program
approved by the Design Review Board as provided in §
156.861.
         (b)   Anchor tenants.
            1.   Anchor tenants may use any combination of attached sign types
to meet the attached sign allowance.
            2.   All attached signs must be appropriately scaled to the
building or property as determined by the Commercial Design Review Board or
Zoning Administrator.
            3.   Anchor tenants in multi-story buildings may locate allowed
attached signs near the top of the building.
            4.   To qualify as an anchor tenant, the business must fully occupy
the anchor space, as noted on the site plan provided in the master sign program
and have a minimum 20,000 square feet of area.
         (c)   The wall signs for all other occupants with a ground-level
public entrance are limited to wall signs and must be located in a sign band
pursuant to the provisions of §
156.902.
         (d)   Building occupants without a ground-level public entrance may
not display an attached sign in addition to the signs allowed for the multi-
tenant development.
   (D)   Wall signs.
      (1)   Definition. A sign attached directly to an exterior wall of a
building or dependent upon a building for support, with the exposed face of the
sign substantially parallel to the exterior building wall to which the sign is
attached.
      (2)   Design standards. Wall signs must be mounted flush to the exterior
wall on which they are mounted.
   (E)   Projecting signs.
      (1)   Definition. Any sign attached to, and projecting more than 18
inches from, the face of a building.
      (2)   Design standards.
         (a)   Projecting signs may not project more than five feet from the
building.
         (b)   Projecting signs must have clearance of ten feet from grade, as
illustrated in Figure 156.826-1.
         (c)   The height of the top edge of a projecting sign may not exceed
the lower of:
            1.   Twenty-five feet above grade; or
            2.   The height of the building at the building line.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13038.png]
 
   (F)    Awning and canopy signs.
      (1)    Definition. A permanent sign attached or applied to an awning or
canopy.
      (2)    Design standards. Awnings and canopies that include signs must be
an integral component of the design of a building and fully functional to
protect pedestrians from the elements.
      (3)    Materials. Awnings must be constructed of cloth or canvas and may
not be illuminated.
      (4)    Sign area allowance calculation.
         ( a)   Logos, lettering, and the like on the face and/or sides of the
awning will count towards the attached sign area allowance.
         (b)   However, one row of copy, not exceeding six inches in height,
located on the awning valence will not be included in the attached sign area
calculation.
   (G)   Roof signs.
      (1)   Definition. Any sign erected over or on the roof of a building.
      (2)   Sloped roofs. For sloped roofs, roof signs may not project or
extend above the ridge line of the roof.
      (3)   Flat roofs.
         (a)   For flat roofs with a parapet wall, a roof sign may not extend
above the top edge of the parapet.
         (b)   Buildings with flat roofs without a parapet wall may not display
roof signs.
   (H)   Window signs.
      (1)   Definition. A permanent sign posted, painted, placed, or affixed to
the inside or outside of a window or glass door.
      (2)   Sign area allowance calculation. Window signs and interior store
signs visible to the outside, will be included as part of the attached sign
area calculation.
      (3)   Exception for sign area allowance calculation. However, a single
row of copy, not exceeding six inches in height, located on the top or bottom
of each ground level display window, will not be included in the attached sign
area calculation.
   (I)   Safety standards.
      (1)   Obstructions. Signs may not obstruct any fire escape, or any
window, door, or opening used as a means of ingress or egress for firefighting
purposes or prevent access from one part of a roof to any other part of the
roof.
      (2)   Location of attachment. Signs may not be attached to a fire escape
or be placed in a location that interferes with any opening required for
ventilation.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.827 MURAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   Definition. A mural is a hand-produced work in which paint or tile is
applied by hand directly on an exterior wall of a building or structure. The
town will not review the content of murals.
   (B)   Mural allowances. Table 156.827-1 states the standards for murals for
non-residential uses. One mural or painted wall sign may be displayed on a
secondary wall of a non-residential building in addition to other signs allowed
in this subchapter.
Table 156.827-1: Mural Allowances
Standard Allowance
Table 156.827-1: Mural Allowances
Standard        Allowance
Allowed         Yes
Permit required Yes
Number          1 per building
Sign area       100% of one wall
Height          No taller than existing wall
Illumination    External only
Readerboard     No
 
   (C)   Location and design.
      (1)   Placement on secondary wall. A mural may not be located on an
exterior wall with direct street frontage. Murals are only allowed on side and
rear façades.
      (2)   Materials and design. A mural may not include:
         (a)   Mechanically produced or computer-generated prints or images,
including digitally printed vinyl sheets and wraps;
         (b)   Works containing electrical or mechanical components; or
         (c)   Works that involve changing or moving images or components.
      (3)   Review criteria. The Design Review Board will review all murals.
The review will include a consideration of the following factors but will not
include any consideration of content:
         (a)   The mural uses durable, exterior grade paints and materials and
weatherproof and ultraviolet-protective coatings, if applicable;
         (b)   The mural uses colors that coordinate with the colors of the
building;
         (c)   The mural is directed at and scaled to pedestrians;
         (d)   The mural does not overwhelm or hide the character-defining
features of a building;
         (e)   The mural is placed and sized to reinforce the building’s
architecture and its surroundings; and
         (f)   The mural is placed at a similar height and façade location as
murals on adjacent buildings, if possible, to provide an integrated block
appearance.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.828 OFF-PREMISES SIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Definition. A sign that advertises businesses, organizations, goods,
products, or services that are not located, sold, manufactured, or distributed
on or from the premises or facilities where the sign is located. For the
purposes of this definition, premises will be considered to include all
contiguous parcels that are under common ownership, maintenance, operation, or
plan. Nothing contained in this definition shall be construed to apply to limit
noncommercial messages or information placed on any allowed sign.
   (B)   District limitations. Off-premises signs are allowed only in the Light
Industrial District (LI).
   (C)   Off-premises sign allowances. One off-premises sign is allowed per
lot, if it meets the following requirements.
      (1)   Separation distance.
         (a)   Separation of off-premises signs shall be at least 1,000 feet,
measured along any street or thoroughfare from any other off-premises sign or
on-premises sign.
         (b)   However, off-premises signs of 35 square feet or less are
allowed less than 1,000 feet apart from other off-premises or on-premises
signs, if they are on a separate platted lot.
      (2)   Setbacks.
         (a)   Setbacks for off-premises signs shall be at least 20 feet,
measured from the pavement edge of the nearest road surface.
         (b)   Additionally, all sign locations must conform to the State
Department of Transportation's Access and Roadside Management Standards Sight
Distance Formula.
      (3)   Height and area.
         (a)   Height of off-premises signs must not exceed 20 feet above the
roadbed toward which the sign face is directed.
         (b)   The sign area of off-premises signs must not exceed 150 square
feet on one side.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.829 THROUGH 156.834 RESERVED.
SUBPART 2.2: RESIDENTIAL SIGNS
§ 156.835 RESIDENTIAL SIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Sign allowances. All residential uses must comply with the allowances
listed in Table 156.835-1.
Table 156.835-1: Allowances for Residential Use - Freestanding and Wall Signs
Standard For Individual Lot For Residential Development
Table 156.835-1: Allowances for Residential Use - Freestanding and Wall Signs
Standard        For Individual Lot For Residential Development
Allowed         No1                Yes2
Permit required N/A                Yes2
Number          N/A                1 two-sided sign or 2 one-sided signs per
                                   entry drive
Sign area       N/A                35 sq. ft.
Height          N/A                8 ft.
Illumination    N/A                Yes
Readerboard     N/A                No
Notes
1 Smaller residential signs are provided for in §
156.845.
2 Special standards apply for residential development signs. Refer to §
156.835(B).
 
   (B)   Residential development signs.
      (1)   Definition. A freestanding sign located near the entrance drive or
road to a residential development or an attached sign located on a multi-family
building. An example of a typical residential development sign is one that
identifies the name of the development or phase of development, sometimes
incorporating architectural or landscape features. The example is provided to
clarify the regulations and does not limit the content of residential
development signs. The town will not review the content of residential
development signs.
      (2)   Number and dimensions for freestanding signs. Residential
developments may have a maximum of two one-sided or one two-sided freestanding
sign per entry drive with vehicle access to the subdivision or development.
These freestanding signs must comply with the allowances in
Table 156.835-1.
      (3)   Location of signs. Where entry drives include or incorporate
decorative features, such as walls, gates, fences, or similar decorative
features, flanking the entrance drive, one sign may be attached to each wall or
other appropriate feature.
      (4)   Alternative wall sign for multi-family buildings. As an alternative
to a freestanding sign provided by this division, an apartment or multiplex
dwelling may display one attached sign, such as a wall, canopy, or projecting
sign. The same sign area allowance applies.
   (C)   Pole signs prohibited. All permanent freestanding signs must be
monument signs. Pole signs may not be used as permanent freestanding signs.
   (D)   Setbacks.
      (1)   Signs must be located on the subject property, must have a minimum
setback of ten feet from the curb and/or street right-of-way, and in no case be
installed within the street right-of-way or project into the vertical plane of
the street right-of- way.
      (2)   Additionally, all sign locations must conform to the State
Department of Transportation's Access and Roadside Management Standards Sight
Distance Formula.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.836 THROUGH 156.844 RESERVED.
SUBPART 2.3: INCIDENTAL AND TEMPORARY SIGNS
§ 156.845 INCIDENTAL SIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Definition. An incidental sign is a small permanent sign that is
freestanding or attached to a building that is in addition to the primary sign
types for the property, such as wall signs and freestanding signs, and that has
a height and scale that is subordinate to the primary sign types allowed for
the property. Examples of typical incidental signs include house numbers,
occupant directories, directional signs, flags, and parking signs. The list of
examples is provided to clarify the regulations and does not limit the content
of incidental signs. The town will not review the content of incidental signs.
   (B)   Dimension and location standards. Table 156.845-1 states the standards
for incidental signs.
Table 156.845-1: Incidental Sign Allowances
Standard Residential Uses Non-Residential Uses
Table 156.845-1: Incidental Sign Allowances
Standard                       Residential Uses Non-Residential Uses
Perimeter Signs
Allowed                        No               Yes
Permit required                N/A              Yes
Incidental sign setback        N/A              N/A
Number (max per entrance/exit) N/A              21
Sign area                      N/A              4 sq. ft.
Height                         N/A              4 ft.
Illumination                   N/A              No
Readerboard                    N/A              No
Small Interior Signs
Allowed                        Yes              Yes
Permit required                No               Yes
Incidental sign setback        10 ft.           10 ft.
Number                         1 per lot2       Up to 20 per acre
Area                           3 sq. ft.        4 sq. ft.
Height                         5 ft.            4 ft.
Illumination                   No               No
Readerboard                    No               No
Large Interior Signs
Allowed                        No               Yes
Permit required                N/A              Yes
Incidental sign setback        N/A              30 ft.
                                                Multi-tenant developments
Number                         N/A              40,000 sq. ft. - 2
                                                Multi-tenant developments <
                                                40,000 sq. ft. - 1
Area                           N/A              35 sq. ft.
Height                         N/A              8 ft.
Illumination                   N/A              External only
Readerboard                    N/A              No
Flags
Allowed                        Yes              Yes
Permit required                No               No
Number                         2                2
                                                Flagpoles 35 ft. - 10 ft. in
                                                width
Flag dimensions (max.)         10 ft. in width  6 ft. in height
                               6 ft. in height  Flagpoles 35 ft. - 12 ft. in
                                                width
                                                8 ft. in height.
                                                35 ft. in areas limited to 40
                                                ft. or less on the Building
Flagpole height (max.)         20 ft.           Height Plan Map3
                                                50 ft. in all other Building
                                                Height Plan Map Areas3
Illumination                   Yes              Yes
Readerboard                    No               No
Notes:
1 Perimeter signs are only available for sites with one-way drives. Refer to
§
156.845(D)(1).
2 Individually platted residential uses may display one freestanding sign or
one wall sign but not both.
3 Refer to §
156.024 for district heights.
 
   (C)   Sign setback. This section regulates the location and size of
incidental signs based on a sign setback that varies by use and incidental sign
type.
      (1)   Measurement. The sign setback is the setback from any property line
and regulates the location and size of incidental signs.
Table 156.845-1 defines the applicable setback for each sign type and use.
      (2)   Perimeter signs. Perimeter signs are signs that may be located
between the property line and the applicable sign setback.
      (3)   Interior signs. Interior signs must be located within a platted lot
and may not be located within the sign setback.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13040.png]
 
   (D)   Number and location.
      (1)   Perimeter signs.
         (a)   
Table 156.845-1 defines the maximum number of perimeter incidental signs per
entrance to a public street.
         (b)   All perimeter signs must be located within 15 feet of a driveway
entrance to a public street.
         (c)   Perimeter signs may only be installed at driveway entrances onto
a property when the traffic patterns within the property or site are strictly
limited to one-way traffic.
      (2)   Interior signs. This section provides for two types of interior
signs: small and large interior signs.
         (a)   
Table 156.845-1 defines the maximum allowances for small interior incidental
signs based on the number of signs per acre. Examples of typical small
incidental signs include house numbers, directional signs, and parking signs.
The list of examples is provided to clarify the regulations and does not limit
the content of incidental signs. The town will not review the content of
incidental signs.
         (b)   Large interior signs. 
Table 156.845-1 defines the allowances for large interior incidental signs
based on the number of signs per development. Examples of typical large
incidental signs include occupant directories, drive-thru menus, and
information kiosks. The list of examples is provided to clarify the regulations
and does not limit the content of incidental signs. The town will not review
the content of incidental signs.
            1.   Multi-tenant developments equal to or greater than 40,000
square feet of gross leasable area may have a maximum of two large interior
signs; and
            2.   Multi-tenant developments with less than 40,000 square feet of
gross leasable area may have one large interior sign.
   (E)   Design standards.
      (1)   Appearance. All incidental signs must utilize a uniform background
color and a uniform font/logo color for all sign panels.
      (2)   Illumination. Incidental signs may not be illuminated.
      (3)   Sight distance. All sign locations must conform to the State
Department of Transportation's Access and Roadside Management Standards Sight
Distance Formula.
      (4)   Interior orientation. Interior signs must be oriented internally to
the development.
      (5)   Installation. An incidental sign on a wall shall affix flush
against the wall of the building.
      (6)   Painted signs prohibited. Incidental signs must not be painted on
an exterior wall.
      (7)   Pavement markings. Pavement markings are allowed only as approved
through site plan review by the Design Review Board or designee.
   (F)   Flags.
      (1)   Generally. 
Table 156.845-1 provides the allowances for flags.
      (2)   Number. A maximum of three flags may be displayed at one time.
However, the flags must be flown on one pole.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.846 TEMPORARY SIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Definition. A temporary sign is a sign constructed of cloth, canvas,
light fabric, cardboard, wood, wallboard, metal, or other light materials, with
or without frames, that is intended to be displayed for a limited period of
time only. Temporary signs include stake signs, post signs, and A-frame signs.
Examples of common temporary sign uses include political signs, public
demonstrations, grand opening signs, contractor signs, real estate signs, and
signs that announce an event such as a carnival, circus, or similar event. The
list of examples is provided to clarify the regulations and does not limit the
content of temporary signs. The town will not review the content of temporary
signs.
   (B)   Prohibited temporary sign types. §
156.813 prohibits the use of several common temporary sign types, including
banners, streamers, balloons, and other gas-filled figures.
   (C)   Dimension and display standards. Table 156.846-1 states the standards
for temporary signs.
Table 156.846-1: Temporary Sign Allowances
Standard Residential Uses Non-Residential Uses
Table 156.846-1: Temporary Sign Allowances
Standard            Residential Uses Non-Residential Uses
A-Frame Signs
Allowed             No               During business hours
Permit required     N/A              Yes
Number              N/A              1 per occupant
Sign area           N/A              12 sq. ft.
Height              N/A              4 ft.
Illumination        N/A              No
Readerboard         N/A              No
All Other Temporary Signs
Allowed             Yes              Yes
Permit required     No               No
Duration of display 90 days          90 days
Number              6                6
Sign area           8 sq. ft.        16 sq. ft.
Height              5 ft.            6 ft.
Illumination        No               No
Readerboard         No               No
 
   (D)   A-frame signs.
      (1)   Location and use standards.
         (a)   A-frame signs must be located within ten feet of the primary
building entrance.
         (b)   A-frame signs may not be located within the ADA accessible
route, eight-foot-minimum sidewalk, verge, right-of-way, or landscaped areas.
      (2)   Design standards.
         (a)   A-frame signs must employ a high level of traditional design and
material. Examples of high level of design include, but are not limited to, the
illustrations in Figure 156.846-1.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13042.png]
 
         (b)   Figure 156.846-2 illustrates examples of signs that are not
appropriate.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13044.png]
 
         (c)   A-frame signs may not employ readerboard or changeable letter
copy. This design aesthetic prohibition does not preclude the inclusion of
chalkboards. Figure 156.846-3 illustrates examples of readerboards that are not
allowed.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13046.png]
 
         (d)   Plastic or similar material is not allowed. Figure 156.846-
4 illustrates examples of plastic materials that are not allowed.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13048.png]
 
   (E)   All other temporary signs.
      (1)   Number. 
Table 156.846-1 defines the maximum limit for other temporary signs per
occupant or user per parcel.
      (2)   Duration temporary signs may be displayed. Each temporary sign may
only be displayed for 90 days or less. However, the same sign may displayed for
multiple time periods if an additional time allowance is available.
      (3)   Owner consent required. A person must obtain the consent of the
property owner before placing a sign on that person’s property.
      (4)   Hazardous signs prohibited. A person may not place, erect, or
maintain any temporary sign so as to pose a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular
traffic along streets, sidewalks, or at street corners.
      (5)   Display locations for multi-tenant developments. Temporary signs in
multi-tenant developments must be displayed within the occupant’s window.
      (6)   Design standards.
         (a)   Except for A-frame signs, temporary signs should be implanted or
anchored in the ground or affixed to the wall of a building or other permanent
structure.
         (b)   Temporary signs must not be anchored to the ground by measures
such as using sandbags or other weighted objects.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.847 THROUGH 156.859 RESERVED.
PART 3: ADMINISTRATION AND  ENFORCEMENT
§ 156.860 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Non-residential uses.
      (1)   Design review. The provisions of this subchapter applicable to non-
residential uses will be administered by the Design Review Board staff
representative through the design review process.
      (2)   Review authority.
         (a)   The Design Review Board has the authority to review and approve
master sign programs pursuant to this subchapter.
         (b)   Applications not requiring a master sign program may be reviewed
and approved by the Zoning Administrator. Any sign that conforms to an approved
sign program may be approved by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning
Administrator may also refer a sign proposal to the Design Review Board as
provided in §
156.862. Applicants may choose to pursue staff-level or Design Review Board
approval for this process.
         (c)   Appeals from staff-level decisions in the design review process
will be considered by the Design Review Board. Decisions of the Design Review
Board may be appealed to Circuit Court.
   (B)   Residential uses.
      (1)   Review authority. The provisions of this subchapter applicable to
residential uses will be administered by the Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Appeals. Appeals from decisions of the Zoning Administrator will be
considered by the Board of Zoning Appeals. Decisions of the Board of Zoning
Appeals may be appealed to Circuit Court.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.861 MASTER SIGN PROGRAM.
   (A)   Purpose. To further the goals of §
156.810 and create a harmonious and aesthetically-pleasing visual environment
within developments.
   (B)   General requirements.
      (1)   A master sign program is required for all multi-tenant
developments.
      (2)   Master sign programs require review and approval through the design
review process.
   (C)   Scope of approval. Approval of architectural plans that include signs
on any portion of the building or property does not constitute approval of
signage. A separate request for signage approval must be submitted for approval
if approval is necessary for the sign type.
   (D)   Review criteria. The reviewing authority may require alterations to
the design, materials, size, or other articles of this chapter, based on the
scale of the building, the proposed location on the property, or other factors,
including the aesthetics or design of the sign.
   (E)   Review authority. The reviewing authority may not alter the
regulations to increase size or circumvent other regulations for the applicant,
except that comprehensive development project signs may be allowed on a lot
outside of the development site provided that the sign must be in as close
proximity to the overall comprehensive development project as possible. For the
purposes of this subchapter, such a sign will not be considered an off-premises
sign.
   (F)   Required information.
      (1)   An accurate site plan of the lot;
      (2)   Location of buildings, parking lots, driveways, and landscaped
areas on the lot;
      (3)   An accurate indication on the site plan of the proposed location of
each proposed and/or existing free-standing sign;
      (4)   A scaled elevation view of the proposed sign locations for attached
signs;
      (5)   Color scheme;
      (6)   Sign style;
      (7)   Lighting;
      (8)   Materials; and
      (9)   Sign dimensions.
   (G)   Procedures.
      (1)   A master sign program is a required condition of approval of any
new signs within a multi-tenant development project.
      (2)   A master sign program shall be a condition of approval of any
planned development, design review, use permit, or other application required
by the town for multi-tenant developments, and shall be processed prior to the
installation of any signs.
      (3)   Approval of a master sign program does not waive the permit
requirements for individual signs.
   (H)   Amendments. A master sign program may be amended by filing a new
master sign program that conforms with all of the requirements of this
subchapter.
   (I)   Existing signs not conforming to master sign program. If any new
master sign program is filed or an existing master sign program on which
existing signs are located is amended, it shall include a schedule for bringing
into conformance all signs not conforming to the proposed or amended program.
   (J)   Binding effect. After approval of a master sign program or amendment
to an existing master sign program, no signs shall be erected, placed, painted,
or maintained, except in conformance with such plan, and such plan may be
enforced in the same way as any provision in this chapter.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.862 SIGN PERMITS.
   (A)   Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, no
person shall erect, move, alter, replace, or change sign copy (except on
readerboard signs), without first obtaining a zoning permit as required by this
subchapter. A permit is required for all sign types and uses for which a permit
is required by the tables for each sign type in this subchapter.
   (B)   Permit not required.
      (1)   Exempt signs. Sign permits are not required for exempt signs listed
in §
156.812.
      (2)   Permit requirement in tables. The tables for each sign type in this
subchapter state whether or not a permit is required for the sign types and
use.
      (3)   Maintenance. Sign permits are not required for customary
maintenance of a sign that does not change the dimensions of the sign or the
copy displayed by the sign.
   (C)   Permit applications.
      (1)   Applications for sign permits shall be submitted on forms provided
by the Department of Planning, Land Use and Neighborhoods, and contain all
information required on the forms and any additional information required to
ensure compliance with all applicable sections of the zoning and/or building
codes.
      (2)   If required by the Building Official, the application shall include
a copy of stress sheets and calculations prepared or approved by a state-
licensed registered structural engineer, showing that the sign is designed for
dead load and wind pressure in any direction in the amount required by this and
all other applicable ordinances of the town.
      (3)   The Building Official may also request details of electrical
connection points, construction details, and attachment details.
   (D)   Permit fees.
      (1)   Every application for a sign approval shall be accompanied by a
fee, in an amount specified by the schedule of fees established by Town Council
resolution, and related provisions of the Town Building Code.
      (2)   Whenever a sign permit fee is required by this section and work is
started prior to obtaining a permit, a fine of up to $500 may be imposed for
failure to secure a permit, in addition to other applicable fines.
   (E)   Issuance of permits.
      (1)   Approval.
         (a)   The Zoning Administrator will review all sign permit
applications within ten days of filing. If, upon review, the proposed sign is
complete and in compliance with all of the requirements of this section, and
any other applicable ordinances of the town, the Zoning Administrator shall
issue a permit that may be subject to conditions, and if required, forward the
permit to the Department of Engineering and Development Services for issuance
of a building permit and/or electrical permit, or refer the application to the
Design Review Board as provided below.
         (b)   Sign permits shall be vested for a period of two years, subject
to the rights and restrictions contained within this title.
         (c)   Should the work not be completed within this timeframe, a new
sign permit is required prior to the installation of the sign.
      (2)   Referral to Design Review Board.
         (a)   The Zoning Administrator may refer any application for a
permanent or attached non-residential sign to the Design Review Board for
evaluation.
         (b)   The Design Review Board shall evaluate a sign application
referred by the Zoning Administrator for aesthetics only and may not evaluate
the content or message of the sign.
         (c)   Aesthetic criteria for the Zoning Administrator to consider in
referral and the Design Review Board to consider in the review include:
            1.   The placement of the sign on the building in locations that
detract from or conceal architectural features;
            2.   The effect of contrasting colors used in the sign;
            3.   The extent that the colors of the sign face or support
structure compliment colors of materials used in buildings and other signs on
the site; and
            4.   The proportions of the sign in relationship to the building or
sign band.
         (d)   If the Design Review Board approves or approves subject to
conditions, the Zoning Administrator shall issue the permit, including any
applicable conditions.
      (3)   Denial. If the application request is not in compliance with all
requirements of this section, then the Zoning Administrator will deny the
application. If the Design Review Board recommends denial of a permit, the
Zoning Administrator shall deny the permit.
   (F)   Revocation of permits. On failure of the holder to comply with any
provision of this section or any other applicable statute, ordinance, or
regulation, the Zoning Administrator is authorized and empowered to revoke any
issued permit and order the immediate removal of the sign.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.863 SIGN INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Maintenance required. Every sign and all parts, portions, units, and
materials comprising the same, together with the frame, background, supports,
or anchorage thereof, shall be maintained in proper repair and a proper state
of preservation.
   (B)   Inspections. All signs for which a permit is required shall be subject
to inspection to ascertain compliance.
   (C)   Notification of need for maintenance. In the event that maintenance is
deemed necessary, the sign owner will be notified by letter, in which case the
noted deficiencies shall be corrected within 60 days, unless an extension is
granted for sufficient cause shown for an appropriate amount of time.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.864 ABANDONED SIGNS.
   (A)   Definition. An abandoned sign is any permitted sign or sign structure
that was erected on a premises in conjunction with a particular use that has
been discontinued for a period of 30 days or more, or any permitted temporary
sign for which the allowed display time has expired.
   (B)   Declaration of abandonment. The Zoning Administrator may declare a
sign to be abandoned.
   (C)   Criteria. Evidence of abandonment is a discontinuance of the use,
activity, place, or business that the sign identifies, or a willful lack of
maintenance to the extent that the sign is in obvious disrepair.
   (D)   Removal. A nonconforming sign that has been declared abandoned by the
Zoning Administrator shall be removed within 90 days of written notification
thereof, and shall not thereafter be reestablished, except in conformity with
the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.865 MEASUREMENTS.
   (A)   Height.
      (1)   Freestanding signs. For freestanding signs, height is the distance
from the highest point of the sign to the base of the sign at the ground level.
Figure 156.865-1: General Sign Measurements illustrates this measurement.
      (2)   Below-grade signs. If the site of the sign is below street level,
the height is measured from street level.
Figure 156.865-1: General Sign Measurements
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13050.png]
 
   (B)   Sign area.
      (1)   Generally. The general sign area, measured in square feet (“sq.
ft.”), is the width multiplied by the height of a single rectangle, parallel
with the ground, that contains all sign copy and other illuminated decorative
embellishments that are not an architectural design element of the building or
the base or sign support structure.
Figure 156.865-1: General Sign Measurements illustrates this measurement.
      (2)   Channel letters. The sign area for signs using channel letters is
the sign face width multiplied by the sign face height for the smallest
rectangle that completely encloses all sign copy. It does not include the
background unless the background is internally illuminated. Figure 156.865-2:
Channel Letter Area Measurement illustrates this measurement.
Figure 156.865-2: Channel Letter Area Measurement 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13052.png]
 
      (3)   For two-sided signs. The sign area of a two-sided sign with
parallel faces of the same size is the measure of the larger sign area of
either of the two sides. Signs with more than two faces and multi-sided signs
or objects are not allowed.
   (C)   Façade width.
      (1)   Measurement. Where this subchapter calculates a sign area allowance
based on the width of a building’s façade facing a street frontage, the width
of the façade is the horizontal distance of the façade at grade on the side of
the building facing a public street. Figure 156.865-3 illustrates this
measurement.
      (2)   Shopping centers and retail centers. For shopping centers and
retail centers with multiple occupants, the width of the façade is the
horizontal distance of the portion of the façade between party walls or tenant
separation partitions for the particular occupant at grade on the side of the
building on which the sign is proposed.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13054.png]
 
   (D)   Setbacks. All setbacks are measured from the foremost plane of a sign
or sign structure.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.866 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED SIGN. Any permitted sign or sign structure that was erected on a
premises in conjunction with a particular use that has been discontinued for a
period of 30 days or more, or any permitted temporary sign for which the
allowed display time has expired.
   A-FRAME SIGN. A portable sign capable of standing without support or
attachment.
   ATTACHED SIGN. An on-premises sign that is permanently affixed to a building
or structure; types include wall signs, projecting signs, awning and canopy
signs, roof signs, and window signs.
   AWNING. Any structure made of flexible fabric or similar material covering a
metal frame attached to a building, whether or not the same is so erected as to
permit its being raised to a position flat against the building when not in
use.
   AWNING AND CANOPY SIGN. A permanent sign attached or applied to an awning or
canopy.
   BANNER. A device made of flexible materials designed to attract attention
that is attached to a building or support structure at each corner to prevent
movement in the wind. BANNERS do not include flags and feather signs.
   CANOPY. Any structure, other than an awning, made of flexible or inflexible
material, supported by the ground or sidewalk, and/or partially supported by
the building.
   FEATHER SIGN. A temporary sign made of flexible material in the shape of a
feather, quill, sail, blade or teardrop, mounted along one margin on a solid or
flexible vertical pole, where the height is greater than the width of the sign
face. These are sometimes referred to as QUILL SIGNS or SAIL BANNERS.
   FLAG. A piece of fabric or other flexible material, with distinctive colors
and patterns, customarily mounted on a pole or similar freestanding structure,
or on a pole mounted on a building, where the width is equal to or greater than
the height.
   FREESTANDING SIGN. Any permanent on-premises sign supported by a sign
structure secured in the ground, wholly independent of any other support.
   GOVERNMENT SIGN. A sign installed or maintained by the federal, state,
Charleston County, or town government, and also a sign located on property
owned or leased by the federal, state, Charleston County, or town government.
   GRAPHICS. Any drawing, symbol, picture, motif, or logo displayed on a sign
face.
   ILLUMINATED SIGN. Any sign directly or indirectly lighted by an artificial
light source.
   INCIDENTAL SIGN. A small permanent sign that is freestanding or attached to
a building that is in addition to the primary sign types for the property, such
as wall signs and freestanding signs, and that has a height and scale that is
subordinate to the primary sign types allowed for the property. Examples of
typical incidental signs include house numbers, occupant directories,
directional signs, flags, and parking signs. The list of examples is provided
to clarify the regulations and does not limit the content of incidental signs.
The town will not review the content of incidental signs.
   INFLATABLE SIGN. Any sign that is either expanded to its full dimensions or
supported by gases contained within the sign, or sign parts, at a pressure
greater than atmospheric pressure. Untethered airships are not considered to be
inflatable signs.
   INTERACTIVE DIGITAL KIOSKS AND DISPLAYS. An object or device with a digital
display of not more than four square feet and characters or icons that do not
exceed four inches in height that has the primary purpose of interactive use by
a pedestrian or occupant of a vehicle to submit payments or make donations,
receive items distributed for non-commercial or commercial purposes, place
orders, or use a service. Examples of interactive uses include donation
portals, check-in portals, kiosks that distribute non-commercial or commercial
literature or information, ticket dispensers, automatic teller machines,
restaurant order interfaces for menus, and fuel station pumps. The list of
examples is provided to clarify the regulations and does not limit the content
of interactive digital kiosks and displays. The town will not review the
content of these devices. These devices are not considered signs.
   INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGN. Any sign that has light transmitted outward
through its face or any part thereof.
   MARQUEE SIGN. A roof-like structure or panel attached to a building and
bearing a sign board or sign area designed for changeable copy.
   MASTER SIGN PROGRAM. A coordinated sign plan that includes details of all
signs (not including exempt or temporary signs) that are, or will be, placed on
a site.
   MONUMENT SIGN. A permanent, on-premises ground sign with a low profile that
has a base and support structure with a solid appearance measuring at least
one-half of the width of the widest part of the sign’s face. Fully enclosed
fascia will be included in the measurement of the width of the sign support.
   MULTI-TENANT DEVELOPMENTS. For the purposes of the sign regulations in this
subchapter, a building or group of buildings developed for multiple non-
residential users or mixed-uses occupying one development site, such as a
shopping center, retail center, office park, multi-story multi-tenant building,
planned development, mixed-use building, or comprehensive development projects.
Exclusively residential developments are not considered a multi-tenant
development.
   MURAL. A mural is a hand-produced work in which paint or tile is applied by
hand directly on an exterior wall of a building or structure. The town will not
review the content of murals.
   NONCONFORMING SIGN. A sign lawfully erected and legally existing on the
effective date of this chapter, or of amendments thereto, but which does not
conform to the provisions of this chapter.
   OCCUPANT. For the purposes of the sign regulations in this subchapter, a
distinct user that occupies a portion of a multi-tenant building, lot, or
development, regardless of the legal arrangement allowing occupancy between the
owner of the building, lot, or development and the user.
   OFF-PREMISES SIGN. A sign that advertises businesses, organizations, goods,
products, or services that are not located, sold, manufactured, or distributed
on or from the premises or facilities where the sign is located. For the
purposes of this definition, premises will be considered to include all
contiguous parcels that are under common ownership, maintenance, operation, or
plan. Nothing contained in this definition shall be construed to apply to limit
noncommercial messages or information placed on any allowed sign.
   ON-PREMISES SIGN. A sign that advertises businesses, organizations, goods,
products, or services that are located, sold, manufactured, or distributed on
or from the premises or facilities where the sign is located. For the purposes
of this definition, premises will be considered to include all contiguous
parcels that are under common ownership, maintenance, operation, or plan.
Nothing contained in this definition shall be construed to apply to limit
noncommercial messages or information placed on any allowed sign.
   PERMITTED SIGN. Any sign for which the town has issued a permit.
   POLE SIGN. A permanent ground sign supported by one or more poles or
vertical members that are less than one-half of the width of the widest part of
the sign’s face. Fully enclosed fascia will be included in the measurement of
the width of the sign support.
   PORTABLE SIGN. A sign not permanently attached to the ground or other
permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including signs
designed to be transported by means of wheels, A-frame signs, and balloons.
   PRIMARY BUILDING FAÇADE. For the purposes of the sign regulations in this
subchapter, that façade most clearly articulated as the visual or focal point
of the building, usually associated with the main entrance. The Zoning
Administrator will make this determination for buildings with corner entrances
or with more than one façade facing the street.
   PROJECTING SIGN. Any sign attached to, and projecting more than 18 inches
from, the face of a building.
   READERBOARD SIGN. A sign on which copy is changed manually in the field,
including but not limited to, business directories, church signs, and gas
pricing signs.
   READERBOARD SIGN, ELECTRONIC. A sign with copy that is displayed through the
use of digital screens, electric lights, illumination, or other electronic or
digital format, and that may be changed at will for the purpose of
advertisement or announcement.
   RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT. For the purposes of the sign regulations in this
subchapter, a subdivision for single-family dwellings or a multi-family
building or group of buildings.
   RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT SIGN. A freestanding sign located near the entrance
drive or road to a residential development or an attached sign located on a
multi-family building. An example of a typical residential development sign is
one that identifies the name of the development or phase of development,
sometimes incorporating architectural or landscape features. The example is
provided to clarify the regulations and does not limit the content of
residential development signs. The town will not review the content of
residential development signs.
   ROOF SIGN. Any sign erected over or on the roof of a building.
   SIGN. A visual display of an object or device that includes elements such as
colors, lights, motion, symbols, images, icons, letters, numerals, figures,
characters, or combines any of those elements, that a person intends to
communicate, advertise, identify, announce, direct, inform, or attract
attention. The term SIGN includes a structure used to support or display a
SIGN.
   SIGN FACE. The part of the sign that is or can be used for the display of
any copy or graphics, including any background material, panel, trim, color, or
illumination that differentiates the sign from a facade or sign structure.
   SIGN STRUCTURE. Any supporting structure erected, used, or intended for the
display of any sign, with or without a sign thereon.
   TEMPORARY SIGN. A sign constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric,
cardboard, wood, wallboard, metal, or other light materials, with or without
frames, that is intended to be displayed for a limited period of time only.
TEMPORARY SIGNS include stake signs, post signs, and A-frame signs. Examples of
common TEMPORARY SIGN uses include political signs, public demonstrations,
grand opening signs, contractor signs, real estate signs, and signs that
announce an event such as a carnival, circus, or similar event. The list of
examples is provided to clarify the regulations and does not limit the content
of TEMPORARY SIGNS. The town will not review the content of TEMPORARY SIGNS.
   VEHICLE SIGN. Any permanent or temporary sign, affixed to, painted, or
represented on, or placed in or upon any vehicle.
   WALL SIGN. A sign attached directly to an exterior wall of a building or
dependent upon a building for support, with the exposed face of the sign
substantially parallel to the exterior building wall to which the sign is
attached.
   WINDOW SIGN. A permanent sign posted, painted, placed, or affixed to the
inside or outside of a window or glass door.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.867 THROUGH 156.879 RESERVED.
SUBCHAPTER H: BUILDING AND SITE DESIGN
PART 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.880 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of the established building and site design standards is
to protect and provide the desired character of the commercial districts and
development areas of the town.
   (B)   By establishing commercial building design standards, the town intends
to:
      (1)   Promote the appearance, character, and economic value of land
located in commercial districts and development areas;
      (2)   Protect the public from the impact of adverse visual nuisances;
      (3)   Assure respect for the character, integrity, and quality of the
built and natural environments of the town;
      (4)   Enhance public safety by defining spaces to influence traffic
movement;
      (5)   Reduce the amount of storm runoff and provide an appropriate and
attractive transition between neighboring properties;
      (6)   Foster civic beauty; and
      (7)   Strengthen the local economy.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.881 TOWN COMMERCIAL AREAS.
   (A)   Purpose. The town’s commercial areas generally include all non-
residential and mixed-use areas under the purview of the Design Review Board.
   (B)   Applicability. The following zoning districts and development types
are subject to this subchapter:
      (1)   Non-residential zoning districts including Limited Office
Professional District (OP-1), Office Professional District (OP-2), Limited
Neighborhood Commercial District (NC-1), Neighborhood Commercial District (NC-
2), Areawide Business-1 District (AB-1), Areawide Business-2 District (AB-2),
Economic Development District (ED), and Light Industrial District (LI);
      (2)   PD, Planned Development District with zoning classifications
containing a non-residential use component, for the non-residential use areas
only, and specifically including entire buildings containing a residential use
located in conjunction with a non-residential use;
      (3)   Overlay districts containing a commercial district zoning
classification or commercial area; however, specifically excluding the
commercially zoned properties located in the Old Village Historic District (OV-
HD);
      (4)   All properties located in the Village-Scale Pedestrian Overlay
District (VSP-OD);
      (5)   All properties located in the Shem Creek Waterfront Districts
(SCWD); and
      (6)   All properties with proposed residential development or
redevelopment consisting of five or more units located in any zoning district.
   (C)   Exemptions. Where detached houses are permitted in zoning districts
subject to this subchapter, they are exempt from the requirements of this
subchapter.
   (D)   Nonconforming buildings and structures. Notwithstanding the provisions
of Subchapter K, minor improvements not exceeding 50% of the reasonable
replacement value of the building or structure shall meet the requirements of
this subchapter; provided, however, that when improvements do not exceed 50% of
the reasonable replacement value of the building or structure, only those
elements proposed for modification are required to comply with this subchapter.
   (E)   Hierarchy of authority. Specific requirements adopted pursuant to
Planned Development District zoning classifications, special design subareas,
and specific requirements of adopted overlay districts take precedence over the
procedures and design requirements in this subchapter, when in conflict with
the same.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.882 DESIGN REVIEW PROCESS REQUIRED.
   The design review process establishes a systematic and uniform review
procedure for proposed construction of all applicable non-residential, mixed-
use, and in some cases multi-family developments to protect and provide for the
desired character of the commercial districts and development areas throughout
the town.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.883 TOWN DESIGN PRINCIPLES.
   (A)   Purpose. The following design principles serve as criteria for staff
and the Design Review Board for decision-making as it relates to Mount Pleasant
vernacular or lowcountry vernacular in the review of proposed development and
redevelopment throughout the town. The goal of the design standards is to
maintain the traditional small village feel of Mount Pleasant as it continues
to grow.
   (B)   Findings. The vernacular buildings of Mount Pleasant are typical of
most small, Atlantic seaboard fishing communities, and can be generally
described as simple and utilitarian in expression of form, design, material,
and detail. Mount Pleasant has historically been a small town. By 1970, the
population had only grown to roughly 6,000 residents. Since that time, the
population has doubled each decade. Buildings were generally small, vernacular
structures. While some buildings with formal styles were constructed, they are
generally few. Therefore, future construction should follow the form and
detailing of the more abundant small, vernacular buildings and utilize
vernacular designs and elements as described herein.
   (C)   Simplicity of massing and form. Traditional buildings are known for
their simple and utilitarian forms. Because traditional structures were built
by hand, elaborate shapes or complex forms were avoided due to labor and cost
implications. Structures must be distilled to a simple massing composed of one
or more rectangular forms.
   (D)   Legible hierarchy and order of elements. Throughout the lowcountry,
features of traditional structures are generally arranged from most to least
important. The most important portions of the building are emphasized and
receive greater attention to detail. The least important portions recede or
receive simpler treatments. Likewise, new buildings must include primary
massing components (i.e., the dominant or central part of a building) and
secondary or tertiary massing components (i.e., areas that flank or link the
main portion of the building are considered less prominent areas).
   (E)   Harmonious proportions. Traditional structures utilize simple
proportions to optimize rationality and constructability. The use of proportion
in new construction must establish harmonious relationships between the massing
of the building and architectural elements. Simple proportional relationships
that contribute to visually pleasing and cohesive whole generally adhere to 1:
1, 3:2, and 5:2 ratios. Vertical orientation, where elements are taller than
they are wide, are preferred because they relate well to human scale and
perception.
   (F)   Consistent arrangement of elements. Traditional architecture arranges
openings, columns, and elements of the building in a manner that is based on
practicality, ease of construction, and time efficiency. Window openings must
be arranged regularly and symmetrical along a building face.
   (G)   Top, middle, and base. Vertical elements must be composed of a clearly
visible top, middle, and base. These three separate concepts are rooted in
classical patterns, provide order, and give articulation to a building.
Building elevations must clearly illustrate a visually pronounced first floor
or base level, a middle ground consisting of all floors above the base level,
and an articulated top consisting of the final floor or top level with defined
cornice or sloped roof profile.
   (H)   Relationship to the street. Traditionally, structures were placed and
arranged so that the most public portion of the building (e.g., the entrance)
orients outward toward the public realm (i.e., a street, park, plaza, or
private courtyard area connecting to a street). The front of buildings must be
arranged to create a strong and discernible connection with the public realm.
   (I)   Relationship to environs. Lowcountry vernacular architecture responds
to and connects with the natural environment and regional climate. Building
placement, orientation to the sun, natural light and ventilation, materiality,
and shading all lend toward developing a strong sense of character that is
unique to Mount Pleasant vernacular. New construction must incorporate elements
that relate well to the natural setting and climate.
   (J)   Materials and detailing. Primary building materials were limited to
those readily available in the area–predominantly wood and some brick. Roofs
generally feature a hipped or gabled roof, often with broad eave overhangs and
exposed rafter tails or fascia trim. Boxed eaves, when present, feature a
traditional pedimented gable or return detail. Roofing materials are
historically metal standing seam or 5-V crimp and later shingles. Windows are
abundant for light and ventilation. Window shapes and panes are taller than
wide. Windows occur as singles, pairs or, in some instances, triples with a
single, wide “picture frame” trim. Decorative trim and detailing is generally
limited to the pedestrian areas of the building, such as display windows and
entry elements, although some simple variations of cornice trim may be found at
the eaves and in the gables. Large porches are common at the primary entries,
with square wood columns that are often chamfered. Simple round Tuscan columns
were sometimes used but are primarily seen as later replacement columns.
   (K)   Vista and view shed. Lowcountry vernacular structures are generally
framed within their settings, often incorporating large trees and roadways into
a visual experience. Where it is reasonably practical, proposed structures
shall not impede scenic views from the main road, from existing structures, or
from natural settings. Structures must strengthen and maintain vistas and view
sheds.
   (L)   Relationship to adjacent structures. Although maximum site densities
and special site requirements defined for particular use districts shall be
preserved, proposed structures shall not dominate, in an incompatible manner,
an adjacent building, nor in surrounding general development substantially in
compliance with this chapter.
   (M)   Cohesive design. Cohesive design elements create harmony through
related massing, scale, proportion, detail, materials, color, site planning,
and landscaping.
      (1)   All elevations of a structure shall be in harmony with one another
in terms of scale, proportion, detail, material, and color. The side and rear
elevations of buildings shall be as visually attractive as the front elevation.
Rooflines and architectural detailing shall present a consistency in quality
design.
      (2)   All buildings and structures within a proposed development,
including canopies, shall utilize a unifying architectural theme and be uniform
in character in order to create a harmonious whole. However, it is not to be
inferred that buildings must look alike to achieve a harmony of style. The
scale of buildings and accessory structures (including canopies) shall be
appropriate to the scale of structures located in the surrounding area.
Canopies designed as domineering or overpowering architectural features are not
allowed.
      (3)   The architecture, landscaping, and building siting must work in
concert to create a unified appearance that contributes to the existing/
developing streetscape.
   (N)   Architectural compatibility.
      (1)   The architectural design and material finish of buildings, signage,
gasoline pump canopies, and other necessary structures shall be compatible with
one another, and with adjacent and surrounding structures where such structures
are substantially in compliance with this section.
      (2)   In reviewing a proposed structure, specific considerations shall be
given to its compatibility with adjacent structures.
      (3)   Proposed structures shall be shown to scale, in a streetscape view
with adjacent buildings, by using elevations or, in certain instances,
photographs, of adjacent structures.
   (O)   Local design quality. Structures that are of symbolic design for
reasons of advertising, corporate identity or corporate continuity shall be
highly discouraged; however, the Design Review Board or staff may work with
applicants to incorporate limited signature design elements into buildings, to
allow recognition of certain corporate or signature identity, while still
retaining the ability to achieve a project design unique to Mount Pleasant.
Similarly, prototype architecture is prohibited; however, the Design Review
Board or staff may work with applicants to incorporate limited signature design
elements into buildings, to allow recognition of certain corporate or signature
identity, while still retaining the ability to achieve a project design unique
to Mount Pleasant.
   (P)   Prohibited architectural styles. Colonial, Classical, Victorian,
Bauhaus, mid-20th Century modern, and/or formal architectural styles and
designs are prohibited. The form may be based on historical models; however,
the formal detailing of the historical period styles should be absent or
extremely simple when present.
   (Q)   Consideration for contemporary architectural treatments. Contemporary
architectural treatments, as demonstrated in Figure 156.883-1: Contemporary Use
of Vernacular Design and Elements below, shall not be prohibited where it
maintains the traditional form, massing, design elements, materials, and
adherence to design principles of Mount Pleasant vernacular or lowcountry
vernacular, and arranges the components in a new and/or modern way such that
the basic nature and form of the traditional architecture is clearly visible
and compatible with surrounding structures and sites. Commercial buildings
should reflect and incorporate traditional characteristics and patterns with
simple modifications made to accommodate emerging market trends and commercial
activities.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13056.png]
 
   (R )   Consideration for taller buildings. Structures that are excessively
wide and tall are not consistent with Mount Pleasant vernacular and lowcountry
vernacular tradition. Vernacular structures were generally no taller than 38 -
40 feet, given the sum of heights of the base, floor-to-floor levels, and roof
of a traditional two-story structure. Therefore, modern buildings generally
taller than three stories and 45 feet should employ traditional design
principles to mitigate excessive massing and scale of building elements and
relate to traditional form and models. Specific design standards that include
parameters for taller buildings are noted in §§
156.892,
156.894, and
156.898(C).
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.884 THROUGH 156.889 RESERVED.
PART 2: BUILDING DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 156.890 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. The architectural compatibility and aesthetic harmony of
commercial buildings within the Town of Mount Pleasant are of critical
importance in protecting and promoting the appearance, character and economic
value of land, in addition to protecting the public from the impact of adverse
visual experienc es. The intent of the design review process is to assure
respect for the character, integrity, and quality of the built and natural
environments of the town; it is not intended to stifle innovative architecture.
   (B)   Applicability. Building design standards apply to all areas described
in §
156.881.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.891 BUILDING SETBACK.
   The setback distances from lot lines having street frontage shall be
determined during the design review process, utilizing a build-to line between
20 and 30 feet, measured from the lot line.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.892 BUILDING STEP-BACK.
   Proposed buildings taller than three stories and 45 feet must provide a
building step-back along the primary street or right-of-way as follows:
   (A)   The building step-back must contain a minimum depth of ten feet and
occur at some point between the first and fourth levels of the building. See
Figure 156.892-1: Building Step-Back.
   (B)   Structures should step-back the upper portions of the building so as
to avoid their becoming the dominant element of the building.
Figure 156.892-1: Building Step-Back
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13058.png]
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.893 PRIMARY FAÇADE AND ENTRY ORIENTATION.
   (A)   All buildings shall have a primary façade, facing the primary street
or right-of-way. See
Figure 156.893-1: Primary Façade.
   (B)   Along primary arterials, such as Highway 17 North, Johnnie Dodds
Boulevard, and Coleman Boulevard, primary building entrances shall be located
facing the primary street and/or at the corner for buildings located at an
intersection. Exceptions may be made in consideration of such conditions as
differences in elevation of the adjacent street and subject property, and the
presence of abutting frontage roads.
   (C)   All buildings located at intersections or corner properties, including
entry drives to shopping centers and/or developments, shall be located at the
corner adjacent to the intersection.
   (D)   Porches or porticos are encouraged to define entryways into buildings
and primary façades.
Figure 156.893-1: Primary Façade
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13060.png]
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.894 TOP, MIDDLE, AND BASE.
   (A)   All buildings shall be composed of distinct base, middle, and top
sections as demonstrated below. See
Figure 156.894-1: Top, Middle, and Base of Buildings.
   (B)   Base.
      (1)   For single-story buildings, the base may be articulated by the
foundation, knee walls, or other architectural features such as bulkheads or
trim used to transition the wall plane to the ground plane.
      (2)   For buildings taller than three stories and 45 feet, the base may
consist of the full first level of the building. The base of such buildings
shall be visually pronounced and clearly delineated from the remaining portions
of the building, distinguished by identifiable features such as but not limited
to a separate building material, portico, shopfront, or separate area with
sloping roof, significant change in vertical proportion of openings.
   (C)   Middle.
      (1)   For single-story buildings, the middle portion of the building
shall consist of the wall plane between the foundation and the roof structure.
      (2)   For buildings taller than three stories and 45 feet, the middle
portion of the building shall consist of upper floor levels between the first
level and top of the building.
   (D)   Top.
      (1)   For single-story buildings, the top shall be articulated by how the
wall plane transitions to the roof structure, including:
         (a)   Wall detailing as described in §
156.896; and
         (b)   Roof form as described in §
156.898
      (2)   For buildings taller than three stories and 45 feet, the upper-most
level of the building shall be considered part of the top and be distinguished
from the lower portions of the building through identifiable design elements,
such as window treatment and wall plane detailing. Buildings taller than three
stories and 45 feet shall include a highly defined cornice or roof profile as
described in §
156.898(C).
Figure 156.894-1: Top, Middle, and Base of Buildings
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13062.png]
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.895 MASSING.
   Buildings and structures shall break down the massing of the building into
simple forms to harmonize with traditional vernacular forms and models. See
Figure 156.895-1: Traditional Vernacular Forms.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13064.png]
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.896 WALL PLANES.
   (A)   Avoid long façades.
      (1)   Long, monotonous façade design, including but not limited to, those
characterized by unrelieved repetition of shape or form, or by unbroken
extensions of a line, are prohibited.
      (2)   Long façades shall break the cornice, parapet, and roof to reduce
massing.
      (3)   Façades shall utilize offsets in wall plane and offsets in building
footprints to differentiate building masses, forms and/or components. Depths of
offsets shall be in proportion to the size of the façade and shall not be
smaller than one foot in depth between adjacent wall planes.
   (B)   Wall plane detailing. Control joints, score lines, gutters and/or
downspouts, or similar building elements or details shall not be used to
express articulation or to differentiate building masses and forms, or to
create sign bands or express other details.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13066.png]
 
   (C)   Parapet walls.
      (1)   Parapet walls must be broken between building elements and/ or
design elements to reinforce the individual building forms and elements, and to
break the horizontal line of the building.
      (2)   Projecting parapets, where allowed, must have return/depth.
      (3)   Refer to Figure 156.896-2: Parapet Walls for examples.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13068.png]
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.897 MATERIALS.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   Material integrity. Materials shall express their function clearly
and honestly and shall not appear as materials that are foreign to the
character of the rest of the building.
      (2)   Consistency of materials. Any building exterior elevation shall
consist of architectural materials that are equal in quality, appearance, and
detail to all other exterior elevations of the same structure.
      (3)   Prohibited materials.
         (a)   No portion of a building may be constructed of unadorned
concrete masonry units or corrugated and/or sheet metal.
         (b)   Paint and/or similar finish is not considered an adornment.
         (c)   Nothing in this section precludes the use of architectural metal
cladding, which may be incorporated into the overall building composition when
used as an architectural accent and when found to meet the intent of this
section. Such architectural cladding will exhibit features, such as quality
architectural materials, a natural or high quality fluoropolymer finish, and
concealed fasteners.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13070.png]
         (d)   However, in areas zoned LI, Light Industrial District, or for LI
District uses located within PD, Planned Development Districts, the above
materials may be used on buildings or portions of buildings that are not
visible from any public right-of-way or from any differently zoned property.
   (B)   Primary building materials.
      (1)   Primary building materials shall be wood.
      (2)   Cementitious and other synthetic materials may be used to
facilitate the appearance of wood lap siding, vertical board and batten siding,
and/or machine sawn shingles. Real wood products may be used when in compliance
with the building code. For the purposes of this division, wood shall refer to
wood, cementitious siding, and other synthetic materials meant to facilitate
the appearance of wood siding as described herein.
      (3)   Stucco may be used as a primary building material only along
primary arterials, such as Highway 17 North, Johnnie Dodds Boulevard, and
Coleman Boulevard, and in Commercial Villages, such as Towne Centre, Irongate
Plaza, The Market at Oakland, and Seaside Farms. Stucco may also be used on
civic structures such as churches and government buildings.
   (C)   Secondary building materials.
      (1)   Buildings taller than three stories and 45 feet may use masonry,
cementitious, or stone material as a secondary building material. See Figure
156.897-2: Use of Stucco-like Material.
      (2)   Stucco or materials similar in appearance or texture may be used in
"voids" or reveals between brick building masses but shall not constitute more
than 50% of the area of a building façade.
      (3)   Stucco or materials similar in appearance or texture may be used
for details such as sills, lintels, and cornice features, including
clerestories.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13072.png]
      (4)   Cast or natural finished stone may be used as decorative detailing
at the base or as lintels and/or sills and cornice features.
      (5)   Materials in the middle and top portions of the building shall
appear lighter than the base material so that heavier materials are located to
the bottom of lighter materials. For example, brick or stone should be provided
below wood or stucco.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13074.png]
   (D)   Base of wooden buildings. The base of wood structures shall consist of
a wooden base trim.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13077.png]
   (E)   Base of masonry buildings. The base of masonry buildings and
structures shall consist of a watertable of the same material, expressed by
either a projecting base or a recessed or projecting beltcourse or stringer
course between the middle and base.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13079.png]
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.898 ROOF FORM.
   (A)   Predominant roof form. Roof forms, including gasoline canopies and all
other structures, shall be simple gable or hip designs.
   (B)   Roof pitch.
      (1)   Roof pitch may be of a moderate, varied, or low slope.
      (2)   Roof pitch shall be proportional to the building design, mass, and
form.
      (3)   Split pitch roofs, or bellcast/flared eaves, may be used where the
lower portion of the roof takes on flatter pitch, in order to cast water
further from the structure.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13081.png]
   (C)   Roof profile of taller structures. Buildings taller than three stories
and 45 feet shall include a highly defined cornice or sloped roof with broad
overhangs, to create a strong and identifiable roof profile as viewed from the
street.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13083.png]
   (D)   Prohibited roof forms.
      (1)   Mansard roofs are prohibited.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13085.png]
      (2)   Unbroken roof lines. Long, monotonous roof design, including but
not limited to, those characterized by unrelieved repetition of shape or form,
or by unbroken extension of line, shall not be permitted.
      (3)   Flat roofs.
         (a)   Flat roofs are prohibited, except when provisions are made for
outdoor mechanical wells and similar types of equipment, as follows.
         (b)   On buildings requiring flat roofs for roof-mounted mechanical
equipment, a flat roof section may be attached to the rear of the building,
with a pitched roof over the front portion of the building so that the flat
roof area appears to be a later addition. Buildings may create a flat roof area
between pitched elements, where the pitched elements completely screen the
mechanical equipment from view. Hipped or gabled roofs with a mechanical roof
well will not be considered mansard roofs, when the roof appears to be a true
hipped or gabled design.
   (E)   Eaves. Gable or hip roofs shall have broad eave overhangs proportioned
to the building.
   (F)   Roof elaborations.
      (1)   Cupolas, widow's walks, and other roof appurtenances, such as
domes, are not allowed; provided, however, that civic buildings, such as
churches, may incorporate these elements when appropriate to the design theme
of the structure.
      (2)   Roof appurtenances, such as dormers, roof monitors, light wells,
and mechanical vents, shall be gabled, hipped, or shed designs, and shall
function as true elements not used for aesthetic purposes only.
      (3)   Tower elements are strongly discouraged. Tower elements may not be
substituted in lieu of, nor considered as, pitched roof elements in order to
meet the requirements of this division.
   (G)   Cornice and eave details.
      (1)   Cornice, eaves, and/or gable trim must have a traditional return.
See Figure 156.898-4: Cornice/Eave Return.
      (2)   Boxed eaves trim are prohibited.
      (3)   Trim or cornice detailing must match at the returns into other
elements.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13087.png]
   (H)   Roof material. Shingles, metal, standing seam, corrugated or 5-
V crimp, or other roofing materials with similar appropriate texture and
appearance shall be utilized.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.899 WINDOWS.
   (A)   Vertical orientation. Windows shall utilize traditional proportions
and be taller than wide.
   (B)   Inset windows. Windows must not be flush with the exterior wall but
must be inset in a traditional manner.
   (C)   Lintel and sill. All windows shall have an expressed lintel and sill;
provided, however, that first floor display, storefront systems, or full-length
windows terminating at building grade or finished floor elevation do not
require a sill.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13089.png]
   (D)   Shopfront windows.
      (1)   Picture and/or display windows are required along the first floor
of retail buildings within every structural bay but shall be no less than every
25 feet along the primary street or right-of-way façade.
      (2)   Window openings shall be greater than 40% of the first-floor wall
area of retail buildings along the primary street or right-of-way façade.
      (3)   However, exceptions may be made, in consideration of such
conditions as differences in elevation of the adjacent street and subject
property,
the presence of abutting frontage roads, and the width of adjacent roadside
buffer, to exempt retail buildings from the 40% first floor window requirement.
Buildings will still need to maintain a primary building façade along the
primary street or right-of-way as required in §
156.893.
      (4)   Picture and/or display windows must always remain open to view from
the exterior, and may not be covered, screened, blocked, or diminished in any
manner for a distance of three feet inside the window. A minimum of 20% of
first floor windows must be picture windows to reveal interior activity.
   (E)   Design of hurricane protection. Hurricane protection of windows shall
be integral to the design of the building or shall utilize subtle attachment
methods that do not detract from its architectural or visual character.
Exterior mounted roll-up hurricane shutters are prohibited. Impact-resistant
glazing is encouraged.
   (F)   Window type specifications.
      (1)   Half-round arched windows shall be prohibited.
      (2)   Segmented, jack, or flat arches may be incorporated when
appropriate to the design of the structure.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13091.png]
      (3)   Spandrel glass is only allowed as glazing in front of interstitial
space on multi-story buildings. Spandrel glass is prohibited on the ground
floor of a structure.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13093.png]
      (4)   Glass shall be clear, grey, or green, and may not be tinted greater
than 30%. Awnings and/or canopies shall be used to shade windows, if shading is
desired.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.900 COLUMNS.
   Columns, including those supporting a gasoline canopy and other canopies and
accessory structures, shall be either square, square with chamfers, square
tapered, or round Tuscan style with entasis, whichever style is most
appropriate for the architectural theme of the structure. Columns shall exhibit
a base and capital, and visibly support an entablature.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.901 AWNINGS, CANOPIES, AND BALCONIES.
   (A)   Awning material. All awnings must be canvas, cloth, or similar
material. Stretched vinyl or materials similar in material, texture, or
appearance are prohibited.
   (B)   Awning attachment.
      (1)   The top of all awning structures must be attached above window
openings so as to protect pedestrians from the elements below.
      (2)   Awnings must project a minimum of three feet from the face of the
building.
      (3)   The bottom of the awning shall not be located higher than ten feet
from grade.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13095.png]
   (C)   Illumination prohibited. Awnings and canopies shall not be
illuminated.
   (D)   Canopy location. Canopies are allowed where appropriate to the design
theme and materials of the structure.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13097.png]
   ( E )    Canopy material. Canopies shall have metal roofing, translucent
roof panels and/or glass roofing, whichever is most appropriate to the design
theme of the structure.
   (F)   Canopy structure.
      (1)   The support structure shall be wood or metal, whichever is most
appropriate to the design theme of the structure.
      ( 2)    Metal suppo rting mem bers shall utilize escutcheons.
   (G)   Protection from elements. Both awnings and canopies shall be designed
to protect pedestrians from the weather and/or provide shade for windows.
   (H)   Arcades. Arcades are prohibited.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13099.png]
   (I)   Balconies. Balconies must function as true, functional balconies, and
shall not be used for aesthetic purposes only.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.902 SIGN BANDS.
   (A)   Sign band area. Sign bands and/or sign areas shall be designed into
the façades of all retail buildings. Sign bands and/or sign areas on other
building types and structures shall be similarly considered and be integral to
the composition of the façade. Building signs shall be limited to the sign band
and/or sign areas of buildings and may not extend beyond the limits of sign
band and/or sign area, where such buildings are in compliance with this
section.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13101.png]
   (B)   Sign location. The location and dimension of wall signs shall be
indicated on the architectural elevations of proposed structures and shall
maintain compatibility with the architectural features of the structure.
   (C)   Sign approval. Approval of architectural plans with signs or sign
areas shown on the building shall not constitute sign approval. A separate
application for a sign permit must be submitted for sign approval as required
by
Subchapter I, Part 7.
   (D)   Symbols. A symbol or symbols attached to a building shall not be
allowed unless it is secondary in appearance to the structure and landscape and
is an aesthetic asset to the building and surrounding area. Where such symbols
are allowed, they shall count towards the allowable sign area of the building.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.903 SCREENING OF MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Mechanical equipment, including exhaust hoods and grease traps,
whether ground level, raised or rooftop, shall be shielded and screened from
public view, and designed to be perceived as an integral part of the building.
   (B)    Roof-mounted equipment shall not be located on the primary street or
right-of-way side of a building. All roof-mounted equipment shall be screened
from public view.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.904 COLORS.
   (A)   Color combinations of paints or stains shall be complementary.
   (B)   In no case shall garish colors be permitted.
   (C)   In general, no more than three different colors per building shall be
allowed, not including a neutral trim color.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.905 THROUGH 156.914 RESERVED.
PART 3: SITE DESIGN STANDARDS
SUBPART 3.1: SITING OF BUILDINGS AND PARKING AREAS
§ 156.915 PURPOSE.
   This subpart pertains to general siting of buildings and parking areas and
shall be used to preserve natural vistas and extend viewing corridors through
better design and structure placement.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.916 APPLICABILITY.
   This subpart applies to all areas described in §
156.881.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.917 PARKING LOT AREAS AND FACILITIES.
   (A)   The placement of the major portion of a proposed development's parking
area must be to the rear of a main structure's corridor façade, or within a
vehicular courtyard surrounded on three sides by a proposed structure.
   (B)   The rationale for this standard is to promote proportional and spatial
definition of corridors, to be accomplished through prioritizing placement of
buildings and landscaping over parking areas.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.918 THROUGH 156.924 RESERVED.
SUBPART 3.2: ACCESS AND CONNECTIVITY
§ 156.925 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. This part pertains to the town’s access management and
overall connectivity and shall be used to ensure public access, accommodate
future transit stops and opportunities, and improve the mobility through
pedestrian and vehicular interconnectivity, including streets, parking lots,
sidewalks, paths, and multi-use trails.
   (B)   Applicability.
      (1)   This subpart applies to all areas described in §
156.881.
      (2)   Land development regulations. §
155.049 applies in addition to the standards in this subpart.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.926 PEDESTRIAN ACCESS, CROSSWALKS, AND SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   New development, subdivisions, and renovations. New developments,
subdivisions, and renovations shall provide appropriate pedestrian access,
either through the construction of concrete sidewalks or pedestrian path/
bikeway systems, or a combination of both. Requirements for pedestrian access
shall be in accordance with the following table.
Table 156.926-1: Table of Pedestrian Access Requirements
Land Use/Road Classification Minimum Requirement
Table 156.926-1: Table of Pedestrian Access Requirements
Land Use/Road Classification                                                    Minimum
                                                                                Requirement
Commercial and industrial (new streets)                                         Sidewalk
                                                                                both sides
                                                                                Sidewalk one
                                                                                side if
                                                                                specified on
Commercial and industrial (new development on existing street)                  Road
                                                                                Improvement/
                                                                                Transpor
                                                                                tation Plan
Major arterial                                                                  Sidewalk
                                                                                both sides
                                                                                Sidewalk one
                                                                                side on
                                                                                streets
                                                                                having
                                                                                direct
                                                                                access to
                                                                                lots
                                                                                Pedestrian
Residential collector (including boulevards, parkways, and spine roads)         path/bikeway
                                                                                on one side
                                                                                may be
                                                                                direct
                                                                                access to
                                                                                lots with
                                                                                Planning
                                                                                Commission
                                                                                approval
Local residential streets                                                        
   Greater than 3.0 units per acre                                           Sidewalk
                                                                                both sides
   Between 3.0 and 1.01 units per acre                                       Sidewalk one
                                                                                side
   Less than or equal to 1.0 units per acre                                  Pedestrian
                                                                                path/bikeway
                                                                                Whenever
                                                                                possible, a
                                                                                pedestrian
                                                                                access path,
                                                                                bike trail,
                                                                                or crosswalk
                                                                                shall be
   Between neighborhoods, commercial developments, schools, parks, community provided
areas and the like                                                              between
                                                                                existing and
                                                                                proposed new
                                                                                subdivisions
                                                                                and other
                                                                                pedestrian-
                                                                                oriented
                                                                                destinations
 
   (B)   Non-residential and mixed-use areas.
      (1)   Generally. In all cases, ease of pedestrian access between proposed
developments and adjacent developments shall be demonstrated in the development
of a proposed project's site and circulation plans.
      (2)   Crosswalks and mid-block crossings.
         (a)   Crosswalks shall be prominently designed, and located at street
intersections, the intersection of parking lot entrances with abutting streets,
and in other locations where pedestrians are invited to cross vehicular areas
such as mid-block crossings.
         (b)   The texture and/or color of their paving material shall contrast
with that of the street.
         (c)   Raised pedestrian crosswalks (speed tables) may be utilized and
are encouraged as a traffic-calming device in areas containing both high
pedestrian activity and long, unbroken vehicular straightaways.
         (d)   Crosswalks made of entirely thermoplastic or painted lines are
not allowed unless part of another governmental agency's requirements. However,
thermoplastic may be used as a border to a stamped and painted asphalt product
serving as the field or interior of the crosswalk.
      (3)   Internal crosswalks for commercial projects.
         (a)   Where crosswalks are required within a commercial center,
uninterrupted travel-way sections of more than three lanes shall be avoided.
         (b)   Uninterrupted travel-way sections of more than four lanes shall
not be allowed.
         (c)   Where wider travel-way sections are required, curb bump outs,
medians and other design features shall be employed to ease pedestrian crossing
at intersections.
         (d)   When medians are used to break a travel-way section of four or
more lanes, they shall be at least five feet in width, from back of curb to
back of curb, allowing an adequate and safe resting zone for crossing
pedestrians, and allowing room for canopy tree plantings to contribute to the
streetscape, break the expanse of asphalt, and reduce the scale of the travel-
way.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13103.png]
          (e)    The above provisions shall apply to private streets, access
ways, and portion s of parking lots that functio n as streets.
      (4)    Sidewalks.
          (a)    Sidewalk connect ions are require d between the developm ent
walkway system and the public sidewalk, which shall be strategically placed to
best facilitate movement from the entrance(s) of development building(s) to the
public sidewalk.
         (b)   Commercial projects fronting streets currently without public
sidewalks shall provide a minimum-five-foot sidewalk within the road right-of-
way.
         (c)   Corner developments or those that otherwise front multiple
streets shall provide a public sidewalk in the right-of-way on street(s)
currently without a sidewalk.
         (d)   In unique cases where a sidewalk cannot be in part or fully
provided on the right-of-way, a public sidewalk shall be provided, in part or
in full, on private property with a public access easement provided to cover
that portion of sidewalk on private property.
Figure 156.926-2: Medians
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13105.png]
         (e)    Corner developments or those that otherwise front multiple
streets shall provide a sidewalk connection to all streets.
         (f)   Projects containing multiple buildings on a particular street
frontage shall provide multiple points of connection to the public sidewalk.
      (5)   Shared-use paths. Development and redevelopment on properties
abutting existing or planned shared-use paths must accommodate a minimum of
eight feet in width, with a preferred width of ten feet, for a continuous,
separated facility.
      (6)   Bike lanes and shared lanes. Development and redevelopment on
properties abutting existing or planned bike lanes and shared lanes must
integrate design capacity to support a continuous bike facility.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.927 VEHICULAR ACCESS.
   ( A)    Access drives.
      ( 1)    Acce ss drives include public streets, rights-of-way, private
streets, access ways, and portions of parking lots that function as streets or
thoroughfares.
      (2)   The location of access drives shall be determined through the
encroachment permit process or design review process, whichever is applicable,
with the appropriate right-of-way owner or governing jurisdiction, using the
most current edition of the South Carolina Department of Transportation Access
and Roadside Management Standards (ARMS Manual) or other appropriate standard
as determined by the governing agency.
   (B)   Visibility triangle. Fences, walls, shrubbery, or other obstructions
to travel vision are prohibited.
   (C)   Curb cuts.
      (1)   No more than one curb cut is allowed per 250 feet.
      (2)   Shared access is required when there is less than 250 feet of
frontage.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.928 INTERNAL ACCESS ROADS.
   (A)   In order facilitate the replication of a grid street pattern and
enhance the streetscape appearance for non-residential and mixed-use
developments where no public street is dedicated, internal access roads are
required whenever site design characteristics reasonably allow them on all
larger parcels and smaller parcels that have been aggregated.
   (B)   These roads shall be designed to appear and function as a public
street. Privately owned access roads must be owner-maintained.
   (C)   Sidewalks and on-street parking are required. On-street parking spaces
on internal access roads may count towards required parking. Buildings should
address these internal access roads in the same manner as a public street with
respect to orientation, setbacks, and bufferyard requirements.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.929 ACCESS EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Where interconnectivity is proposed, access easements shall be
provided from a public right-of-way to the property line of the adjacent
property it is meant to serve.
   (B)   Where a final plat is required, easements shall be provided prior to
final plat approval. For developments that do not require a final plat,
easements shall be provided prior to issuance of any building permits for the
development.
   (C)   Easements shall provide for unencumbered access by the adjoining
property owner(s) and the public through the property in perpetuity, or until
such time as the property is redeveloped and the easement is no longer
required.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.930 DRIVE-THROUGH AND DRIVE-UP USES.
   (A)   Drive-through access. Drive-through access shall be integrally
designed with the building, and shall not dominate the design generally or wrap
around the street side(s) of the building; provided, however, that exceptions
may be made in consideration of such conditions as differences in elevation of
the adjacent street and subject property, historic tree location, the presence
of abutting frontage roads, and the width of adjacent roadside buffers; and
further provided that the following provisions hereunder shall apply, except
that drive-through access and parking areas are prohibited in the activity zone
of properties.
   (B)   Banks (or similar financial institutions), post offices, or utility
company offices.
      (1)   Multi-lane, drive-through access is allowed, but is limited to no
more than four lanes, including a by-pass lane.
      (2)   Such uses are encouraged to provide hybrid lanes, which may
accommodate two functions per lane such as a tube and an ATM (See
Figure 156.926-2: Medians).
      (3)   Drive-through medians containing tubes or other equipment shall
extend beyond the canopy above and be left open as planters, with a width no
less than 30 inches wide, as measured between the back of curb on each side, to
provide the opportunity for plant material to serve in place of bollards and
reduce the expanse of asphalt.
      (4)   Paved areas approaching and exiting the drive-through area shall be
narrowed to the best extent possible.
   (C)   Gas stations and similar pump-dispensed uses.
      (1)   Gasoline and other chemical pump dispensers, and any canopies
covering the dispensers, shall be located to the side of, or behind, the
building so that it is between the pumps and the primary street frontage.
      (2)   If located on a corner lot, the building must be situated in the
corner of the lot at the intersection.
      (3)   Drive-through medians containing dispensing pumps or other
equipment shall extend beyond the canopy above and be left open as planters,
with a width no less than 30 inches wide, as measured between the back of curb
on each side, to provide the opportunity for plant material to serve in place
of bollards and to reduce the expanse of asphalt.
      (4)   Accessory buildings, vacuum units, air stations, ice chests and the
like shall be shown on the site plans for approval and shall be sited in such a
way as to allow screening and not disrupt pedestrian flow on sidewalks. In no
case shall they contain garish colors on emblems, stickers, or other visible
means of attracting attention.
   (D)   Pharmacy, fast food restaurant, and similar uses. These uses may
utilize a single drive-through access lane and/or a single row of parking, with
a two-way drive aisle located between the building and the primary street
frontage, pursuant to the following conditions:
      (1)   The drive-through pick-up window shall not be located on the
primary street;
      (2)   The drive-through access isle and parking shall be suitably
screened from view, with a structure such as a pierced-brick wall and/or a
vegetated hedge of single- or double-row vegetation. Because individual
building sites vary and to provide variety in design, these treatments will be
determined during the design review process;
      (3)   The plant unit multiplier shall be 1.5 for required vegetation,
except as stated above, if a hedge screening treatment is utilized, and the
canopy trees utilized shall be from the list as provided in §
156.585;
      (4)   Double- or multi-lane drive-through access is allowed elsewhere on
the site, but not between the building and the primary street frontage;
      (5)   The drive-through lanes and access aisle(s) shall be considered
separately and will not be limited to a 24-foot-total width of paving; and
      (6)   Paved areas approaching and exiting the drive-through area shall be
narrowed to the best extent possible.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.931 THROUGH 156.939 RESERVED.
SUBPART 3.3: SITE COMPONENTS
§ 156.940 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. This part addresses miscellaneous site elements and
associated design standards.
   (B)   Applicability. This subpart applies to all areas described in §
156.881.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.941 UTILITIES.
   (A)   The necessity for utility connections, meter boxes, and similar
elements should be recognized and integrated with the architectural elements of
the site plan, proposed landscaping, and general site layout.
   (B)   All utility lines, such as electric, telephone, CATV, or similar lines
serving individual sites, as well as all utility lines necessary within the
property, shall be placed underground in accordance with the following
provisions:
      (1)   Existing aerial lines may be maintained in their present location
and configuration, but there shall be no net gain in additional aerial lines
when providing new service.
      (2)   Where development requires existing aerial lines to be relocated,
they will then be required to be placed underground.
      (3)   Properties to be serviced from existing aerial distribution lines
located across a street shall be required to bore beneath roads to reach the
proposed development and shall not cross a street with an aerial line to set a
dip pole to serve the proposed development.
      (4)   In cases of off-site connections, additional survey information is
required to adequately address potential off-site impacts.
   (C)   Where these off-site impacts occur within another jurisdiction, such
as Charleston County, approval of utility installation shall be furnished to
the town prior to receiving approval.
   (D)   All utility pad fixtures and meters shall be shown on the proposed
site plans, and shall include:
      (1)   Method of installation;
      (2)   Location of connection to existing facilities;
      (3)   Size of cabinet or box;
      (4)   Direction of door swings on applicable cabinets;
      (5)   Proposed easements associated with the new utility installation;
and
      (6)   Direction of access to service the fixture.
   (E)   All utility cabinets and other similar aboveground structures shall be
screened with appropriate landscaping, as approved by designated reviewing
authority and the pertinent utility agencies, from all sides that are visible
from a public or private street, access way, and portions of parking lots that
function as streets or thoroughfares.
   (F)   Whenever possible, utility boxes shall be located in areas that will
not require bollards for their protection.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.942 SHOPPING CART STORAGE.
   (A)   Generally. In general, carts are encouraged to be stored inside the
building. However, if outdoor storage of carts is intended, an enclosure is
required that does not impede lateral or direct pedestrian traffic to the
subject building or adjacent buildings.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13107.png]
   (B)   Shopping cart corrals located in parking areas.
      (1)   Typical prefabricated pipe or plastic enclosures placed in a
parking space shall not be allowed; rather, corral enclosures shall be
incorporated into a parking lot planter island, with concrete curbing outlining
the storage area.
      (2)   To the degree possible, the corral shall be designed to retain the
minimum required planter island size and shall be roughly centered in one side
of the island, leaving two narrow peninsular islands forming the sides of the
enclosure.
      (3)   For island configurations of other proportions, the designated
reviewing authority shall have the flexibility to allow other and similar tree
planting requirements as needed to suit the condition.
      (4)   Landscape treatments shall be dictated by the size and
configuration of the planter island parking corral, but in all cases shall
generally correspond to the graphic representation below.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13109.png]
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.943 MAILBOXES, OUTDOOR SALES RACKS, AND SIMILAR ITEMS.
   (A)   Mailboxes, outdoor sales racks, and similar items shall be shown on
site plans and have cut sheets provided to convey the sizes, colors, finishes
and the like of each item.
   (B)   These items shall be placed in areas so as to not impede pedestrian
access or landscape maintenance.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.944 OUTDOOR FURNITURE.
   Outdoor furniture includes benches, water fountains, bicycle racks, refuse
containers, and other forms of outdoor furniture shall be shown on all site
plans, with the number and placement of fixtures evaluated with respect to:
   (A)   Style size, color, material, and finish;
   (B)   Consistency of style within a development; and
   (C)   Strategic locations within the development layout.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.945 BOLLARDS.
   (A)   The use of bollards is strongly discouraged.
   (B)   Alternative methods of structure protection shall be employed wherever
possible, such as:
      (1)   Site redesign to increase distance from the travel aisle to the
structure to be protected; or
      (2)   The use of landscaping and/or other structures, such as trash cans,
benches, steps and the like, that will provide varying levels of protection.
   (C)   In cases where the above remedies are impractical, the following
treatments may be utilized, in order of preference:
      (1)   Decorative concrete bollards, with detail expressed from the
architecture of the building; and to the extent possible, so designed as a site
amenity able to accommodate dual uses, such as seating, incorporation of
plantings, trash enclosures, public art, lighting and the like; or
      (2)   Pipe bollards provided that they are no taller than 36 inches, no
more than five inches in diameter, and painted black or a color to match an
adjacent site or building element.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.946 LOADING AREAS, SERVICE COURTYARDS, AND DUMPSTERS.
   (A)   Structures shall be oriented so that loading areas, service
courtyards, and/or dumpsters are in no manner visible from residential
districts or from existing or planned future public rights-of-way. Loading
areas and service courtyards shall be screened from view by the use of a wall
that is compatible with the overall architectural scheme of the project and
appropriately landscaped.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13111.png]
   (B)   Loading areas may be oriented toward adjoining commercially zoned,
developed properties, or toward adjoining properties eligible for future
commercial development, if they are entirely screened from view by the use of a
wall that is compatible with the overall architectural scheme of the project
and appropriately landscaped.
   (C)   Service areas, vehicle repair, installation facilities, or service
facilities with roll-up or service doors facing an existing right-of-way or
proposed or future street or public right-of-way must use glass doors to create
the appearance of storefront units consistent with the concepts expressed in
Subchapter H, Part 2. Provided, however, that exceptions may be made in
consideration of such conditions as differences in elevation of the adjacent
street and subject property, the presence of abutting frontage roads, and the
width of adjacent roadside buffers.
   (D)   Vehicles, mobile units, and containers which provide a temporary or
permanent service for a business must be screened in accordance with this
section.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.947 SCREENING FOR ENCLOSURES.
   (A)    Screening for dumpster and roll-out trash can enclosure s, HVAC,
generator s, compacto rs, and other similar elements shall be:
      (1)    Clearly indicated on the project site plan; and
      (2)   Screened from view, in an enclosure built entirely of masonry or
wood infill walls between masonry columns, with enclosure detailing to match
the architecture of the building.
   (B)   HVAC units, generators and other similar elements shall be screened
with an appropriate enclosure constructed of materials to match the building.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.948 SATELLITE DISHES.
   (A)   All ground-mounted satellite dishes:
      (1)   Shall be shown on the project site plans;
      (2)   May not be located between building and street; and
      (3)   Shall be completely screened from view from the street or right-of-
way.
   (B)   All building- or structure-mounted satellite dishes shall be shown on
the architectural plans.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.949 TELECOMMUNICATION TOWERS AND ASSOCIATED GROUND-MOUNTED EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   A fence and/or wall is required to screen the equipment. However,
chain link fencing shall not be used to screen the equipment.
   (B)   Unless otherwise required by the Board of Zoning Appeals through
special exception approval, the designated reviewing authority may also require
the installation of 20-foot, Type C perimeter and right-of-way landscape
bufferyards.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.950 FREE-STANDING SIGNAGE.
   (A)   All free-standing signs shall be shown on the site plans and
landscaping adjusted to incorporate and accentuate the sign.
   (B)   The sign design shall have its text at an appropriate height and its
plantings appropriately designed to avoid maintenance conflicts with
landscaping.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.951 TRUNCATED DOMES (DETECTABLE WARNINGS).
   (A)   Prefabricated truncated dome mats are prohibited.
   (B)   Poured-in-place and imprinted concrete are strongly discouraged.
   (C)   Use of prefabricated pavers with truncated domes are preferred where
such detectable warnings are required. Consideration should be given to paver
joints being mortared. Paver color shall contrast with the walking surface
within which they are placed.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.952 THROUGH 156.964 RESERVED.
SUBPART 3.4: EXTERIOR LIGHTING
§ 156.965 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to:
      (1)   Reduce the problems created by improperly designed and installed
exterior lighting;
      (2)   Eliminate glare, minimize light trespass and sky glow, and reduce
unnecessary excess exterior lighting by limiting lighting levels and
establishing design standards for all exterior lighting;
      (3)   Provide a safe and secure nighttime environment;
      (4)   Provide safe access into buildings; and
      (5)   Enhance historic or notable features, buildings, or architectural
elements.
   (B)   While intended to provide appropriate lighting levels for commercial
and apartment complex uses, this subchapter also requires that all exterior
fixtures be decorative in design and contribute to the aesthetic quality of the
development.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.966 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following types of exterior lighting are exempt from the requirements of
this subchapter:
   (A)   Lighting used only under emergency conditions;
   (B)   Traffic control signals and devices;
   (C)   Lighting for detached house dwellings, manufactured homes, duplex
dwellings, townhouse dwellings, triplex dwellings, and quadplex dwellings;
   (D)   Lighting solely used for signs;
   (E)   Lighting associated with an approved temporary use;
   (F)   Temporary lighting associated with a development site;
   (G)   Lighting for public monuments and statues;
   (H)   Underwater lighting in fountains, swimming pools, and other water
features;
   (I)   Lighting required pursuant to state and federal laws (e.g., FAA);
   (J)   Lighting required by the Building Code; and
   (K)   Seasonal lighting.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.967 PROHIBITED EXTERIOR LIGHTING.
   The following types of exterior lighting are prohibited:
   (A)   Exterior lighting resembling emergency signals. Exterior lighting that
contains reflectors or glaring, strobe, or rotating lights, beacons, beams, or
flashing illumination resembling an emergency signal.
   (B)   Searchlights, aerial lasers, and beacons. Searchlights, aerial lasers,
or any type of beacon used to attract attention to a property. This does not
prohibit the use of a searchlight by authorized personnel for emergency
purposes.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.968 GENERAL EXTERIOR LIGHTING STANDARDS.
   (A)   Lighting shall enhance the overall aesthetics of the site.
   (B)   Lighting shall be integrated with the architectural design of the
building and shall contribute to the landscaping effect.
   (C)   The type of lamp (e.g., LED, incandescent, fluorescent) selected shall
be consistent throughout the site.
   (D)   Lamps (bulbs) shall not be visible.
   (E)   If parking lots and vehicular use areas are lighted, the lighting must
comply with this subchapter.
   (F)   Security lighting shall be provided, particularly at pedestrian
walkways.
   (G)   Landscape lighting shall be designed to illuminate specific site
features using a concealed light source fixture that does not:
      (1)   Distort colors or structures;
      (2)   Spill over into adjoining properties and roadways; or
      (3)   In any way interfere with the vision of oncoming motorists.
   (H)   Timers, dimmers, or vacancy or motion sensors should be utilized when
continuous lighting is not needed for safety or operational purposes.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.969 UNIFORMITY.
   (A)   Uniformity ratios shall meet those established by the Illuminating
Engineering Society’s Lighting Library Standards, as assigned by activity or
use.
   (B)   When a particular activity or use is unlisted or is sufficiently
unclear, the Zoning Administrator shall assign a uniformity ratio.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.970 LIGHTING COLOR.
   (A)   Blue light emissions can be harmful to flora and fauna, and can result
in decreased nighttime visibility and increased skyglow. In order to minimize
blue light emission, warm spectrum, amber lighting shall be utilized rather
than cool spectrum, blue or white lighting, as specified in division (B) below.
   (B)   The correlated color temperature of all exterior lighting shall be
3,500 Kelvin (4000K) or lower, with tolerance within the ANSI standard C78.377
for LED sources.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.971 LIGHTING HEIGHT.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   Freestanding (ground-mounted) lighting equipment shall not exceed
18 feet in height from the average surrounding grade, except as otherwise
provided in this section.
      (2)   Building-mounted lighting equipment shall meet the height limit
specified in Subchapter B for the district in which the lighting is located.
   (B)   Luminaire mounted on pedestal.
      (1)   A luminaire located in a parking area may be mounted on top of a
pedestal (see example in Figure 156.971-1), if the pedestal is 36 inches or
less in height. The pedestal height is excluded from the height limit specified
in division (A) above.
      (2)   The pedestal must be similar in color and material to the principal
building on the site or as specified through the design review process.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13113.png]
   (C)   Maximum luminaire height in parking areas.
      (1)   Luminaires up to 25 feet in height may be located only in the
central areas of the parking lot; and
      (2)   Decorative luminaires up to 18 feet in height shall be utilized
along the primary vehicular and pedestrian corridors.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.972 BUILDING LIGHTING, BUILDING AREA LIGHTING, AND SERVICE AREA LIGHTING.
   (A)   Applicability. In addition to the general requirements established in
§
156.968, any lighting designed or intended to illuminate any exterior portion
of a building, its immediate surroundings, or service/loading areas shall meet
the requirements in this section.
   (B)   Ground-mounted lighting.
      (1)   Ground-mounted luminaires shall:
         (a)   Be shielded so that all of the light is focused on the building
façade; and
         (b)   Not exceed 100 lumens.
      (2)   Ground-mounted lighting equipment shall be placed no further than
20 feet away from the building.
   (C)   Building-mounted lighting.
      (1)   Lighting intended to illuminate the roof of a structure is strongly
discouraged.
      (2)   The placement of neon banding, string lights, or the like on any
portion of a building is prohibited.
      (3)   Fully-shielded wallpack-style fixtures are allowed in service/
loading areas of properties zoned LI District, except that when the service
area is highly visible from a street or any area with significant pedestrian
and automobile traffic, wallpacks are prohibited.
      (4)   All other lighting placed on the building itself shall:
         (a)   Be decorative in design; and
         (b)   Primarily complement the architecture and design themes
established for the site.
      (5)   The use of fully-shielded luminaires is encouraged for all lighting
placed on the building that is not specifically utilized for service areas.
   (D)   Gas stations, overhead canopies, and drive-through canopies.
      (1)   All lighting housed beneath the canopy shall be recessed or flush-
mounted with the canopy ceiling so that no portion of the light source extends
below ceiling plane.
      (2)   A drop lens is allowed and may extend below the ceiling plane no
further than two inches.
      (3)   The maximum to minimum uniformity ratio for the area beneath the
canopy shall not exceed 2:1.
   (E)   Automatic teller machines (ATMs).
      (1)   Lighting for ATMs shall not exceed IES-recommended levels for
security.
      (2)   Area lighting for ATMs shall extend for a radius not to exceed 50
feet from the face of the machine, or as determined through the design review
process.
      (3)   If the ATM is located under a canopy, the standards in division (D)
above also apply.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.973 POLE-MOUNTED LIGHTING.
   (A)   The light source in a pole-mounted luminaire shall be completely
concealed within an opaque housing, and shall not be visible from any adjacent
lot or public right-of-way.
   (B)   All pole-mounted luminaires shall be flush-mounted to existing grade,
except as provided in division (B)(2) below.
      (1)   Proper pole offsets from parking areas, curbing, and wheel stops
shall be used to prevent automobile and pole conflicts.
      (2)   If the pole cannot be adequately protected through these methods,
it may be mounted on a pedestal or bollard as provided in §
156.971(B).
   (C)   All lighting equipment and poles shall:
      (1)   Be decorative in design;
      (2)   Primarily complement the architecture and design themes established
for the site; and
      (3)   Not be incongruent with other design themes utilized by the
municipality.
   (D)   Pole-mounted lighting within service or loading areas may be required
to provide additional shielding so that the light is contained specifically
within the service or loading area.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.974 LIGHTING ZONES.
   (A)   Generally. §
156.975 regulates the amount of exterior lighting by district. Many zoning
districts have common characteristics for the purposes of exterior lighting
regulations, and this section combines the zoning districts subject to this
subchapter into common lighting zones. Table 156.974-1: Lighting Zones
designates the zoning districts included in each lighting zone.
 
Table 156.974-1: Lighting Zones
Zoning District or Future Land Use Map Designation of Adjacent  Lighting Zone
Lot
CO, CR-O, PI-1, RC-1, RC-2, RR, CC, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, TH, RM,
OP-1, NC-1, CL, PD (residential areas) Rural Residential,       LZ 1
Conventional Residential Neighborhood, Traditional Residential
Neighborhood, Settlement Community, Mixed Neighborhood
PI-2, OP-2, NC-2, AB-1, AB-2, ED, LI, WG-C, SCW, PD (non-       LZ 2
residential areas)
 
   (B)   Description of lighting zones.
      (1)   Lighting Zone 1. Lighting Zone 1 (LZ 1) includes areas with low to
moderate ambient lighting levels. These typically include residential areas,
apartment complexes, institutional residential uses, neighborhood commercial
areas, neighborhood-serving recreational and playing fields, and mixed use
development with a predominance of residential uses.
      (2)   Lighting Zone 2. Lighting Zone 2 (LZ 2) includes areas with
moderately high lighting levels. These typically include commercial corridors,
suburban commercial areas, town centers, mixed use areas, industrial uses with
night time activity, high-use recreational and playing fields, car dealerships,
gas stations, and other retail areas active at nighttime.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.975 LIGHTING LEVELS.
   (A)   Individual lighting power allowances for building exteriors are
specified in the International Energy Conservation Code (IECC). The IECC
includes allowances for building entrances and exits as well as uncovered
parking areas, walkways, sales canopies, and outdoor sales areas.
   (B)   The IECC regulates exterior lighting by lighting zone, and generally
describes the types of uses in each lighting zone. §
156.974 establishes lighting zones specific to Mount Pleasant, which are
consistent with the lighting zones established in the IECC.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.976 LIMITS TO OFF SITE IMPACTS.
   (A)   Backlight, uplight, and glare (BUG) ratings.
      (1)   Generally. The three components of BUG ratings are based on the
Illuminating Engineering Society’s Technical Memorandum: Luminaire
Classification System for Outdoor Luminaires. Each component is assigned a
value between zero and five, with lower numbers indicating a luminaire emits
less light in a given direction. A zero value means the luminaire emits no
light in the given direction.
      (2)   Backlight. Backlight creates light trespass onto adjacent lots and
streets.
      (3)   Uplight. Uplight contributes to skyglow.
      (4)   Glare. Glare causes visual discomfort or reduced visibility.
   (B)   Maximum allowable BUG ratings.
      (1)   All luminaires shall be rated and installed according to
Table 156.976-3: Maximum Allowable Backlight, Uplight, and Glare (BUG) Ratings.
      (2)   A luminaire may be used if it is rated for the lighting zone of the
site or is lower in number for all ratings (B, U, and G). Luminaires equipped
with adjustable mounting devices permitting alteration of luminaire aiming in
the field are prohibited.
      (3)   If a luminaire does not have a BUG rating, it shall be fully-
shielded.
Table 156.976-3: Maximum Allowable Backlight, Uplight, and Glare (BUG)
Ratings
Key: max. = maximum allowed | B = backlight | U = uplight | G = glare
 Lighting Zone (LZ)
 LZ 1 LZ 2
Table 156.976-3: Maximum Allowable Backlight, Uplight, and Glare (BUG) Ratings
Key: max. = maximum allowed | B = backlight | U = uplight | G = glare
                                                            Lighting Zone (LZ)
                                                            LZ 1 LZ 2
Backlight Rating (max.)
2 or more mounting heights from lot line                    B4   B5
1 to less than 2 mounting heights from lot line and ideally B3   B4
oriented1
0.5 to 1 mounting heights from lot line and ideally         B2   B3
oriented1
Less than 0.5 mounting height to lot line and ideally       B0   B1
oriented1
Uplight Rating (max.)
All luminaires                                              U0   U0
Glare Rating (max.)
2 or more mounting heights from lot line                    G2   G3
Any luminaire not ideally oriented within 1 to less than 2  G1   G1
mounting heights to any lot line
Any luminaire not ideally oriented within 0.5 to 1 mounting G0   G1
heights to any lot line
Any luminaire not ideally oriented within less than 0.5     G0   G0
mounting heights to any lot line
1 To be considered ideally oriented, the luminaire must be mounted with the
backlight portion of the light output oriented perpendicular and towards the
lot line.
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.977 LIMITATION ON HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   Applicability. This section applies to exterior lighting on sites with
buildings containing more than 40,000 square feet of enclosed floor area. This
section applies whether the exterior lighting was installed before, on, or
after the effective date of this subchapter.
   (B)   Hours of operation. All exterior lighting should be turned off between
11:00 p.m. (local time) and sunrise, except when used for:
      (1)   Commercial and industrial uses (such as sales, assembly, and repair
areas) where business is conducted after 11:00 p.m., but only while the
business is open to the public;
      (2)   Lighting necessary for security purposes or to illuminate walkways
or roadways; and
      (3)   Recreational use that continues after 11:00 p.m., but only for so
long as such use continues.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.978 SPECIAL PURPOSE LIGHTING.
   (A)   Exterior lighting that does not comply with the technical requirements
of this subchapter, but is consistent with its intent, may be installed for the
special uses listed below:
      (1)   Sports facilities including, but not limited to, open courts,
fields, and stadiums. This includes sports facilities located on a school
campus;
      (2)   Outdoor amphitheaters;
      (3)   Parking structures;
      (4)   Ports; and
      (5)   Lots zoned LI or ED that contain uses with unique operational
characteristics.
   (B)   The applicant shall demonstrate in the exterior lighting plan (see §
156.980) that the proposed lighting installation:
      (1)   Has sustained every reasonable effort to mitigate the effects of
light on the environment and surrounding properties, supported by a signed
statement describing the mitigation measures;
      (2)   Only includes luminaires with a backlight rating of zero (B0);
      (3)   Does not create unwarranted glare or skyglow;
      (4)   Employs lighting controls to reduce lighting at a project-specific
curfew time established in the exterior lighting plan. For sports facilities,
this curfew must be no later than one hour after the end of the final game or
match.
   (C)   The mounting height of luminaires associated with:
      (1)   Parking structures shall be 18 feet or less above the top floor of
the structure; and
      (2)   Sports facilities, outdoor amphitheaters, and ports may be up to 70
feet above grade unless otherwise specified by the Board of Zoning Appeals as
part of a special exception use approval.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.979 STREET LIGHTING.
   Lighting used for the principal purpose of illuminating streets and
sidewalks:
   (A)   Is subject to §
156.970, but is not subject to any other provisions of this subchapter; and
   (B)   Must comply with the SCDOT ARMS Manual or town street standards, as
applicable.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.980 EXTERIOR LIGHTING PLAN REQUIRED.
   (A)   An exterior lighting plan demonstrating compliance with this
subchapter shall be submitted as a component of the design review application
in accordance with
Subchapter I, Part 12.
   (B)   The exterior lighting plan shall:
      (1)   Have a minimum scale of one inch equals 20 feet;
      (2)   Be integrated with the required landscaping plan; and
      (3)   Include:
         (a)   Location and mounting information for each luminaire;
         (b)   A graphic representation of each type of luminaire;
         (c)   A fixture schedule listing fixture design, type of lamp, lumens,
correlated color temperature, and BUG rating for each luminaire;
         (d)   Manufacturer's photometric data for each type of luminaire;
         (e)   COMcheck Exterior Lighting Compliance Certificate or other
verification that the proposed exterior lighting complies with the IECC
individual lighting power allowances for building exteriors (see §
156.975); and
         (f)   Illumination calculations showing:
            1.   Light levels in footcandles at points located on a ten-foot
center grid; and
            2.   Uniformity ratio.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.981 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subpart, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BACKLIGHT. For an exterior luminaire, lumens emitted in the quarter sphere
below horizontal and in the opposite direction of the intended orientation of
the luminaire. For luminaires with symmetric distribution, backlight will be
the same as front light.
   CORRELATED COLOR TEMPERATURE (CCT). A numerical figure used to describe the
apparent color of white or nearly white light sources such as LEDs or metal
halide.
   DIRECT LIGHT. Light emitted directly from the lamp, off of the reflector or
reflector diffuser, or through the refractor or diffuser lens of a luminaire.
   EXTERIOR LIGHTING. The illumination of an outside area or object by any
human-made device located outdoors that produces light by any means.
   FIXTURE. The assembly that houses the lamp or lamps, and can include all or
some of the following parts: a housing, a mounting bracket or pole socket, a
lamp holder, a ballast, a reflector or mirror, or a refractor or lens.
   GLARE. Lighting entering the eye directly from luminaires or indirectly from
reflective surfaces that causes visual discomfort or reduced visibility.
   LAMP. The component of a luminaire that produces the actual light. A generic
term for a source of optical radiation (i.e., “light”), often called a “bulb”
or “tube.” Examples include incandescent, fluorescent, high-intensity discharge
(HID) lamps, and low pressure sodium (LPS) lamps, as well as light-emitting
diode (LED) modules and arrays.
   LANDSCAPE LIGHTING. Lighting equipment powered at less than 15 volts with
luminaires having a rated initial luminaire lumen output of 525 lumens or less.
   LIGHT TRESPASS. Light that falls beyond the boundaries of the property it is
intended to illuminate.
   LIGHTING EQUIPMENT. Equipment specifically intended to provide gas or
electric illumination, including but not limited to, lamps, luminaires,
ballasts, poles, posts, lenses, and related structures, electrical wiring, and
other necessary or auxiliary components.
   LUMEN. The unit of measure used to quantify the amount of light produced by
a lamp or emitted from a luminaire (as distinct from “watt,” a measure of power
consumption).
   LUMINAIRE. A complete lighting unit (fixture), consisting of a lamp, or
lamps and ballast(s) (when applicable), together with the parts designed to
distribute the light (reflector, lens, diffuser), to position and protect the
lamps, and to connect the lamps to the power supply.
   LUMINAIRE, FULLY-SHIELDED. A luminaire constructed and installed in such a
manner that all light emitted by the luminaire, either directly from the lamp
or a diffusing element, or indirectly by reflection or refraction from any part
of the luminaire, is projected below the horizontal plane through the
luminaire's lowest light-emitting part. Any structural part of the luminaire
providing this shielding must be permanently affixed and part of the luminaire,
not part of any surrounding building or architectural elements.
   LUMINAIRE, HEIGHT OF. The vertical distance from the ground directly below
the centerline of the luminaire to the lowest, direct, light-emitting part of
the luminaire.
   MOUNTING HEIGHT. See LUMINAIRE, HEIGHT OF.
   SEASONAL LIGHTING. Temporary lighting installed and operated in connection
with holidays or traditions.
   SECURITY LIGHTING. The minimum amount of exterior lighting necessary to
illuminate building entrances, exits, and other possible points of entry;
exterior walkways; and/or outdoor storage areas.
   SKYGLOW. The brightening of the nighttime sky that results from scattering
and reflection of artificial light by moisture and dust particles in the
atmosphere. SKYGLOW is caused by light directed or reflected upwards or
sideways and reduces one's ability to view the night sky.
   UNIFORMITY. A description of the smoothness of the lighting pattern or the
degree of intensity of light and dark areas in the area to be lighted.
   UNIFORMITY RATIO. A measurement of the relative difference between the
average footcandles of illumination on the area to be lighted and the
footcandles at the point of minimum illuminance on the area to be lighted. The
lower the ratio, the more uniform the lighting design. A UNIFORMITY RATIO of 3:
1 means the average footcandles value on the area to be lighted is three times
the footcandles value at the point of least illuminance on the area to be
lighted.
   UPLIGHT. For an exterior luminaire, flux radiated in the hemisphere at or
above the horizontal plane.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.982 THROUGH 156.989 RESERVED.
SUBPART 3.5: LANDSCAPING
§ 156.990 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of these landscaping requirements is to:
   (A)   Reduce the visibility of paved areas from adjacent properties and
streets;
   (B)   Moderate climatic effects;
   (C)   Minimize noise and glare;
   (D)   Provide habitat for wildlife;
   (E)   Reinforce a sense of place with use of indigenous lowcountry plants;
   (F)   Enhance public safety by defining spaces that influence efficient
traffic movement; and
   (G)   Enhance the character, value, and attractiveness of new development
and surrounding properties.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.991 GENERAL LANDSCAPING STANDARDS.
   (A)   Existing vegetation. Existing vegetation of any type, size, or origin
shall not be altered or removed, unless it satisfies the requirements of this
part;
Subchapter D, Part 2;
Subchapter E; and §
156.760.
   (B)   Integral design. Landscape design and planning shall be integrated
with the overall project design concept and shall not be considered as merely
an afterthought.
   (C)   Natural landscape.
      (1)   The natural landscape character shall be preserved in every
reasonable instance.
      (2)   Trees measuring three inches DBH or larger shall not be felled
except where authorized by this chapter.
   (D)   Included in landscape. In applying landscaping to complement natural
conditions, factors to be included in the integral design of development
projects include:
      (1)   Trees and plantings;
      (2)   All vegetative cover and ornamentation;
      (3)   Paving;
      (4)   All the items of exterior furniture, including pedestrian benches;
      (5)   Fountains;
      (6)   Fences;
      (7)   Mailboxes;
      (8)   Light fixtures; and
      (9)   Shopping cart return stalls.
   (E)   Types and selection of landscaping.
      (1)   All items of the landscape are to be selected for both their
functional and aesthetic value, and must complement the whole.
      (2)   Plants must be selected in accordance with §
156.585 and meet the requirements in §
156.584.
Figure 156.992-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13119.png]
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.992 LANDSCAPE DESIGN.
   (A)   Landscape plan required. A comprehensive landscaping program for each
individual lot subject to this part is essential for protecting and promoting
the appearance, character, and economic value of land. As such, a landscape
plan is required for all projects.
   (B)   Low impact development features. Landscaping will reduce the amount of
stormwater runoff and provide transition between neighboring properties. The
use of bio-swales, rain gardens, and other low impact development (LID)
features in required landscape areas is allowed and encouraged.
   (C)   Landscaping between buildings and parking areas. Landscaping is
required between buildings and parking areas to:
      (1)   Soften the appearance of structures and parking lots from the road;
      (2)   Screen vehicular headlight glare on- and off-site;
      (3)   Lessen spillover light from on-site lighting; and
      (4)   Enhance the aesthetics of the site.
   (D)   Landscaping between buildings and sidewalks or curbs and between
parking lots and driveways. Landscaping is required between buildings and
sidewalks and/or buildings and curbing and between parking lots and driveways.
      (1)   Such landscaping shall include understory and canopy trees, as
approved by the designated reviewing authority.
      (2)   The scale of the proposed landscaping and landscape areas shall be
in proportion to the building.
      (3)   Landscape areas shall be appropriately sized for required
plantings.
   (E)   Landscaping at buildings or in planters immediately fronting a
building.
      (1)   Proposed landscaping shall consider architectural features in order
to avoid immediate or future conflict with projecting elements. See examples in
Figure 156.992-1: Landscaping Along Building Frontage.
      (2)   Proposed landscaping shall consider building sign locations to
avoid adverse pruning for sign visibility.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.993 EVALUATION CRITERIA.
   (A)   Emphasis shall be placed upon landscaping as a means of achieving
beauty in the community and, in some areas, it will be the primary tool
available.
   (B)   Toward this end, proposed landscaping will be evaluated in relation
to:
      (1)   Existing natural landscape that may be used as a "plant palette"
for the given site;
      (2)   Existing or proposed buildings; and
      (3)   Existing and proposed landscaping, including that existing on
adjacent properties and street rights-of-way, to provide consistent street tree
plantings.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.994 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   All landscaping required by this part shall be shown on all development site
plan(s) and shall be installed in accordance with specified species, height,
spread, density, and quality prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.995 DESIGN REVIEW PROCESS.
   For buildings, structures, and developments subject to the design review
process (see
Subchapter I, Part 12), alteration of existing vegetation or landscaping
treatments is prohibited without prior approval through the design review
process.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.996 MAINTENANCE.
   Landscaping required by this part shall be maintained in accordance with
Subchapter D, Part 7.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.997 THROUGH 156.1009 RESERVED.
PART 4: SPECIAL DESIGN SUBAREAS
SUBPART 4.1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.1010 SPECIAL DESIGN SUBAREAS.
   Special design subareas are areas of town that exhibit a type of development
pattern that varies from the town’s building and site design standards. Each of
the special design subareas outline standards in order to produce a desired
outcome for a given area.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1011 HIERARCHY OF AUTHORITY.
   (A)   All standards applicable to special design subareas take precedence
over town commercial area standards.
   (B)   The town commercial area standards apply for any standard not
addressed in the subarea standards.
   (C)   All codified development criteria otherwise required by the town
applies in addition to these standards.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1012 THROUGH 156.1019 RESERVED.
SUBPART 4.2: COMMERCIAL VILLAGE SPECIAL DESIGN SUBAREA
§ 156.1020 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. The Commercial Village concept shares certain similarities
with standard enclosed malls in terms of business types, but its land use
patterns differ considerably.
      (1)   Where enclosed malls are surrounded by large, streetless seas of
asphalt, which, in turn, are surrounded by numerous developed outparcels devoid
of pedestrian linkages; the Commercial Village will assimilate various uses on
a unified street system capable of continued evolution.
      (2)   Structures, including buildings, utility buildings, and parking
decks, will display a high degree of architectural integrity to appeal to and
attract people, and promote the appearance, character, and economic value of
the property.
      (3)   Development patterns are encouraged to have office or residential
uses above retail uses. Design elements will include excellence in the
architecture of structures, unified scale and proportionality shared by
buildings, street furniture, lighting standards, streets and parking lots, the
use of window displays, and convenience of parking relative to sidewalks, as
described by standards herein.
      (4)   The accommodation of automobiles, though utterly essential, will
not dominate land use patterns or design quality.
   (B)   Applicability. This subpart applies to developments consisting of
shopping centers, strip centers, super centers, malls, and other combined
commercial projects totaling more than 100,000 square feet, including
outparcels.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1021 SUPPLEMENTAL BUILDING DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Building setback. Buildings will follow a generally uniform setback
along the street. Variations may be allowed to accommodate architectural
features.
   (B)   Primary façade and entry orientation. Building façades facing parking
lots shall be considered the same as street-front façades and shall be designed
as a primary façade.
   (C)   Structures.
      (1)   Individuality in the design of each building is encouraged.
         (a)   Unity between buildings shall rely primarily on proportional
relationship and composition of material.
         (b)   Regardless of height, buildings must relate to one another by
exactly or closely approximating each other's cornice and fenestration lines.
      (2)   The establishment of a successful relationship between the scale of
structures is critical.
         (a)   Regardless of height or size, buildings must relate to one
another's scale, particularly where large buildings abut small buildings.
         (b)   Therefore, large buildings must avoid wide, flat expanses by
using architectural treatments to reduce the visual effect of width.
      (3)   Proportional height-to-width ratios are expected to be provided by
project architects and applied to all structures and the development area. Tall
structures that contain only one floor must use architectural treatments to
infer a second story.
      (4)   Structures designed solely to promote standardized corporate images
are prohibited.
      (5)   All structures are to be specifically designed for their particular
sites and in consideration of the character of the entire development.
   (D)   Parking lot areas and facilities.
      (1)   Generally.
         (a)   Parking lot areas must be designed to accommodate pedestrians
and landscaping, as well as vehicles.
         (b)   Parking lot areas must be designed to reduce lateral parking
space requirements and increase the amount of landscaped and/or buildable area.
      (2)   Location of parking lot.
         (a)   Parking lots must be positioned to the rear or side of
buildings.
         (b)   Where this is not required as a result of the design review
process and where they abut streets, parking lots must be shielded from view by
the use of walls and landscaping that contribute to the streetscape of the
adjacent built environment.
         (c)   Entrances to parking areas must be evident through the use of
landmark entrance treatments.
      (3)   Spatial requirements.
         (a)   Parking areas must be located within a reasonable safe walking
distance from destinations no further than 400 feet from the entrance to a
commercial building.
         (b)   Each individual parking lot area will measure no larger than 400
by 400 feet.
         (c)   All parking lots will provide pedestrian linkages to the
buildings they serve. In order to channel foot traffic to appropriate entrances
and exits, clearly marked pedestrian sidewalks and pathways are required within
large parking lots accommodating more than 100 vehicles.
         (d)   Parking lot areas must be clearly delineated by the use of
borders around the perimeter.
            1.   Borders may be created by landscape strips, buildings, walls,
or fences.
            2.   When walls and fences are utilized, the landscaped strip may
be reduced to five feet.
            3.   Otherwise, landscaped borders shall be ten feet wide.
            4.   Curbing is required within parking lots, unless suitable
substitutes are approved through the design review process.
      (4)   Planter islands at ends of parking rows. Canopy trees shall be
planted between every 12 parking places.
      (5)   Excess parking areas. Excess parking may be provided if it is
composed of porous or semi-porous material and with an approved alternative
parking plan.
   (E)   Internal access roads.
      (1)   A system of interconnecting, predominantly linear streets is
required.
      (2)   All streets must include sidewalks on each right-of-way.
         (a)   The width of the sidewalks shall be determined by the estimated
amount of pedestrian traffic.
         (b)   In most instances, where buildings abut sidewalks, an eight- to
ten-foot width will be necessary.
      (3)   Angled and/or parallel parking shall be provided along streets
where it can be safely accommodated.
      (4)   Street trees shall line every street to contribute to the
definition of the streetscape, and will be selected to create a street canopy
that provides effective shade for pedestrians and vehicles. They will be
planted to provide separation of the sidewalk from the street curb.
      (5)   Buildings must be separated from street sidewalks by narrow,
planted earth islands, landscaped boxes, or other landscaped features.
      (6)   All streets shall have standing curbs.
      (7)   Street furniture, particularly in the form of benches, kiosks,
drinking fountains, and trash receptacles, shall be strategically placed for
the benefit of pedestrians.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1022 THROUGH 156.1034 RESERVED.
SUBPART 4.3: VILLAGE-SCALE PEDESTRIAN SPECIAL DESIGN SUBAREA
§ 156.1035 APPLICABILITY.
   In addition to the requirements of the town’s commercial design standards
described in Parts 2 and 3 of this subchapter, the design standards in this
subpart apply for all development within the Village-Scale Pedestrian Overlay
District (VSP-OD).
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1036 ACTIVITY ZONE.
   (A)   Description. The activity zone is a quasi-public space that may be
used for pedestrian circulation, placement of required canopy trees, planters,
benches, trash receptacles, and other street furnishings, in addition to the
uses described herein.
   (B)   Location. Because the activity zone is specifically defined as the
area between the street right-of-way line and build-to line, this means that an
activity zone is not allowed where a setback is required.
      (1)   On Coleman and Ben Sawyer Boulevards, activity zones are expressly
prohibited where a setback is required, as specified in
Table 156.254-1: Coleman Boulevard Development Standards.
      (2)   On Johnnie Dodds Boulevard, activity zones are expressly prohibited
on the following neighborhood streets: Lansing Drive, Tall Pine Road, Dragoon
Drive, Pine Hollow Road, Cottingham Drive, Williamson Drive, and the western
side of Bowman Road between Johnnie Dodds Boulevard and Mathis Ferry Road.
      (3)   On Chuck Dawley Boulevard, activity zones are allowed only on Chuck
Dawley Boulevard. Activity zones are expressly prohibited on all side streets.
   (C)   Permitted uses. All uses in the activity zone shall be conducted
outside of the street right-of-way. Design review approval is required prior to
establishing any use and/or installing any street furnishings within the
activity zone. Allowed uses are limited to the following:
      (1)   Streetside dining;
      (2)   Outdoor merchandise display, which must be related to the business
in front of which it is located;
      (3)   Non-amplified music performers or entertainers, subject to the
town's noise ordinance;
      (4)   Pushcarts; and
      (5)   A-frame signs in accordance with the requirements of
Subchapter G.
   (D)   Activity zone design standards.
      (1)   Awnings and balconies.
         (a)   Awnings may cover the entire activity zone area not utilized for
canopy tree placement and as defined for streetside dining.
         (b)   Awnings must be at least five feet in depth, measured
horizontally from face of building.
         (c)   Awnings shall be a maximum of eight feet in height, measured
from the bottom of an awning and/or valence to the sidewalk adjacent to
building. This measurement may be adjusted for grand, multi-story windows.
         (d)   Balconies may project over the activity zone, but in no instance
shall they extend over the right-of-way.
         (e)   Support structures for awnings and balconies are prohibited in
the activity zone.
      (2)   Raised planters. In order to enhance the pedestrian-oriented theme
of development, planters are required as a design element to soften the
building exterior and enhance the streetscape.
      (3)   Street furniture. Street furniture shall be utilized to enhance and
facilitate the pedestrian experience and shall not be utilized as additional
signage.
      (4)   Pedestrian access to remain unimpeded. In all cases, permanent or
temporary design features or activities shall not impede pedestrian access on
the public sidewalk.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1037 TERMINAL VISTAS.
   (A)   Properties that terminate views down streets shall be identified
during the design review process, and will be held to a higher architectural
standard along this visible façade.
   (B)   Such identified properties are those across from side streets that
intersect the primary boulevard and terminate or intersect and continue at a
different angle.
   (C)   Properties that are at the end of a straightaway on the boulevard
shall also meet this requirement.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1038 COLEMAN BOULEVARD STANDARDS.
   (A)   Active ground floor use.
      (1)   For buildings with frontage on Coleman Boulevard, within the area
located between Live Oak Street and the intersection of Coleman, Ben Sawyer,
and Chuck Dawley Boulevards, a minimum of 60% of the ground floor street
frontage shall be utilized for retail, restaurant, or entertainment use, as
allowed by the base zoning district (see §
156.338). Such retail, restaurant, or entertainment space shall be of a
meaningful depth so as to create a functional, usable commercial space that
addresses the activity zone and creates interest and activity in the public
realm.
      (2)   The remaining 40% of first floor level area may be devoted to
office or residential use.
   (B)   Bufferyards and street trees.
      (1)   Three canopy trees of a minimum-four-inch caliper are required for
each 100 linear feet of road frontage, using species southern red oak, live
oak, willow oak, elm varieties, and American beech. These tree types must be
consistent along each block and evenly spaced, with exceptions made for curb
cuts, utilities, and other obstructions. On side streets, the required street
trees shall be located in an area behind the sidewalk.
      (2)   Internal side and rear (non-street frontage) bufferyards shall be
provided in accordance with
Table 156.254-1: Coleman Boulevard Development Standards.
      (3)   Sabal palmettos shall be planted in the public right-of-way
adjacent to lots on Coleman Boulevard, at approximately 30 feet on center.
Additional low shrub or groundcover plantings, including grass, may be required
between the Sabal palmettos in the verge.
   (C)   Parking lot islands. Parking lot islands, which must include four-inch
caliper or larger canopy trees of a species approved during the design review
process, must be provided at a minimum of every 12 spaces when adjacent to rear
or side property lines. Internal parking lot islands either shall be provided
at a minimum of every 12 spaces or only at the end of parking rows.
   (D)   Sidewalks and landscaping.
      (1)   There shall be a public sidewalk, either within the right-of-way or
within a pedestrian easement on private property, on both sides of all streets.
The sidewalk shall be at least five feet wide on side streets and internal
access roads and at least eight feet wide on boulevard streets.
      (2)   On boulevard streets, sidewalks shall typically be separated from
traffic by a grassed verge, which shall be at least three feet wide, measured
from the back of curb, and planted with palmettos at approximately 30 feet on
center. However, where on-street parking is utilized, the palmettos may be
planted in openings of three feet by three feet, with eight-foot-wide sidewalks
serving the parallel parking areas. See Figures 156.1038-1, 156.1038-2, and
156.1038-3.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13123.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13125.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13127.png]
 
   (E)   Lot frontage.
      (1)   On Coleman Boulevard between its intersection with Lansing Drive
and its intersection with Chuck Dawley Boulevard, the minimum building frontage
on properties of less than 100 feet is 100% of its frontage, except for
adequate allowance for one curb cut. The total required building frontage may
be accomplished through a phased development plan.
      (2)   For properties with more than 100 feet of frontage on the
boulevards, a minimum of 70% building frontage is required. The total required
building frontage may be accomplished through a phased development plan.
      (3)   Pocket parks, plazas, and other civic open spaces that are
integrated into the overall design of a project count for up to 20% of the
required building frontage.
      (4)   The minimum allowable size of a pocket park or other suitable civic
open space is 12 feet of frontage and 300 square feet of overall area.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1039 JOHNNIE DODDS BOULEVARD STANDARDS.
   (A)   Bufferyards.
      (1)   Scenic Highway Buffer (Mathis Ferry Road). See §
156.607.
      (2)   Right-of-way bufferyard. Three canopy trees of a minimum-four-inch
caliper are required for each 100 linear feet of street frontage, using species
such as southern red oak, live oak, willow oak, elm varieties, and American
beech. These trees must be consistent along each block and evenly spaced, with
exceptions made for curb cuts, utilities, and other obstructions.
      (3)   Perimeter bufferyards.
         (a)   In general, perimeter bufferyard requirements on individual lots
are specified in Subchapter D, Part 2. However, contingent upon approval
through the design review process, development utilizing an integrated site
plan involving multiple parcels may forgo perimeter bufferyards along lot
lines, except when commercial uses abut residential uses lying outside the VSP-
OD. In the latter case, a minimum ten-foot, Type C bufferyard, with an F3
fence, is required in all instances. This buffer may overlap with the required
side and/or rear yard setback.
         (b)   Perimeter bufferyards are not required where common wall
construction to adjacent properties spanning property lines is utilized in
accordance with applicable Building and Fire Code requirements.
   (B)   Pedestrian trails.
      (1)   A key component of the VSP-OD in the Johnnie Dodds Boulevard area
is the provision of an integrated pedestrian and bicycle access plan through
sidewalks and trails. This system is graphically depicted in Figure 156.1039-1:
Pedestrian Trails.
      (2)   Dedication of easements and construction for sidewalks and
pedestrian trails on development parcels may be required in the approval
process to implement this pedestrian and bicycle access system.
      (3)   In addition to the pedestrian trail system, Figure 156.1039-1:
Pedestrian Trails illustrates areas suitable for open space and parks.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13129.png]
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1040 CHUCK DAWLEY BOULEVARD STANDARDS.
   (A)   Right-of-way bufferyards. Three canopy trees of a minimum four-inch
caliper are required for each 100 linear feet of street frontage, using species
such as southern red oak, live oak, willow oak, elm varieties, and American
beech. These trees must be consistent along each block and evenly spaced, with
exceptions made for curb cuts, utilities, and other obstructions.
   (B)   Perimeter bufferyards.
      (1)   In general, perimeter bufferyard requirements on individual lots
are specified in
Subchapter D, Part 2. However, contingent upon approval through the design
review process, developme nt utilizing an integrated site plan involving
multiple parcels may forgo perimeter bufferyard s along lot lines, except when
commercia l uses abut residential uses lying outside the VSP-OD. In the latter
case, a minimum ten-foot, Type C bufferyard, with an F3 fence, is required in
all instances. This buffer may overlap with the required side and/or rear yard
setback.
      (2)   Perimeter bufferyards are not required where common wall
construction to adjacent properties spanning property lines is utilized in
accordance with applicable Building and Fire Code requirements.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1041 SUPPLEMENTAL BUILDING DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Primary façade and entry orientation.
      (1)   Primary entry. For buildings with frontage on the boulevards or
frontage roads, the primary entry must be from Coleman Boulevard, Ben Sawyer
Boulevard, Johnnie Dodds Boulevard frontage road, or Chuck Dawley Boulevard.
Rear of buildings shall not be designed to appear as fronts. Display windows
are required on all street facades for retail buildings. Other commercial or
office buildings shall adhere to the requirements of §
156.899(D)(4). Second floor and above, with a separate entrance from the first
floor, shall have primary entrance from the primary street, when feasible.
Buildings, businesses, and residences facing side streets should have entrances
from the side street.
      (2)   Secondary entry. Secondary entrances from the rear of a store may
be allowed; however, this area may not be treated as a storefront in detailing
or pedestrian amenities.
   (B)   Elevated buildings. In order to project a pedestrian-friendly
streetscape, it is highly recommended that alternatives to elevating commercial
buildings located in "A" flood zones be pursued. This may be accomplished by
flood proofing or altering the elevation of the finished floor inside the
building. However, in the event that these techniques are not feasible and the
building must be elevated, such elevation may not exceed the minimum elevation
required plus one foot of additional freeboard; provided further, that this
provision does not apply to a parking garage located in a flood zone.
   (C)   False second floors. False second floors are not allowed for buildings
in which multiple stories are required. However, a mezzanine comprising one-
third of the area of the floor below, or an atrium located between the floor
and ceiling equivalent to two-story spaces, may be utilized to fulfill this
requirement.
   (D)   Parking lot areas and facilities.
      (1)   Parking lot requirements for multi-family, mixed use, and non-
residential uses.
         (a)   Ground level parking in buildings and parking structures is
permitted, if the street level frontage of the building complies with the
requirements outlined in this subsection.
         (b)   In no case shall ground level parking lots occupy more than one-
third of a lot’s frontage along a pedestrian street or street segment;
excluding primary and secondary entries.
         (c)   Parking and exterior loading areas shall be buffered from any
adjacent pedestrian way by planting canopy trees and providing a landscaped
area with a continuous row of high shrubs, or a fence or seating wall, subject
to the design review process.
         (d)   On private property, pervious materials, other than loose rock
or gravel, may be utilized for required parking spaces and parking drive
aisles, subject to the design review process.
      (2)   Parking structures. When possible, parking structures (garages)
shall be placed in the center of the block and may utilize ground floor
parking. See Figure 156.1041-1: Parking Structure Location.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13131.png]
   ( E)    Access and connectivity.
      (1 )   R esident ial uses, including detached single-family dwellings,
duplex dwellings, and townhouse dwellings.
         (a)   Units on the second floor and above must have a direct access to
the street. This access may be created through the use of a single or multiple
lobby(ies) that access the street level.
         (b)   Where duplex or townhouse dwellings may be approved along any
boulevard streets, requirements for sidewalks and street tree plantings shall
be in accordance with the specifications of the respective sub-area.
         (c)   Parking in structures not located mid-block shall be above the
ground floor or behind the storefront or residential uses, if located on the
ground floor as described below.
            1.   If located to the side of a building, the parking structure
must be set back from the front of that building and have an architectural
façade.
            2.    Slopi ng floor s shall not be visible from primary streets.
            3.   Retail storefronts, residences, or other business uses on
street level shall be required on street frontages of parking structures to
provide vitality.
            4.   Vehicular access shall be from side streets or alleys wherever
possible, and not directly from the primary street.
      (2)   Incentive for parking structures. There shall be no maximum parking
requirements for commercial uses if a parking structure is utilized on site.
      (3)   Parking for outdoor dining. Parking for outdoor dining shall be
determined by the minimum number of off-street parking spaces required for
restaurant use in
Subchapter F, Part 2 and not based upon square footage of outdoor use area.
   (F)   Vehicular access.
      (1)   Access points to the boulevards shall look like streets, with
identifiable features including pavement markings, sidewalks and crosswalks,
planting strips, and canopy trees, distinguishable from parking lot entrances,
as illustrated in the figures below.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13133.png]
 
      (2)   Shared vehicular access is encouraged; the benefit is more frontage
and more developable land on parcels.
      (3)   Residential uses, including detached single-family dwellings,
duplex dwellings, and townhouse dwellings. In cases where single-family lots
are subdivided with access to an existing public street, access for parking
must be located to the rear of the lots (alley-fed). Driveways for individual
dwelling units may not be located on existing public streets.
   (G)   Drive-through uses.
      (1)   Because driving culture is not compatible with the walkability
goals of the Village Scale Pedestrian area, drive-through facilities are
generally discouraged, and may need to be located internal to sites, behind
other road-front buildings that meet the goals of the standards.
      (2)   Drive-through lanes are prohibited within the activity zone.
      (3)   Drive-through lanes shall not present impediments to the smooth and
orderly flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic to or within the site.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1042 THROUGH 156.1054 RESERVED.
SUBPART 4.4: SHEM CREEK WATERFRONT  SPECIAL DESIGN SUBAREA
§ 156.1055 APPLICABILITY.
   In addition to the requirements of the town’s commercial design standards
described in
Subchapter H, Part 2 and Part 3, the design standards in this subpart apply for
all development within the Shem Creek Waterfront Districts.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1056 SUPPLEMENTAL BUILDING DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   Buildings shall front on Shem Creek;
      (2)   Avoid monolithic massing and create visual variety;
      (3)   Provide variation in cornice and/or eave height along Shem Creek;
      (4)   Vary building elevation, using step-backs or other changes in
building massing to limit continuous repetitive facades; and
      (5)   Vary building height, roof slope, and roof details.
   (B)   Building edge and massing.
      (1)   The building edge must be maintained for at least 75% of any
frontage on Shem Creek; and
      (2)   Continuous repetitive facades must be limited to 50 feet along
building fronts.
   (C)   View plane.
      (1)   A view plane for Shem Creek or marsh frontages shall be defined,
beyond which no building element shall penetrate, determined by maximum
allowable façade height at the minimum building setback line, starting at a
height of 25 feet along this line, at an angle of 30 degrees upward from the
horizontal.
      (2)   Building façades shall be no closer to Shem Creek than the minimum
setback defined below in this section and no further than 15 feet beyond the
resulting minimum building setback.
   (D)   Rooflines.
      (1)   Roofs must maintain a sloped or gabled design.
      (2)   However, a flat roof may be provided at the center of a structure
solely for the purpose of housing required mechanical equipment and associated
services areas not accessible by the public.
      (3)   Roofing materials shall be metal standing seam, terne metal,
corrugated or 5-V crimp metal.
   (E)   Materials.
      (1)   Primary building materials. Primary building materials shall be
wood. For the purposes of this division, wood shall refer to wood, cementitious
siding, and other synthetic materials meant to facilitate the appearance of
wood siding as described herein.
      (2)   Secondary building materials. Secondary building materials shall be
wood except as provided below:
         (a)   Limited use of 5-V crimp, corrugated, standing seam terne metal,
or standing seam copper architectural metal cladding, may be incorporated into
the overall building composition when used as an architectural accent and when
found to meet the intent of this section. Such architectural cladding will
exhibit features, such as quality architectural materials, a natural finish,
and concealed fasteners.
         (b)   Metal cladding shall not constitute more than 50% of any façade.
   (F)   Elevated buildings.
      (1)   Buildings in flood zones.
         (a)   In order to project a pedestrian-friendly streetscape, it is
highly recommended that alternatives to elevating commercial buildings located
in “AE” flood zones be pursued. This may be accomplished by floodproofing or
altering the elevation of the finished floor inside the building. However, in
the event that these techniques are not feasible, and the building must be
elevated, such elevation may not exceed the minimum elevation required by Town
of Mount Pleasant flood damage prevention regulations.
         (b)   All elevated buildings shall utilize traditional building design
elements such as doors and window openings to give the appearance of a
traditional ground floor where those façades are most visible from the public
view to the extent allowed by Town of Mount Pleasant flood damage prevention
ordinances.
         (c)   Where flood damage prevention ordinances prohibit or severely
limit the use of architectural treatments to create the appearance of a ground
floor, landscaping should be used to screen the ground floor area.
      (2)   Open space and parks. Passive parks, plazas or public gathering
spaces should be utilized to facilitate a vibrant, pedestrian-friendly
streetscape between the street and building façade of elevated buildings.
      (3)   Street furniture. Street furniture shall be utilized in passive
parks, plazas, or public gathering spaces between the street and building
façade of elevated buildings to enhance and facilitate the pedestrian
experience.
      (4)   Parking design standards.
         (a)   Stand up curbing will not be required within parking lots;
however concrete wheel stops shall be used to border and define drive aisles,
where determined necessary. Alternative curbing substitutes shall be reviewed
through the design review process.
         (b)   Diamond-shaped planter islands (minimum 36-inch width), which
must include Sabal palms or single-stem Crape myrtles, shall be placed every 36
feet within a row of parking, both internally and when adjacent to rear and
side property lines. The planter will be placed in the center of the
intersection of four parking spaces. The equidistant placement of this planter
will provide vegetation in the parking area, without detracting from parking
counts. See Figure 156.1056-1: Diamond-Shaped Planter Island.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13135.png]
         ( c)   Planter islands are not required to terminate parking rows.
         ( d)   Gravel parking is permitted as a suitable material. However,
accessible parking stalls must meet IBC standards in which gravel is not
permitted.
      (5)    Buffer and landscaping vegetation requirements.
         ( a)   Natural habitats. As the Shem Creek area is a noted habitat
containing wetlands and estuaries housing migratory birds, required landscaping
shall be native or bird-friendly species, with an intention to create or
augment habitat areas.
         (b)   Perimeter buffers only. In the interest of meeting the
district's intent of both pedestrian interconnectivity and accommodation of
parking, internal buffers will not be required between neighboring properties
within the districts, except for the following conditions.
            1.   A five-foot A-type bufferyard (two canopy trees, three
understory, five shrubs per 100 feet linear) with native or bird-friendly
vegetation shall be required around the outer perimeter of each district and
along the following district streets: Coleman Blvd., Mill St., and Haddrell.
            2.   If a conflict in application of requirements exists, the
district's specific buffer requirements shall apply first; Planned Development
district zoning specific requirements second; and requirements of Subchapter D
third.
      (6)   Site furnishings and miscellaneous.
         (a)   Bike racks will be required to be installed at each commercial
establishment in conjunction with any site or building additions, renovations,
or remodels.
         (b)   Mobile raised planters are encouraged to help define outdoor
activity space within the perimeter of a property. Planters are not permitted
to obstruct pedestrian interconnectivity or prohibit interaction with the
public realm as approved through the design review process.
   (G)   Parking. The applicant must propose a parking design plan for
consideration as part of the design review process.
      (1)   No more than 10% of surface parking areas shall be covered by
impervious surfaces, as defined in Subchapter N.
      (2)   For the uses listed below, the following requirements apply:
         (a)   Restaurant: 1.25 parking spaces per 100 square feet.
         (b)   Lodging: one parking space per room
         (c)   Office: one parking space per 200 square feet.
         (d)   Except as provided in division (G)(2)(f) below, kayak and
paddleboard rentals:
            1.   One parking space per four individual watercrafts available
for use by customers; and
            2.   One parking space per two full time employees
         (e)   Except as provided in division (G)(2)(f) below, charter boats,
water taxis, and other excursions:
            1.   One parking space per four individual passenger capacity
available for use by customers; and
            2.   One parking space per two employees.
         (f)   Kayak and paddleboard rentals, charter boats, water taxis, and
other water-related excursions land uses may satisfy the above requirements by
either:
            1.   Providing shuttle services to all customers; or
            2.   Providing required parking on an adjacent parcel, which may be
separated by a local road.
         (g)   For all other land uses, minimum parking provided must be as
specified in Subchapter F, Part 2.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1057 THROUGH 156.1074 RESERVED.
SUBCHAPTER I: PROCEDURES
PART 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.1075 PURPOSE.
   The purposes of this subchapter are to:
   (A)   Consolidate the procedures and outline clear standards for filing and
processing applications for zoning approvals required by this chapter; and
   (B)   Allow applicants, town officials, and the public to quickly and
efficiently ascertain the steps involved in obtaining zoning approvals.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1076 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This subchapter establishes the procedures for the initiation, review,
and decision for all zoning permits or approvals required by this chapter.
   (B)   This subchapter establishes the procedures for the administration of
this chapter and amendments to this chapter.
   (C)   
Chapter 157: Development Agreement Code sets forth the procedures for
establishment and amendment of Development Agreements.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1077 SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES.
   Table 156.1077-1: Summary of Procedures summarizes the procedures
established in this subchapter.
Table 156.1077-1: Summary of Procedures
Key: Staff = PLAN Department Staff | TRCC = Technical Review and Code
Compliance Team | PC = Planning Commission | BOZA = Board of Zoning
Appeals | DRB = Design Review Board | HDPC = Historic District
Preservation Commission | TC = Town Council | <> = Public Hearing
Required | R = Review Body |
D = Decision-Making Body | A = Appeals Body
          Reviewing, Decision-Making, and Appeal Bodies
Procedure Staff TRCC PC BOZA DRB HDP C TC
Table 156.1077-1: Summary of Procedures
Key: Staff = PLAN Department Staff | TRCC = Technical Review and Code
Compliance Team | PC = Planning Commission | BOZA = Board of Zoning Appeals |
DRB = Design Review Board | HDPC = Historic District Preservation Commission |
TC = Town Council | <> = Public Hearing Required | R = Review Body |
D = Decision-Making Body | A = Appeals Body
                                  Reviewing, Decision-Making, and Appeal Bodies
Procedure                         Staff TRCC PC  BOZA DRB  HDP C TC
Annexation                        R                              D
Initial zoning                    R          <>                  D
Comprehensive plan and future     R          R                   <D >
land use map amendments
Zoning map amendments (rezonings) R          <R>                 D
Zoning permits                    D              <A>
Special exception use permits     R              <D>
Impact assessments                R          R                   D
Technical review and code               R
compliance
Design review for major projects  R                   D
Design review for minor projects  D                   <A >
Certificates of appropriateness   R                        <D >
for major work
Certificates of appropriateness   D                        <A >
for minor work
Demolition by neglect             R                        <D >
Variances                         R              <D>
Zoning code interpretations       D              <A>
Appeals of administrative                        <D>
decisions
Text amendments                   R          <R>                 D
Small wireless facilities         See
applications                      Subchapter C, Part 7, Subpart 7.1
Telecommunications towers         See
applications                      Subchapter C, Part 7, Subpart 7.2
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1078 GENERAL PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS AND AUTHORITY.
   (A)   General requirements.
      (1)   Application forms. All applications shall be made on forms
maintained for each permit or approval by the PLAN Department, which are
available online or in-person at Town Hall.
      (2)   Submittal requirements. Applications filed under this subchapter
must include the information required by
Subchapter I, Part 2,
including all information required on the application checklist maintained by
the PLAN Department for the particular permit or approval.
      (3)   Application fees. The applicant shall pay all applicable fees at
the time of the application (see §
156.1101).
   (B)   Concurrent applications. Except where this subchapter allows submittal
of concurrent applications, only one application at a time can be considered
for a particular lot.
   (C)   Conformance with application and submitted plans. Zoning permits and
other approvals issued on the basis of plans and applications approved under
this chapter authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in
the approved plans and applications, and do not authorize any other use,
arrangement, or construction.
   (D)   Written findings.
      (1)   Unless otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, written
findings are not required for a final decision on any application.
      (2)   At the request of an applicant or a party with standing to
challenge an application under the South Carolina Local Government
Comprehensive Planning Enabling Act of 1994, codified as S.C. Code Title 6,
Chapter 29, or on its own initiative, the approving authority may make a
decision subject to the subsequent adoption of written findings. In those
cases, the decision is not final until the written findings are adopted.
   (E)   Workflow summary. This subchapter sets up rules for procedures, such
as pre-application meetings, notices, and public hearings. It then describes
the process for specific zoning-related decisions. The procedures generally
share a common workflow and description, as specified in
Table 156.1078-1: Procedure Workflows.
Table 156.1078-1: Procedure Workflows
Element Meaning
Table 156.1078-1: Procedure Workflows
Element           Meaning
Purpose           Explains the reasons for a particular procedure.
Applicability     Identifies the type of development or situation that is
                  subject to the process.
Initiation        Describes how the applicant begins the process, including
                  which department or official receives the application.
Completeness      Describes how the town determines the application has
                  sufficient information to be processed.
Notice            Describes the type of notice required and how it is provided.
Decision          States who approves the application and the type of
                  proceeding that leads to the decision.
Review criteria   Specifies the standards that apply to the application.
                  Identifies the activities the application authorizes. For
Scope of approval example, some approvals send the applicant to the next step
                  in the overall process, while others authorize construction
                  or use.
                  If an application is denied or withdrawn, some processes have
Reapplication     a waiting period before that type of application can be re-
                  filed for the property.
Appeals           Provides a way to review an application that is denied or an
                  approval that has conditions the applicant disagrees with.
                  Some procedures have specific requirements for maintaining
Recordkeeping     records of applications and actions, which are included in
                  this subchapter. Town record retention policies govern other
                  recordkeeping requirements.
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1079 PRE-APPLICATION MEETING.
   (A)   Applicability.
      (1)   Pre-application meetings are required for the following types of
applications:
         (a)   Zoning map amendments (rezonings), if the application is filed
by the property owner or their agent;
         (b)   Special exception use permits;
         (c)   Impact assessments;
         (d)   Certificates of appropriateness; and
         (e)   Variances.
      (2)   Pre-application meetings for all other procedures are voluntary. An
applicant may request a pre-application meeting for any type of procedure
established by this subchapter.
      (3)   PLAN Department staff may waive the pre-application meeting
requirement upon finding the applicant has sufficient familiarity with the
approval process that a pre-application meeting would not serve a valid
purpose.
   (B)   Timing.
      (1)   The pre-application meeting must occur prior to application
submittal.
      (2)   Prior to the scheduled pre-application meeting, the applicant shall
submit to the PLAN Department a copy of plans and information relevant to the
application.
   (C)   Meeting location. Pre-application meetings may occur in-person, by
telephone, or by other remote meeting technology.
   (D)   Topics for meeting.
      (1)   The pre-application meeting is for informational purposes for the
applicant and PLAN Department staff, and no formal decisions are made.
      (2)   The applicant shall provide a brief overview of the project,
including proposed location, uses, densities, project layout, design features,
and other information relevant to the application.
      (3)   PLAN Department staff will provide information and comments at the
pre-application meeting but will not take formal action on the application. In
addition to providing verbal information, PLAN Department staff may provide a
pre-application meeting checklist.
      (4)   The applicant’s and PLAN Department staffs’ comments are for
purposes of information but are not binding on either the town or the
applicant.
      (5)   A submittal checklist item may be waived as part of this review if
determined to be unnecessary, already known, or needed at a future stage.
      (6)   The pre-application meeting may include the following:
         (a)   Discussion of the extent to which the proposed application
conforms to this chapter and other applicable regulations;
         (b)   A discussion of technical studies, plans, and other information
deemed relevant to the specific application request;
         (c)   A discussion regarding possible modifications to the
application, if warranted;
         (d)   Discussion of the anticipated level of citizen interest;
         (e)   Identification of public hearing or meeting requirements, if
applicable; and
         (f)   A discussion of the general project consistency with the
Comprehensive Plan.
      (7)   PLAN Department staff may request input on the proposed application
from other town departments, state agencies, utility providers, and other
reviewing agencies.
   (E)   Documentation. PLAN Department staff may record in writing (paper or
electronic) any pertinent information concerning the proposed application
described by the applicant, as well as a brief record of written or verbal
guidance provided by town staff or other reviewing agencies.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1080 COMPLETENESS REVIEW.
   (A)   When applications deemed complete.
      (1)   The town will not process incomplete applications.
      (2)   An application is not complete until the applicant submits all
required items (see
Subchapter I, Part 2).
      (3)   PLAN Department staff will review applications for completeness and
determine whether the application is complete.
         (a)   If staff determines an application is incomplete, staff may:
            1.   Reject the application and require the applicant to resubmit a
new application; or
            2.   Specify those parts of the application that are incomplete,
indicate how such parts can be made complete, and specify a date by which the
applicant must provide the missing information in order for the application to
be considered.
         (b)   Staff and the other review and decision-making bodies are not
obligated to further review the application until the required information is
provided.
      (4)   A time period required by this chapter to process an application
does not commence until PLAN Department staff determines the applicant has
submitted a complete application. Review for completeness of the application is
solely to determine whether preliminary information required for submission
with the application is sufficient to allow further processing. It does not
constitute a decision as to whether an application complies with this chapter.
      (5)   If the applicant elects not to pursue an application for any
reason, the application expires 180 days after the application filing date and
the applicant must re-file an application (including payment of any applicable
fees) for any further consideration.
      (6)   The regulations provided in
Subchapter I, Part 20 and Part 19 modify the completeness review provisions of
this section.
   (B)   Application and submittal deadlines.
      (1)   The PLAN Department or the review and decision-making bodies may
provide submission deadlines for materials required in support of any
application provided for in this chapter. These deadlines are typically
published annually on the boards and commissions meeting schedule.
      (2)   Compliance with those deadlines required by the PLAN Department or
the review and decision-making bodies must occur for the application to be
placed on an agenda to be heard by the review or decision-making body.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1081 PRELIMINARY STAFF REVIEW.
   (A)   Some application types, such as impact assessments and planned
development district text amendments, require preliminary staff review.
   (B)   The purpose of preliminary staff review is to provide an opportunity
for staff to review and provide comments on more complex applications, and for
the applicant to address staff’s comments prior to submittal of the application
for board or commission review. Preliminary staff reviews do not result in an
approval or disapproval of the application or create a vested right.
   (C)   The applicant must submit a complete application for preliminary staff
review on or before the next board or commission application deadline date
specified on the annual meeting schedule.
   (D)   Department of Planning, Land Use, and Neighborhoods staff will review
the proposed application and provide written comments to the applicant prior to
the next board or commission application deadline. Staff may also schedule a
meeting with the applicant to review these written comments, with such meeting
to occur prior to the next board or commission application deadline.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1082 NOTICE PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   This section establishes various requirements for public notice of
applications. This section does not address general notice requirements for
board and commission meetings, which are specified in S.C. Code § 30-4-80:
Notice of meetings of public bodies.
      (2)   Table 156.1082-1: Type and Description of Notice, describes the
various types of notice and its contents. More specific notice requirements are
located in each procedural section.
 
Table 156.1082-1: Type and Description of Notice
Type of Notice Description
               PLAN Department staff will mail the required notices. Regular
Mail           mail is sufficient unless certified mail is required by a
               specific process or state law. Notices to property owners will
               be mailed to the owner listed in Charleston County tax records.
               PLAN Department staff will post at least one sign on the subject
Posted         lot(s) visible from each public street the lot abuts when
               required by state or local ordinance.
Publication    PLAN Department staff will place a notice in a newspaper of
               general circulation in the town.
 
   (B)   Posted notice.
      (1)   Posting by town. If posted notice is required, town staff will post
at least one notice sign in a conspicuous location on the subject lot(s)
visible from each public street the lot abuts.
      (2)   Maintenance by applicant.
         (a)   Once notice is posted on the subject property or properties by
town staff, the property owner or applicant is responsible for maintaining the
signs up until the hearing.
         (b)   If the sign or signs are removed, become damaged and unreadable,
or are not visible from each street that abuts the property after posting by
town staff for the advertised hearing date, the hearing may be postponed upon
motion and affirmative vote of the decision-making body to postpone, at which
time the hearing must be re-advertised at the expense of the applicant. The
application shall not be rescheduled until the applicant has reimbursed the
town for this cost.
   (C)   Written notification policy. The PLAN Department shall maintain a
written notification policy that may be amended from time to time. This policy
may include additional notice requirements that exceed minimum South Carolina
statutory requirements and the requirements of this code.
   (D)   Substantial compliance. All notice provisions require substantial
compliance.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1083 REMOVAL OF APPLICATIONS FROM A MEETING AGENDA.
   Staff may remove an application from a meeting agenda, even if the
application was complete and submitted on time, if:
   (A)   The application is missing information that could significantly change
the proposed development plan; or
   (B)   A variance or special exception use permit is necessary to accommodate
the proposed use or development plan.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1084 PUBLIC HEARINGS.
   (A)   Purpose. A public hearing gives interested parties an opportunity to
be heard. Public hearings are distinct from public meetings. A public meeting
is open to the public but does not necessarily include an opportunity for the
public to provide input.
   (B)   Public input and recordkeeping. If an application requires a public
hearing:
      (1)   The review or decision-making body, as applicable, shall allow the
applicant and all other interested members of the public a reasonable and fair
opportunity to be heard.
      (2)   The review or decision-making body’s Recording Secretary shall make
an accurate written summary of the proceedings.
   (C)   Rules of procedure for public hearings. The Town Council, Board of
Zoning Appeals, Planning Commission, and Historic District Preservation
Commission may adopt rules of procedure for public hearings by resolution or
bylaws.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1085 MODIFICATIONS TO APPROVED APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Proposed modifications require review. When an applicant proposes a
modification to an application approved under this subchapter, the Zoning
Administrator shall determine whether the modification is minor and can be
administratively approved or is major and must be reviewed through the
applicable procedure in this subchapter.
   (B)   Modifications to Planned Development District ordinances. Any
modification to a Planned Development District ordinance requires review
through the same procedure as the original application (see
Subchapter I, Part 6).
   (C)   Modifications to all other applications.
      (1)   For all other application types, a major modification includes:
         (a)   A change to the site that affects the number of primary
structures, building location, or location of required site design elements
such as parking, open space, or site access;
         (b)   A change in height of the building(s) by more than ten feet or
one story;
         (c)   A 10% or greater change to the building footprint, density, or
intensity of uses;
         (d)   A 5% or greater change to lot coverage;
         (e)   A change in the architecture, exterior elevation of the building
(s), or type or style of dwelling units proposed to be constructed in a
particular area or block; and
         (f)   A change of more than 5% to areas devoted to open space or the
relocation of such areas.
      (2)   Major modifications require review through the same procedure as
the original application.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1086 BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   A building permit is required prior to the construction of any
building, including accessory buildings.
   (B)   Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy:
      (1)   Clearing and repair of public facilities, including all stormwater
storage facilities, site work, and permanent erosion control features, shall be
reviewed for satisfactory completion and conformance with the approved site
plan and permit requirements;
      (2)   Easements disturbed without approval during the construction
process shall be restored to pre-permit conditions.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1087 REVIEW OF DECISIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS.
   (A)   The Zoning Administrator shall provide an annual report to the Town
Council on decisions of the Board of Zoning Appeals under Subchapter I, Part 17
and code interpretations rendered under
Subchapter I, Part 16.
   (B)   The report shall include any recommendations for amendments to this
chapter needed for consistency with these decisions.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1088 MORATORIA.
   (A)   Generally. A moratorium on development is justified in certain
circumstances and can be implemented to prevent property owners from hindering
and/or circumventing the zoning process.
   (B)   Authorization. The town may implement a moratorium using the process
specified in S.C. Code § 6-1-110, if deemed necessary and proper by Town
Council.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1089 THROUGH 156.1094 RESERVED.
PART 2: SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 156.1095 PURPOSE.
   This part establishes the information that applications must include in
order to be considered complete for review under this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1096 FORMAT OF APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Digital copies required. The applicant shall submit one complete
digital copy of all application materials.
   (B)   Paper copies may be required by staff. The applicant shall also
provide up to four complete paper copies of all application materials if
requested by PLAN Department staff.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1097 AUTHORIZATION OF AGENT.
   All applications for consideration by a board or commission shall include a
signed property owner acknowledgement form for applications to boards and
commissions authorizing the agent to act on the owner’s behalf, if an agent of
a lot owner submits an application on the owner’s behalf.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1098 APPLICATION CHECKLISTS.
   (A)   The PLAN Department maintains application submittal requirements
checklists for each type of procedure described in this subchapter. Each
application must include all elements required by this chapter and the
applicable checklist.
   (B)   This subchapter specifies additional submittal requirements for
certain procedures, such as impact assessments.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1099 RECORDED RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS.
   (A)   Pursuant to the provisions of S.C. Code § 6-29-1145, the applicant for
a development approval (permit) shall confirm that the activity for which
approval has been requested is not restricted by any recorded covenant that is
contrary to, conflicts with, or prohibits the activity, by signing a
development approval application (permit): recorded covenant affidavit or, for
online applications, indicating that fact where required on the application
form.
   (B)   If it has actual notice of the existence of a recorded covenant that
is contrary to, conflicts with, or prohibits the activity for which approval
has been requested, either from information in the affidavit, from materials or
information submitted by the applicant, or from any other source, including
other property holders, the town shall immediately cease processing the
application, request, or permit, and shall not approve the same unless
confirmation from the applicant is received that the restrictive covenant has
been released, by action of the appropriate authority or property holders, or
by court order.
   (C)   As used in this section:
      (1)   ACTUAL NOTICE is not constructive notice of documents filed in the
local offices concerning the property, and does not require the town to conduct
searches in any records offices for filed restrictive covenants;
      (2)   PERMIT does not mean an authorization to build or place a structure
on a tract or parcel of land, and expressly applies only to applications or
requests for approval of the following:
         (a)   Zoning map amendments;
         (b)   Variances;
         (c)   Special exception use permits; and
         (d)   Impact assessments.
      (3)   RESTRICTIVE COVENANT does not mean a restriction concerning a type
of structure that may be built or placed on a tract or parcel of land.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1100 PERMITS REQUIRED BY OTHER AGENCIES.
   (A)   Proof of permits to be provided with application. The applicant for
any permit under this chapter shall submit one complete digital (PDF) copy of
all final approvals required from any other local, state, and/or federal
permitting agencies. All approvals must be demonstrated to be up-to-date and in
effect.
   (B)   Permit not issued at time of application. In cases where the final
permitting agency approval has not been rendered at the time a town application
is submitted, the applicant shall provide one complete digital (PDF) copy of
the application submitted to other permitting agencies. Once final approval is
received, the applicant shall provide one complete digital (PDF) copy of the
permit to town staff prior to the start of operations.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1101 FEES.
   (A)   Fees established. The Department of Planning, Land Use, and
Neighborhoods Fee Schedule establishes fees for all applications required by
the Zoning Code and is updated when Town Council adopts new fees.
   (B)   Fees required. All applicable fees must be paid for an application to
be considered complete for review.
   (C)   Fee for re-advertising a public hearing.
      (1)   The applicant must pay the expense for posting the property and
publication to re-advertise the public hearing if:
         (a)   The applicant requests a deferral or delay of a public hearing;
or
         (b)   A public hearing does not proceed because the posted notice
signs have been removed, became damaged and unreadable, or were not visible
from each street that abuts the property after posting by town staff for the
advertised hearing date.
      (2)   The application may not be rescheduled until the applicant has
reimbursed the town for this cost.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1102 THROUGH 156.1109 RESERVED.
PART 3: ANNEXATION AND INITIAL ZONING
§ 156.1110 PURPOSE.
   This part describes how lots in unincorporated areas are annexed into the
Town of Mount Pleasant.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1111 APPLICABILITY.
   This part applies to any petition to expand the town’s municipal boundary.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1112 INITIATION.
   (A)   Annexation. An annexation petition is initiated in accordance with the
applicable requirements of S.C. Code Title 5, Chapter 3.
   (B)   Initial zoning.
      (1)   If the annexation petition is not accompanied by an application for
initial zoning:
         (a)   The initial zoning is applied in accordance with the procedure
in this part;
         (b)   The lot(s) proposed for annexation shall be zoned R-1,
Residential District, except as specified in division (B)(2) below; and
         (c)   The lot(s) proposed for annexation shall be incorporated into
any applicable overlay district, unless the applicant explicitly requests
exclusion of the lot(s) from the overlay district. In such cases, Town Council
decides whether to include or exclude the lot(s) from the overlay district.
      (2)   If the annexation petition is not accompanied by an application for
initial zoning and the future land use map designation of the lot(s) is:
         (a)   Rural Residential (Rural Neighborhoods in the text), then the
lot(s) shall be zoned RR, Rural Residential District;
         (b)   Settlement Community, then the lot(s) shall be zoned CC,
Community Conservation District;
         (c)   Recreation Open Space, then the lot(s) shall be zoned CR-O,
Conservation- Recreation-Open Space District; or
         (d)   Conservation, Marsh, and Wetlands (Conservation Open Space in
the text), then the lot(s) shall be zoned CO, Conservation-Open Space District.
All marsh, marsh islands, and other islands annexed into the town shall be
zoned CO, Conservation-Open Space District.
      (3)   If the annexation petition is accompanied by an application for
initial zoning:
         (a)   The initial zoning request follows the procedure specified in
Subchapter I, Part 6;
         (b)   The proposed zoning district should be in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan; and
         (c)   The initial zoning application should include a request for the
lot(s) to be included in any applicable overlay districts; however, the
applicant may request exclusion of the lot(s) from the overlay district(s).
Town Council decides whether to include or exclude the lot(s) from the overlay
district(s).
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1113 COMPLETENESS.
   See §
156.1080.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1114 NOTICE.
   (A)   Public notice may be required for an annexation petition, as specified
in S.C. Code Title 5, Chapter 3.
   (B)   Public notice is required for the initial zoning associated with an
annexation petition in accordance with Table 156.1114-1: Required Notice for
Initial Zoning.
 
Table 156.1114-1: Required Notice for Initial Zoning
   Key: N/A = not applicable
Type         Required To Whom        When
Mail         No       N/A            N/A
Posted       Yes      General public At least 15 days prior to public hearing
Publicatio n Yes      General public At least 15 days prior to public hearing
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1115 DECISION.
   (A)   Public hearing on initial zoning only.
      (1)   The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the initial
zoning associated with an annexation petition. Since the initial zoning is
automatically applied in accordance with §
156.1112(B)(1) and (B)(2), the Planning Commission does not provide a
recommendation on the initial zoning.
      (2)   The Planning Commission does not hold a public hearing or make a
recommendation on the annexation petition.
   (B)   Town Council decision.
      (1)   Following the Planning Commission’s public hearing, Town Council
shall approve or disapprove the annexation petition. If Council approves the
annexation petition, the initial zoning automatically applies as provided in §
156.1112(B)(1) and (B)(2) unless the applicant has submitted an initial zoning
application as allowed by §
156.1112(B)(3).
         (a)   If Town Council feels the circumstances of the case warrant a
second public hearing, then it may vote to hold one.
         (b)   Town Council may defer the matter for further consideration or
remand the matter back to its Planning and Development Committee or Planning
Commission for further study and recommendation.
      (2)   Town Council may amend the Zoning Map to provide for initial zoning
of an annexed lot through the procedures specified in Chapter 30 of the Mount
Pleasant Code of Ordinances.
      (3)   After a period of six months, if readings of the annexation
petition and initial zoning are not finalized, the petition becomes null and
void, rescinding any Town Council action on the request. Resubmission of the
petition shall be processed as a new application with prescribed fees and all
other requirements met.
   (C)   Postponement requests and application withdrawals.
      (1)   Withdrawal of an annexation petition and initial zoning prior to
the advertisement for its initial public hearing or posting of the property is
considered as a termination of the petition. Resubmission of the petition shall
be processed as a new application with prescribed fees and all other
requirements met.
      (2)   A postponement request or withdrawal of an annexation petition and
initial zoning that occurs between the time of published advertisement of the
public hearing or posting of the property and the public hearing proceedings
shall be treated as a request denial. Reapplication is subject to a one-year
waiting period, unless granted a waiver by Council, as specified in §
156.1343.
      (3)   In either case, amendment processing shall terminate upon receipt
of written notice from the applicant or owner.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1116 REVIEW CRITERIA.
   In making its decision, Town Council shall consider the following factors:
   (A)   The relationship of the proposed annexation to the Comprehensive Plan;
   (B)   The fiscal impact of providing municipal services;
   (C)   Consideration of the annexation area’s existing conditions and
potential future needs for expansion or improvement of utility and
transportation infrastructure;
   (D)   Whether the town can efficiently and effectively provide services,
such as police and fire protection and trash collection;
   (E)   Whether annexation will create a tax burden or measurably reduce the
level of service(s) provided to existing citizens and property owners;
   (F)   Whether the proposed annexation creates new enclaves of unincorporated
area surrounded by the municipality; and
   (G)   Any other factors Town Council deems appropriate.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1117 SCOPE OF APPROVAL.
   (A)   Approval of an annexation petition and initial zoning becomes
effective immediately upon final reading by Town Council and the lot(s) is
subject to all laws and regulations of the Town of Mount Pleasant.
   (B)   Approval of an annexation petition and initial zoning does not
authorize development. Any development that occurs after annexation requires
additional approval, which may include site plan or subdivision plat approval,
if applicable, and building permits and certificates of occupancy.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1118 REAPPLICATION.
   (A)   When Town Council disapproves an annexation petition, the petition may
not be initiated on the same parcel or any part thereof for a period of 12
months, irrespective of change(s) in ownership;
      (1)   However, after receipt of written petition by the property owner(s)
or other body authorized to submit an annexation petition stating how
conditions have changed substantially in the community since prior
consideration of the annexation petition so as to justify another review, Town
Council may, on a case-by-case basis, waive the waiting period requirements by
a vote of a majority of members present and voting in favor, and direct PLAN
Department staff in writing to process the application.
      (2)   Denial of the petition is final. The one-year waiting period shall
be met before further consideration of a change in zoning district
classification.
   (B)   Resubmittal of an annexation petition shall be processed as a new
application with all fees specified in §
156.1101.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1119 APPEALS.
   This chapter does not authorize new rights to an appeal from or remedies for
adverse decisions by Town Council, but interested parties may pursue existing
remedies from the Circuit Court.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1120 RECORDKEEPING.
   (A)   Annexation petitions shall be assigned a file number and recorded in
the zoning GIS layer (see §
156.022). The initial zoning for the annexed lot(s) shall be depicted on the
Zoning Map.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of all annexation
petitions and related materials.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1121 THROUGH 156.1124 RESERVED.
PART 4: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN ADOPTION
§ 156.1125 PURPOSE.
   This part describes how the town adopts a new Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1126 APPLICABILITY.
   This part applies to the adoption of a new Comprehensive Plan. S.C. Code §
6-29-510(E) requires the town to update all elements of the Comprehensive Plan
at least every ten years. See
Subchapter I, Part 5 for the procedure to amend the current Comprehensive Plan
and Future Land Use Map.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1127 INITIATION.
   (A)   The process to create a new Comprehensive Plan may be initiated by:
      (1)   The Town Council, by adoption of a motion;
      (2)   The Planning Commission, by adoption of a motion; or
      (3)   Recommendation of the PLAN Department.
   (B)   Once the town has initiated the process to create a new Comprehensive
Plan, it may develop the plan as it deems appropriate. This may include the use
of advisory committees as authorized by S.C. Code § 6-29-520(A).
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1128 COMPLETENESS.
   The town initiates this procedure without an application, so §
156.1080 does not apply.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1129 NOTICE.
   The notice specified in Table 156.1129-1 is required for adoption of the
Comprehensive Plan.
 
Table 156.1129-1: Required Notice for   Comprehensive Plan Adoption
   Key: N/A = not applicable
Type         Required To Whom        When
Mail         No       N/A            N/A
Posted       No       N/A            N/A
Publicatio n Yes      General public At least 30 days prior to public hearing
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1130 DECISION.
   (A)   Planning Commission.
      (1)   Recommendation of the Comprehensive Plan or any element must be by
resolution of the Planning Commission, carried by the affirmative votes of at
least a majority of the entire membership. The resolution must refer expressly
to maps and other descriptive matter intended by the Planning Commission to
form the whole or element of the recommended plan.
      (2)   The Planning Commission may recommend the adoption of the plan as a
whole or elements of the plan. The elements shall correspond with the major
geographical sections or divisions of the planning area or with functional
subdivisions of the subject matter of the Comprehensive Plan, or both.
      (3)   The Planning Commission Secretary shall provide a copy of the
recommended Comprehensive Plan or element to the Town Council and all other
legislative or administrative agencies affected by the Plan.
   (B)   Town Council.
      (1)   The Town Council shall conduct a public hearing on the
Comprehensive Plan or element, as applicable, prior to adoption.
      (2)   The Town Council may adopt the Comprehensive Plan as a whole by a
single ordinance or elements of the plan by successive ordinances. The elements
shall correspond with the major geographical sections or divisions of the
planning area or with functional subdivisions of the subject matter of the
Comprehensive Plan, or both.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1131 REVIEW CRITERIA.
   Adoption of a new Comprehensive Plan is not subject to specific review
criteria. The Comprehensive Plan establishes the community’s long-term vision
for Mount Pleasant and establishes policies related to land use, housing,
transportation, economic development, natural and cultural resources, community
facilities, public infrastructure and facilities, and community resilience.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1132 SCOPE OF APPROVAL.
   Adoption of the Comprehensive Plan is a formal statement of town policy. It
does not authorize or require specific actions as a result.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1133 REAPPLICATION.
   The town initiates this procedure without an application, so this section
does not apply.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1134 APPEALS.
   This chapter does not authorize new rights to an appeal from or remedies for
adverse decisions by the Town Council, but interested parties may pursue
existing remedies from the Circuit Court.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1135 RECORDKEEPING.
   (A)   When the Town Council adopts a new Comprehensive Plan, it shall
maintain at least one physical copy at Town Hall for public review and shall
post a digital copy on the town website.
   (B)   When the Town Council adopts a new Future Land Use Map, the PLAN
Director works with the Information Technology Division of the Finance and
Corporate Services Department to update the Future Land Use GIS layer.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1136 THROUGH 156.1139 RESERVED.
PART 5: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND FUTURE LAND USE MAP AMENDMENTS
§ 156.1140 PURPOSE.
   This part describes how the town makes changes to the Comprehensive Plan.
For example, an applicant may use this procedure to ask the town to change the
future land use category designated on the Future Land Use Map for a specific
lot. Also, S.C. Code § 6-29-510(E) requires the Planning Commission to review
the Comprehensive Plan or elements of it as often as necessary, but at least
once every five years, to determine whether changes in the amount, kind, or
direction of development of the area or other reasons make it desirable to
amend the plan.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1141 APPLICABILITY.
   This part applies to any request to amend the Comprehensive Plan, including
amendments to the Future Land Use Map.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1142 INITIATION.
   (A)   The process to amend any part of the adopted Comprehensive Plan may be
initiated by:
      (1)   The Town Council, by adoption of a motion;
      (2)   The Planning Commission, by adoption of a motion; or
      (3)   Recommendation of the PLAN Department.
   (B)   The process to amend the Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map may be
initiated by any of the agencies specified in division (A) above, or by any
property owner in the Town of Mount Pleasant.
      (1)   A property owner may only request a change in the Future Land Use
Map designation of their lot(s).
      (2)   When a property owner submits a Future Land Use Map Amendment
application, the property owner may concurrently submit a zoning map amendment
(rezoning) application (see Subchapter I, Part 6) for consistency with the
proposed Future Land Use Map amendment, if the current zoning is inconsistent
with the proposed Future Land Use Map designation.
   (C)   An application for a Comprehensive Plan or Future Land Use Map
amendment is filed with the PLAN Department.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1143 COMPLETENESS
   When a property owner submits a Future Land Use Map amendment application, §
156.1080 applies.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1144 NOTICE.
   The notice specified in Table 156.1144-1 is required for a Comprehensive
Plan or Future Land Use Map amendment application.
 
Table 156.1144-1: Required Notice for  Comprehensive Plan and Future Land
Use Map Amendments
   Key: N/A = not applicable
Type        Required To Whom        When
Mail        No       N/A            N/A
Posted      No       N/A            N/A
Publication Yes      General public At least 30 days prior to public hearing
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1145 DECISION.
   (A)   Planning Commission.
      (1)   The Planning Commission shall consider the request and provide a
recommendation.
      (2)   For Comprehensive Plan amendments, the Commission shall provide a
recommendation for approval, approval with modifications, or disapproval of the
proposed amendment.
      (3)   For Future Land Use Map amendments, the Commission shall provide a
recommendation for approval or disapproval of the proposed amendment.
      (4)   Recommendation of a Comprehensive Plan amendment must be by
resolution of the Planning Commission, carried by the affirmative votes of at
least a majority of the entire membership.
   (B)   Town Council.
      (1)   The Town Council shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed
amendment prior to adoption.
      (2)   For Comprehensive Plan Amendments, the Town Council shall approve,
approve with modifications, or disapprove the proposed amendment.
      (3)   For Future Land Use Map amendments, the Town Council shall approve
or disapprove the proposed amendment.
      (4)   The Town Council may, on its own motion or at the applicant’s
request, defer its decision and table the request for not more than 60 calendar
days from the date of the public hearing to consider other information that may
have a direct bearing on the decision.
      (5)   If the Town Council elects to table the request, the tabling shall
specifically state the meeting date at which the proposed amendment shall
reappear on the Town Council agenda. Further notice is not required.
      (6)   Approval of a Comprehensive Plan or Future Land Use Map amendment
requires a supermajority (75%) of voting members of Town Council. When
calculating the number of votes required to achieve a 75% supermajority, any
fraction is rounded up to the next highest whole number.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1146 REVIEW CRITERIA.
   In considering any Comprehensive Plan or Future Land Use Map amendment
application, the Planning Commission and Town Council shall consider the
following criteria:
   (A)   Whether the proposed amendment is consistent with other policies and
recommendations in the Comprehensive Plan;
   (B)   Whether the proposed amendment is consistent with other adopted town
plans and policies relevant to the application;
   (C)   Whether the amendment is consistent with sound planning principles;
and
   (D)   Any other factors the Commission or Council deem appropriate.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1147 SCOPE OF APPROVAL.
   A Comprehensive Plan or Future Land Use Map amendment is a formal change in
town policy. It does not authorize or require specific actions as a result.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1148 REAPPLICATION.
   When Town Council disapproves a Comprehensive Plan or Future Land Use Map
amendment application, the same amendment may not be initiated for a period of
12 months.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1149 APPEALS.
   This chapter does not authorize new rights to an appeal from or remedies for
adverse decisions by the Town Council, but interested parties may pursue
existing remedies from the Circuit Court.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1150 RECORDKEEPING.
   (A)   When the Town Council approves changes to the text of the
Comprehensive Plan, the PLAN Director updates the Comprehensive Plan to include
these changes or adds the changes as an appendix to the Plan, as appropriate.
   (B)   When the Town Council approves changes to the Future Land Use Map, the
PLAN Director updates the Future Land Use GIS layer.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1151 THROUGH 156.1154 RESERVED.
PART 6: ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS (REZONINGS)
§ 156.1155 PURPOSE.
   This part describes the way the town changes the zoning classification of a
lot.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1156 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This part applies to any proposal to amend the Zoning Map, including
any proposal to establish a new Planned Development (PD) District. In
accordance with S.C. Code § 6-29-740, any request involving the establishment
of a PD District or is considered an amendment to this chapter.
   (B)   Amendments to existing PD Districts follow the procedure specified in
Subchapter I, Part 18.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1157 INITIATION.
   (A)   Applicant eligibility. A Zoning Map amendment application may be
initiated by:
      (1)   Town Council by adoption of a motion;
      (2)   Planning Commission by adoption of a motion;
      (3)   The owner of the subject property, or their agent; and
      (4)   The Zoning Administrator.
   (B)   Pre-application meeting. A pre-application meeting is required, if the
application is filed by the property owner or their agent (see §
156.1079).
   (C)   Application requirements.
      (1)   A Zoning Map Amendment application is filed with the PLAN
Department on or before the Planning Commission application deadline specified
on the annual meeting schedule. Applications may be filed electronically.
      (2)   Only one Zoning Map amendment application pertaining to the same
property shall be considered at a time.
   (D)   Zoning Map amendments for Planned Development Districts.
      (1)   Planned Development District Zoning Map amendment applications are
first submitted for preliminary staff review (see §
156.1081).
      (2)   Following preliminary staff review, the Planned Development
District text amendment application is submitted in accordance with §
156.1337(B)(1).
      (3)   If a proposed Planned Development District text amendment
application involves the text of a development agreement proposed or adopted
pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 157, the applicant must submit the complete application at least 56
days prior to the meeting at which the Planning Commission will consider the
amendment.
   (E)   Town-initiated rezoning.
      (1)   When the Town Council or the Planning Commission initiates a
rezoning, PLAN Department staff will notify the owners of the property by
written notice by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. The
letter must be mailed at least 21 days prior to the Planning Commission public
hearing on the rezoning.
      (2)   If the addressee of any required notice under this section fails or
refuses to accept or sign a return receipt for the notice, or the notice is
returned undelivered, the notice may be served by regular mail, deposited in
the United States mail, properly stamped, to the address used by the addressee
for tax purposes, or the notice may be served in any manner permitted under
Rule 4 of the South Carolina Rules of Civil Procedure, and an affidavit of the
official required to give the notice, setting forth the time and manner of
service of the notice, will be conclusive evidence of the giving of the notice
under this section.
      (3)   Posted notice on each affected parcel is not required for town-
initiated rezoning for large areas. Notice for rezoning of large areas will be
posted at prominent locations and intersections.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1158 COMPLETENESS.
   See §
156.1080.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1159 NOTICE.
   The notice specified in Table 156.1159-1 is required for a Zoning Map
amendment application.
 
Table 156.1159-1: Required Notice for Zoning Map Amendments
   Key: N/A = not applicable
Type        Required To Whom        When
Mail        No       N/A            N/A
Posted      Yes      General public At least 15 days prior to public hearing
Publication Yes      General public At least 15 days prior to public hearing
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1160 DECISION.
   (A)   Planning Commission review and recommendation.
      (1)   The Planning Commission shall review all Zoning Map amendment
applications and prepare a report and recommendation, stating its findings and
its evaluation of the proposed amendment. In making its report, the Commission
shall consider the criteria specified in §
156.1161.
      (2)   The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing. From the
closing date of the public hearing, the Commission has 30 days in which to
submit its report and recommendation to Town Council. A public hearing by the
Commission shall not be extended for more than a period of 30 days. Once a
public hearing begins, it must be closed no later than 30 days from the
commencement date.
      (3)   If the Commission fails to submit its report to Town Council within
the required 30 days, it is deemed to have recommended approval of the
proposal.
   (B)   Town Council decision.
      (1)   Town Council may amend the Zoning Map through the procedures
specified in Chapter 30 of the Mount Pleasant Code of Ordinances.
      (2)   Following the recommendation of the Planning Commission, Council
shall approve or disapprove the proposed amendment. In rendering its decision,
Town Council shall consider, but is not bound by, the recommendation of the
Planning Commission.
         (a)   If Town Council feels the circumstances of the case warrant a
second public hearing, then it may vote to hold one.
         (b)   Town Council may defer the matter for further consideration or
remand the matter back to its Planning and Development Committee or Planning
Commission for further study and recommendation.
      (3)   No change in or departure from the Zoning Map Amendment as
recommended by the Planning Commission may be made pursuant to the hearing
unless the change or departure is first submitted to the Planning Commission
for review and recommendation.
      (4)   After a period of six months from the Planning Commission
recommendation, if readings of the Zoning Map Amendment application are not
finalized, the application becomes null and void, rescinding any Town Council
action on the request. Any further Council action on the same request that has
been denied or expires requires a public hearing by the Planning Commission
before Town Council acts upon subsequent readings of the amending ordinance.
   (C)   Postponement requests and application withdrawals.
      (1)   Withdrawal of a Zoning Map amendment application prior to the
advertisement for its initial public hearing or posting of the property is
considered as a termination of the application. Resubmission of applications
shall be processed as a new application with prescribed fees and all other
requirements met.
      (2)   A postponement request or withdrawal of a Zoning Map amendment
application that occurs between the time of published advertisement of the
public hearing or posting of the property and the public hearing proceedings
shall be treated as a request denial. Reapplication is subject to a one-year
waiting period, unless granted a waiver by Council, as specified in §
156.1343.
      (3)   In either case, amendment processing shall terminate upon receipt
of written notice from the applicant or owner.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1161 REVIEW CRITERIA.
   (A)   As a matter of policy, Town Council shall not approve a Zoning Map
amendment application, except:
      (1)   Where necessary to implement the Comprehensive Plan;
      (2)   To correct an original mistake, a manifest error in the
regulations;
      (3)   To recognize substantial change or changing conditions or
circumstances in a particular locality; or
      (4)   To recognize changes in technology, the style of living, or manner
of doing business.
   (B)   In making its decision, Town Council shall consider the following
factors, as applicable:
      (1)   The relationship of the proposed Zoning Map amendment application
to the Comprehensive Plan and Future Land Use Map;
      (2)   Whether the request supports or contradicts the Comprehensive Plan;
      (3)   The relationship of the proposed Zoning Map amendment to other
relevant plans adopted by the town;
      (4)   Whether the uses allowed by the proposed change would be
appropriate in the area concerned;
      (5)   Whether adequate public school facilities, roads, and other public
services exist or can be provided to serve the needs of the development likely
to take place as a result of such change, and the consequences of such change;
      (6)   Whether the proposed change is in accordance with any existing or
proposed plans for providing public water supply and sanitary sewers to the
area;
      (7)   The amount of vacant land currently classified for similar
development in the vicinity and elsewhere in the town, and any special
circumstances that may make a substantial part of such vacant land unavailable
for development;
      (8)   Whether the proposed Zoning Map amendment is consistent with
Chapter 155;
      (9)   Whether the proposed Zoning Map amendment is consistent with best
practices for community planning and design; and
      (10)   Whether public necessity, safety, or general welfare justifies the
Zoning Map amendment.
   (C)   When a Zoning Map amendment application includes property located
within the boundaries of an overlay district, the application will be
considered in context with the purpose of the overlay district.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1162 SCOPE OF APPROVAL.
   (A)   A Zoning Map Amendment becomes effective immediately upon final
reading by Town Council.
   (B)   Approval of a Zoning Map amendment application does not authorize
development. Any development that occurs after the Zoning Map amendment is
adopted requires additional approval, which may include site plan or
subdivision plat approval, if applicable, and building permits and certificates
of occupancy.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1163 REAPPLICATION.
   (A)   When Town Council disapproves a Zoning Map amendment application, the
same amendment may not be initiated on the same parcel or any part thereof for
a period of 12 months, irrespective of change(s) in ownership;
      (1)   However, after receipt of written petition by the property owner(s)
or other body authorized to submit a Zoning Map amendment application stating
how conditions have changed substantially in the community since prior
consideration of the Zoning Map amendment application so as to justify another
review, Town Council may, on a case- by-case basis, waive the waiting period
requirements by a vote of a majority of members present and voting in favor,
and direct PLAN Department staff in writing to process the application.
      (2)   Denial of the petition is final. The one-year waiting period shall
be met before further consideration of a change in zoning district
classification.
   (B)   Resubmittal of a Zoning Map amendment application shall be processed
as a new application with all fees specified in §
156.1101.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1164 APPEALS.
   This chapter does not authorize new rights to an appeal from or remedies for
adverse decisions by Town Council, but interested parties may pursue existing
remedies from the Circuit Court.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1165 RECORDKEEPING.
   (A)   Zoning Map amendments shall be assigned a file number and recorded in
the zoning GIS layer (see §
156.022).
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of all Zoning Map
amendment applications and related materials.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1166 THROUGH 156.1169 RESERVED.
PART 7: ZONING PERMITS
§ 156.1170 PURPOSE.
   The zoning permit procedure allows the Zoning Administrator to review new
uses, structures, activities, and developments prior to establishment of the
use or commencement of development activities to ensure they:
   (A)   Comply with the standards in this chapter;
   (B)   Have appropriate design and infrastructure; and
   (C)   Comply with any conditions of approval required by other procedures,
such as design review, special exception use permits, and variances.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1171 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This part applies to an application for zoning permit approval. Unless
elsewhere exempted by this chapter, an applicant shall obtain a zoning permit
prior to:
      (1)   Clearing, excavating, or filling of any lot for any site
improvements;
      (2)   Constructing any building, or commencing construction of any
building on an already prepared lot;
      (3)   Commencing the moving or alteration of any building;
      (4)   Establishing a new principal use, including conditional uses and
special exception uses;
      (5)   Changing one existing principal use to another;
      (6)   Reestablishing a use after a period of non-use of 180 days or more;
      (7)   Establishing a new accessory use, including conditional accessory
uses;
      (8)   Establishing a temporary use;
      (9)   Removing a protected tree on a developed lot;
      (10)   Removing vegetation other than invasive species or initiating land
disturbance activity of any kind in a critical area buffer, wetland buffer, or
historical and cultural resources buffer;
      (11)   Erecting, moving, altering, replacing, or changing copy on (except
on readerboard signs) any sign;
      (12)   Issuance of a building permit, if applicable; and
      (13)   Issuance of a business license, if applicable.
   (B)   Zoning permit applications for communications towers or small wireless
facilities are subject to the requirements in this part and in Subchapter I,
Parts 19 and 20, as applicable.
   (C)   This part does not apply to the construction of fences seven feet in
height or less, unless they are:
      (1)   Constructed of brick, stone, or concrete; or
      (2)   Located on a corner lot along one or more lot lines adjacent to a
street right-of-way.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1172 INITIATION.
   (A)   Applicant eligibility. A zoning permit application may be initiated
by:
      (1)   The property owner or tenant of the subject property; or
      (2)   An agent of the property owner or tenant of the subject property.
   (B)   Application requirements.
      (1)   Generally. A zoning permit application is filed with the PLAN
Department. Applications may be filed electronically or in-person.
      (2)   Site plan.
         (a)   A site plan with adequate detail of features such as building
layout, setbacks, easements, parking, circulation systems, tree protection
zones, and buffers must be submitted in conjunction with the zoning permit
application.
         (b)   An application filed without an adequate site plan is considered
incomplete, unless the Zoning Administrator determines a site plan is not
necessary for the particular proposal. The Zoning Administrator may make such
determination when the applicant can demonstrate compliance with this chapter
through other means.
   (C)   Concurrent applications. A zoning permit application may be filed
concurrently with a building permit application.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1173 COMPLETENESS.
   See §
156.1080.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1174 NOTICE.
   Notice is not required for a zoning permit.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1175 DECISION.
   The Zoning Administrator reviews and approves or disapproves a zoning permit
application.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1176 REVIEW CRITERIA.
   (A)   The Zoning Administrator shall review the zoning permit application
for compliance with applicable provisions of the Zoning Code.
   (B)   When a zoning permit application includes two or more lots proposed
for development as a single, unified site, all setback and screening
requirements apply only to the exterior lot lines of the unified development
site and not to internal lot lines within the unified site, unless otherwise
required by another procedure.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1177 SCOPE OF APPROVAL.
   Approval of a zoning permit application authorizes:
   (A)   The Building Official to issue a building permit for the proposed
construction, if applicable;
   (B)   The Business License Official to issue a business license for the
proposed use, if applicable; and
   (C)   The applicant to proceed with the use or development described in the
approved zoning permit application.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1178 REAPPLICATION.
   There is no time limit on refiling a withdrawn or disapproved zoning permit
application.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1179 APPEALS.
   The Zoning Administrator’s decision on a zoning permit application may be
appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with
Subchapter I, Part 17.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1180 RECORDKEEPING.
   The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of all zoning permit
applications and related materials.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1181 THROUGH 156.1184 RESERVED.
PART 8: SHORT-TERM RENTAL PERMITS
§ 156.1185 CROSS-REFERENCE TO APPLICABLE PROCEDURE.
   The procedure for establishment of a short-term rental is specified in
Subchapter C, Part 6.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1186 THROUGH 156.1199 RESERVED.
PART 9: SPECIAL EXCEPTION USE PERMITS
§ 156.1200 PURPOSE.
   Some land uses, buildings, or structures are not appropriate under all
circumstances in a given zoning district but may be appropriate if adequate
precautions are taken to assure compatibility with surrounding uses, public
need, and the town as a whole. This part allows such uses through a special
exception use permit.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1201 APPLICABILITY.
   This part applies to an application for a special exception use permit. An
applicant shall obtain a special exception use permit before changing a use to
or establishing a new use that is designated as a special exception use for the
zoning district, as shown in §
156.338.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1202 INITIATION.
   (A)   Applicant eligibility. A special exception use permit application may
be initiated by:
      (1)   The property owner or tenant of the property proposed for the use;
or
      (2)   An agent of the property owner or tenant of the property proposed
for the use.
   (B)   Pre-application meeting. A pre-application meeting is required (see §
156.1079).
   (C)   Application requirements.
      (1)   A special exception use permit application is filed with the PLAN
Department on or before the Board of Zoning Appeals application deadline
specified on the annual meeting schedule. Applications may be filed
electronically or in-person.
      (2)   A conceptual site plan with adequate detail of features such as
building layout, setbacks, easements, parking, circulation systems, and buffers
must be submitted in conjunction with the special exception use permit
application. An application filed without an adequate conceptual site plan is
considered incomplete.
   (D)   Effect on other proceedings. A special exception use permit request
that would correct a zoning violation stays all legal proceedings by the town
on the zoning violation, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board
of Zoning Appeals, after the special exception use permit application has been
filed, that a stay would cause an imminent peril to life and property. In cases
where there is an imminent peril to life and property, proceedings will not be
stayed unless a restraining order is granted by the Board or by a court of
record on application.
   (E)   Consideration for Planning Commission and Town Council procedures. As
a matter of process and procedure, proposed developments involving applications
for special exception uses that also require separate review by the Planning
Commission and/or separate Town Council approval, shall not be considered by
the Board of Zoning Appeals until the referenced review and/or approval is
completed.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1203 COMPLETENESS.
   See §
156.1080.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1204 NOTICE.
   (A)   The notice specified in Table 156.1204-1 is required for a special
exception use permit application.
   (B)   If the Board remands a special exception use permit request to the
Zoning Administrator for further review, the Board may set a hearing without
further public notice for a time certain within 60 days unless otherwise agreed
to by the parties. The Board must maintain a list of persons who express an
interest in being informed when the remanded matter is set for rehearing, and
notice of the rehearing must be mailed to these persons before the rehearing.
 
Table 156.1204-1: Required Notice for Special Exception Use Permit
Applications
   Key: N/A = not applicable
Type         Required To Whom             When
Mail         Yes      Parties in interest Due notice
Posted       Yes      General public      Prior to public hearing
Publicatio n Yes      General public      At least 15 days prior to public
                                          hearing
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1205 DECISION.
   (A)   The Board of Zoning Appeals will hear all applications for special
exception use permits and will render a decision in each matter.
   (B)   The Board will hear a special exception use request within 60 days of
the date the application is deemed complete.
   (C)   At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by
attorney.
   (D)   The burden of proof for the relief sought is upon the applicant.
   (E)   Based on the hearing and probable impact of the proposed use on
surrounding uses and conditions, the Board may approve, approve with
conditions, or disapprove the request. The Board may approve a special
exception use permit application subject to such reasonable terms and
conditions as it may consider necessary to accomplish the intent of this part
and this entire Zoning Code.
   (F)   On its own motion or the motion of a party, the Board may remand a
special exception use permit request to the Zoning Administrator if the Board
determines the record is insufficient for review. special exception use permit
applications that are remanded must be rescheduled for hearing within 60 days
unless the parties agree on an extension.
   (G)   The Board will issue a written decision within 45 days of the final
hearing on the matter.
   (H)   All final decisions or orders of the Board will be delivered to
parties-in-interest by certified mail.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1206 REVIEW CRITERIA.
   (A)   In considering an application for a special exception use permit, the
Board shall:
      (1)   Apply the standards for the proposed special exception use as set
out in
Subchapter C, Part 3, Subpart 3.3; and
      (2)   Use the following general criteria for judging the compatibility of
the proposal with the surrounding area:
         (a)   Adequate provision is made for such items as setbacks, fences,
and buffer or planting strips to protect adjacent properties from the possible
adverse influence of the proposed use, such as noise, vibration, dust, glare,
odor, traffic congestion, and similar factors;
         (b)   Vehicular traffic and pedestrian movement on adjacent roads is
not hindered or endangered;
         (c)   Off-street parking and loading areas and the entrance(s) and
exit(s) of these areas are adequate in terms of location, amount, design, and
construction to serve the proposed use; and
         (d)   The proposed use is compatible with existing uses to the extent
that such use will not adversely affect the level of property values, general
character, or general welfare of the nearby area.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1207 SCOPE OF APPROVAL.
   (A)   Generally. An approved special exception use permit application does
not authorize construction or development. All special exception uses also
require zoning permit approval, following approval by the Board of Zoning
Appeals and prior to the establishment of the use.
   (B)   Approval based on submitted plans.
      (1)   Unless specifically modified by the Board's approval, the special
exception use must be established in accordance with the specific plans
submitted with the application.
      (2)   Minor changes to the approved plans that do not affect the approval
granted may be allowed in order to meet other code requirements, if approved by
the Zoning Administrator.
      (3)   Routine repairs and maintenance may be made to a structure
constructed pursuant to special exception use permit approval as required to
preserve it in sound condition. Any proposed changes to the structure shall be
presented to the Board Secretary for a determination as to whether a new
application is required.
   (C)   Vested rights.
      (1)   In order to complete additional applications and receive the
necessary permits for construction, special exception use permits are vested
for a period of two years, subject to the rights and restrictions contained
within this title.
      (2)   Failure to receive the necessary permits within the prescribed
timeframe renders the special exception use permit approval void and of no
force or effect.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1208 REAPPLICATION.
   (A)   For a period of 12 months, the Board shall not accept a special
exception use permit application for a matter upon which it has rendered a
final decision, except as provided in the Board’s rules of procedure.
   (B)   Prior to the lapse of the 12-month timeframe and upon a majority vote
ascertaining changed facts or circumstances, the Board may accept such a
special exception permit application for consideration.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1209 APPEALS.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   A person who may have a substantial interest in any decision of the
Board of Zoning Appeals, or an officer or agent of the Town of Mount Pleasant,
may appeal from a decision of the Board to the Circuit Court of Charleston
County, by filing with the Clerk of Court a petition, in writing, setting forth
plainly, fully, and distinctly why the decision is contrary to law. The appeal
must be filed within 30 days after the decision of the Board is mailed.
      (2)   A property owner whose land is the subject of a decision of the
Board of Zoning Appeals may appeal either:
         (a)   As provided in this division (A); or
         (b)   By filing a notice of appeal with the Circuit Court, accompanied
by a request for pre-litigation mediation in accordance with S.C. Code § 6-29-
825. Any notice of appeal and request for pre-litigation mediation must be
filed within 30 days after the decision of the Board is postmarked.
   (B)   Notice of appeal and transcript. Upon the filing of the appeal, the
Clerk of the Circuit Court shall give immediate notice of it to the Secretary
of the Board and, within 30 days from the time of the notice, the Board shall
file with the Clerk a certified copy of the proceedings held before the Board
of Zoning Appeals, including a transcript of the evidence heard before it, if
any, and the decision of the Board, including its findings of fact and
conclusions.
   (C)   Supersedeas. The filing of an appeal in the Circuit Court from a
decision of the Board shall not ipso facto act as a supersedeas, but the judge
of the Circuit Court may, at their discretion, grant a supersedeas upon such
terms and conditions as may seem reasonable and proper.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1210 RECORDKEEPING.
   (A)   The Board will keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of
each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating the
fact.
   (B)   The Board will issue a written decision to all parties involved in the
matter.
   (C)   All final decisions and orders of the Board must be in writing and
permanently filed in the PLAN Department office as a public record. All
findings of fact and conclusions of law must be separately stated in final
decisions or orders of the Board, which must be delivered to parties of
interest by certified mail.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1211 THROUGH 156.1214 RESERVED.
PART 10: IMPACT ASSESSMENTS
§ 156.1215 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of an impact assessment is to provide a basis for assessing a
proposed major development project's favorable or unfavorable impact on the
town's overall environment and infrastructure, with an emphasis on
transportation, drainage, and service provision.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1216 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Minimum thresholds. Impact assessments are required for new
development and redevelopment that meet the following minimum thresholds:
      (1)   New development of land.
         (a)   An impact assessment is required when one or more of the
following conditions are met:
            1.   The proposed development is comprised of residential uses that
are projected to generate more than 75 peak hour vehicle trips; or
            2.   The proposed development is comprised of 40,000 square feet or
more of non-residential area, and is projected to generate more than more than
75 peak hour vehicle trips; or
            3.   The proposed development is comprised of a combination of
residential and non-residential uses such that the residential component only
is projected to generate more than 75 peak hour vehicle trips, and the non-
residential component consists of 40,000 square feet or more of area.
         (b)   Projected peak hour vehicle trips are determined by the Zoning
Administrator in consultation with the Director of Engineering and Development
Services.
         (c)   Calculations of total square footage of open venues for
entertainment, recreation, and civic uses, such as playing fields,
amphitheaters, or concert lawns, shall include the open area square footage.
      (2)   Redevelopment of improved property. An impact assessment is
required for redevelopment projects when the net increase in both peak hour
vehicle trips and building square footage meets the threshold requirements
specified in division (A)(1)(a) above. The impacts assessed shall be predicated
only upon the net increase of peak hour vehicle trips and building square
footage.
   (B)   Project phasing.
      (1)   The subdivision of a project into development phases, or any
staging proposals (irrespective of ownership), or subdivision of a larger
parcel into smaller parcels for sale or development, does not void the
requirement of an impact assessment for the overall project.
      (2)   In phased development projects, additional impact assessments may
be required, if the proposed development phase meets any of the minimum
threshold requirements.
      (3)   The determination of whether additional impact assessments are
required is made by the Zoning Administrator at the time of the developer's
additional plan approval request.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1217 INITIATION.
   (A)   Pre-application meeting. An applicant initiates the Impact Assessment
procedure by attending a pre-application meeting with staff from the PLAN
Department and the Department of Engineering and Development Services.
      (1)   During the pre-application meeting, the developer must identify the
type of development and size; access requirements; land use types and
densities; project phasing; and the anticipated build-out year for the proposed
development. The developer shall also present any available construction plans,
concept drawings, or figures of the proposed development.
      (2)   The developer shall also request any needed clarifications of the
remaining process. Town staff shall provide guidance concerning the
transportation impact assessment process (see §
156.1218(F)) and assist in identifying any additional information that is
required.
      (3)   It is not necessary for the applicant to complete the
transportation impact assessment data form (see §
156.1218(F)(3)) prior to the pre-application meeting, but having the requested
information readily available will make the meeting more productive.
   (B)   Transportation impact assessment process. The transportation impact
assessment process is initiated in accordance with §
156.1218(F)(2), which requires a pre-application meeting as specified in
division (A) above.
   (C)   Transportation impact assessment data form. Following the pre-
application meeting, the applicant must submit a complete transportation impact
assessment data form (see §
156.1218(F)(3)) at least eight weeks prior to the Planning Commission meeting
at which the impact assessment is anticipated to be considered.
   (D)   Preliminary staff review. Submittal of an impact assessment for
preliminary staff review (see §
156.1081) is required. Impact assessments submitted for preliminary staff
review are not required to include a complete traffic study, but traffic
summaries and anticipated mitigation should be provided for review.
   (E)   Impact assessment application submittal. Once the applicant has
completed the preliminary impact assessment review, they may submit a complete
impact assessment application for consideration by the Planning Commission and
Town Council. The application must be submitted on or before the Planning
Commission application deadline specified on the annual meeting schedule.
   (F)   Zoning requests.
      (1)   Requests for zoning of property proposed for annexation or rezoning
requests for property located within the municipal limits and for which no
specific development plan is contemplated do not require submittal for impact
assessment approval in conjunction with the zoning/rezoning request.
      (2)   However, if a specific development plan is contemplated that will
require impact assessment approval, the impact assessment may be submitted in
conjunction with the zoning/rezoning request.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1218 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Generally. The impact assessment shall be prepared by qualified
professionals pursuant to checklist forms devised and provided by the
Department of Planning, Land Use, and Neighborhoods, and shall include, but is
not limited to, the information specified in this section.
   (B)   Conceptual plan. The impact assessment shall be submitted with a
conceptual plan, the requirements of which are compiled in a checklist by the
Department of Planning, Land Use, and Neighborhoods, and may be subject to
alteration from time to time, as deemed necessary.
   (C)   General description of proposed major development project. Provide a
general written description of the proposed major development project. Include
in this description the proposed phases of development or operation and
facility utilization, target dates for each of these, and date of completion.
In addition:
      (1)   Indicate the site size, development staging, and appropriate
descriptive measures of the proposed project;
      (2)   Describe the relationship of the proposed development to the town
Comprehensive Plan's objectives and policies;
      (3)   Indicate the relationship to existing or proposed plans for public
facilities, such as parks and recreation, schools, transportation, wastewater
treatment, and the like; and
      (4)   Describe the relationship of the proposed project to any of the
town's special area management plans.
   (D)   Specific impacts on public facilities – water supply, and wastewater
management. Identify projected average daily potable water demands at the end
of each development phase. Specify any consumption rates that have been assumed
for the project. Provide a description of the volume and characteristics of
effluents.
   (E)   Specific impacts on public facilities – drainage. Provide the
following minimum requirements to adequately determine the impacts from changes
to the stormwater characteristics of the land:
      (1)   Current drainage pattern of the property, which shall include
topographic information represented with one-foot contours;
      (2)   Sub-watershed map identifying significant drainage features within
the nearest receiving waterbody drainage basin;
      (3)   When repetitive flood losses have been documented on FEMA reporting
forms within the sub-watershed basin, provide a hydrology analysis that
demonstrates no change in conditions upstream or downstream from the proposed
development;
      (4)   Water quality plan describing how the impairment will be addressed
during and after construction, when the receiving waterbody contains a total
maximum daily loading (TMDL) restriction, or when an impaired monitoring
station that is identified on the South Carolina Department of Environmental
Services Bureau of Water 303d list.
   (F)   Specific impacts on public facilities – transportation. The following
procedures shall be used to identify traffic impacts and mitigation strategies
associated with the proposed development project and may be referred to as the
“transportation impact assessment process.”
      (1)   Purpose.
         (a)   The purpose of this division (F) is to establish a process
allowing town staff and officials to better understand the relationship between
new development and the existing and proposed transportation infrastructure.
         (b)   It will provide a highly detailed analytical tool for the
identification of transportation deficiencies and corresponding mitigation
strategies addressing the impacts related to new development.
         (c)   The described analysis and resulting mitigation strategies are
predicated upon an accepted operational Level of Service D for suburban
population areas, as recommended in the town's adopted Transportation Plan as
included in the current Comprehensive Plan. It is not intended to provide
justification for the denial of individual development projects, per se, based
solely upon the inability to provide an operational Level of Service D to all
roadway segments identified as the transportation influence area described
herein.
      (2)   Transportation impact assessment process initiation. To engage in
the formal transportation impact assessment review process, the developer must
obtain a transportation impact assessment application package from the
Department of Engineering and Development Services, schedule a pre-application
meeting (see §
156.1217), and ultimately complete the application. The package will contain a
description of the review process, a checklist of required information, and a
transportation impact assessment data form.
      (3)   Transportation impact assessment data form.
         (a)   Once the pre-application meeting (see §
156.1217) is complete, the developer must submit a complete transportation
impact assessment data form to town staff. The purpose of the transportation
impact assessment data form is to provide town staff with sufficient
information regarding the proposed development to determine whether an impact
assessment is required, and what the general impact of the development may be
on the transportation system. The impact assessment data form will include, at
a minimum, the following information:
            1.   Name, address, and phone number of the owner, agent, and
developer of the property;
            2.   Name, address, and phone number of the qualified
transportation professional conducting the transportation impact assessment;
            3.   Name of the proposed development;
            4.   The location of the development (including a location map
clearly showing the roadways adjacent to the proposed project);
            5.   A description of the proposed project, including a site plan,
total developed area, types of land uses, and land use densities (i.e., gross
square footage of building space, dwelling units, employees);
            6.   A brief narrative describing the project, including phasing of
the project, anticipated build-out year, and access requirements; and
            7.   Trip generation characteristics.
         (b)   The layout and content of the form may be periodically modified
to ensure that town staff is requesting and obtaining the data necessary for
preliminary impact assessment review.
         (c)   Town staff shall determine whether the transportation impact
assessment data form is complete and notify the applicant appropriately. Only
proposed developments that have submitted complete transportation impact
assessment data forms at least eight weeks prior to the anticipated Planning
Commission meeting will be carried forward in the current batch of projects.
      (4)   Preliminary transportation impact assessment review.
         (a)   Review process.
            1.   For those projects carried forward in the process, town staff
shall conduct a preliminary review of the proposed development and provide the
applicant with the results.
            2.   Applicants will not only receive the preliminary review
results from their own proposal, but also those for other proposals currently
under review.
            3.   This will enable applicants to address the impacts of other
proposals currently under review in their transportation impact assessment
reports.
         (b)   Travel demand models and capacity spreadsheets. Town staff shall
use travel demand models and capacity spreadsheets in conducting the
preliminary impact reviews, using the travel demand modeling computer program
known as “QRS.”
         (c)   Travel demand modeling process.
            1.   Using QRS travel demand models, town staff shall estimate
traffic volume changes on the surrounding road network resulting from each
proposed development. The surrounding roadway network is comprised of the major
transportation facilities, as identified in the adopted Transportation Plan,
and consists of 76 separate roadway segments.
            2.   Using the land use densities (i.e., dwelling units, square
footage, employment data) and/or estimated vehicle trips included with the
transportation impact assessment data form, town staff shall modify the travel
demand model to include the proposed development.
            3.   Staff shall have QRS estimate the number of trips based on
socioeconomic data or, if data is provided on the transportation impact
assessment data form, define the proposed development as a point generator and
enter the total number of trips originating from that point.
            4.   Based on the location of the proposed development, staff shall
modify the data for the appropriate Traffic Analysis Zone (TAZ) within the
model. The model can then estimate the number of trips and distribute/assign
the trips onto the surrounding road network.
            5.   Once staff has modified and run the travel demand models,
modeled volumes will be imported into a capacity analysis spreadsheet. The
capacity spreadsheets indicate the maximum capacity of roadway segments and
track the consumption of capacity by existing volumes and volumes attributable
to approved or proposed developments. Maximum capacities shall be calculated
using Highway Capacity Manual methodology.
            6.   Volumes used for capacity evaluation are calculated by
applying modeled growth percentages to existing counts. Modeled volumes for the
most recent year for which counts are available shall serve as the base values
for estimating modeled growth percentages.
            7.   To assess the impacts of proposed development on the road
network, it is necessary to compare modeled volumes to those estimated for
developments that have been approved but not yet constructed. Growth
percentages shall be calculated for two conditions, approved projects and
proposed projects. (Proposed developments that are pending approval by the
Planning Commission or Town Council will be considered as approved for reviews
of the group of projects undergoing preliminary impact assessment reviews.)
            8.   The percent growth in modeled volumes shall then be applied to
existing traffic counts and converted to p.m. peak hour volumes, using existing
peak hour factors and directional splits. These volumes will then be compared
to existing roadway capacities in order to identify any potential roadway
deficiencies resulting from the proposed development.
            9.   After reviewing the results of the capacity analysis
spreadsheets, town staff will define the minimum area of influence to be used
in conducting a detailed traffic impact study for the proposed development. The
minimum area of influence shall be defined by identifying all road segments
with volumes attributable to the development exceeding 2% of the road segment's
available LOS D capacity.
            10.   Staff will notify the developer as to the limits of the
traffic impact study area, and any other analysis requirements to be included
in the traffic impact study prepared by the developer. An example of other
analysis requirements could include a.m. peak period analysis in the vicinity
of a school site to address operational and safety concerns, such as signal
provision/coordination or turn lane additions.
      (5)   Traffic impact study.
         (a)   Study area/minimum requirements.
            1.   The traffic impact study area shall be comprised of all areas
with adverse links. ADVERSE LINKS are defined as roadway segments in which the
projected trips added to the existing volume and committed trips (E + C) exceed
the LOS D capacity for that link.
            2.   Based on the limits of the traffic impact study area and any
other requirements specified by town staff, the developer shall conduct a
detailed traffic impact study for the proposed development.
            3.   The methodology and procedures used in the traffic impact
study must be in accordance with accepted engineering practices of the state
and approved by town staff. At a minimum, the traffic impact study must include
a summary of the trips the development will generate, capacity analysis of the
intersections and roadway segments contained within the study area,
identification of any roadway deficiencies caused by the development, and
proposed improvements for mitigating transportation network deficiencies, if
applicable.
         (b)   Application timeframe.
            1.   Once the traffic impact study has been completed, it shall be
submitted, along with other required documentation, to the town as part of the
transportation impact assessment application package.
            2.   The transportation impact assessment application package will
not be accepted earlier than 14 days from the time staff provides reports from
the preliminary impact assessment review.
      (6)   Transportation impact assessment application.
         (a)   The transportation impact assessment application package must
include a completed transportation impact assessment data form, site plan/
construction drawings, a description of land use types and densities, access
requirements, the traffic impact study report, and other information discussed
in the pre-application meeting.
            1.   Application packages will be reviewed in the order they are
received, based on time stamps that will be applied upon confirmation of
receipt of a complete package.
            2.   Town staff shall determine whether the developer has submitted
a complete application package.
            3.   Only proposed developments that meet established deadlines for
completed application packages will be carried forward in the current batch of
projects.
            4.   Projects that meet deadlines for the transportation impact
assessment data form, but fail to meet application package deadlines, shall
begin the impact assessment process from the start.
         (b)   A complete application package will include estimates of the
number of trips generated by the proposed development, including, if
appropriate, the estimated amount of vehicle trips generated by the proposed
development for each phase of the development and at build-out. The estimated
number of vehicle trips must be calculated for total daily and p.m. peak hours,
using the procedures outlined in the ITE Trip Generation Handbook.
            1.   Vehicle trips will be estimated using either ITE trip rates or
formulas contained in the latest edition of the ITE Trip Generation Manual.
            2.   Any other methods used for estimating vehicle trips must be
approved by the Director of Engineering and Development Services prior to
submitting the application package.
         (c)   The application package must include:
            1.   A detailed summary of the proposed land use types and
associated densities, ITE land use codes, and ITE trip rates/formulas;
            2.   A table summarizing the total daily and p.m. peak hour
vehicles trips generated by the proposed development by phase and build-out;
            3.   A distribution of the number of vehicle trips entering and
exiting the development for the p.m. peak hour;
            4.   A table summarizing assumed internal trip capture rates and
pass-by trips, if applicable; and
            5.   A brief narrative describing any assumptions made regarding
the estimation of vehicle trips, distribution, internal capture, and pass-by
trips.
      (7)   Staff review period.
         (a)   While town staff shall estimate the impacts of proposed
developments individually during the preliminary impact assessment review,
recommendations to local officials shall be based on the aggregate effects of
all projects in the current group of projects under review. (For the aggregate
analysis, only projects that have been previously approved by the Planning
Commission are considered “approved.”) Staff recommendations must be developed,
considering the information contained in the completed application packages and
the analysis of the aggregate impacts.
         (b)   Town staff must analyze the current proposed projects as a
group, using QRS models and capacity spreadsheets, according to the following
significance and adversity testing methodology.
            1.   Significance. The significance level is defined by the general
use of 2% of LOS D capacity for a given roadway link. When projected trips on
any given link exceed the 2% threshold, trips on the link are considered
significant. Provided, however, that trips on a link that already exceed the
LOS D capacity shall be exempt from consideration for mitigation, other than
site-specific safety and operational features, such as the provision of turn
lanes and/or signalization improvements.
            2.   Adverse. Adversity on any given roadway link is achieved when
project trips added to the existing volume and committed trips (E+C) exceed LOS
D for that link.
            3.   Mitigation. Mitigation will be considered when project trips
are both significant and adverse with respect to each affected roadway link, as
illustrated in the following scenarios:
               a.   Scenario 1. Project trips do not exceed the 2% threshold,
but with the addition of project trips the link becomes adversely affected.
This represents adversity, but not significance. This will likely happen when a
link is already very close to the LOS D capacity with the E+C trips. Mitigation
is not recommended;
               b.   Scenario 2. Project trips exceed the 2% threshold, but
adding them to the E+C trips does not exceed the LOS D capacity. This
represents significance, but not adversity. Mitigation is not recommended;
               c.   Scenario 3. Project trips exceed the 2% threshold
(significance). The E+C trips do not exceed the LOS D capacity, meaning the
link is currently not adverse with existing plus committed trips. However, when
project trips are added to the E+C trips, the LOS D capacity is exceeded and
the link becomes adverse due to the project trips. Mitigation is recommended;
               d.   Scenario 4. Project trips exceed the 2% threshold
(significance). The E+C trips already exceed the LOS D capacity, meaning the
link is already adverse with existing plus committed trips. Mitigation shall be
limited to site-specific safety and operational features (such as the provision
of turn lanes and/or signalization improvements).
            4.   Other mitigation circumstances. It is important to emphasize
that, since the analysis is predicated upon each link in the roadway network,
it may be that certain links in the area of influence are already deficient
(LOS E or F) and may only require mitigation to remedy site-specific
operational and safety concerns, but at the same time, other links in the area
of influence may become deficient as a direct result of additional project
trips and, therefore, require additional mitigation improvements.
         (c)   Town staff shall review the application and present
recommendations to the Planning Commission. Staff shall review the traffic
impact study and compare it to the results of its own analyses. Based on their
review, staff will determine if any additional analysis is required. If the
town determines that additional analysis is required, the developer may be
requested to revise the application and/or the traffic impact study
accordingly. Once town staff has completed their review, they will evaluate the
need for mitigation projects to address impacts as a result of the development.
      (8)   Mitigation projects.
         (a)   Based on staff's review of the development and recommendations
contained in the traffic impact study, town staff may recommend transportation
improvements necessary to mitigate identified negative impacts.
            1.   If improvements are required, town staff can provide a list of
roadway segments that were identified as being below LOS D due to the proposed
development. The town will enter negotiations with the developer to identify
transportation system improvements that mitigate the impact of the proposed
development on the identified set of roadway segments.
            2.   Site-specific mitigation efforts, such as additional turn
lanes or storage modifications, may also be required, even though the project
may not cause a LOS failure on roadway segments.
         (b)   On individual roadway links where existing volumes currently
exceed the Level of Service D capacity, or on individual roadway links where
existing and committed demand volumes exceed the Level of Service D capacity,
mitigation improvements shall be limited to remedy site-specific safety and
operational concerns.
         (c)   The provision of all or a portion of mitigation improvements
shall be limited to the proportionate share of demand generated by the proposed
development. When mitigation embodies improvements identified in the town's
current Transportation Capital Improvement Plan, an appropriate credit will be
given towards the development project's transportation impact fee.
         (d)   If town staff and the developer agree on a set of improvements,
such agreements will be documented and included in the application package.
            1.   If an agreement cannot be reached regarding what improvements
should be implemented with the development, the developer may request to
present the development proposals to the Planning Commission.
            2.   Town staff will also present their recommendations and
findings to the Planning Commission.
      (9)   Provisions for phasing required improvements. Include a description
of how phased improvements will occur during the development process,
identifying when specific improvements will be accomplished and the entity
responsible for the same.
      (10)   Graphic illustration of process.
         (a)   Figure 156.1218-1 illustrates the Transportation Impact
Assessment approval process.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13145.png]
 
         (b)   The graphic illustrates the anticipated approval timeframe for
the transportation impact assessment process.
            1.   Submittal deadlines for complete transportation impact
assessment data forms and impact assessment applications must be met to keep
the review process on schedule.
            2.   Staff review timeframes are predicated upon best estimates,
but are tentative and may be extended, based upon such factors as project size,
complexity of analysis, and similar factors. The rationale is that the
applicant controls the scope of development, and staff must be allowed
sufficient time to conduct and review analysis and mitigation alternatives.
   (G)   Specific impacts on police, fire, recreation, and public services. The
impact assessment shall:
      (1)   Describe how the proposed project will affect basic town services
in general;
      (2)   To the extent possible, relate service provisions to appropriate
standards (i.e., personnel, service area, facilities, and equipment) and the
relationship to adopted plans (e.g., Recreation Master Plan), if applicable.
Examples include such analysis as police officers per 1,000 population, nearest
fire station, the necessity for additional garbage trucks to serve the
development, and the like; and
      (3)   Indicate the method of solid waste collection, either public or
private, in text, and describe pertinent factors such as aggregated individual
receptacles or common collective receptacles. Graphically depict location on
Conceptual Plan and address applicable access requirements.
   (H)   Specific impacts on education. Provide an assessment of impact on the
school system, to include projection of school age children in the proposed
development by type of school and attendance zone.
   (I)   Specific impacts on cultural, archeological, and environmental
resources.
      (1)   Describe the impact of the proposed development on relevant
cultural, archeological, and environmental resources, particularly as it
relates to displacement or alteration of the same as a result of drainage
improvements and land disturbance for development.
      (2)   Indicate proposed tree removal on Conceptual Plan.
   (J)   Fiscal/economic considerations.
      (1)   Provide an analysis of the estimated average annual ad valorem tax
yield from the proposed project during each phase of development. Indicate
assumptions and standards utilized, including but not limited to, assessed
value, exemptions, millage rate, and the like.
      (2)   Provide an analysis of the estimated cost for the town to serve the
proposed development. Staff may develop a process and/or calculation method
that applicants must use.
      (3)   Provide totals for other applicable fees, such as impact fees,
permit fees, and plan review fees.
   (K)   Housing. Provide a breakdown of the proposed residential units, by
price or rental range; and the type of unit, such as detached house, duplex,
townhouse, and the like; and assess the potential of the proposed development
to meet local housing needs.
   (L)   Infrastructure. For impact assessments involving new residential
subdivisions that are subject to the preliminary and final plat process, the
application must include a master drainage plan, a master sanitary sewer plan,
and a master potable water distribution plan (see §
155.029)
   (M)   Letters of coordination. Based upon the necessity of addressing
particular concerns of a given project, letters of coordination from various
town departments, agencies, or other entities referenced herein may be required
to adequately assess specific impacts. This determination will be made by PLAN
staff at the pre-application meeting.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1219 COMPLETENESS.
   (A)   The PLAN Director shall review the impact assessment application and
all supporting data for accuracy, verification, and completeness. Toward this
end, they may conduct field investigations and “in-house” studies, including
verification of pertinent material by independent consultants, if deemed
appropriate.
   (B)   Upon a finding that the required data and information are complete,
accurate, and in proper form, the PLAN Director shall refer the assessment for
further consideration by the Planning Commission and the Town Council.
   (C)   If the PLAN Director finds the impact assessment is incomplete with
respect to data and information requirements or that the data and information
submitted contains significant errors of fact, they shall return the Assessment
to the applicant with an itemized statement of the deficiencies and/or
inaccuracies to be corrected.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1220 NOTICE.
   Notice is not required for an impact assessment application.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1221 DECISION.
   (A)   Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall consider the
request and provide a recommendation for approval, approval with conditions, or
disapproval of the proposed impact assessment.
   (B)   Town Council. The Town Council shall consider the request and approve,
approve with conditions, or disapprove the proposed impact assessment.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1222 REVIEW CRITERIA.
   (A)   Acceptable impact.
      (1)   The finding of an acceptable impact is a prerequisite to approval
of an impact assessment.
      (2)   This finding shall be noted on the approved Conceptual Plan.
   (B)   Unacceptable negative impact.
      (1)   Where negative impacts are identified, the Town Council shall, upon
the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission, determine whether,
given the goals of the Comprehensive Plan, these impacts are acceptable and in
the public interest.
      (2)   The Council may request the developer mitigate negative impacts
that are deemed to be unacceptable.
      (3)   If satisfactory mitigation cannot be achieved, the town may
disapprove the impact assessment application as submitted.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1223 SCOPE OF APPROVAL.
   (A)   Generally. Approval of an impact assessment enables an applicant to
proceed with any other application required by this chapter,
Chapter 155, or other chapters of the Town Code for the proposed development,
including special exception use permit applications and zoning permit
applications.
   (B)   Development approvals and construction/denial. Development approvals
and construction shall be in accordance with division (C) below, and the
following:
      (1)   Once Town Council approves the impact assessment, the developer
will follow established town development procedures for construction projects,
including obtaining permits.
      (2)   Development approvals may be contingent upon the developer making
certain transportation improvements.
         (a)   In order to obtain a building permit, the developer may post a
financial guarantee suitable to the town, in an amount of one and one half
times the amount of the cost of construction of the improvements.
         (b)   The certificate of occupancy may be withheld until all
contingent transportation improvements are completed.
   (C)   Time limitation.
      (1)   Vested rights. Approved impact assessments are vested for a period
of two years, subject to the rights and restrictions contained within this
title. Should the property owner fail to exercise these provisions or allow the
vested right to otherwise lapse, the following provisions may apply.
      (2)   Residential developments. Approval of an impact assessment for
residential construction shall become null and void if site work predicated
upon an approved preliminary plat has not commenced within the two-year
timeframe, or if the preliminary plat approval authorizing the installation of
improvements becomes void pursuant to division (E) below.
      (3)   Non-residential and multiplex developments. Approval of an impact
assessment for commercial, mixed use, or multiplex development shall become
null and void if a building permit predicated upon an approved site plan has
not been issued within the two-year timeframe. The issuance of a building
permit, in and of itself, shall not be deemed to fulfill the time limitation
requirement, but must be followed by construction progressing in a timely
manner toward project completion.
      (4)   Relationship to valid wetlands disturbance permit. Notwithstanding
the provisions of divisions (C)(2) and (C)(3) above, if a valid wetlands
disturbance permit that has been filed with the proper authorities, pursuant to
and at the approximate same time as impact assessment approval, is pending a
final decision, the time limitation shall be tolled until the final decision
has been rendered.
      (5)   Lapse in construction. If construction improvements lapse for a
consecutive period of six months or more from the initial date of commencement,
the PLAN Director may require an update of the impact assessment. The duration
of a lapse in construction improvements shall be determined by the PLAN
Director.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1224 REAPPLICATION.
   There is no time limit on resubmitting a withdrawn or disapproved impact
assessment application.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1225 APPEALS.
   This chapter does not authorize new rights to an appeal from or remedies for
adverse decisions by the Town Council, but interested parties may pursue
existing remedies from the Circuit Court.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1226 RECORDKEEPING.
   The PLAN Director shall maintain a record of all impact assessment
applications and related materials.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1227 THROUGH 156.1229 RESERVED.
PART 11: TECHNICAL REVIEW AND CODE COMPLIANCE
§ 156.1230 PURPOSE.
   The technical review and code compliance process ensures certain types of
applications meet applicable regulations prior to the decision-making body’s
review of and action on the application. This streamlines the review process
and helps ensure timely and accurate review for all applicants.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1231 APPLICABILITY.
   Technical review and code compliance (TRCC) is required for:
   (A)   Design review applications, including applications for minor projects
as defined in §
156.1247(C);
   (B)   Sketch plan applications (see §
155.021); and
   (C)   Town projects involving site alterations that impact drainage and/or
transportation systems.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1232 INITIATION.
   (A)   A pre-application meeting, used to assess the feasibility of a
proposed project, is highly encouraged but not required.
   (B)   The TRCC process is triggered upon submittal of a complete design
review or sketch plan application. For town projects, the department project
manager initiates the TRCC process.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1233 COMPLETENESS.
   See §
156.1080.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1234 NOTICE.
   Notice is not required for a TRCC application.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1235 DECISION.
   (A)   The Development Review Team (see
Subchapter J, Part 2, Subpart 2.3) will establish a process(es) and timeline(s)
for its review of all applications subject to this part.
   (B)   As part of its review process, the Development Review Team (DRT)
provides comments to applicants and may require changes to submitted
applications and plans to ensure compliance with applicable regulations.
   (C)   The TRCC review process does not result in a decision. After the
applicant successfully addresses the DRT’s comments, the DRT forwards the
complete application to the Design Review Board or Planning Commission, as
applicable, for review and action. Comments are considered “successfully
addressed” based upon written confirmation by the TRCC Program Manager.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1236 REVIEW CRITERIA.
   The DRT ensures applications comply with all regulations applicable to the
proposed development, including:
   (A)   
Chapter 51;
   (B)   
Chapter 76;
   (C)   
Chapter 152;
   (D)   
Chapter 153;
   (E)   
Chapter 155;
   (F)   
Chapter 156;
   (G)   
Chapter 158;
   (H)   International Building Code, Chapter 11: Accessibility;
   (I)   International Fire Code, Appendix D: Fire Apparatus Access Roads; and
   (J)   SCDOT Access and Roadside Management Standards Manual.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1237 SCOPE OF APPROVAL.
   (A)   Following its compliance review, the DRT forwards complete
applications to the Design Review Board or Planning Commission, as applicable.
The DRT does not forward an application unless it fully complies with minimum
Code requirements.
   (B)   The TRCC and DRT do not approve or disapprove applications or
development plans. As such, the TRCC review process does not confer vested
rights for any application.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1238 REAPPLICATION.
   Reapplication is subject to the time limits specified for the applicable
application type.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1239 APPEALS.
   The TRCC procedure does not result in a decision; therefore, there is no
appeal process.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1240 RECORDKEEPING.
   The TRCC Program Manager maintains a record of all applications submitted
for TRCC review and the status of each application.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1241 THROUGH 156.1244 RESERVED.
PART 12: DESIGN REVIEW
§ 156.1245 PURPOSE.
   This part describes how to obtain approval for building and site design for
certain types of new construction and for improvements to certain types of
existing structures and sites.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1246 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Generally. Design review is required for:
      (1)   All land uses and zoning districts subject to Subchapter H; and
      (2)   Site improvements and building exteriors, but not for building
interiors.
   (B)   Activities requiring design review. Design review approval is required
prior to undertaking the following activities:
      (1)   New construction. Construction of new buildings and structures
(including walls, fences, light fixtures, steps and pavement, or other
appurtenant features), above-ground utility structures, and any type of outdoor
signs;
      (2)   Alteration, restoration, or relocation. Alteration of, addition to,
or relocation of existing buildings and structures (including walls, fences,
light fixtures, steps and pavement, or other appurtenant features), above-
ground utility structure, or any type of outdoor sign;
      (3)   Landscaping. Landscaping for new construction sites and for
existing developed sites, including the alteration of existing landscaping;
      (4)   Construction on public property. Private construction of porches,
steps, posts, fences, walks, walls, landscaping, or other improvements on
public property, which also requires an encroachment permit from the property
owner.
   (C)   Maintenance and repair.
      (1)   Nothing in this part prevents the ordinary maintenance or repair of
any exterior architectural feature that does not involve a change in its
design, material, color, or outer appearance.
      (2)   Nothing in this part prevents the construction, reconstruction,
alteration, restoration, or demolition of any feature the Building Official or
similar official certifies is required for public safety because of an unsafe
or dangerous condition.
   (D)   Design review process for properties zoned ED, Economic Development
District.
      (1)   At the applicant's choosing, either Department of Planning, Land
Use, and Neighborhoods staff or the Design Review Board (DRB) will review a
proposed development located on a lot(s) zoned ED, Economic Development
District.
      (2)   This includes lots zoned for Economic Development use within a
Planned Development District; provided, however, that the choice of review
process is only available for the economic development use as specified in the
use table when other permitted uses are also allowed on the parcel.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1247 INITIATION.
   (A)   Applicant eligibility. A design review application may be initiated
by:
      (1)   The property owner or tenant of the subject property; or
      (2)   An agent of the property owner or tenant of the subject property.
   (B)   Application requirements.
      (1)   A design review application is filed with the PLAN Department on or
before the DRB application deadline specified on the annual meeting schedule.
Applications may be filed electronically or in-person.
      (2)   Submitting a complete design review application triggers the
technical review and code compliance and process (see
Subchapter I, Part 11).
   (C)   Minor projects.
      (1)   Applicants may request review and approval of minor projects by
Department of Planning, Land Use, and Neighborhoods staff by including a
written request attached to the application.
      (2)   The written request shall include confirmation from the applicant
that the proposed project construction cost, excluding improvements or
renovations to building interiors, does not exceed $250,000. The proposed cost
shall include all phases of the proposed project.
      (3)   The determination of whether a project is minor and that the
written confirmation of project cost is reasonable is within the discretion of
the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator may consult with the
Building Official for projects involving building improvements.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1248 COMPLETENESS.
   (A)   See §
156.1080.
   (B)   In addition, design review applications, which require review through
the TRCC procedure (see
Subchapter I, Part 11), are not considered complete until all TRCC Team
comments are addressed.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1249 NOTICE.
   Notice is not required for a design review application.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1250 DECISION.
   (A)   Minor projects.
      (1)   The DRB Secretary shall approve or disapprove applications for
minor projects, as defined in §
156.1247(C).
      (2)   The DRB Secretary shall forward a minor project application to the
DRB for review and action if the application proposes to modify one or more of
the design standards specified in
Subchapter H, Part 2.
      (3)   The DRB Secretary may forward a minor project application to the
DRB for review and action if the proposed project:
         (a)   Is located along a major street;
         (b)   Is located adjacent to or across a street from a residential
zoning district or use;
         (c)   Is located on a lot with a maximum height limit 20 feet or
greater than that of an adjacent lot or a lot across a street; or
         (d)   Includes fuel dispensing, drive-through, and/or drive-in
facilities.
   (B)   DRB review and action.
      (1)   Generally. The DRB shall approve, approve with conditions, or
disapprove the application.
      (2)   Review process.
         (a)   The design review process may include conceptual, preliminary,
and/or final plan reviews.
         (b)   DRB approval of the conceptual and/or preliminary plan does not
guarantee approval of the final plan.
         (c)   An approval of the final plan, but not the conceptual or
preliminary plans, results in a vested right.
      (3)   Modification of design standards. The DRB may modify the design
standards in
Subchapter H, Parts 2 and 3 as deemed appropriate for the particular project in
consideration of its individual circumstances.
      (4)   Projects approved with conditions. For projects approved with
conditions, the DRB may direct the DRB Secretary to conduct a final review of
the plans in order to ensure compliance with the conditions of approval.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1251 REVIEW CRITERIA.
   The DRB or the DRB Secretary, as applicable, shall act on a design review
application based upon the standards in Subchapter H and other applicable
provisions of the Zoning Code, in addition to the following criteria:
   (A)   Ease of pedestrian access between proposed developments and adjacent
developments is considered in the proposed development's site and circulation
plans;
   (B)   The architecture, landscaping, and building siting works in concert to
create a unified appearance that contributes to the existing/developing
streetscape;
   (C)   The proposed development avoids excessive or unsightly grading,
indiscriminate earth moving or clearing, and removal of trees and vegetation
that could cause disruption of natural water courses or disfiguration of
natural land forms;
   (D)   The proposed development is located and configured in a visually
harmonious manner with the terrain and vegetation of the subject parcel and
with that of surrounding parcels; and
   (E)   When a proposed development includes multiple phases, the application
includes a phasing plan that demonstrates how future phases will connect and
relate to the current phase.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1252 SCOPE OF APPROVAL.
   (A)   Approval of a design review application authorizes the applicant to
undertake the work specified in the approved plans once a building permit is
issued for the same.
   (B)   Design review approvals are vested for a period of two years, subject
to the rights and restrictions contained within this title.
   (C)   Routine repairs and maintenance may be made to a structure approved
for construction through the design review process, as required to preserve it
in sound condition. Any proposed changes to the structure as approved through
the design review process shall be presented to the DRB Secretary for
determination whether a new application is required.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1253 REAPPLICATION.
   There is no time limit on refiling a withdrawn or disapproved design review
application.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1254 APPEALS.
   (A)   Appeal of DRB decision. Any aggrieved party may appeal a decision of
the Design Review Board to the circuit court, pursuant to the provisions of
S.C. Code §§ 6-29-900 et seq.
   (B)   Appeal of administrative decision.
      (1)   Any person aggrieved (or any officer, department, board, or bureau
of the Town of Mount Pleasant) may appeal to the DRB from actions of the Zoning
Administrator or other administrative official in matters within the
jurisdiction of the Board pursuant to S.C. Code §§ 6-29-880 and 6-29-890.
      (2)   The appeal must be filed within 30 days after the affected party
receives actual notice of the decision, by filing with the officer from whom
the appeal is taken and with the DRB notice of appeal specifying the grounds of
the appeal.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1255 RECORDKEEPING.
   (A)   The DRB Recording Secretary will keep minutes of the DRB’s
proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent
or failing to vote, indicating the fact.
   (B)   All records of the DRB’s actions are filed in the PLAN Department
office as a public record.
   (C)   The DRB Secretary shall maintain a log of administrative actions on
minor projects.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1256 THROUGH 156.1259 RESERVED.
PART 13: CERTIFICATES OF  APPROPRIATENESS
§ 156.1260 PURPOSE.
   This part describes how to obtain approval for improvements to structures
and sites located in the Old Village Historic District.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1261 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Activities requiring a certificate of appropriateness. Unless
otherwise stated within the Old Village Historic District Guidelines, a
certificate of appropriateness (COA) is required prior to:
      (1)   Partial or total demolition (including demolition by neglect);
      (2)   Exterior alteration or addition;
      (3)   New construction;
      (4)   Site alteration;
      (5)   Installation of hardscaping, including walkways, driveways, and
patios;
      (6)   Installation of fences, walls, and docks; and
      (7)   The moving of any building into, out of, or within the historic
district.
   (B)   Requirements of municipal and publicly regulated utilities.
      (1)   The town and all publicly regulated utility companies are required
to go before the Historic District Preservation Commission (HDPC) in accordance
with this part;
Subchapter B, Part 4, Subpart 4.3;
Subchapter J, Part 3, Subpart 3.5; and the HDPC Rules of Procedure, prior to
initiating any changes in the character of street paving, sidewalks, trees,
utility installations (excluding traffic-control devices), lighting, walls,
fences, structures and buildings on property, easements, or widening or
constricting of streets owned or franchised by the town or public utility
companies.
      (2)   Nothing in this chapter prevents municipal or publicly regulated
utilities from the orderly maintenance of their systems or the services they
provide.
   (C)   Exceptions following a disaster or in a state of emergency.
      (1)   In the event of a natural disaster or when state of emergency is
declared, the HDPC or HDPC Secretary may authorize temporary disaster-related
repairs in order to weatherproof or stabilize a damaged building/structure
(waiver shall not relieve the applicant/property owner of making permanent
repairs that meet the established guidelines).
      (2)   The immediate restoration or maintenance of any existing above-
ground utility structure is hereby authorized as long as repair results in no
exterior change from the appearance before the disaster or state of emergency.
      (3)   The HDPC may waive all application deadline and notification
requirements pertaining to disaster-related repairs.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1262 INITIATION.
   (A)   Applicant eligibility. A COA application may be initiated by:
      (1)   The property owner of the subject property; or
      (2)   An agent of the property owner of the subject property.
   (B)   Pre-application meeting required. Prior to acceptance of a COA
application, a pre-application meeting is required with the HDPC Secretary (see
§
156.1079).
   (C)   Preliminary review.
      (1)   Prior to final approval for a COA, applicants may, but are not
required to, request a preliminary review by the HDPC. Preliminary review
requests may be appropriate for new construction or complex or large scale
projects, or projects involving major work to historic properties.
      (2)   Preliminary reviews do not result in approval or disapproval of the
application, and do not create a vested right.
      (3)   Preliminary reviews do not require the same level of detail as a
COA application, and are designed to establish the intent and scope of the
proposed project and to review any plans provided. The HDPC may provide the
applicant with comments regarding the request and any items that need to be
addressed prior to a submittal for final COA approval.
   (D)   Application requirements. A COA application is filed with the PLAN
Department on or before the HDPC application deadline specified on the annual
meeting schedule. Applications may be filed electronically.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1263 COMPLETENESS.
   See §
156.1080.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1264 NOTICE.
   The notice specified in Table 156.1264-1 is required for a COA, except that
minor work applications subject to review by the HDPC Secretary do not require
public notice.
 
Table 156.1264-1: Required Notice for Certificates of Appropriateness
   Key: N/A = not applicable
Type         Required To Whom        When
Mail         N/A      N/A            N/A
Posted       Yes      General public At least 2 weeks prior to public hearing
Publicatio n N/A      N/A            N/A
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1265 DECISION.
   (A)   Minor work reviewed by staff.
      (1)   An application consisting entirely of minor work may be reviewed
and approved or disapproved by the HDPC Secretary.
      (2)   A list of work items designated by the HDPC as minor work is
available from the HDPC Secretary. The list may be changed or updated as
necessary by a majority of the HDPC.
      (3)   The HDPC Secretary shall review all minor work applications within
ten business days of receipt of a complete application.
      (4)   At each regularly scheduled meeting, the HDPC Secretary shall
provide a report of all staff-level approvals granted within the month.
   (B)   HDPC review and action.
      (1)   The HDPC will review and approve, approve with conditions, or
disapprove a COA application.
      (2)   The COA process may include conceptual, preliminary, and/or final
plan reviews. HDPC approval of the conceptual and/or preliminary plan does not
guarantee approval of the final plan. An approval of the final plan, but not
the conceptual or preliminary plans, results in a vested right.
      (3)   The HDPC will take final action upon a complete and fully
documented COA application within a reasonable amount of time.
      (4)   The HDPC may postpone the issuance of a COA for demolition for 90
days in order to find an alternative to the demolition or to find an entity
willing to save the building or salvage architectural materials.
      (5)   When the HDPC approves a COA application subject to conditions, the
HDPC Secretary shall verify the applicant has met the conditions prior to
issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
   (C)   Substantial economic hardship exemption.
      (1)   Circumstances. A property owner may apply for an exemption based on
the substantial hardship of maintaining the property according to the design
guidelines. Substantial hardship shall be considered by the HDPC where one or
more of the following unusual and compelling circumstances exist:
         (a)   The property cannot reasonably be maintained in the manner
dictated by the design guidelines due to economic constraints;
         (b)   There are no other reasonable means of saving the property from
deterioration or collapse; or
         (c)   The property is owned by a nonprofit organization and it is not
feasible, financially or physically, to achieve the charitable purposes of the
organization while appropriately maintaining the property.
      (2)   Evidence. If the property owner wishes to make a claim of
substantial economic hardship (as defined herein) owing to the effects of this
chapter, the property owner must submit evidence describing the circumstances
of hardship. Evidence may include:
         (a)   Nature of ownership (individual, business, or nonprofit) or
legal possession, custody, and control;
         (b)   Financial resources of the owner and/or parties in interest
(such as tax returns for the past two years);
         (c)   Cost of repairs;
         (d)   Assessed value of the land and improvements;
         (e)   Real estate taxes for the past two years;
         (f)   Amount paid for the property, date of purchase, and party from
whom purchased, including a description of the relationship between the owner
and the person from whom the property was purchased, or other means of
acquisition of title, such as by gift or inheritance;
         (g)   Annual debt service, if any, for previous two years;
         (h)   Any listing of the property for sale or rent, price asked, and
offers received, if any;
         (i)   Annual gross income from the property for the previous two years
(if the property is income-producing);
         (j)   Itemized operating and maintenance expenses for the previous two
years, including proof that adequate and competent management procedures were
followed (if the property is income-producing); and
         (k)   Annual cash flow, if any, for the previous two years (if the
property is income-producing).
      (3)   In the event the HDPC finds substantial economic hardship in
meeting the guidelines, the finding shall be accompanied by a recommended plan
to relieve the economic hardship. This plan may include loans or grants from
public, private, or nonprofit sources, acquisition by purchase or eminent
domain, or relaxation of the provisions of this chapter sufficient to mitigate
substantial economic hardship.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1266 REVIEW CRITERIA.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   The Historic District Preservation Commission or the HDPC
Secretary, as applicable, shall approve or disapprove a COA application based
upon the specific criteria in Subchapter B, Part 4, Subpart 4.3 and the Old
Village Historic District Guidelines.
      (2)   The HDPC, or HDPC Secretary in the case of minor work, shall not
consider:
         (a)   The use of the building;
         (b)   The interior of the building; or
         (c)   Vegetative landscaping, except living fences.
      (3)   The HDPC, or HDPC Secretary in the case of minor work, shall not
impose conditions on an application except to prevent developments that are not
in harmony with the prevailing character of the streetscape or the district in
general, or are obviously incongruous with the character, integrity, or style
of a building or site.
   (B)   Disapproval of a COA application.
      (1)   A COA application shall be disapproved if the demolition or partial
demolition, alterations and/or additions to existing structures, erection of
new structures, alteration of site, or other factors listed within are
considered in violation of the specific criteria in
Subchapter B, Part 4, Subpart 4.3 or the Old Village Historic District
Guidelines, as applicable.
      (2)   Reasons for disapproval of an application shall be clearly listed
in the motion to disapprove the COA. The motion shall cite the exact section(s)
of the ordinance or design review guidelines the application violates.
      (3)   In the case of staff disapproval, staff shall provide a written
explanation citing the exact section(s) of the ordinance or design review
guidelines the application violates.
   (C)   Demolition. Permits for full demolition without replacement are only
allowed for accessory structures and are allowed for primary structures. The
HDPC shall review all requests for demolition based on the following criteria:
      (1)   Historic buildings and structures. Historic properties comprised of
buildings and structures designated through nomination by inclusion in a survey
or survey update, or by individual nomination, shall be afforded the highest
degree of preservation. Demolition may only be allowed if one or more of the
following conditions are met, with the burden of proof falling upon the
applicant:
         (a)   Where the public safety and welfare requires the removal of the
building;
         (b)   If the building or structure cannot be economically
rehabilitated on the site to provide a reasonable income or residential
environment compared to other structures in the general area; or
         (c)   A finding of substantial economic hardship (see §
156.1265(C)) is established by the HDPC.
      (2)   Buildings and structures lacking historic designation status. In
the case of buildings or structures lacking historic property designation, the
HDPC may, at its discretion, first make a determination that the building or
structure is worthy of individual designation as an historic property pursuant
to the provisions of §
156.1477(B). If no such determination is made, demolition may then be allowed
if one or more of the following conditions are met, with the burden of proof
falling upon the applicant:
         (a)   Where the public safety and welfare requires the removal of the
building;
         (b)   The structure cannot be economically rehabilitated on the site
to provide a reasonable income or residential environment compared to other
structures in the general area;
         (c)   A finding of substantial economic hardship is established by the
HDPC; or
         (d)   Where the proposed new development is more compatible with the
surrounding area, considering such factors as location and exterior design.
      (3)   Accessory buildings and structures. In the case of accessory
buildings and structures, demolition shall be allowed if one of the following
conditions is met, with the burden of proof falling upon the applicant:
         (a)   Where the building or structure is determined not to have any
historical significance; or
         (b)   Where the public safety and welfare requires the removal of the
building or structure.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1267 SCOPE OF APPROVAL.
   (A)   Generally. Approval of a COA application authorizes the applicant to
undertake the work specified in the COA once a building permit is issued for
the same.
   (B)   What COA does not authorize.
      (1)   The COA does not approve tree protection zone modification,
removal, relocation, or replacement. Tree protection zone modification,
removal, relocation, or replacement are granted by the appropriate staff or
board as stated in §§
156.1476 and
156.1477.
      (2)   The COA does not approve stormwater and drainage management plans.
Stormwater and drainage management plans are reviewed by the appropriate staff
pursuant to
Chapter 152.
   (C)   Demolition.
      (1)   Where full demolition requests were granted as a result of new
construction plans or where the applicant intends to request new construction
plans in the future, the permit for demolition shall not be issued until new
construction plans have been approved by the HDPC and submitted for a building
permit.
      (2)   During demolition, nearby sites, structures, and, in the case of
partial demolitions, connecting structures, shall be protected. After
demolition, the site shall be cleared and cleaned.
   (D)   Validity. The COA is valid for a period of two years from the date of
approval by the HDPC or HDPC Secretary, as applicable, and thereafter for the
time prescribed by this title.
      (1)   At any time during the two-year period, or any subsequent vested
rights extensions, the Building Official may grant a building permit to the
applicant.
      (2)   Should the COA expire at any time prior to the application for a
building permit, a building permit shall not be issued until the applicant
provides a current COA.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1268 REAPPLICATION.
   (A)   There is no time limit on resubmitting a withdrawn COA application.
   (B)   If a COA application is disapproved, a new application affecting the
same property may be submitted only if substantial change is made in the plans
for the proposed work.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1269 APPEALS.
   (A)   Appeal of HDPC decision. Any aggrieved party may appeal a decision of
the HDPC to the Courts of South Carolina pursuant to S.C. Code §§ 6-29-900 et
seq.
   (B)   Appeal of administrative decision.
      (1)   Any person aggrieved (or any officer, department, board, or bureau
of the local government) may appeal to the HDPC from actions of the Zoning
Administrator, or other administrative official, in matters within the
jurisdiction of the Board pursuant to S.C. Code §§ 6-29-880 and 6-29-890.
      (2)   The appeal must be filed within 30 days after the affected party
receives actual notice of the decision, by filing with the officer from whom
the appeal is taken and with the HDPC notice of appeal specifying the grounds
of the appeal.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1270 RECORDKEEPING.
   (A)   Generally. The HDPC Secretary shall maintain a record of all COA
applications and related materials.
   (B)   Approved COA applications.
      (1)   The COA is a standardized form signed by the HDPC Secretary. The
COA states the specific changes that will result from the proposed work for
which the application has been made, and shall state that those changes are
approved by the HDPC or HDPC Secretary, in the case of minor work.
      (2)   The HDPC Secretary shall provide the COA and draft minutes of the
hearing of the application to the applicant within ten days of approval of the
plans.
   (C)   Disapproved COA applications. The HDPC Secretary shall mail or email
the draft minutes of the hearing of the application to the applicant within 20
business days of disapproval of the COA application.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1271 THROUGH 156.1274 RESERVED.
PART 14: DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT
§ 156.1275 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this procedure is to prevent demolition of buildings in the
historic district(s) through neglect of the property.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1276 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This part applies when five or more residents or property owners in an
historic district believe a building located within the historic district is
effectively being demolished by means of neglect and bring forward a petition
to the Historic District Preservation Commission (HDPC), with the goal to bring
the building into compliance with current historic district design guidelines.
   (B)   Nothing in this part diminishes the town's power to declare a building
unsafe or in violation of the minimum housing code.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1277 INITIATION.
   (A)   All charges of demolition by neglect are initiated by a petition
signed by five residents or property owners in the historic district in which
the subject building is located.
   (B)   Residents or property owners residing at the same address count only
once toward the total number of signatures.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1278 COMPLETENESS.
   Petitions for a finding of demolition by neglect must include:
   (A)   A written description and photographic evidence of said neglect; and
   (B)   A summary of the detrimental effect upon the character of the historic
district as a whole or the life and character of the property itself.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1279 NOTICE.
   The notice specified in Table 156.1279-1 is required for a petition for
demolition by neglect.
 
Table 156.1279-1: Required Notice for a Petition for Demolition by Neglect
   Key: N/A = not applicable
Type         Required To Whom        When
Mail         Yes      Property owner 30 to 45 days prior to the public hearing
Posted       No       N/A            N/A
Publicatio n No       N/A            N/A
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1280 DECISION.
   (A)   Generally. The HDPC shall consider the petition and other evidence at
a public hearing, and render a decision as to whether the building is being
demolished by means of neglect.
   (B)   Substantial economic hardship.
      (1)   If the property owner wishes to make a claim of substantial
economic hardship, they must submit evidence describing the circumstances of
hardship. Evidence may include the items listed in §
156.1265(C)(2).
      (2)   In the event the HDPC finds substantial economic hardship, the
finding shall be accompanied by a recommended plan to relieve the economic
hardship. This plan may include loans or grants from public, private, or
nonprofit sources, acquisition by purchase or eminent domain, or relaxation of
the provisions of this chapter sufficient to mitigate substantial economic
hardship.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1281 REVIEW CRITERIA.
   The HDPC may declare a building to be in a condition of demolition by
neglect if one or more of the following conditions exist:
   (A)   Any fault, defect, or condition in the building that renders it
structurally unsafe or not properly watertight;
   (B)   Building components that may fall and injure the public;
   (C)   Defective or deteriorated floor supports, walls, ceiling, roofs,
chimneys, or vertical or horizontal supports that split, lean, list, buckle,
sag, or split; or
   (D)   Deteriorated or inadequate foundation.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1282 SCOPE OF APPROVAL.
   (A)   If, pursuant to the hearing, the HDPC finds that a building within the
limits of the historic district is being demolished by means of neglect, the
HDPC shall contact the property owner to instruct them to bring the building
into compliance with the current historic district regulations and design
guidelines.
   (B)   If the property owner does not respond, apply for a certificate of
appropriateness, or initiate repair not requiring a COA within 90 days of the
HDPC's issuance of notification, the HDPC shall report to the Zoning
Administrator that the building is in violation of the design guidelines,
providing their findings for such violation(s). The Zoning Administrator may
then take appropriate enforcement action.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1283 REAPPLICATION.
   If the HDPC does not approve the petition for a finding of demolition by
neglect, it shall not hear a petition concerning the same building for at least
12 months from the date of the decision.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1284 APPEALS.
   Any aggrieved party may appeal a decision of the Commission to the courts of
South Carolina pursuant to S.C. Code §§ 6-29-900 et seq.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1285 RECORDKEEPING.
   The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of all petitions for
demolition by neglect and related materials.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1286 THROUGH 156.1289 RESERVED.
PART 15: VARIANCES
§ 156.1290 PURPOSE.
   This part establishes a procedure to avoid unnecessary hardships that could
result from a strict application of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1291 APPLICABILITY.
   This part applies to an application for a variance. An applicant shall
obtain variance approval to construct, develop, or make a material change in
any lot, building, or structure that does not comply with the standards of this
chapter.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1292 INITIATION.
   (A)   Applicant eligibility. A variance application may be initiated by:
      (1)   The property owner or tenant of the subject property; or
      (2)   An agent of the property owner or tenant of the subject property.
   (B)   Pre-application meeting. A pre-application meeting is required (see §
156.1079).
   (C)   Application requirements.
      (1)   A variance application is filed with the PLAN Department on or
before the Board of Zoning Appeals application deadline specified on the annual
meeting schedule. Applications may be filed electronically or in-person.
      (2)   A conceptual site plan with adequate detail of features such as
building layout, setbacks, easements, parking, circulation systems, and buffers
must be submitted in conjunction with the special exception permit application.
An application filed without an adequate conceptual site plan is considered
incomplete.
   (D)   Effect on other proceedings. A variance application that would correct
a zoning violation stays all legal proceedings by the town on the zoning
violation, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board of Zoning
Appeals, after the variance application has been filed, that a stay would cause
an imminent peril to life and property. In cases where there is an imminent
peril to life and property, proceedings will not be stayed unless a restraining
order is granted by the Board or by a court of record on application.
   (E)   Consideration for Planning Commission and Town Council procedures. As
a matter of process and procedure, proposed developments involving variance
applications that also require separate review by the Planning Commission and/
or separate Town Council approval, shall not be considered by the Board of
Zoning Appeals until the referenced review and/or approval is completed.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1293 COMPLETENESS.
   See §
156.1080.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1294 NOTICE.
   (A)   The notice specified in Table 156.1294-1 is required for a variance
application.
   (B)   If the Board remands a variance application to the Zoning
Administrator for further review, the Board may set a hearing without further
public notice for a time certain within 60 days unless otherwise agreed to by
the parties. The Board must maintain a list of persons who express an interest
in being informed when the remanded matter is set for rehearing, and notice of
the rehearing must be mailed to these persons before the rehearing.
 
Table 156.1294-1: Required Notice for Variance Applications
   Key: N/A = not applicable
Type        Required To Whom             When
Mail        Yes      Parties in interest Due notice
Posted      Yes      General public      Prior to public hearing
Publication Yes      General public      At least 15 days prior to public
                                         hearing
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1295 DECISION.
   (A)   The Board of Zoning Appeals will hear all applications for variances
and will render a decision in each matter.
   (B)   The Board will hear a variance request within 60 days of the date the
application is deemed complete.
   (C)   At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by
attorney.
   (D)   The burden of proof for the relief sought is upon the applicant.
   (E)   Based on the hearing and probable impact of the proposed use on
surrounding uses and conditions, the Board may approve, approve with
conditions, or disapprove the request. The Board may approve a variance
application subject to conditions regarding the location, character, or other
features of the proposed building, structure, or use as the Board may consider
advisable to protect established property values in the surrounding area or to
promote the public health, safety, or general welfare.
   (F)   On its own motion or the motion of a party, the Board may remand a
variance application to the Zoning Administrator if the Board determines the
record is insufficient for review. Variance applications that are remanded must
be rescheduled for hearing within 60 days unless the parties agree on an
extension.
   (G)   The Board will issue a written decision within 45 days of the final
hearing on the matter.
   (H)   All final decisions or orders of the Board will be delivered to
parties-in-interest by certified mail.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1296 REVIEW CRITERIA.
   (A)   The Board may grant a variance in an individual case of unnecessary
hardship, if the Board makes and explains, in writing, all of the following
findings:
      (1)   There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to
the particular piece of property;
      (2)   These conditions do not generally apply to other property in the
vicinity;
      (3)   Because of these conditions, the application of the code to the
particular piece of property would effectively prohibit or unreasonably
restrict the utilization of the property; and
      (4)   The authorization of a variance will not be of substantial
detriment to adjacent property or to the public good, and the character of the
district will not be harmed by the granting of the variance.
   (B)   The Board shall not grant a variance, the effect of which would be to:
      (1)   Allow the establishment of a use not otherwise permitted in a
zoning district;
      (2)   Extend physically a nonconforming use of land; or
      (3)   Change the zoning district boundaries shown on the Zoning Map.
   (C)   The fact that property may be utilized more profitably if a variance
is granted shall not be considered grounds for a variance.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1297 SCOPE OF APPROVAL.
   (A)   Generally. An approved variance application does not authorize
construction or development. Any construction or development that occurs after
approval of a variance application requires zoning permit approval, following
approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (B)   Approval based on submitted plans.
      (1)   Unless specifically modified by the Board's approval, relief
granted as the result of an appeal shall be in accordance with the specific
plans submitted with the application.
      (2)   Minor changes to the approved plans that do not affect the relief
granted may be allowed in order to meet other code requirements, if approved by
the Zoning Administrator.
      (3)   Routine repairs and maintenance may be made to a structure
constructed pursuant to relief granted by the Board as required to preserve it
in sound condition. Any proposed changes to the structure shall be presented to
the Board Secretary for determination whether a new application is required.
   (C)   Vested rights.
      (1)   In order to complete additional applications and receive the
necessary permits for construction, variances are vested for a period of two
years, subject to the rights and restrictions contained within this title.
      (2)   Failure to receive the necessary permits within the prescribed
timeframe renders the variance approval void and of no force or effect.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1298 REAPPLICATION.
   (A)   For a period of 12 months, the Board shall not accept a variance
application for a matter upon which it has rendered a final decision, except as
provided in the Board’s rules of procedure.
   (B)   Prior to the lapse of the 12-month timeframe and upon a majority vote
ascertaining changed facts or circumstances, the Board may accept such a
variance application for consideration.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1299 APPEALS.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   A person who may have a substantial interest in any decision of the
Board of Zoning Appeals, or an officer or agent of the Town of Mount Pleasant,
may appeal from a decision of the Board to the Circuit Court of Charleston
County, by filing with the Clerk of Court a petition, in writing, setting forth
plainly, fully, and distinctly why the decision is contrary to law. The appeal
must be filed within 30 days after the decision of the Board is mailed.
      (2)   A property owner whose land is the subject of a decision of the
Board of Zoning Appeals may appeal either:
         (a)   As provided in §
156.1209(A); or
         (b)   By filing a notice of appeal with the Circuit Court, accompanied
by a request for pre-litigation mediation in accordance with S.C. Code § 6-29-
825. Any notice of appeal and request for pre-litigation mediation must be
filed within 30 days after the decision of the Board is postmarked.
   (B)   Notice of appeal and transcript. Upon the filing of the appeal, the
Clerk of the Circuit Court shall give immediate notice of it to the Secretary
of the Board and, within 30 days from the time of the notice, the Board shall
file with the Clerk a certified copy of the proceedings held before the Board
of Zoning Appeals, including a transcript of the evidence heard before it, if
any, and the decision of the Board, including its findings of fact and
conclusions.
   (C)   Supersedeas. The filing of an appeal in the Circuit Court from a
decision of the Board shall not ipso facto act as a supersedeas, but the judge
of the Circuit Court may, at their discretion, grant a supersedeas upon such
terms and conditions as may seem reasonable and proper.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1300 RECORDKEEPING.
   (A)   The Board will keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of
each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating the
fact.
   (B)   The Board will issue a written decision to all parties involved in the
matter.
   (C)   All final decisions and orders of the Board must be in writing and
permanently filed in the PLAN Department office as a public record. All
findings of fact and conclusions of law must be separately stated in final
decisions or orders of the Board, which must be delivered to parties of
interest by certified mail.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1301 THROUGH 156.1304 RESERVED.
PART 16: ZONING CODE INTERPRETATIONS
§ 156.1305 PURPOSE.
   A Zoning Code interpretation is a written decision issued by the Zoning
Administrator regarding the interpretation of any provision set forth in the
Zoning Code. It is intended to clarify ambiguities in the Zoning Code and to
resolve any ambiguities in future amendments.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1306 APPLICABILITY.
   This part applies to requests for a decision by the Zoning Administrator to:
   (A)   Interpret a possible ambiguous standard in this chapter;
   (B)   Clarify a standard in this chapter;
   (C)   Clarify conditions of approval pursuant to this chapter;
   (D)   Clarify standards approved for Planned Development Districts; or
   (E)   Address the categorization of a land use (“use determination”),
building, or structure that is not specifically addressed by this chapter.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1307 INITIATION.
   (A)   Applicant eligibility. Any person may submit a written request for a
Zoning Code interpretation to the Zoning Administrator.
   (B)   Application requirements. A request for a Zoning Code interpretation
shall be filed with the PLAN Department. At a minimum, the request for a code
interpretation shall be in writing and include:
      (1)   The section of the Zoning Code, standard, or condition that is
allegedly ambiguous or needing clarification;
      (2)   The subject matter or nature of the request; and
      (3)   A statement of facts relevant to the nature of the request.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1308 COMPLETENESS.
   See §
156.1080.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1309 NOTICE.
   Notice is not required for a Zoning Code interpretation.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1310 DECISION.
   (A)   The Zoning Administrator may approve a request by issuing a written
decision regarding the interpretation of any provision set forth in the Zoning
Code or standard identified in §
156.1306.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator may reject the request through a written
response to the applicant explaining why there is no ambiguity or need for the
requested clarification.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1311 REVIEW CRITERIA.
   (A)   The Zoning Administrator may approve a request if there is an
ambiguity or need for the clarification requested by the applicant.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator may disapprove or reject the request if there
is no ambiguity or need for the clarification requested by the applicant.
   (C)   The Zoning Administrator shall render only one interpretation per
issue. If an interpretation is requested on an issue previously addressed, the
Zoning Administrator shall provide a copy of the previous interpretation.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1312 SCOPE OF APPROVAL.
   (A)   A Zoning Code interpretation becomes effective upon execution by the
Zoning Administrator.
   (B)   A Zoning Code interpretation does not authorize development. Any
development that occurs after the Zoning Code interpretation has been issued is
subject to all applicable requirements of this chapter, as revised by the
interpretation.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1313 REAPPLICATION.
   An applicant shall not resubmit a Zoning Code interpretation application
once the Zoning Administrator has rendered a determination.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1314 APPEALS.
   The Zoning Administrator’s decision on a Zoning Code interpretation may be
appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with
Subchapter I, Part 17.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1315 RECORDKEEPING.
   The Zoning Administrator shall maintain records of all interpretations made
under this part.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1316 THROUGH 156.1319 RESERVED.
PART 17: APPEALS OF  ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS
§ 156.1320 PURPOSE.
   This part provides a process for applicants to request the review and
correction of decisions by administrative officials that they believe are in
error.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1321 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This part applies to appeals of an order, requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Zoning Administrator or any other administrative
official in the enforcement of this chapter, except as provided in divisions
(B) and (C) below.
   (B)   Administrative decisions on design review applications are heard by
the Design Review Board in accordance with §
156.1254.
   (C)   Administrative decisions on COA applications are heard by the Historic
District Preservation Commission in accordance with §
156.1269.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1322 INITIATION.
   (A)   Applicant eligibility. An administrative decision appeal application
may be initiated by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board,
or bureau of the Town of Mount Pleasant.
   (B)   Application requirements.
      (1)   An administrative decision appeal application must be filed within
30 days from the date the appealing party receives actual notice of the action
from which the appeal is taken, by filing with the officer from whom the appeal
is taken and with the Board of Zoning Appeals notice of appeal specifying the
grounds for appeal.
      (2)   The officer from whom the appeal is taken immediately shall
transmit to the Board all the documents and files constituting the record upon
which the action appealed from was taken.
      (3)   Applications may be filed electronically or in-person.
   (C)   Effect on other proceedings. An appeal application that would correct
a zoning violation stays all legal proceedings by the town on the zoning
violation, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board of Zoning
Appeals, after the Appeal application has been filed, that a stay would cause
an imminent peril to life and property. In cases where there is an imminent
peril to life and property, proceedings will not be stayed unless a restraining
order is granted by the Board or by a court of record on application.
   (D)   Consideration for Planning Commission and Town Council procedures. As
a matter of process and procedure, proposed developments involving appeal
applications that also require separate review by the Planning Commission and/
or separate Town Council approval, shall not be considered by the Board of
Zoning Appeals until the referenced review and/or approval is completed.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1323 COMPLETENESS.
   See §
156.1080.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1324 NOTICE.
   (A)   The notice specified in Table 156.1324-1 is required for appeals of
administrative decisions.
   (B)   If the Board remands an appeal application to the Zoning Administrator
for further review, the Board may set a hearing without further public notice
for a time certain within 60 days unless otherwise agreed to by the parties.
The Board must maintain a list of persons who express an interest in being
informed when the remanded matter is set for rehearing, and notice of the
rehearing must be mailed to these persons before the rehearing.
 
Table 156.1324-1: Required Notice for Appeals of Administrative Decisions
   Key: N/A = not applicable
Type        Required To Whom             When
Mail        Yes      Parties in interest Due notice
Posted      Yes      General public      At least 15 days prior to public
                                         hearing
Publication Yes      General public      At least 15 days prior to public
                                         hearing
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1325 DECISION.
   (A)   The Board of Zoning Appeals will hear all appeal applications and will
render a decision in each matter.
   (B)   The Board will hear an appeal application within 60 days of the date
the application is deemed complete.
   (C)   At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by
attorney.
   (D)   The burden of proof for the relief sought is upon the applicant.
   (E)   On its own motion or the motion of a party, the Board may remand an
appeal application to the Zoning Administrator if the Board determines the
record is insufficient for review. Appeal applications that are remanded must
be rescheduled for hearing within 60 days unless the parties agree on an
extension.
   (F)   The Board will issue a written decision within 45 days of the final
hearing on the matter.
   (G)   All final decisions or orders of the Board will be delivered to
parties-in-interest by certified mail.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1326 REVIEW CRITERIA.
   In considering an appeal of an administrative decision, the Board shall
apply the standards of this chapter, other applicable law, and previous
interpretations of this chapter by the Board.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1327 SCOPE OF APPROVAL.
   An approved appeal application does not authorize development. Any
development that occurs after the decision on the appeal is subject to all
applicable requirements of this chapter, as amended by the Board of Zoning
Appeals’ decision, if applicable.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1328 REAPPLICATION.
   (A)   For a period of 12 months, the Board shall not accept an appeal
application for a matter upon which it has rendered a final decision, except as
provided in the Board’s rules of procedure.
   (B)   Prior to the lapse of the 12-month timeframe and upon a majority vote
ascertaining changed facts or circumstances, the Board may accept such an
appeal application for consideration.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1329 APPEALS.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   A person who may have a substantial interest in any decision of the
Board of Zoning Appeals, or an officer or agent of the Town of Mount Pleasant,
may appeal from a decision of the Board to the Circuit Court of Charleston
County, by filing with the Clerk of Court a petition, in writing, setting forth
plainly, fully, and distinctly why the decision is contrary to law. The appeal
must be filed within 30 days after the decision of the Board is mailed.
      (2)   A property owner whose land is the subject of a decision of the
Board of Zoning Appeals may appeal either:
         (a)   As provided in §
156.1209(A); or
         (b)   By filing a notice of appeal with the Circuit Court, accompanied
by a request for pre-litigation mediation in accordance with S.C. Code § 6-29-
825. Any notice of appeal and request for pre-litigation mediation must be
filed within 30 days after the decision of the Board is postmarked.
   (B)   Notice of appeal and transcript. Upon the filing of the appeal, the
Clerk of the Circuit Court shall give immediate notice of it to the Secretary
of the Board and, within 30 days from the time of the notice, the Board shall
file with the Clerk a certified copy of the proceedings held before the Board
of Zoning Appeals, including a transcript of the evidence heard before it, if
any, and the decision of the Board, including its findings of fact and
conclusions.
   (C)   Supersedeas. The filing of an appeal in the Circuit Court from a
decision of the Board shall not ipso facto act as a supersedeas, but the judge
of the Circuit Court may, at their discretion, grant a supersedeas upon such
terms and conditions as may seem reasonable and proper.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1330 RECORDKEEPING.
   (A)   All final decisions and orders of the Board must be in writing and
permanently filed in the office of the Board as a public record.
   (B)   All findings of fact and conclusions of law must be separately stated
in final decisions or orders of the Board, which must be delivered to parties
of interest by certified mail.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1331 THROUGH 156.1334 RESERVED.
PART 18: TEXT AMENDMENTS
§ 156.1335 PURPOSE.
   This part describes the way the town changes the text of this Zoning Code or
the regulations pertaining to an existing Planned Development (PD) District.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1336 APPLICABILITY.
   This part applies to any proposal to amend the text of this chapter and any
proposal to amend the text and/or map of a PD District ordinance. In accordance
with S.C. Code § 6-29-740, any request involving changes to an existing PD
District ordinance is considered an amendment to this chapter.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1337 INITIATION.
   (A)   Applicant eligibility.
      (1)   A text amendment application may be initiated by:
         (a)   The Town Council by adoption of a motion;
         (b)   The Planning Commission by adoption of a motion; and
         (c)   The Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   The process to amend the text of a Planned Development District
ordinance may be initiated by any of the bodies specified in division (A)(1)
above, or by any property owner whose property is subject to the provisions of
the Planned Development District ordinance.
   (B)   Application requirements.
      (1)   A text amendment application is filed with the PLAN Department on
or before the Planning Commission application deadline specified on the annual
meeting schedule. Applications may be filed electronically or in-person.
      (2)   Only one text amendment application pertaining to the same subject
matter may be considered at a time.
   (C)   Planned Development District text amendments.
      (1)   Planned Development District text amendment applications are first
submitted for preliminary staff review (see §
156.1081).
      (2)   Following preliminary staff review, the Planned Development
District text amendment application is submitted in accordance with division
(B)(1) above.
      (3)   If a proposed Planned Development District text amendment
application involves the text of a development agreement proposed or adopted
pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 157, the applicant must submit the complete application at least 56
days prior to the meeting at which the Planning Commission will consider the
amendment.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1338 COMPLETENESS.
   See §
156.1080.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1339 NOTICE.
   The notice specified in Table 156.1339-1 is required for a text amendment
application.
 
Table 156.1339-1: Required Notice for Text Amendments
   Key: N/A = not applicable
Type         Required                 To Whom        When
Mail         No                       N/A            N/A
             Yes, for a Planned                      At least 15 days prior to
Posted       Development District     General public public hearing
             Ordinance text amendment
Publicatio n Yes                      General public At least 15 days prior to
                                                     public hearing
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1340 DECISION.
   (A)   Planning Commission review and recommendation.
      (1)   The Planning Commission shall review all text amendment
applications and prepare a report and recommendation, stating its findings and
its evaluation of the proposed amendment. In making its report, the Commission
shall consider the criteria specified in §
156.1341.
      (2)   The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing. From the
closing date of the public hearing, the Commission has 30 days in which to
submit its report and recommendation to Town Council. A public hearing by the
Commission shall not be extended for more than a period of 30 days. Once a
public hearing begins, it must be closed no later than 30 days from the
commencement date.
      (3)   If the Commission fails to submit its report to Town Council within
the required 30 days, it is deemed to have recommended approval of the
proposal.
   (B)   Town Council decision.
      (1)   Town Council may amend the Zoning Code through the procedures
specified in
Chapter 30 of the Mount Pleasant Code of Ordinances.
      (2)   Following the recommendation of the Planning Commission, Council
shall approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove the proposed
amendment. In rendering its decision, Town Council shall consider, but is not
bound by, the recommendation of the Planning Commission.
         (a)   If Town Council feels the circumstances of the case warrant a
second public hearing, then it may vote to hold one.
         (b)   Town Council may defer the matter for further consideration or
remand the matter back to its Planning and Development Committee or Planning
Commission for further study and recommendation.
      (3)   No change in or departure from the text amendment as recommended by
the Planning Commission may be made pursuant to the hearing unless the change
or departure is first submitted to the Planning Commission for review and
recommendation.
      (4)   After a period of six months, if readings of the text amendment
application are not finalized, the application becomes null and void,
rescinding any Town Council action on the request.
      (5)   Any further Council action on the same request that has been denied
or expires requires a public hearing by the Planning Commission before Town
Council acts upon subsequent readings of the amending ordinance.
   (C)   Postponement requests and application withdrawals.
      (1)   Withdrawal of a text amendment application prior to the
advertisement for its initial public hearing or posting of the property is
considered as a termination of the application. Resubmission of applications
shall be processed as a new application with prescribed fees and all other
requirements met.
      (2)   A postponement request or withdrawal of a text amendment
application that occurs between the time of published advertisement of the
public hearing or posting of the property and the public hearing proceedings
shall be treated as a request denial. Reapplication is subject to a one-year
waiting period, unless granted a waiver by Council, as specified in §
156.1343.
      (3)   In either case, amendment processing shall terminate upon receipt
of written notice from the applicant or owner.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1341 REVIEW CRITERIA.
   (A)   As a matter of policy, Town Council shall not approve a text amendment
application, except:
      (1)   Where necessary to implement the Comprehensive Plan;
      (2)   To correct an original mistake, a manifest error in the
regulations;
      (3)   To recognize substantial change or changing conditions or
circumstances in a particular locality; or
      (4)   To recognize changes in technology, the style of living, or manner
of doing business.
   (B)   In making its decision, Town Council shall consider the following
factors, as applicable:
      (1)   The relationship of the proposed text amendment application to the
Comprehensive Plan and Future Land Use Map;
      (2)   Whether the request supports or contradicts the Comprehensive Plan;
      (3)   The relationship of the proposed text amendment to other relevant
plans adopted by the town;
      (4)   Whether the uses allowed by the proposed text amendment would be
appropriate in the area concerned;
      (5)   Whether adequate public school facilities, roads, and other public
services exist or can be provided to serve the needs of the development likely
to take place as a result of such change, and the consequences of such change;
      (6)   Whether the proposed text amendment is in accordance with any
existing or proposed plans for providing public water supply and sanitary
sewers to the area;
      (7)   The amount of vacant land currently classified for similar
development in the vicinity and elsewhere in the town, and any special
circumstances that may make a substantial part of such vacant land unavailable
for development;
      (8)   Whether the proposed text amendment is consistent with Chapter 155;
      (9)   Whether the proposed text amendment is consistent with best
practices for community planning and design; and
      (10)   Whether public necessity, safety, or general welfare justifies the
text amendment.
   (C)   When a Planned Development District is located within the boundaries
of an overlay district, the PD District text amendment application will be
considered in context with the purpose of the overlay district.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1342 SCOPE OF APPROVAL.
   (A)   A text amendment is effective as directed in the ordinance adopting
the amendment by Town Council and as provided in
Chapter 30 of the Mount Pleasant Code of Ordinances.
   (B)   Approval of a text amendment does not authorize development. Any
development that occurs after the text amendment is adopted is subject to all
applicable requirements of this chapter and the Planned Development District
ordinance (if applicable), as revised by the text amendment.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1343 REAPPLICATION.
   (A)   Zoning Code text amendments. When Town Council disapproves a Zoning
Code text amendment application, the same proposed amendment may not be
initiated for a period of 12 months.
   (B)   Planned Development District text amendments. When Town Council
disapproves a Planned Development District text amendment application, the same
proposed amendment may not be initiated for the Planned Development District
for a period of 12 months, irrespective of change(s) in ownership.
      (1)   However, after receipt of written petition by the property owner(s)
or other body authorized to submit a text amendment application stating how
conditions have changed substantially in the community since prior
consideration of the text amendment application so as to justify another
review, Town Council may, on a case-by-case basis, waive the waiting period
requirements by a vote of a majority of members present and voting in favor,
and direct PLAN Department staff in writing to process the application.
      (2)   Denial of the petition is final. The one-year waiting period shall
be met before further consideration of the amendment.
   (C)   Resubmittal. Resubmittal of a text amendment application shall be
processed as a new application with all fees specified in §
156.1101.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1344 APPEALS.
   This chapter does not authorize new rights to an appeal from or remedies for
adverse decisions by Town Council, but interested parties may pursue existing
remedies from the Circuit Court.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1345 RECORDKEEPING.
   (A)   When the Town Council approves changes to the text of the Zoning Code,
those changes will be reflected in the Mount Pleasant Code of Ordinances as
provided in Chapter 30.
   (B)   When the Town Council approves changes to the text of a Planned
Development District ordinance, those changes shall be assigned a file number
and recorded in the zoning GIS layer (see §
156.022).
   (C)   The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of all text amendment
applications and related materials.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1346 THROUGH 156.1349 RESERVED.
PART 19: SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES  APPLICATIONS
§ 156.1350 CROSS-REFERENCE TO APPLICABLE PROCEDURE.
   The procedure for establishment of small wireless facilities is specified in
Subchapter C, Part 7, Subpart 7.1.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1351 THROUGH 156.1369 RESERVED.
PART 20: TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS  APPLICATIONS
§ 156.1370 CROSS-REFERENCE TO APPLICABLE PROCEDURE.
   The procedure for establishment of telecommunications towers is specified in
Subchapter C, Part 7, Subpart 7.2.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1371 THROUGH 156.1389 RESERVED.
SUBCHAPTER J: REVIEWING AND DECISION-MAKING BODIES
PART 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.1390 PURPOSE.
   (A)   This subchapter formally establishes commissions, boards, and
administrative officials, or recognizes existing commissions, boards, or
administrative officials, that administer this chapter.
   (B)   This subchapter establishes the composition of those reviewing and
decision-making bodies, their jurisdiction, and related administrative matters.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§
156.1391 THROUGH
156.1394 RESERVED.
PART 2: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW AND  DECISION-MAKING BODIES
SUBPART 2.1: DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING, LAND USE, AND NEIGHBORHOODS
§ 156.1395 DIRECTOR OF PLANNING, LAND USE, AND NEIGHBORHOODS.
   In addition to the duties specified in §
31.081, the Director of Planning, Land Use, and Neighborhoods has the following
duties in the administration and enforcement of this chapter:
   (A)   Advise applicants for permits concerning the provisions of
Chapter 156 and assist applicants in preparing applications;
   (B)   Receive, file, and forward to the Planning Commission all complete
applications that require its review, pursuant to
Subchapter I;
   (C)   Provide public notice as required by
Subchapter I;
   (D)   Perform field inspections for individual applications to verify
compliance with this chapter;
   (E)   Provide public information relative to this chapter;
   (F)   Maintain permanent and current records of matters pertaining to this
chapter, including:
      (1)   All original and current zoning maps;
      (2)   Zoning Code text and map amendments; and
      (3)   Comprehensive Plan text and Future Land Use map amendments.
   (G)   Execute any and all reports as the Town Council may require; and
   (H)   Coordinate with other town departments and outside agencies as needed
in the execution of these duties.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1396 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   As specified in §
31.081, the Zoning Administrator shall be the Director of Planning, Land Use,
and Neighborhoods, unless the Director specifically designates another
individual, in writing, to act as same.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator has the following specific duties in the
administration and enforcement of this chapter:
      (1)   Advise applicants for permits concerning the provisions of
Chapter 156 and assist applicants in preparing applications;
      (2)   Receive, review, and act on zoning permit applications (see
Subchapter I, Part 7);
      (3)   Receive, file, and forward to the Board of Zoning Appeals all
complete applications that require its review, pursuant to
Subchapter I;
      (4)   Receive, file, and forward to the Design Review Board all complete
applications that require its review, pursuant to Subchapter I;
      (5)   Receive, file, and forward to the Historic District Preservation
Commission all complete applications that require its review, pursuant to
Subchapter I: Procedures;
      (6)   Coordinate the activities of the Historical Commission (see
Subchapter J, Part 3, Subpart 3.6);
      (7)   Review applications for building permits, as needed, to verify
compliance with the Zoning Code;
      (8)   Develop interpretations of ambiguities in this chapter and other
issues in accordance with
Subchapter I, Part 16;
      (9)   Provide public notice as required by
Subchapter I;
      (10)   Provide public information relative to this chapter;
      (11)   Conduct inspections and perform field inspections as needed for
individual applications to verify compliance with this chapter;
      (12)   Maintain permanent and current records and files of any and all
matters referred to them;
      (13)   Execute any and all reports as the Town Council may require;
      (14)   Investigate Zoning Code violations; issue citations, warnings, or
notices where such violations exist; follow up on violations until the
situation has been properly remedied; and attend court hearings and testify
concerning Zoning Code violations;
      (15)   As appropriate, report to the Town Council any violation or
proposed violation of the Zoning Code;
      (16)   Order discontinuances of illegal use of land, buildings, or
structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures of illegal additions,
alterations, or structural changes; discontinuance of any illegal work being
done; or any other action authorized by this chapter to ensure compliance with
or to prevent violation of its provisions (see
Subchapter L);
      (17)   Coordinate with other town departments and outside agencies as
needed in the execution of these duties; and
      (18)   Other general requirements the town deems necessary to administer
this chapter.
   (C)   It shall also be the duty of all officers and employees of the town to
assist the Zoning Administrator by reporting to them new construction or new
land uses and apparent violations of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1397 THROUGH 156.1404 RESERVED.
SUBPART 2.2: ENGINEERING AND  DEVELOPMENT SERVICES DEPARTMENT
§ 156.1405 DIRECTOR OF THE ENGINEERING AND DEVELOPMENT SERVICES DEPARTMENT.
   The Director of the Engineering and Development Services Department has the
following duties in the administration and enforcement of this chapter:
   (A)   Designate a Program Manager for the Technical Review and Code
Compliance procedure; and
   (B)   Review for compliance with intersection sight distance requirements
any application referred by the PLAN Director or Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1406 DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF THE ENGINEERING AND ENVIRONMENTAL DIVISION.
   The Deputy Director of the Engineering and Environmental Division of the
Engineering and Development Services Department has the following duties in the
administration and enforcement of this chapter:
   (A)   Administer the tree protection regulations in Subchapter E for
detached house dwellings;
   (B)   Review proposals to redesignate critical area buffers on existing lots
(see §
156.622);
   (C)   Review proposals to establish new critical area buffer vision
corridors (see §
156.626); and
   (D)   Participate on the Technical Review and Code Compliance Team and/or
designate one or more staff members to serve on the TRCC.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1407 THROUGH 156.1414 RESERVED.
SUBPART 2.3: TECHNICAL REVIEW AND  CODE COMPLIANCE TEAM
§ 156.1415 COMPOSITION.
   (A)   Staff members.
      (1)   Technical Review and Code Compliance (TRCC) is administered by the
Design Review Team (DRT) which may be composed of staff members from the
following departments:
         (a)   Department of Planning, Land Use, and Neighborhoods;
         (b)   Engineering and Development Services Department;
         (c)   Fire Department;
         (d)   Police Department; and
         (e)   Public Services Department.
      (2)   Staff from other departments or outside agencies may be consulted
on a case-by-case basis, depending on the complexity of the proposed project.
   (B)   Program Manager.
      (1)   The Director of the Engineering and Development Services Department
shall designate a Program Manager.
      (2)   The Program Manager:
         (a)   Reviews incoming DRB and Planning Commission applications to
determine which qualify for TRCC review; and
         (b)   Coordinates the DRT members and TRCC review process.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1416 MEETINGS.
   The DRT meets for TRCC on a monthly or as-needed basis.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1417 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The TRCC process reviews all:
      (1)   Design review applications (see
Subchapter I, Part 12); and
      (2)   Sketch plan applications (see §
155.021).
   (B)   The TRCC determines whether applications and associated development
plans comply with the town Code of Ordinances.
   (C)   As part of the TRCC review process, the DRT provides comments to
applicants and may require changes to submitted applications and plans to
ensure compliance with town ordinances.
   (D)   Following TRCC review, the DRT forwards complete applications to the
Design Review Board or Planning Commission, as applicable. The DRT does not
forward an application unless it fully complies with minimum code requirements.
   (E)   TRCC does not approve or disapprove applications or development plans.
As such, the TRCC review process does not confer vested rights for any
application.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1418 THROUGH 156.1429 RESERVED.
PART 3: APPOINTED REVIEW AND  DECISION-MAKING BODIES
SUBPART 3.1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.1430 APPLICABILITY.
   This subpart applies to the Planning Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals,
Design Review Board, Historic District Preservation Commission, and Historical
Commission.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1431 TERM OF OFFICE.
   (A)   Term length.
      (1)   Unless otherwise specified in this subchapter, all seats on all
appointed boards and commissions have a three year term.
      (2)   Terms begin on the date of appointment. Members shall assume their
duties at the first regular meeting after their appointment.
      (3)   Each member shall serve until Town Council appoints their
successor.
   (B)   Number of terms. Each person appointed may serve up to three
consecutive terms on a particular board or commission.
   (C)   Term expiration. Upon the expiration of a term, the Town Council shall
act promptly to make appointments in order to avoid vacant seats, the continued
service of members with expired terms, or the clustering of more than three
term expirations on any one board or commission in a given year.
   (D)   Implementation of new terms.
      (1)   The Zoning Code revision in 2025 implemented universal three-year
terms. To implement this change, each current board or commission member serves
the remainder of their current term. The three-year term commences with each
subsequent appointment or reappointment.
      (2)   Each member may serve up to three consecutive terms on a particular
board or commission, regardless of the number of years in each term.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1432 ATTENDANCE, REMOVAL, AND VACANCIES.
   (A)   Attendance.
      (1)   Members that have served less than one year of their appointed term
shall attend at least 75% of all called meetings. This is measured on the first
of every month for the preceding year. Attendance at fewer than 75% of meetings
is cause for removal.
      (2)   Members that have served one year or more of their appointed term
may be absent from up to four called meetings per year on a 12-month rolling
basis. The fifth absence is cause for removal.
   (B)   Removal.
      (1)   Any member of a board or commission may be removed by the Town
Council or Town Administrator, as specified below, for just cause. Neglect of
duty, no longer being a resident of the town, or misconduct in office
constitutes just cause.
      (2)   If removal for cause, except due to attendance, appears imminent,
the Chairperson of the respective board or commission shall contact the member
and ascertain whether removal should be considered by the Town Council. The
Chairperson shall then make a recommendation to Council, prior to Council
action on the matter.
      (3)   If removal due to attendance is necessary, the Town Administrator
shall remove the member from the board or commission prior to the next
scheduled meeting and shall notify Town Council.
   (C)   Vacancies.
      (1)   A vacancy in the term of office occurs whenever a member resigns,
is unable to serve for any reason, or is removed in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
      (2)   Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled, as soon as may
reasonably be accomplished by the Town Council, in the same manner as the
original appointment.
      (3)   Members appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve a full three-year
term, as specified in §
156.1431, regardless of the amount of time left in the previous member’s term.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1433 CHAIRPERSONS, VICE-CHAIRPERSONS, AND SECRETARIES.
   (A)   Chairpersons and vice-chairpersons.
      (1)   At the first regular meeting of each calendar year, each board or
commission shall elect a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson by secret ballot.
      (2)   The term of office of the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson is a
period of one year.
      (3)   If a vacancy occurs in an office prior to the expiration of the
full term, another election to fill the remainder of the term of office shall
be conducted at the first meeting thereafter.
      (4)   The Chairperson shall be a voting member and shall:
         (a)   Call special meetings;
         (b)   Preside at meetings and hearings;
         (c)   Swear in witnesses when applicable;
         (d)   Act as spokesperson for the board or commission; and
         (e)   Perform other duties approved by the board or commission.
      (5)   The Vice-Chairperson shall exercise the duties of the Chairperson
in the absence, disability, or disqualification of the Chairperson.
      (6)   In the absence of the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson, the members
present shall elect an acting Chairperson.
   (B)   Secretaries.
      (1)   The PLAN Director shall designate staff members of the Planning,
Land Use, and Neighborhoods Department to serve as Secretary and Recording
Secretary of each board or commission.
      (2)   The Secretary shall:
         (a)   Coordinate with board/commission members to schedule meetings;
         (b)   Provide proper notice for all meetings;
         (c)   Create meeting agendas;
         (d)   Distribute meeting materials;
         (e)   See that the property involved is properly posted, as
applicable;
         (f)   Serve board or commission decisions on parties, as applicable;
         (g)   Maintain records of the board’s or commission’s actions as a
public record;
         (h)   Attend to board or commission correspondence;
         (i)   Advise the board/commission as needed; and
         (j)   Undertake other duties as specified in the board’s or
commission’s rules of procedure.
      (3)   The Recording Secretary shall:
         (a)   Keep minutes of the board’s or commission’s proceedings, showing
the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact;
         (b)   Assist with meeting room setup;
         (c)   Ensure recording and audio/video equipment are available and set
up as needed;
         (d)   Serve as support staff to the Secretary; and
         (e)   Other duties as specified in the board’s or commission’s rules
of procedure.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1434 MEETINGS AND QUORUMS.
   (A)   Meetings of each board or commission shall be held regularly, as
specified on the annual meeting schedule, at the call of the Chairperson, and
at such other times as the Chairperson or board/commission determine.
   (B)   All meetings of the board or commission shall be open to the public.
   (C)   Public notice for all board and commission meetings shall be provided
in accordance with the requirements outlined in S.C. Code, Title 30, Chapter 4,
also known as the Freedom of Information Act, and S.C. Code Title 6, Chapter
29, also known as the South Carolina Local Government Comprehensive Planning
Enabling Act of 1994.
   (D)   A majority of the members appointed and currently serving constitute a
quorum for conducting business, including members who have recused themselves
for conflict of interest, pursuant to S.C. Code § 8-13-700(B). In no case shall
a quorum exist if the number of members currently serving on the board or
commission is less than the minimum number of members allowable under
applicable state law.
   (E)   Decisions shall be made by a majority vote of a quorum of members.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1435 RULES OF PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Each board and commission shall adopt rules of procedure at its first
meeting of each calendar year.
   (B)   Rules of procedure for each board and commission are available on the
town’s website.
   (C)   Robert's Rules of Order governs the conduct of meetings, except as
otherwise provided by the board’s or commission’s rules of procedure.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1436 LIABILITY OF MEMBERS.
   (A)   Any member of a board or commission acting within the powers granted
by this subchapter is relieved from all personal liability for any damage and
shall be held harmless by the town.
   (B)   Any suit brought against any member of a board or commission within
their official capacity shall be defended by a legal representative furnished
by the town until the termination of the procedure.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1437 THROUGH 156.1444 RESERVED.
SUBPART 3.2: PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 156.1445 ESTABLISHMENT AND MEMBERSHIP OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Establishment. Pursuant to S.C. Code §§ 6-29-310 et seq., this part
establishes a Planning Commission, composed of nine members appointed by the
Mayor and Town Council.
   (B)   Membership.
      (1)   It is the declared policy of the Town Council that it will consider
and appoint only those persons who:
         (a)   Are residents of the town and have been so for a period of at
least one year prior to the appointment; and
         (b)   Have demonstrated their professional expertise, knowledge of the
community, and concern for the future welfare of the total community and its
citizens.
      (2)   Members shall represent a broad cross-section of interests and
concerns within the town.
      (3)   Members of the Commission shall:
         (a)   Regularly attend meetings and public hearings of the Commission;
and
         (b)   Serve without compensation, except for reimbursement for
authorized expenses related to the performance of their duties.
      (4)   While serving on the Commission, a member shall not hold any public
office or position in the Town of Mount Pleasant or Charleston County.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1446 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Planning Commission has all the powers, duties, and
responsibilities as set forth herein and in S.C. Code §§ 6-29-310 et seq.
   (B)   It is the function and duty of the Planning Commission to undertake a
continuing planning program for the physical, social, and economic growth,
development, and redevelopment of the area within its jurisdiction.
      (1)   The plans and programs must be designed to promote public health,
safety, morals, convenience, prosperity, or the general welfare, as well as the
efficiency and economy of its area of jurisdiction.
      (2)   Specific planning elements must be based upon careful and
comprehensive surveys and studies of existing conditions and probable future
development, and include recommended means of implementation.
      (3)   The Planning Commission may make, publish, and distribute maps,
plans, and reports and recommendations relating to the plans and programs and
the development of this area of jurisdiction to public officials and agencies,
public utility companies, civic, educational, professional, and other
organizations and citizens.
      (4)   All public officials shall, upon request, furnish to the Planning
Commission, within a reasonable time, such available information as it may
require for its work.
      (5)   The Planning Commission, its members, and its employees, in the
performance of its functions, may enter upon any land with consent of the
property owner or, after ten days' written notification to the owner of record,
make examinations and surveys, and place and maintain necessary monuments and
marks on them, provided, however, that the Planning Commission shall be liable
for any injury or damage to property resulting therefrom.
      (6)   In general, the Planning Commission has the powers as may be
necessary to enable it to perform its functions and promote the planning of its
political jurisdiction.
   (C)   In the discharge of its responsibilities, the Planning Commission has
the power and duty to:
      (1)   Prepare and revise periodically plans and programs for the
development and redevelopment of its area, as provided herein;
      (2)   Prepare and recommend for adoption to the Town Council as a means
for implementing the plans and programs in its area:
         (a)   Zoning ordinances to include zoning district maps and
appropriate revisions thereof, as provided herein;
         (b)   Regulations for the subdivision or development of land, and
appropriate revisions thereof, and to oversee the administration of the
regulations that may be adopted, as provided herein;
         (c)   An official map and appropriate revision on it showing the exact
location of existing or proposed public street, highway, and utility rights-of-
way, and public building sites, together with regulations to control the
erection of buildings or other structures or changes in land use within the
rights-of-way, building sites, or open spaces within its political jurisdiction
or a specified portion of it, as set forth herein;
         (d)   A landscaping ordinance setting forth required planting, tree
preservation, and other aesthetic considerations for land and structures;
         (e)   A capital improvements program setting forth projects required
to implement plans that have been prepared and adopted, including an annual
listing of priority projects for consideration by the governmental bodies
responsible for implementation prior to preparation of their capital budget;
and
         (f)   Policies or procedures to facilitate implementation of planning
element; and
      (3)   Name or rename streets within the town.
   (D)   The Planning Commission may purchase equipment and supplies, and may
employ or contract for such staff and such experts as it considers necessary
and consistent with funds appropriated.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1447 THROUGH 156.1454 RESERVED.
SUBPART 3.3: BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
§ 156.1455 ESTABLISHMENT AND MEMBERSHIP OF THE BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.
   (A)   Establishment. Pursuant to S.C. Code §§ 6-29-780 et seq., this part
establishes a Board of Zoning Appeals (BOZA), composed of seven members
appointed by the Mayor and Town Council.
   (B)   Membership.
      (1)   It is the declared policy of Town Council that it will consider and
appoint only those persons who:
         (a)   Are residents of the town and have been so for a period of at
least one year prior to the appointment; and
         (b)   Have demonstrated their general knowledge of the community and
concern for the welfare of the total community and its citizens.
      (2)   Members shall represent a broad cross-section of interests and
concerns within the town.
      (3)   Members of the Board shall:
         (a)   Regularly attend meetings; and
         (b)   Serve without compensation, except for reimbursement for
authorized expenses related to the performance of their duties.
      (4)   While serving on the Board, a member shall not hold any other
public office or position in the Town of Mount Pleasant or Charleston County.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1456 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   Powers and duties. The Board of Zoning Appeals has all of the powers,
duties, and responsibilities set forth in S.C. Code §§ 6-29-780 through 6-29-
860, as amended, unless otherwise stated herein. Specifically, the Board has
the following powers:
      (1)   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in an
order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative
official in the enforcement of the Zoning Code (see
Subchapter I, Part 17);
      (2)   To hear and decide appeals for variance from the requirements of
the Zoning Code when strict application of the provisions of the Code would
result in unnecessary hardship (see
Subchapter I, Part 15);
      (3)   To permit uses by special exception, (see
Subchapter I, Part 9); and
      (4)   To remand a matter to an administrative official upon motion by a
party or the Board's own motion, if the Board determines the record is
insufficient for review.
         (a)   A party's motion for remand may be denied if the Board
determines the record is sufficient for review.
         (b)   The Board must set a rehearing on the remanded matter without
further public notice for a time certain within 60 days, unless otherwise
agreed to by the parties.
         (c)   The Board must maintain a list of persons who express an
interest in being informed when the remanded matter is set for rehearing, and
notice of the rehearing must be mailed to these persons prior to the rehearing.
   (B)   Exercise of powers and duties.
      (1)   In exercising the above powers and duties, the Board of Zoning
Appeals may:
         (a)   In conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or
affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the order, requirements, decision,
determination, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from
whom the appeal is taken;
         (b)   Issue or direct the issuance of a permit;
         (c)   Subpoena witnesses; and,
         (d)   In case of contempt by a party, witness, or other person before
the Board of Zoning Appeals, may certify this fact to the circuit court having
jurisdiction. The judge of the court, in open court or in chambers, after
hearing, may impose a penalty as authorized by law.
      (2)   The Chairperson or, in their absence, the Vice-Chairperson may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1457 FINANCING.
   The Town Council may:
   (A)   Appropriate such monies, otherwise unappropriated, as it considers fit
to finance the work of the Board of Zoning Appeals and to generally provide for
the enforcement of any zoning regulations and restrictions authorized hereunder
that are adopted; and
   (B)   Accept and expend grants of money for those purposes from either
private or public sources, whether local, state, or federal.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1458 THROUGH 156.1464 RESERVED.
SUBPART 3.4: DESIGN REVIEW BOARD
§ 156.1465 ESTABLISHMENT AND MEMBERSHIP OF THE DESIGN REVIEW BOARD.
   (A)   Establishment. Pursuant to S.C. Code §§ 6-29-870 et seq., this part
establishes a Design Review Board (DRB), composed of seven members appointed by
the Mayor and Town Council.
   (B)   Membership.
      (1)   It is the declared policy of the Town Council that it will consider
and appoint only those persons who:
         (a)   Are residents of the town and have been so for a period of at
least one year prior to the appointment;
         (b)   Have demonstrated their professional expertise, knowledge of the
community, and concern for the welfare of the total community and its citizens;
and
         (c)   Have a demonstrated interest in, competence in, and knowledge
of, architecture, landscape architecture, and urban design.
      (2)   At least one member of the DRB shall be a state-licensed architect
and at least one member shall be a state-licensed landscape architect.
      (3)   To the extent there are local resources, membership priority may be
given, in Council’s sole discretion, to state-licensed landscape architects,
state-licensed architects, licensed professional engineers, and licensed
general building contractors.
      (4)   Members of the DRB shall:
         (a)   Regularly attend meetings of the DRB; and
         (b)   Serve without compensation, except for reimbursement for
authorized expenses related to the performance of their duties.
      (5)   While serving on the DRB, a member shall not hold any other public
office or position in the Town of Mount Pleasant or Charleston County.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1466 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The DRB has all the powers, duties, and responsibilities as set forth
herein and in S.C. Code §§ 6-29-870 et seq.
   (B)   It is the duty and power of the DRB to:
      (1)   Protect and promote the appearance, character, and economic value
of commercial development located within the commercial districts and
development areas of the town and of apartment complex developments located in
residential and mixed use areas of the town;
      (2)   Review and approve or deny all applications submitted to it for
proposed new commercial developments located within the commercial districts
and development areas of the town and for proposed new apartment complex
developments;
      (3)   Review and approve or deny all applications submitted to it for
major alterations and/or additions to existing commercial developments located
within the commercial districts and development areas of the town and for
proposed new apartment complex developments;
      (4)   Review and approve or deny all applications submitted to it for
landscape plans proposed by the town or any other public or state agency for
public rights-of-way or for publicly-owned property located within the
commercial districts and development areas of the town;
      (5)   Review and approve or deny all applications submitted to it for
architectural plans for facilities to be located within designated commercial
districts and development areas proposed by the town or any other public or
state agency;
      (6)   Foster civic beauty; and
      (7)   Strengthen the local economy.
   (C)   In order to accomplish the above, the DRB has the authority to adjust
or modify the building and site design standards of Subchapter H, Parts 2 and 3
as deemed appropriate to the particular project and its individual
circumstances.
   (D)   The DRB’s area of purview is more fully described in Subchapter H.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1467 THROUGH 156.1474 RESERVED.
SUBPART 3.5: HISTORIC DISTRICT PRESERVATION COMMISSION
§ 156.1475 ESTABLISHMENT AND MEMBERSHIP OF THE HISTORIC DISTRICT PRESERVATION
COMMISSION.
   (A)   Establishment. Pursuant to S.C. Code §§ 6-29-870 et seq., as amended,
the Historic District Preservation Commission (HDPC), composed of five members
appointed by the Mayor and Town Council, was established by Ordinance No.
19062, passed November 12, 2019; having replaced and superseded the previous
Old Village Historic District Commission, which was established by Ordinance
No. 06052, passed June 21, 2006; having replaced and superseded the previous
Town Appearance Commission, which was established by ordinance passed May 5,
1986.
   (B)   Membership.
      (1)   It is the declared policy of the Town Council that it will consider
and appoint only those persons who:
         (a)   Have been residents of the town for a period of at least two
years prior to appointment;
         (b)   Reside in the historic districts, except that a member in one of
the five seats is not required to reside within an historic district. Each
Historic District shall have at least one resident on the HDPC;
         (c)   Have demonstrated their general knowledge of the community and
concern for the welfare of the total community and its citizens; and
         (d)   Have a demonstrated interest and knowledge of the historic
district.
      (2)   At least one member of the HDPC shall be a professional in
architectural history, preservation, history, archaeology, building arts, or
any other area of knowledge that would benefit the mission of the Commission
and meet the membership requirement of the certified local government program.
      (3)   In general, and to the extent that there are local resources in the
community, members shall be knowledgeable in architecture, architectural
history, planning, archeology, history, building arts, and any other areas of
knowledge that would benefit the mission of the Commission and community.
      (4)   Members of the Commission shall:
         (a)   Regularly attend meetings; and
         (b)   Serve without compensation, except for reimbursement for
authorized expenses related to the performance of their duties.
      (5)   While serving on the Board, a members shall not hold any other
public office or position in the Town of Mount Pleasant or Charleston County.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1476 JURISDICTION.
   The HDPC shall oversee the Old Village Historic District (see Subchapter B)
and any future historic districts established by the town.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1477 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   Survey and inventory.
      (1)   Pursuant to the town's historic district Certified Local Government
(CLG) status, the Commission may request funding for and authorize a new survey
and inventory of properties, or update of a prior inventory, provided that such
survey or update is conducted in accordance with professional standards under
qualified supervision; and is coordinated with and complementary to those
standards of the State Historic Preservation Office; and follows procedures
described in the South Carolina State Historic Preservation Program: Survey
Manual.
      (2)   The Commission shall maintain a local survey and inventory of
buildings, structures, and sites. These records shall be available to the
public.
      (3)   In addition to maintaining CLG status, the survey and inventory may
be used to:
         (a)   Record the historic architecture of the town;
         (b)   Study a given area in order to evaluate eligibility for the
National Register of Historic Places or district status; or
         (c)   Monitor change to the architectural fabric of Mount Pleasant.
      (4)   The 2010 comprehensive survey of the district entitled "A Historic
Resources Survey of the Old Village Historic District" shall be the survey
referenced for any of the uses listed above.
   (B)   Designation of historic properties.
      (1)   The Commission shall review the local survey and inventory and make
recommendations for historic designation to the Town Council, based on any of
the following criteria:
         (a)   A property, be it a structure or site, may be designated
historic if it was built at least 50 years before the current year, and:
            1.   Has inherent character, interest, or value as part of the
development or heritage of the community, state, or nation;
            2.   Is the site of an event significant in history;
            3.   Has an association with a person or persons who contributed
significantly to the culture and development of the community, state, or
nation;
            4.   Exemplifies the cultural, political, economic, social, ethnic,
architectural, archeological, or historic heritage of the community, state, or
nation;
            5.   Embodies distinguishing characteristics of a type, style,
period, or specimen in architecture or engineering;
            6.   Is the work of a designer whose work has significantly
influenced the development of the community, state, or nation;
            7.   Contains elements of design, detail, materials, or
craftsmanship that represent a significant innovation;
            8.   Is part of or related to a distinctive element of community
planning;
            9.   Represents an established and familiar visual feature of the
neighborhood, waterfront, or community;
            10.   Represents an archeological site, be it a prominent land
feature with significance to the development of the historic districts, a
prehistory site, or other culturally significant place important to the history
of Mount Pleasant, the historic districts, the state, or the nation; or
            11.   Embodies distinguishing characteristics of a type of land
development character through the prevailing patterns of existing lots,
densities, spacing of homes, lot sizes and shapes, and other characteristics
that exemplify the culture, traditions, beliefs, practices, lifeways, arts,
crafts, and social institutions that constitute the heritage of the community;
         (b)   Ordinarily structures that have been moved from their original
locations, reconstructed historic buildings, properties primarily commemorative
in nature, and properties that have achieved significance within 50 years
before the current year shall not be considered eligible for historic
designation. However, such properties may be recommended if they fall within
the following categories:
            1.   A building or structure removed from its original location,
but that is significant primarily for architectural value, or that is the
surviving structure most importantly associated with a historic person or
event;
            2.   A reconstructed building, when accurately executed in a
suitable environment and presented in a dignified manner as part of a
restoration master plan, and when no other building or structure with the same
association has survived;
            3.   A property primarily commemorative in intent if design, age,
tradition, or symbolic value has invested it with its own historical
significance; or
            4.   A property achieving significance within 50 years before the
current year if it is of exceptional importance;
      (2)   The Commission may review properties for historic designation at
its discretion or when prompted when a structure or site has achieved 50 years
since construction.
      (3)   Owners of properties recommended for designation shall be provided
notice and an opportunity for a public hearing before the Town Council prior to
a final decision. Specifically, the owners shall be notified in writing, via
certified mail, 30 days before the Town Council's review of the recommendation,
and may appear before Town Council to support or oppose the proposed historic
designation.
      (4)   Upon approval of the Town Council, designated districts, district
extensions, buildings, structures, and sites shall be preserved and protected
under the regulations of this Chapter and the design guidelines referenced in
division (G) below.
      (5)   Property owners who wish to appeal the decision of the Town Council
may do so before the courts of the state, as provided in South Carolina Code of
Laws.
   (C)   Creation of new historic districts and the reduction or elimination of
existing historic districts.
      (1)   The Commission has the power to recommend to the Town Council the
creation of new historic districts and the reduction or elimination of existing
historic districts. The recommendation shall be based upon the properties
within the district meeting the criteria specified in division (B) above.
      (2)   Owners of properties to be included in new or expanded districts or
those eliminated from districts shall be notified in writing, via certified
mail, 30 days prior to consideration by the Town Council. Owners may appear
before the Town Council to voice their opinion on the designation, and may
object to the decision of the Town Council to designate their property by
filing suit before the courts of the state, as provided in the South Carolina
Code of Laws.
      (3)   Upon approval by the Town Council, newly created historic districts
shall be treated as new zoning overlay districts, with regulations and
guidelines appropriate for that district and area of the town and shall be
under the authority of the HDPC.
   (D)   Nominations to the National Register of Historic Places.
      (1)   The Commission may nominate buildings, structures, sites, objects,
or districts to the National Register of Historic Places, according to the
criteria and registration requirements set forth by the National Park Service
which oversees the National Register of Historic Places.
      (2)   The Commission shall have first review and evaluation of all
proposed nominations to the National Register of Historic Places within its
jurisdiction, including any that may have been submitted to the State Historic
Preservation Office. Owners of properties to be reviewed by the Commission
shall be notified in writing, via certified mail, 30 days prior to the
Commission's review.
      (3)   The Commission shall forward all reviewed nominations to the State
Historic Preservation Office, with recommendations for consideration by the
State Board of Review.
      (4)   The Commission does not have the authority to nominate properties
directly to the National Register of Historic Places; only the State Board of
Review and the State Historic Preservation Office has this final review
authority.
   (E)   Identification of historic properties and districts.
      (1)   The Secretary shall maintain a map illustrating all historic
properties as defined herein, which may be amended from time to time as allowed
within these provisions.
      (2)   All locally designated historic districts shall be clearly shown
through a written description and map located within each Historic Overlay
District.
   (F)   Design review.
      (1)   It is the duty of the Commission to review applications regarding
moving, demolition, new construction, exterior alteration, building additions,
site alterations, hardscaping, walkways, driveways, patios, walls, fences, and
docks in the Old Village Historic District.
      (2)   This review shall follow established criteria (see
Subchapter I, Part 13) in accordance with approved design guidelines (see
division (G) below).
   (G)   Design guidelines.
      (1)   In order to accomplish the design review as provided in division
(F) above, the Commission shall adopt design guidelines.
      (2)   Such design guidelines, and any subsequent amendments thereto,
shall be published and made available to the public. The Old Village Historic
District Guidelines are available on the town’s website.
      (3)   Amendments to design guidelines take effect at the second regularly
scheduled monthly meeting of the HDPC following the approval.
      (4)   The Commission shall readopt design guidelines at their first
regularly scheduled meeting of each year.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1478 PROFESSIONAL ADVISOR.
   (A)   The Commission may consult with an architect, architectural historian,
a person with an expertise in the building arts, or any other professional on
an as-needed basis to receive professional advice.
   (B)   This advisor may be appointed by Town Council at the request of the
Commission.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1479 THROUGH 156.1484 RESERVED.
SUBPART 3.6: HISTORICAL COMMISSION
§ 156.1485 ESTABLISHMENT AND MEMBERSHIP OF THE HISTORICAL COMMISSION.
   (A)   Establishment.
      (1)   This part establishes a Historical Commission, composed of seven
members appointed by the Mayor and Town Council.
      (2)   The Historical Commission was originally created on January 10,
1989 and was reconstituted in accordance with the South Carolina Local
Government Comprehensive Planning Enabling Act of 1994.
   (B)   Membership. It is the declared policy of Town Council that it will
consider and appoint only those persons who:
      (1)   Are residents of the town and have been so for a period of at least
one year prior to the appointment; and
      (2)   Have demonstrated their general knowledge of the community and
concern for the welfare of the total community and its citizens.
      (3)   Members of the Commission shall:
         (a)   Regularly attend meetings; and
         (b)   Serve without compensation, except for reimbursement for
authorized expenses related to the performance of their duties.
      (4)   While serving on the Commission, a member shall not hold any other
public office or position in the Town of Mount Pleasant or Charleston County.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1486 PURPOSE.
   The Historical Commission’s purpose is to:
   (A)   Promote local history and historical areas through educational
programs and activities.
   (B)   Preserve, protect, and promote the integrity of properties significant
in local history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, economics,
transportation, and culture; and
   (C)   Initiate, encourage, and maintain local historical preservation
efforts in coordination with community desires and the Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1487 JURISDICTION.
   The Commission's jurisdiction applies to all real property within the
municipal limits of the town, including all future annexations.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1488 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   In furtherance of §
156.1486, the Commission has the following powers and duties:
   (A)   Official map. To prepare and maintain revisions of an official map,
locating the position of historical and cultural sites within the town;
   (B)   Public educational programs and promotion of historical areas. To
promote local history and the use and enjoyment of historical areas through
lectures, exhibits, publications, special events and programs;
   (C)   Historical marker program. To promote local sites, events, and persons
through the historical marker program;
   (D)   Mount Pleasant special collection. To establish a special collection
for the purpose of collecting, cataloging, and preserving information about the
history of the town and its residents; and
   (E)   History-related tourism. To provide advice, recommendations, and
assistance regarding history-related tourism.
   (F)   Monuments and memorials. To evaluate and recommend the approval or
denial of applications for non-town-sponsored and town-sponsored large
memorials and monuments at town parks or on town property, in accordance with §
43.02.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1489 THROUGH 156.1494 RESERVED.
SUBPART 3.7: SPECIAL PURPOSE AND  ADVISORY COMMISSIONS
§ 156.1495 ESTABLISHMENT AND MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   Establishment. This subpart recognizes that, from time to time, it may
be desirable or necessary to establish commissions for special purposes,
composed of members appointed by the Mayor and Town Council. These special
purpose or advisory commissions may be established by resolution of the Town
Council
   (B)   Membership. The number of members and any special composition of
membership shall be specified in the resolution creating the Advisory or
Special Purpose Commission.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1496 PURPOSE.
   The purpose shall be specified in the resolution creating the Advisory or
Special Purpose Commission.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1497 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   Unless otherwise specified in the resolution creating the Advisory or
Special Purpose Commission, the term of office and other general provisions
shall be consistent with
Subchapter J, Part 3, Subpart 3.1 for as long as the Advisory or Special
Purpose Commission is authorized.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1498 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The powers and duties shall be specified in the resolution creating the
Advisory or Special Purpose Commission.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1499 THROUGH 156.1514 RESERVED.
SUBCHAPTER K: NONCONFORMITIES
PART 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.1515 PURPOSE.
   Nonconformities in the use and development of structures, land, and
buildings are to be avoided, or eliminated where now existing, wherever and
whenever possible, except when necessary to:
   (A)   Preserve property rights established prior to the official date of
these regulations;
   (B)   Promote the general welfare; and
   (C)   Protect the character of surrounding property.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1516 BURDEN OF PROOF.
   (A)   The burden of proof to determine whether a lawfully established
nonconformity exists and was compliant with the zoning, subdivision, building,
and other development regulations in effect at the time the use, building,
structure, site feature, sign, or exterior lighting equipment was created is
placed upon the property owner and not the Town of Mount Pleasant.
   (B)   Appropriate evidence must be provided to the Zoning Administrator to
be able to establish a valid nonconformity. Upon receipt of adequate proof, the
Zoning Administrator shall acknowledge such proof in writing and decide on the
validity of the claim.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1517 PRINCIPAL STRUCTURES LEGALLY CONSTRUCTED PRIOR TO AUGUST 13, 1979.
   Principal structures legally constructed prior to adoption of the Zoning
Code on August 13, 1979, are considered to have been constructed in conformity
with setback, height, and building coverage regulations in place at the time of
construction.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1518 NONCONFORMITIES CREATED BY GOVERNMENT ACTION.
   In situations where a nonconformity is created on a private property due to
government action to provide public amenities, utilities, or infrastructure,
the nonconformity is considered as a legal conforming situation and the
property owner held harmless and relieved of the need to remedy the
nonconformity.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1519 THROUGH 156.1524 RESERVED.
PART 2: NONCONFORMING LOTS
§ 156.1525 CONTINUANCE OF NONCONFORMING LOTS.
   (A)   Subject to all limitations in this section, any nonconforming lot may
continue without change in boundaries and may be utilized or developed, if the
uses and development are otherwise authorized by this chapter.
   (B)   The front, side, and rear yard setbacks of a lot that is nonconforming
with respect to dimensional standards (area, width, or depth) may be reduced by
up to 20%. If a variance greater than 20% is required to accommodate the
proposed use of the lot, a request for relief from the requirements of this
section must be filed with the Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (C)   When an undeveloped split-zoned lot is proposed for development or
when the principal structure on a split-zoned lot is proposed to be improved by
more than 50% of its taxable/use value of improvement as determined by
Charleston County, the lot must be rezoned or subdivided to eliminate the split
zoning. This provision does not apply to split-zoned lots where the zoning
district boundary line generally separates marsh/water areas from high ground
areas.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1526 DISCONTINUANCE OF NONCONFORMING LOTS.
   Any lot that is made conforming by combining with other lots, by subdividing
or re-subdividing, or by rezoning thereafter shall be recognized as a
conforming lot, and shall fully comply with this chapter.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1527 THROUGH 156.1534 RESERVED.
PART 3: NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES,  USES, AND SITE FEATURES
§ 156.1535 PURPOSE.
   Where structures, uses, or site features legally existing on the effective
date of this chapter, or any subsequent amendment thereto, do not conform with
the provisions of this chapter, it is the intent and purpose of this section
to:
   (A)   Declare such structures, uses, and site features to be nonconforming
and detrimental to the orderly development of the town; and
   (B)   Eliminate such nonconformities consistent with the rights of the
owners and users thereof, for the purpose of protecting the public health,
safety, and general welfare.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1536 CONTINUING EXISTING NONCONFORMITIES.
   (A)   Any structure, use, or site feature that does not conform with the
provisions of this chapter for the district in which it is located is deemed to
be nonconforming and may continue only as specified in this section if the
condition was:
      (1)   Legally existing at the time of the enactment of this chapter;
      (2)   Applied for or approved by the town under previous regulations in
effect before the effective date of this chapter, if the condition conformed
with the previous regulations; or
      (3)   For annexed parcels, legally existing on the effective date of the
annexation into the town.
   (B)   Provided, however, that this section does not apply to any structure,
use, or site feature established in violation of the Zoning Ordinance
previously in effect in the town, unless such structure, use, or site feature
now conforms with this chapter.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1537 DETERMINATION OF VALUE.
   (A)   Principal structures. The total market value as determined by
Charleston County is used to determine the value of existing principal
structures.
   (B)   Accessory structures. The value of accessory structures is based on
the average per square foot cost of construction for accessory structures as
established by the most current adopted version of the International Code
Council (ICC) building valuation. For unlisted structures, the reasonable
replacement value is used. The Zoning Administrator may consult with
appropriate town officials, such as the Building Official and Town Engineer, to
provide, apply, and interpret the ICC building valuation or determine
reasonable replacement value.
   (C)   Site features. The reasonable replacement value is used to determine
the value of existing site features. The Zoning Administrator may consult with
appropriate town officials, such as the Building Official and Town Engineer, to
determine reasonable replacement value.
   (D)   Property tax exemption. Properties that have been approved for
property tax exemption by the South Carolina Department of Revenue and have a
Charleston County total market value of $0 may provide an appraisal of the
structure and land. The appraisal must have been completed by an appraiser
licensed by the Real Estate Appraisers Board of the South Carolina Department
of Labor, Licensing, and Regulation within one year prior to the date of
application for repairs, alterations, renovations, maintenance, improvements,
or replacement.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1538 REPAIRS, ALTERATIONS, AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Ordinary repairs, alterations, or maintenance of nonconforming
structures. Ordinary nonstructural repairs, alterations, or maintenance may be
made to a nonconforming structure as required to keep it in sound condition.
      (1)   Alterations or repairs of a structural nature to a nonconforming
structure are prohibited, except when :
         (a)   Required by law or ordinance; or
         (b)   The structural alterations or repairs are made to a
nonconforming residential structure used for residential purposes.
      (2)   Nothing in this chapter prevents the strengthening or restoring to
a safe condition of any part of any structure declared unsafe by proper
authority.
   (B)   Improvements to nonconforming principal structures.
      (1)   Any nonconforming principal structure that is renovated, repaired,
altered, or otherwise improved by more than 50% of its total market value as
determined by Charleston County at the time of renovation, repair, or
alteration shall be brought into conformance with all applicable sections of
this Zoning Code. This includes the upgrading of the site to meet landscaping,
buffering, parking, stormwater, and other applicable requirements.
      (2)   When a nonconforming principal structure is improved by less than
50% of its total market value as determined by Charleston County, the
improvements must comply with this subchapter.
   (C)   Improvements to nonconforming site features.
      (1)   Any nonconforming site feature that is renovated, repaired,
altered, or otherwise improved by more than 50% of its reasonable replacement
cost at the time of renovation, repair, alteration, or improvement shall be
brought into conformance with all applicable sections of this Zoning Code. This
includes the upgrading of the site to meet landscaping, buffering, parking,
stormwater, and other applicable requirements.
      (2)   When a nonconforming site feature is improved by less than 50% of
its reasonable replacement cost, the improvements must comply with this
subchapter.
   (D)   Improvements to nonconforming accessory structures.
      (1)   A nonconforming accessory structure may be maintained within its
current height and footprint but shall not be expanded nor improved by more
than 50% of the International Code Council (ICC) building valuation.
      (2)   In order to expand a nonconforming accessory structure or improve
it by more than 50% of its ICC building valuation, it must be brought into
compliance with all applicable requirements of this chapter.
   (E)   Phasing of improvements. Applicants shall not phase improvements to
circumvent compliance with this subchapter. The town calculates the percentage
of improvements over a rolling five-year period.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1539 CHANGE OF USE.
   A nonconforming land use shall not be changed to another nonconforming use.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1540 ABANDONMENT OF USE.
   (A)   A use shall be deemed to have been abandoned when it has been
discontinued, whether temporarily or permanently, with the intent to abandon
the use.
   (B)   Evidence of abandonment includes but is not limited to :
      (1)   Lack of use;
      (2)   Vacancy for at least 12 consecutive months or for 18 accumulated
months in a two-year period; and
      (3)   Substituting a conforming use.
   (C)   A nonconforming use of a structure or land that has been declared
abandoned shall not thereafter be reestablished, except in conformity with this
chapter.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1541 RESTORATION OF DAMAGED STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Damage due to neglect, deferred maintenance, or normal wear and tear.
Any nonconforming structure damaged to more than 50% of its taxable/use value
of improvement at the time of damage, either through neglect, deferred
maintenance, or normal wear and tear over a period of time, shall not be
reconstructed and used as before such happenings.
      (1)   If less than 50% damaged, it may be repaired, if the repair is
started within six months of such happenings.
      (2)   The foregoing restrictions do not apply to duplex, triplex,
quadplex, or multiplex units that are nonconforming solely on the basis of
residential density requirements. These units may be replaced, but such
replacement units must comply with all other applicable requirements of the
Zoning Code.
   (B)   Damage or destruction due to unforeseen hazards. Any nonconforming
principal structure damaged or destroyed due to natural or human-made hazards
such as fire, flood, or other catastrophic event beyond the control of the
property owner, may undergo an in-kind replacement or reconstruction in
accordance with the limitations and exceptions in this section.
      (1)   Increase in nonconformity limited. In general, except as otherwise
allowed by these provisions, the degree of nonconformity may not be increased.
      (2)   Replacement or reconstruction limitations. Structures may be placed
in the same location on the lot within the confines of the structure footprint
and with no greater height, total habitable floor area, or total number of
dwelling units as the most recent structure(s) existing on the lot prior to
such damage.
      (3)   Exception for increased elevation. An increase in the elevation of
a building above the maximum allowed height to comply with minimum floodplain
regulations in Chapter 152 is allowed. The building may only be raised to meet
the minimum design flood elevation required by Chapter 152. Any increase in
height above the minimum design flood elevation requires a variance from the
Board of Zoning Appeals.
      (4)   Time limit for reconstruction or repair.
         (a)   Except when Town Council might declare a special emergency to
suspend certain aspects of this chapter, a building permit for any
reconstruction or repair under this section shall be issued within 12 months of
the date of damage. Further, a certificate of occupancy for such repaired or
restored building shall be secured within 24 months of the date of the building
permit issuance.
         (b)   These time limits may be extended upon written request from the
property owner with appropriate documentation to justify an extension, such as:
            1.   Other approvals required by different levels of government or
other agencies are in progress;
            2.   The property is the subject of litigation; or
            3.   The property is under dispute for an insurance settlement due
to the event.
   (C)   Phasing of repairs. Applicants shall not phase repairs to circumvent
compliance with this subchapter. The town calculates the percentage of repairs
over a rolling five-year period.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1542 EXTENSIONS OF NONCONFORMITIES.
   (A)   A nonconforming structure or use of land shall not be enlarged,
intensified, or extended in such a way as to displace a conforming use or
structure.
   (B)   A nonconforming structure or use of land shall not be extended to
occupy additional land area or height not utilized for such nonconformity as of
the effective date of this chapter.
   (C)   In cases where a structure is nonconforming solely as a result of a
setback encroachment, additions to the structure are allowed, if the new
addition does not project into the setback. If a proposed addition would
encroach into the same setback that already had been encroached upon, the
addition is allowed if it projects no further into the setback than the
existing structure and in no way extends past the line of the existing
structure.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1543 CONSTRUCTION APPROVED PRIOR TO CHAPTER.
   (A)   This subchapter does not require any change in plans, construction, or
designated use of a structure for which the land owner can establish that they
have a vested right to continue such use though it does not conform to this
chapter.
   (B)   Such structure shall be deemed to be a nonconforming use and shall
thereafter be subject to the regulations in this chapter.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1544 CESSATION.
   The nonconforming uses of land listed below shall be discontinued and the
nonconforming structures listed below shall be torn down, altered, or otherwise
made to conform with the provisions of this chapter within the following
periods of time:
   (A)   Nonconforming objects that impede vision at intersections.
Nonconforming fences, hedges, shrubbery, and signs impeding vision at
intersections shall be brought into compliance by removal, relocation, or
alteration within 90 days of written notice to the property owner;
   (B)   Nonconforming manufactured housing units.
      (1)   Nonconforming manufactured housing units or manufactured housing
unit sales facilities shall not be replaced if they are vacated for six
consecutive months.
      (2)   An existing nonconforming manufactured housing unit shall not be
replaced with another manufactured housing unit, except in the HNB-VR-OD and
SB-OD.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1545 INSUFFICIENT AUTOMOBILE PARKING FACILITIES.
   Where the automobile parking facilities are insufficient to meet the
standards set forth in this chapter, or where no such parking facilities have
been provided for structures constructed prior to the effective date of this
chapter, such structures may not be altered, change use, nor may any additional
facilities be provided within such structures, until after the requirements for
off-street parking shall have been satisfied for those facilities thus added or
enlarged.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1546 NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR IMPERVIOUS SURFACE COVERAGE.
   (A)   When a lot exceeds the maximum allowable building coverage or
impervious surface coverage, as applicable, the buildings or impervious
surfaces that create the nonconformity shall not be removed and replaced with
other elements that perpetuate the nonconformity.
   (B)   For example, if the maximum impervious surface limit is 40% and a lot
is 60% covered by impervious surfaces, the property owner cannot remove the
driveway and add a swimming pool and maintain the 60% impervious surface
coverage.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1547 HISTORIC PROPERTIES.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any of the preceding provisions of this subchapter,
historic properties may be considered conforming to this code with respect to
any height, setback, yard, area, or other dimension found by the Historic
District Preservation Commission to be of historic significance.
   (B)   In this regard, these existing conditions may supersede any
conflicting standard set forth in the zoning district in which the structure is
located, and may be applied to the structure and the site in making future
determinations of conformity as to the existing structure or any changes
consistent with an approved certificate of appropriateness.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1548 EXCEPTION FOR INCREASED ELEVATION.
   (A)   An increase in the elevation of a building above the maximum allowed
height to comply with minimum floodplain regulations in Chapter 152 is allowed.
   (B)   The building may only be raised to meet the minimum design flood
elevation required by
Chapter 152.
   (C)   Any increase in height above the minimum design flood elevation
requires a variance from the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1549 THROUGH 156.1554 RESERVED.
PART 4: NONCONFORMING SIGNS
§ 156.1555 GENERALLY.
   A nonconforming sign is a sign that does not meet the requirements of this
chapter.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1556 CONTINUATION OF EXISTING SIGNS.
   (A)   Permanent signs.
      (1)   Nonconforming permanent signs may continue in existence as provided
in this section if they were:
         (a)   Legally existing on the effective date of this chapter;
         (b)   Applied for or approved by the town under previous regulations
in effect before the effective date of this chapter, if the sign conformed with
the previous regulations; or
         (c)   For annexed parcels, legally existing on the effective date of
the annexation into the town.
      (2)   Nonconforming permanent signs shall only be repaired, altered, or
replaced in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Temporary signs. All nonconforming temporary signs must be removed
within 90 days of the effective date of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1557 REPAIR, ALTERATION, AND MAINTENANCE OF SIGNS.
   (A)   Maintenance. Ordinary nonstructural repairs or maintenance may be made
to a nonconforming sign as required to keep it in good condition, appearance,
and function.
   (B)   Replacement of sign face.
      (1)   The sign face of a nonconforming sign may be replaced so long as:
         (a)   The sign features or materials are not changed to be
nonconforming; and
         (b)   The changes do not expand or extend any existing nonconformity.
      (2)   The sign face may be replaced pursuant to this division due to
changes of ownership or use.
   (C)   Repair or alteration of signs.
      (1)   The repair or alteration of a nonconforming sign is allowed so long
as:
         (a)   The cost of the repair or alteration does not exceed 50% of the
replacement cost of the sign;
         (b)   The sign features or materials are not changed to be
nonconforming; and
         (c)   The changes do not expand or extend any existing nonconformity.
      (2)   The repair or alteration of a is not allowed if the cost of the
alteration or repair exceeds 50% of the replacement cost of the sign,
regardless of the reason or cause for the repair or alteration.
   (D)   Relocation of signs. Nonconforming signs required to be moved because
of public right-of-way or utilities improvements may be re-established so long
as:
      (1)   The sign features or materials are not changed to be nonconforming;
and
      (2)   The changes do not expand or extend any existing nonconformity.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1558 ABANDONMENT.
   Nonconforming signs declared abandoned pursuant to §
156.864 must be removed or brought into full compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1559 THROUGH 156.1564 RESERVED.
PART 5: NONCONFORMING EXTERIOR LIGHTING
§ 156.1565 CONTINUATION OF EXISTING EXTERIOR LIGHTING.
   Any exterior lighting existing on the effective date of this chapter that
does not conform with the provisions of this chapter is a nonconforming
exterior lighting design, and may be continued only as specified in this
section.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1566 REPAIRS, ALTERATIONS, AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Ordinary repairs or maintenance may be made to a nonconforming pole-
mounted luminaire or other exterior lighting equipment, as required to keep it
in sound condition.
   (B)   Repairs requiring the removal or replacement of pole-mounted
luminaires or other exterior lighting equipment are prohibited, except as
required by law or ordinance or authorized by the Zoning Administrator.
   (C)   A nonconforming pole-mounted luminaire or other exterior lighting
equipment shall not be moved, altered, enlarged, or replaced except in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1567 ABANDONMENT OF USE.
   (A)   A nonconforming pole-mounted luminaire or other exterior lighting
equipment that the Zoning Administrator has declared to be abandoned shall be
removed within 90 days of written notification and shall not thereafter be
reestablished, except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Evidence of abandonment is demonstrated by a discontinuance of the
use, activity, place, or business on the site, or willful lack of maintenance
to the extent that the luminaire is in obvious disrepair.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1568 RESTORATION OF DAMAGED NONCONFORMING EXTERIOR LIGHTING.
   (A)   Any nonconforming exterior lighting damaged by more than 50% of its
reasonable replacement cost at the time of damage assessment, either through
neglect, deferred maintenance, or normal wear and tear over a period of time,
or by fire, flood, explosion, wind, earthquake, war, riot, or other event
outside the control of the property owner, shall not be restored or
reconstructed and used as before such happenings, unless in conformity with the
provisions in this chapter.
   (B)   If less than 50% damaged, the exterior lighting may be repaired and
used as before, if such repair is started within six months of the date on
which the damage occurred.
   (C)   The percentage of damage is calculated by dividing the estimated cost
of restoring the exterior lighting to its pre-damaged condition by its
reasonable replacement cost.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1569 THROUGH 156.1574 RESERVED.
SUBCHAPTER L: ENFORCEMENT
§ 156.1575 PURPOSE.
   This subchapter establishes the procedures to enforce compliance with this
chapter and to mandate corrections for violations of this chapter or conditions
of an approval or permit issued under this chapter.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1576 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   When any building is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered,
repaired, or converted, or any building or land is used in violation of this
chapter, the Zoning Administrator is authorized and directed to institute any
appropriate action to put an end to such violation.
      (2)   Pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, more specific penalties
are prescribed for violations of the tree protection regulations (see
Subchapter E) and the critical area buffer (see
Subchapter D, Part 3).
   (B)   Types of violations. The following activities, acts, failures to act,
and conditions are violations of this chapter and will be enforced using the
penalties and remedies provided by this Subchapter, the Mount Pleasant Code,
and any requirements or limitations of South Carolina law:
      (1)   Development or use without permit or approval. Any activity that is
not authorized by the acquisition of all required permits, approvals,
certificates, and authorizations required by this chapter;
      (2)   Development or use of land inconsistent with this chapter. Any
activity that is inconsistent with any zoning, development, landscaping, sign,
or general regulation of this chapter or any amendment to it;
      (3)   Development or use inconsistent with conditions of approval. Any
activity that is inconsistent with any term, condition, or qualification placed
by the town upon a required permit, certificate, rezoning, plan approval, or
other form of authorization granted by the town to allow the use, development,
placement of signs, or other activity upon land or improvements of land;
      (4)   Making a lot or yard nonconforming. Reducing or diminishing any lot
area, lot width, lot depth, or setback so that the lot or yard is smaller than
prescribed by the requirements of this chapter;
      (5)   Increasing impervious surface coverage. Increasing the impervious
surface coverage on a lot so that it exceeds the maximum allowed by this
chapter;
      (6)   Increasing the intensity of use. Increasing the intensity or
density of use of any land or structure, except in accordance with the
procedural and substantive requirements of this chapter;
      (7)   Deficient landscaping and site improvements. Failing to install or
maintain any landscaping, screening, or site improvements required by this
chapter;
      (8)   Removal of vegetation in buffers and bufferyards. The unauthorized
removal or disturbance of vegetation from required buffers or bufferyards,
except in accordance with the provisions of
Subchapter D;
      (9)   Removal of protected trees. The unauthorized removal or disturbance
of protected trees, except in accordance with the provisions of
Subchapter E;
      (10)   Disrupting notice. Removing, defacing, obscuring, or interfering
with any notice posted or made pursuant to this chapter;
      (11)   Failure to comply with a stop work order. Continuing construction
or other site work on any development, building, or structure on any land or
site after service of a stop work order issues by the town pursuant to this
subchapter;
      (12)   Displaying a temporary sign longer than permitted. Displaying a
temporary sign for a period of time in excess of that stated in the approval;
      (13)   Unauthorized changes to Zoning Map. Any change in zoning district
boundaries on the Zoning Map that is not made in conformance with the
procedures set forth in
Subchapter I; and
      (14)   Other acts. Any other act that is prohibited by this chapter or
the failure to do any act that is required by this chapter is a violation under
this section and is punishable under this chapter.
   (C)   Each day constitutes a separate offense. Each day that any violation
of any provision of this chapter continues constitutes a separate offense.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1577 PENALTIES.
   (A)   Generally. In case any building, structure, or land is or is proposed
to be used in violation of this chapter, the Zoning Administrator or any
adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be damaged by such violation,
may, in addition to other remedies as provided by law, institute injunction,
mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance, or
use, or to correct or abate the violation, or to prevent the occupancy of the
building, structure, or land.
   (B)   Violation is a misdemeanor.
      (1)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter by performing
an act prohibited by it or by failing to perform an act required by it is
guilty of a misdemeanor under the laws of the State of South Carolina.
         (a)   Upon conviction thereof, an offender shall be liable for a fine
of not more than $500 or imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both.
         (b)   However, the penalty shall not exceed the penalty provided by
state law for similar offenses.
      (2)   The Town Council, Town Attorney, Zoning Administrator, or Planning
Director, or their designee, may institute all necessary proceedings in any
court having jurisdiction or other appropriate venue to prosecute violations
under this chapter.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1578 ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Notice of violation.
      (1)   In the case of violations of this chapter involving continuing
construction or development or any emergency situation, the Zoning
Administrator shall provide written notification to the person responsible for
the violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action
necessary to correct it.
      (2)   In the case of violations of this chapter not involving continuing
construction or development or any emergency situation, the Zoning
Administrator shall give written notice of the nature of the violation to the
owner, occupant, or agent of the property at the last known address.
      (3)   The contents of the notice shall describe the nature of the
violation in terms that would reasonably allow the property owner or other
responsible person, representative, or tenant to determine the nature of the
violation to allow for self-abatement and shall mandate a minimum 15 business
day time to cure before further enforcement action will be taken.
      (4)   The person to whom notice is directed shall correct the violation
or be subject to further enforcement action.
      (5)   The notice shall be personally served or sent by certified mail,
return receipt requested. Failure to sign for the certified mail or failure to
pick up the notice from the post office is not deemed a lack of notice under
this chapter where delivery was attempted, and a record of this attempt was
provided as required by procedures for restricted mail.
   (B)   Immediate enforcement.
      (1)   If the Zoning Administrator determines that an emergency situation
exists or continuing construction is occurring in violation of this chapter,
the town may immediately use the enforcement powers and remedies available to
it pursuant to §§
156.1577 and
156.1579.
      (2)   No other notification procedures are required as a prerequisite to
an immediate enforcement action.
   (C)   Action by Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator may:
      (1)   Follow up on violations until the situation is properly remedied;
      (2)   Order discontinuances of illegal use of land, buildings, or
structures;
      (3)   Order the removal of illegal buildings or structures or illegal
additions, alterations, or structural changes;
      (4)   Order the discontinuance of any illegal work being done; and
      (5)   Take any other action authorized by this chapter and governing law
to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1579 REVOCATION OF PERMIT OR APPROVAL.
   (A)   Basis for revocation. A permit or approval may be revoked by the
Zoning Administrator at any time prior to the completion of the use, building,
structure, development, site improvement, or subdivision for which the permit
was issued, when the Zoning Administrator determines that one or more of the
following conditions is present:
      (1)   There is departure from the plans, specifications, or conditions as
required under the terms of the permit;
      (2)   That the permit was procured by materially incorrect information;
      (3)   That the permit was issued in error; or
      (4)   That any of the provisions of this chapter are being violated.
   (B)   Notice. Written notice of the revocation shall be served upon the
owner, the owner's agent or contractor, or any person employed in the building
or structure for which the permit was issued or shall be posted in a prominent
location on the lot. Where notice of revocation is served or posted, all
further construction, use, or development of the lot shall cease.
   (C)   Appeal of revocation. Any revocation of a permit may be appealed to
the Board of Zoning Appeals as provided in
Subchapter I, Part 17.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1580 THROUGH 156.1589 RESERVED.
SUBCHAPTER M: RULES OF INTERPRETATION AND MEASUREMENT
PART 1: RULES OF INTERPRETATION
§ 156.1590 GENERAL RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   This part, §
10.02, and §
10.06 establish rules for interpreting provisions in this chapter.
   (B)   In their interpretation and application, the regulations in this
chapter, including the various zoning district regulations, are the minimum
requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, and
welfare.
   (C)   For purposes of interpreting this chapter, the following definitions
of word use apply:
      (1)   Words used in the present tense include the future tense;
      (2)   Words used in the singular include the plural and words used in the
plural include the singular;
      (3)   Words of one gender include the other genders and firms,
partnerships, and corporations;
      (4)   The word “person” includes a corporation, firm, company,
partnership, association, organization, or public or private authority, as well
as an individual;
      (5)   The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory;
      (6)   The words "may," "should," and “encouraged” are permissive;
      (7)   The word “used” or “occupied” as applied to any land or building
shall be construed to include the words “intended, arranged, or designed to be
used or occupied.”
      (8)   The phrase "used for" includes "designed for," "intended for,"
"maintained for," and "occupied for;"
      (9)   The words “such as,” “includes,” “including,” and “for example”
mean “including, but not limited to” or “by way of example and not limitation,”
unless otherwise provided;
      (10)   The term "structure" includes the term "building;" and
      (11)   The word “lot” includes the words “plot” or “parcel.”
   (D)   This chapter contains tables, illustrations, and graphics, which are
designed to assist the reader in understanding the provisions of this chapter.
However, to the extent that there is any inconsistency between the text of this
chapter and any tables, illustrations, or graphics, the text controls.
   (E)   Where this chapter permits or requires an act on the part of an
"owner," "lot owner," or “property owner” and a particular lot or tract of land
is owned by several persons, whether in indivision, partnership, joint venture,
or other form of joint ownership, the act shall be taken on behalf of, and with
the express consent of, all such persons.
   (F)   Any reference to a statute, provision of the Mount Pleasant Code of
Ordinances, other laws or regulations, reference documents, technical manuals,
or other documents refer to the most recent versions of those documents,
including any amendments or updates to the statute, Town Code, law, regulation,
or other document.
   (G)   In computing any period of time, refer to §
10.06(C) unless specifically provided in this chapter.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1591 INTERPRETATION OF ZONING MAP.
   (A)   Unless expressly stated otherwise in the associated rezoning
ordinance, the boundaries of zoning districts extend to the centerline of all
adjacent rights-of-way.
   (B)   Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of districts
shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules of interpretation apply:
      (1)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following corporate area
lines, shall be construed as following the corporate area lines;
      (2)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following lot lines shall be
construed as following the lot lines;
      (3)   Where the boundary of a district follows a stream, lake, or other
body of water, the boundary line is deemed to be at the limit of the
jurisdiction of the town, unless otherwise indicated; and
      (4)   Where a district boundary line divides a lot, the town may require
a survey to establish the precise location of the district boundary line. The
regulations for each district apply to the portion of the lot located in that
district.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1592 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Zoning district hierarchy.
      (1)   When base or floating zoning district and overlay zoning district
provisions conflict, the provisions of the overlay zoning district control.
      (2)   When planned zoning district and overlay zoning district provisions
conflict, the provisions of the planned zoning district control.
   (B)   Conflicts between zoning code standards. When generally applicable
standards in this chapter conflict, the more restrictive standard controls.
   (C)   Stricter standards in this chapter. In accordance with S.C. Code § 6-
29-960, where this chapter imposes a greater width or size of yards, courts, or
other spaces; a lower height of buildings or smaller number of stories; a
greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied; or otherwise imposes higher
standards than are required in any other state statute or local ordinance or
regulation, the provisions of this chapter control.
   (D)   Stricter standards in state statutes or local ordinances or
regulations. When the provisions of any state statute or local ordinance or
regulation require more restrictive standards than required by the regulations
of this chapter, the provisions of such statute govern.
   (E)   Conflicts with private restrictions.
      (1)   It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with, abrogate, or
annul any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties.
      (2)   Where this chapter is more restrictive or imposes higher standards
than a private restriction, this chapter controls.
      (3)   Where a private restriction is more restrictive or imposes higher
standards than this chapter, the private restriction controls if properly
enforced by a person having the legal right to enforce the restrictions. The
town does not enforce private restrictions.
      (4)   However, the town may cease processing an application if it has
actual notice of the existence of a recorded covenant that is contrary to,
conflicts with, or prohibits the activity for which an applicant requests
approval (see §
156.1099).
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1593 THROUGH 156.1599 RESERVED.
PART 2: RULES OF MEASUREMENT
SUBPART 2.1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.1600 PURPOSE.
   This part establishes rules for measurement or calculation of Zoning Code
standards, such as lot area and height.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1601 THROUGH 156.1604 RESERVED.
SUBPART 2.2: BUILD-TO LINE
§ 156.1605 GENERALLY.
   This subpart describes how to measure a build-to line, which is regulated in
Subchapter B and
Subchapter H.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1606 HOW TO MEASURE BUILD-TO LINES.
   (A)   A build-to line is a set building line on a lot where a building
façade must be located. In certain instances, the build-to line is expressed as
a range (e.g., between 20 feet and 30 feet from the front lot line) within
which the building façade must be located.
   (B)   A build-to line is located parallel to the adjacent street right-of-
way.
   (C)   A build-to line is measured from the back of the curb to the face of
the building. If a curb is not present, a build-to line is measured from the
edge of the pavement.
   (D)   Awnings and canopies may encroach beyond a build-to line.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1607 THROUGH 156.1609 RESERVED.
SUBPART 2.3: BUILDING COVERAGE
§ 156.1610 GENERALLY.
   This subpart describes how to calculate building coverage, which is
regulated in
Subchapter B and
Subchapter C.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1611 HOW TO CALCULATE BUILDING COVERAGE.
   (A)   Measurement. Building coverage is:
      (1)   Expressed as a percentage of lot area; and
      (2)   Calculated by dividing the total area (in square feet) of all
building footprints within a lot by the total lot area (in square feet), and
multiplying the result by 100.
   (B)   Exceptions. The calculation of building coverage excludes buildings
that are located completely below the finished lot grade, such as subgrade
basements.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1612 THROUGH 156.1614 RESERVED.
SUBPART 2.4: DENSITY
§ 156.1615 GENERALLY.
   (A)   This subpart describes how to calculate residential density, which is
regulated in
Subchapter B and
Subchapter C.
   (B)   Density for residential uses is expressed in dwelling units per acre
of land.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1616 HOW TO CALCULATE MAXIMUM DENSITY.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   The calculation of maximum density:
         (a)   Is based on the gross area of all land within the boundaries of
a residential project, including land designated for support of the
development; that is, all areas for lots, parking areas, drives, roads,
drainage and utility easements, rights-of-way, sign easements, entrance
structure easements, and lands designated for private recreation;
         (b)   Includes freshwater wetlands; and
         (c)   Does not include tidally influenced saltwater wetlands.
      (2)   Other land area located within a parcel's boundaries, but outside
of the residential project boundaries not used for residential use, shall not
be included for the purpose of calculating residential density except as
provided in division (A)(3) below.
      (3)   In mixed use projects where non-residential uses are provided in
conjunction with, and are functionally integrated into, the residential uses,
the total area within the project boundaries of all such uses may be used to
calculate density.
   (B)   Accessory dwelling units. Accessory dwelling units are not included in
the calculation of density.
   (C)   Calculation. To calculate the maximum number of dwelling units or
bedrooms, as applicable, allowed in a development, multiply the gross lot area
by the maximum density standard for the zoning district. See Table 156.1616-1:
Example Calculation of Maximum Density (Dwelling Units per Acre).
   (D)   Rounding. When density calculations result in a fraction, the allowed
number of dwelling units or bedrooms, as applicable, is rounded down to the
next lowest whole number.
Table 156.1616-1: Example Calculation of Maximum Density (Dwelling Units per
Acre)
Table 156.1616-1: Example Calculation of Maximum Density (Dwelling Units per
Acre)
Key: max = maximum allowed | du = dwelling unit | ac = acre | sf = square feet
District                                   R-1 District
Density (max.)                             3 du/ac
Gross site area                            779,421 sf
Example calculation of maximum density      
Step 1: Convert lot area to acres (1 ac =  779,421 sf / 43,560 sf = 17.89 ac
43,560 sf)
Step 2: Multiply gross lot area (in acres) 17.89 ac x 3 du/ac = 53.67 = 53 du
by the maximum density                     (rounded)
 
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1617 THROUGH 156.1619 RESERVED.
SUBPART 2.5: GROSS FLOOR AREA
§ 156.1620 GENERALLY.
   This subpart describes how to calculate gross floor area, which is regulated
in
Subchapter B and
Subchapter C.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1621 HOW TO CALCULATE GROSS FLOOR AREA.
   (A)   Gross floor area (GFA):
      (1)   Is measured from the inside perimeter of the exterior walls of the
structure, without deduction for the thickness of internal walls;
      (2)   Includes the total horizontal area of all floors of a structure,
including interior balconies, mezzanines, corridors, stairways, ramps, closets,
columns, and other features; and
      (3)   Excludes shafts with no openings and interior courts. A “court” is
an open, uncovered space, unobstructed to the sky, bounded on three or more
sides by exterior building walls or other enclosing devices.
   (B)   The floor area of a structure or portion thereof without exterior
walls is the useable area under the horizontal projection of the roof or floor
above.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1622 THROUGH 156.1624 RESERVED.
SUBPART 2.6: HEIGHT
§ 156.1625 GENERALLY.
   (A)   This subpart describes how to measure building and structure height
and allows exceptions for certain structures or elements.
   (B)   Unless necessary to meet drainage or other applicable requirements of
this code, lots shall not be filled in order to artificially increase building
height.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1626 HOW TO MEASURE HEIGHT.
   (A)   Height regulated in feet. Where this chapter regulates height in feet,
the height of a structure is the vertical distance measured from grade plane to
the average height of the highest roof surface.
   (B)   Height regulated in stories. Height, where not regulated in feet, is
regulated in stories.
      (1)   A story is measured:
         (a)   From top to top of two successive finished floor surfaces; and
         (b)   For the topmost story, from the top of the highest finished
floor to the top of the ceiling joists or to the top of the roof rafters if
there is no ceiling.
      (2)   An attic counts as a story if it contains habitable attic space, as
defined by the Building Code.
      (3)   To be considered a half-story, as defined in
Subchapter N, the floor area with head room of five feet or more shall not
exceed 50% of the total floor area of the story below it.
      (4)   The ground level component of an elevated building is considered a
story if it is at least seven feet in height, as specified in the definition of
“story” in
Subchapter N.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1627 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The purpose of this section is to allow a certain category of features
to exceed the maximum height limitation for buildings and structures that would
otherwise be unreasonably restrictive. These features shall not accommodate
human occupancy and shall be the minimum necessary to achieve a specified
purpose.
   (B)   The following projections are exempt from the height limitations of
this chapter to the extent established below:
      (1)   Any chimney or antenna on a building;
      (2)   Church spires or the sanctuary portion of a building associated
with a place of worship;
      (3)   Belfries, cupolas, and domes not intended for human occupancy;
      (4)   Smokestacks;
      (5)   Aerials;
      (6)   The judicious application of portions of a building containing or
shielding from view electrical or mechanical equipment;
      (7)   Elevator penthouses;
      (8)   Masts;
      (9)   Construction cranes or ships; and
      (10)   Other similar elements, such as decorative railings.
   (C)   These projections may be constructed in accordance with other
regulations or ordinances of the Town of Mount Pleasant or of other
jurisdictions, such as the Federal Aviation Administration.
   (D)   Telecommunications towers are subject to the height limits specified
in
Subchapter C, Part 7, Subpart 7.2.
   (E)   Any areas intended for human occupancy, such as rooftop decks,
pergolas, and the like shall not exceed the height limitations of this chapter,
unless otherwise specified in this chapter.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1628, 156.1629 RESERVED.
SUBPART 2.7: IMPERVIOUS SURFACE COVERAGE
§ 156.1630 GENERALLY.
   This subpart describes how to calculate impervious surface coverage, which
is regulated in
Subchapter B and
Subchapter C.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1631 HOW TO CALCULATE IMPERVIOUS SURFACE COVERAGE.
   (A)   Impervious surface coverage is:
      (1)   Expressed as a percentage of lot area; and
      (2)   Calculated by dividing the total area of all impervious surfaces
within a lot by the total lot area, and multiplying the result by 100.
   (B)   When a lot contains tidally influenced saltwater wetlands/marsh or
open water beyond the delineated SCDES-BCM critical line, impervious surface
coverage is calculated using only the "high ground" of the lot and specifically
excluding the wetlands/marsh or open water.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1632 THROUGH 156.1634 RESERVED.
SUBPART 2.8: LOT AREA, WIDTH,  AND DEPTH
§ 156.1635 GENERALLY.
   This subpart describes how to measure lot area, lot width, and lot depth.
Subchapter B and
Subchapter C regulate these metrics.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1636 HOW TO CALCULATE LOT AREA.
   (A)   The area of a lot:
      (1)   Is calculated in square feet by multiplying the lot depth by the
lot width; and
      (2)   Does not include any portion of a road right-of-way.
   (B)   When a lot is irregularly shaped, the calculation method varies based
on the lot shape and the information available (see www.mathopenref.com/
polygonirregulararea.html)
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1637 HOW TO MEASURE LOT WIDTH.
   (A)   Measurement.
      (1)   The width of a lot is the horizontal distance between the side lot
lines, measured:
         (a)   Parallel to the front lot line; or
         (b)   In the case of a curvilinear street, parallel to the chord of
the arc between the intersection of the side lot lines and the front lot line.
      (2)   The zoning district minimum lot width must be met at the front lot
line, except as specified in division (B) below.
   (B)   Lots on cul-de-sacs. For lots located on a cul-de-sac, the zoning
district minimum lot width must be met at the front setback for the district.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1638 HOW TO MEASURE LOT DEPTH.
   The depth of a lot is the average horizontal distance between the front and
rear lot lines, measured generally parallel to the side lot lines.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1639 THROUGH 156.1644 RESERVED.
SUBPART 2.9: SETBACKS AND YARDS
§ 156.1645 GENERALLY.
   (A)   Purpose. This subpart describes how to measure yards and setbacks.
Subchapter B and
Subchapter C regulate these metrics.
   (B)   Required yards cannot overlap. Required yards provided for one
structure shall not be used to meet yard requirements for another structure.
   (C)   Setbacks for lots subject to design review process. For lots subject
to
Subchapter H, setback distances from lot lines with street frontage are
determined through the design review process, using a build-to line of between
20 and 30 feet.
   (D)   Setbacks for lots in the Old Village Historic District. For lots
located within the Old Village Historic District (see
Subchapter B, Part 4, Subpart 4.3), setback distance is determined during the
certificate of appropriateness (COA) review process, with consideration of
existing conditions and setbacks of adjacent lots.
   (E)   Setbacks for postage stamp lots. Normal setback and yard requirements
do not apply to lot lines for “postage stamp” lots subdivided pursuant to the
provisions of §
155.047(C)(1)(a). The setback and yard requirements of the zoning district
classification apply to the perimeter of the larger parcel in which these lots
are located.
   (F)   Setbacks for the subdivision of lots with more than one dwelling unit.
Normal setback and yard requirements do not apply to lot lines for lots
resulting from the subdivision of lots with more than one dwelling unit
pursuant to the provisions of §
155.047(C)(1)(b).
   (G)   Determinations and interpretations. When making determinations or, if
necessary, interpretations under this subpart, the Zoning Administrator shall
consider the following characteristics of the lot and surrounding lots:
      (1)   The orientation of existing or proposed buildings containing the
principal use;
      (2)   The orientation of adjacent buildings and other buildings along the
street;
      (3)   The location of a dwelling’s curtilage;
      (4)   Means of gaining safe access;
      (5)   The relative dimensions of the lot and yards;
      (6)   Delivery of services to the lot, including mail and trash
collection;
      (7)   Setbacks on surrounding lots; and
      (8)   Other features related to site design and safe circulation.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1646 LOT ORIENTATION, YARDS, AND SETBACKS.
   (A)   A front yard is adjacent to the front lot line, and is typically
located along a street. A rear yard is adjacent to the rear lot line, and is
generally located parallel to the front yard. Side yards are adjacent to side
lot lines, and are generally located perpendicular to the front and rear yards.
   (B)   
Figure 156.1646-1: Typical Location of Yards and Setback Lines illustrates
yards and setback lines on typical lots. Setback lines are located parallel to
the associated lot line. The Zoning Administrator determines the location of
yards and setbacks on irregularly shaped lots using the criteria specified in
this section and in §
156.1645(G).
Figure 156.1646-2 depicts the typical location of yards and setback lines on
two types of irregularly shaped lots, marsh front lots and flag lots.
   (C)   Typically, the shorter lot dimensions are considered the front and
rear lot lines and the longer lot dimensions are considered the side lot lines.
This provides the most buildable area on a lot. However, where a lot has street
frontage that is wider than the lot is deep and was platted prior to adoption
of the Town Zoning Code on August 13, 1979:
      (1)   The front yard setback may be applied along the street frontage,
and the rear yard setback along the parallel lot line (longer side). The side
yard setbacks may be applied on lot lines of adjacent parcels (shorter side)
when consistent with the lots on either side of the subject lot or the majority
of the lots within the block; and
      (2)   The principal structure must conform with the setback adjustment.
If any portion of an existing or proposed principal structure does not comply
with the adjusted setbacks, a variance to allow the establishment of setbacks
must be approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (D)   In the case of new construction on a corner lot, the owner may
establish the location of the front and rear yards based on preference of
orientation, taking into consideration orientation of adjacent structures and
existing development patterns.
Figure 156.1646-1: Typical Location of Yards and Setback Lines
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13147.png]
Figure 156.1646-2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13149.png]
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1647 HOW TO MEASURE SETBACKS.
   Setbacks are measured from the lot line to the closest projection of any
portion of a building or structure, except for encroachments as allowed by §
156.1651.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1648 FRONT YARDS AND SETBACKS.
   (A)   Definition.
      (1)   A front yard is an open, unoccupied space on a lot (except for
encroachments as allowed by § 156.1651) that generally faces a street and
extends across the entire width of a lot between the side lot lines.
      (2)   For lots without frontage on a street, the front lot line is the
lot line where access to the lot is provided.
      (3)   The horizontal distance between the principal structure and the
front lot line shall be at least equal to the minimum front setback for the
zoning district in which the lot is located (see
Subchapter B).
   (B)   Front setbacks on double frontage lots. For double frontage lots, the
front setback requirements apply along both streets as illustrated in Figure
156.1648-1: Front Setbacks on Double Frontage Lots.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13151.png]
   (C)   Average front setbacks.
      (1)   The minimum front yard setback requirement for dwellings does not
apply on any lot where the average setback of existing buildings located,
wholly or in part, within 100 feet on each side of such lot within the same
block and zoning district and fronting on the same side of the street, is less
than the minimum required setback.
      (2)   In these cases, the setback on such lots may be less than the
required minimum setback, but not less than the average of the setbacks of the
aforementioned existing buildings.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1649 REAR YARDS AND SETBACKS.
   (A)   A rear yard is an open, unoccupied space (except for encroachments as
allowed by §
156.1651) that extends across the entire width of a lot between the side lot
lines.
   (B)   The horizontal distance between the principal structure and the rear
lot line shall be at least equal to the minimum rear setback required for the
zoning district in which the lot is located (see
Subchapter B).
   (C)   The horizontal distance between an accessory structure and the rear
lot line shall be at least equal to the minimum rear setback required for the
type of accessory structure (see
Subchapter C, Part 4).
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1650 SIDE YARDS AND SETBACKS.
   (A)   A side yard is an open, unoccupied space (except for encroachments as
allowed by §
156.1651) that extends from the front yard to the rear yard.
   (B)   The horizontal distance between the principal structure and each side
lot line shall be at least equal to the minimum side setback required for the
zoning district in which the lot is located (see
Subchapter B).
   (C)   The side yard setback requirement applies where a side yard abuts a
street (corner lot). However, accessory buildings shall not be located closer
to the street than the front yard setback line of the adjacent lot.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1651 ENCROACHMENTS.
   (A)   This section specifies allowed encroachments into required yards.
   (B)   REQUIRED YARD means that portion of any yard constituting the minimum
area required in any zoning district, but excluding that portion of the yard in
excess of the minimum required area.
   (C)   Items such as sills, eaves, belt courses, window air-conditioning
units, chimneys, cornices, ornamental features, and bay windows may protrude
into a required yard a distance not to exceed 24 inches; provided, however, a
bay window projection is limited to maximum span length of ten feet along the
exterior wall of the building.
   (D)   Items such as open fire escapes; elevators; outside stairways leading
to a building entrance, but not to an uncovered porch or deck; balconies; and
outside air-conditioning units and propane/heating oil tanks may be permitted
to project into the required yard for a distance of not more than four feet,
when so placed as to not obstruct light and ventilation, but in no case closer
than three feet from the property line.
   (E)   Uncovered porches and uncovered decks may encroach into a required
rear or side yard not more than 40% of the required setback, but no closer than
three feet from the property line; except that when a zero-lot line provision
is in effect, the 40% reduction applies to the minimum required distance
between structures. No additional encroachments for outside stairways is
allowed.
   (F)   Ramps for ADA accessibility may encroach into any required yard and do
not have a minimum setback from a lot line.
   (G)   Minor accessory uses and structures may encroach into any required
yard and do not have a minimum setback from a lot line (see
Subchapter C, Part 4).
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1652 THROUGH 156.1659 RESERVED.
SUBPART 2.10: USE SEPARATION
§ 156.1660 GENERALLY.
   (A)   This subpart describes how to measure the required minimum separation
distance between certain conditional and special exception uses specified in
Subchapter C, Part 3, Subpart 3.3.
   (B)   Depending on the regulated use,
Subchapter C, Part 3, Subpart 3.3 specifies a minimum separation distance
between the new regulated use and:
      (1)   Certain zoning districts; and/or
      (2)   Certain sensitive land uses, such as residential uses.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1661 HOW TO MEASURE SEPARATION DISTANCE.
   Measurements shall be taken in a straight line from the nearest portion of
the lot line where the new regulated use is proposed to the nearest portion of
the lot line or zoning district boundary line of the uses and districts from
which the regulated use must be separated.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1662 THROUGH 156.1674 RESERVED.
SUBCHAPTER N : DEFINITIONS AND ACRONYMS
PART 1: ACRONYMS
§ 156.1675 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this part is to define acronyms used in this chapter.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1676 LIST OF ACRONYMS.
   ADU.   Accessory dwelling unit.
   ANSI.   American National Standards Institute.
   BCM.   South Carolina Department of Environmental Services Bureau of Coastal
Management.
   BOZA.   Town of Mount Pleasant Board of Zoning Appeals.
   CCT.   Correlated color temperature (of exterior lighting).
   COA.   Certificate of appropriateness.
   CCRC.   Continuing care retirement community.
   DES.   See SCDES.
   DRB.   Design Review Board.
   FAR.   Floor area ratio.
   GFA.   Gross floor area.
   HDPC.   Historic District Preservation Commission.
   ICC.   International Code Council.
   LID.   Low impact development.
   PD.      Planned Development District. Sometimes referred to as PUD, Planned
Unit Development.
   PID.   Parcel identification number (same as TMS).
   PUD.   See PD.
   ROD.   Charleston County Register of Deeds.
   SCDA.   South Carolina Department of Agriculture.
   SCDES.   South Carolina Department of Environmental Services.
   SFHA.   Special flood hazard area.
   TMS.   Tax Map sequence number (same as PID).
   TRCC.   Technical review and code compliance.
   USACE.   United States Army Corps of Engineers.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1677 THROUGH 156.1679 RESERVED.
PART 2: DEFINITIONS
§ 156.1680 PURPOSE.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Any terms not
defined in this part have their ordinary and customary meaning unless the
context of the word or phrase indicates otherwise.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1681 DEFINED TERMS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING, STRUCTURE, OR USE. A building, structure, or use
customarily incidental and subordinate to, and detached from, the principal use
or building and located on the same lot with such principal use, uses, or
building.
   ACTIVITY ZONE. An improved area located between the street right-of-way and
the build-to line, where allowed by this chapter. ACTIVITY ZONES must be
approved through the design review process prior to establishment, and may be
utilized for pedestrian-friendly uses, such as but not limited to, streetside
dining, entertainment, pushcarts, or outdoor display of merchandise.
   ADULT USES. Any business or activity located on a premises, or portion
thereof utilized as an adjunct to some other business activity but which
constitutes a major attraction to the premises, from which minors are generally
excluded and in which a substantial portion of its stock-in-trade involve the
sale, rental, or viewing of materials that are characterized by their emphasis
on sexual subject matter, or where activities are conducted that are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on exposing, depicting,
describing or otherwise relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical parts.
   AGRICULTURAL STORAGE. The keeping of materials and/or equipment related to
an agricultural use either outdoors or inside a structure.
   ALLEY. An improved private right-of-way used primarily as a secondary means
of access to the side or rear of properties whose principal frontage is on
another street.
   ALTER. As applied to a building or structure, a change or rearrangement in
the structural parts, or in the exit facilities, or an enlargement, whether by
extending on a side or by increasing in height; or the moving from one location
or position to another.
   ALTERATION. A change in the external architectural features of any structure
in an historic district.
   ALTERATIONS OF BUILDING. Any change in the supporting members of a building,
such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders, or floor joists.
   ALTERNATIVE LENDING SERVICES. An establishment that provides short-term,
high-interest personal lending services. These institutions include, but are
not limited to, check cashing establishments (not including incidental check
cashing), motor vehicle title lenders, pawnbrokers, payday lenders, deferred
presentment services, bail bonding, and other businesses with similar business
models and land use impacts. This definition does not include banks, credit
unions, savings and loan associations, precious metals dealers, or similar
uses.
   AMENITY BUILDINGS OR FACILITIES. Those features of a residential development
designed for and intended to serve residents of the development, which may
include, but are not limited to, laundry facilities, swimming pools, tennis
courts, fitness rooms, game and theater rooms, picnic areas, play fields,
walking trails, docks, boat launches, and boat storage.
   AMUSEMENT CENTER. Any privately-owned or operated establishment, whether
operated for profit or not for profit, which houses six or more mechanical or
electronic amusement devices, and either:
      (1)   Has as its chief, leading, main, or most considerable and important
activity the operation of mechanical or electronic amusement devices; or
      (2)   Obtains 25% or more of its gross receipts from the operation of
mechanical or electronic amusement devices.
   AMUSEMENT DEVICE, MECHANICAL OR ELECTRONIC. Any machine, device, or game
that permits a person or operator of the same to use the device as a game,
contest of skill, or amusement. It shall include, but not be limited to,
pinball machines, skill ball, bowling machines, billiard and pool tables, and
video games, and specifically includes a computer or similar device used, in
whole or in part, for gaming or amusement.
   ANIMAL BOARDING FACILITY OR DAYCARE. A commercial establishment where the
primary service offered is the care and supervision of dogs, cats, or other
household pets for any length of time. Such establishment may offer ancillary
services, such as grooming. This definition excludes pet care services and
veterinary clinics.
   ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. The practice of raising and managing any domestic animals
other than customary household pets, including breeding, pasturing, ranching,
and sales of animals, but not concentrated animal feeding operations.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. An establishment where stray or abandoned dogs, cats, or
other household pets are kept, boarded, treated, and/or groomed for purposes of
adoption by members of the public.
   ANNUAL MEETING SCHEDULE. A schedule of all regular meetings of appointed and
elected officials of the Town of Mount Pleasant, that is published no later
than December of each year and may be amended from time to time.
   APARTMENT. A dwelling unit, including a coliving dwelling unit, located in a
triplex, quadplex, or multiplex dwelling; or in a mixed use building.
   APARTMENT COMPLEX. Two or more duplex, triplex, quadplex, or multiplex
dwellings located on a single lot. Any building in an apartment complex may
contain one or more coliving dwelling units.
   APICULTURE. Beekeeping, which includes one or more hives or boxes occupied
by honeybees (hives or boxes include colonies), but does not include honey
houses, extraction houses, warehouses, or appliances.
   APPEAL. A formal request submitted to the Board of Zoning Appeals alleging
an error in an order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an
administrative official in the enforcement of the Zoning Code.
   APPLICANT. A property owner or any person or entity acting as an agent for
the property owner in an application for permits or other approval required by
this chapter.
   AQUACULTURE. The growing or propagation of harvestable freshwater,
estuarine, or marine plant or animal species.
   ARCHITECTURAL AND ENGINEERING SERVICES. This use group includes the
following types of establishments, as defined in the 2022 North American
Industry Classification System (NAICS):
      (1)   Architectural services (NAICS 541310);
      (2)   Landscape architectural services (NAICS 541320);
      (3)   Engineering services (NAICS 541330); and
      (4)   Drafting services (NAICS 541340).
   AREA, GROSS FLOOR. The total number of square feet of floor space within the
exterior walls of a building, excluding space in cellars, basements, and
unfinished attics. The area of a building without exterior walls is the usable
area under the horizontal projection of the roof or floor above (see
Subchapter M).
   AREA, LOT. The total square footage of the horizontal surface within the
boundary lines of a lot (see §
156.1636).
   AREA, SITE. The total area within the property lines of a development
project, excluding external streets.
   ARMS MANUAL. See SCDOT ARMS MANUAL.
   ART GALLERY. A place or establishment arranged for the display and
exhibition of works of art by one or more artists and for the sale of works of
art.
   ARTISAN (includes ARTIST, CRAFTSMAN). A person skilled in an applied art,
artistic, or craft discipline.
   ARTISAN WORKSHOP (includes ARTIST STUDIO and BOUTIQUE MANUFACTURING). An
establishment for the preparation, display, and/or sale of individually crafted
artwork, jewelry, furniture, sculpture, pottery, leathercraft, hand-woven
articles, baked or prepared food and drink, watercraft, and similar items by
one or more artisans. This definition excludes SWEETGRASS BASKET STANDS.
   ASSISTED LIVING (includes NURSING HOME). A facility that offers room and
board and provides a degree of personal care for a period of time in excess of
24 consecutive hours for two or more persons, 18 years old or older, not
related to the licensee within the third degree of consanguinity.
   ATTAINABLE HOUSING. Housing affordable to low and moderate income families
(those earning up to 120% of the Charleston-North Charleston Metropolitan
Statistical Area (MSA) median family income, as defined in the schedule
published annually by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development).
   ATTAINABLE HOUSING UNIT. A dwelling unit that is affordable to low and
moderate income families (those earning up to 120% of the Charleston-North
Charleston Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) median family income, as defined
in the schedule published annually by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development).
   ATTIC. The space between the ceiling framing of the top story and the
underside of the roof.
   AVIATION FACILITY. A location where aircraft such as fixed-wing, rotary
wing, or lighter- than-air aircraft, helicopters, and/or blimps take off and
land. Aircraft may be stored or maintained at an aviation facility. An AVIATION
FACILITY consists of at least one surface such as a runway for a plane to take
off and land or a helipad, and often includes buildings such as control towers,
hangars, and terminal buildings. This definition excludes helipads used for
emergency services, such as a helipad located at a hospital.
   AWNING. An architectural projection that provides weather protection,
identity, or decoration and is partially or wholly supported by the building to
which it is attached. An awning is comprised of a lightweight frame structure
over which a covering is attached.
   BAKERY. An establishment primarily engaged in the production and retail sale
of baked goods.
   BANK, CREDIT UNION, AND SAVINGS AND LOAN ASSOCIATION. An establishment that
provides retail banking services, mortgage lending, or similar financial
services to an individual or business.
   BAR (includes NIGHTCLUB, LOUNGE). An establishment serving alcoholic
beverages for on-site consumption as the primary use.
   BASEMENT (includes CELLAR). A portion of a building partly underground with
more than half of its height, measured from finished floor to finished ceiling,
above the average grade of the adjoining ground; and not deemed a story unless
the ceiling is six feet or more above the grade.
   BEDROOM. A habitable room, as defined in the Building Code, that is heated
and cooled and includes at least one window located no more than 44 inches
above the floor with an unobstructed opening of at least 5.7 square feet.
   BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS. The Town of Mount Pleasant Board of Zoning Appeals,
established in accordance with the South Carolina Local Government
Comprehensive Planning Enabling Act. (See
Subchapter J)
   BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS SECRETARY. The staff person designated to assist the
Board of Zoning Appeals as specified in §
156.1433 or their designee.
   BOAT LAUNCH OR DOCK. A facility for launching and/or mooring boats that is
available for use by the general public and for which a user fee may or may not
be charged. Also includes associated parking areas.
   BOAT LAUNCH OR DOCK, NEIGHBORHOOD. A facility for launching and/or mooring
boats located within a residential area and intended primarily for use by
residents of the immediate area. Also includes associated parking areas.
   BOAT LAUNCH OR DOCK, PERSONAL. A facility for launching and/or mooring boats
located on an individual residential lot and intended solely for use by the
parcel owner. A PERSONAL BOAT LAUNCH OR DOCK may be shared by two or more
adjacent lot owners.
   BODY PIERCING. The creation of an opening in the body of a person so as to
create a permanent hole for the purpose of inserting jewelry or other
decoration. This includes, but is not limited to, piercing of the lip, tongue,
nose, eyebrow, and the cartilaginous portion of an ear. For the purpose of this
chapter, BODY PIERCING does not include piercing of the ear lobe.
   BONA FIDE FORESTRY OPERATIONS. See FORESTRY OPERATIONS, BONA FIDE.
   BOOKSTORE/NEWSSTAND. An establishment for the retail sale of books,
magazines, periodicals, newspapers, or other printed matter, audio recordings,
motion pictures, and other digital materials. BOOKSTORE/NEWSSTAND does not
include adult uses.
   BOUTIQUE MANUFACTURING. See ARTISAN WORKSHOP.
   BREWERY. A facility used for the commercial purpose of the production of
beers, ales, and similar beverages. The facility may incorporate all aspects of
production including aging, storage, bottling, wholesale sales, warehousing,
and administrative office functions. Retail sales, tasting facilities, and
event facilities may be permitted as part of the facility operations. This
definition excludes BREWPUBS.
   BREWPUB. A component of a restaurant, bar, or hotel that produces on the
premises a maximum of 2,000 barrels a year of beer for sale on the premises.
   BUILD-TO LINE. The line at which construction of a building façade is to
occur on a parcel. A BUILD-TO LINE runs parallel to the street right-of-way and
is established to create a generally consistent building line along a street.
   BUILDABLE AREA. The maximum two-dimensional space on a lot within which a
structure or structures can be built, as permitted by applicable setback and
buffer requirements.
   BUILDING. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, for the
shelter, housing, or enclosure of any individual, animal, activity, process,
equipment, goods, or materials of any kind, exclusive of mailboxes, birdhouses,
or similar construction. The term BUILDING shall be construed as if followed by
the words “or part thereof.”
   BUILDING CODE. The codes adopted by the town in
Chapter 150.
   BUILDING COVERAGE. The proportion of the lot area covered by the building
footprint.
   BUILDING FOOTPRINT. All parts of a building that rest, directly or
indirectly, on the ground, including: garages, bay windows, chimneys, porches,
decks, eaves, exterior stairs, cantilevered floor space or decks, and covered
breezeways or walkways. BUILDING FOOTPRINT includes any two-dimensional
coverage, specifically including such elements as steps, decks, terraces, and
roof and eave structure. Includes the term STRUCTURE FOOTPRINT.
   BUILDING HEIGHT. See
Subchapter M, Part 2, Subpart 2.6.
   BUILDING HEIGHT PLAN MAP. A graphic depiction of the maximum structure
height allowed on all lots in the town. (See §
156.024).
   BUILDING LINE (includes SETBACK and SETBACK LINE). A line that represents
the minimum distances, when measured at right angles, a building or structure
must be placed from a lot line in accordance with this chapter. Front and rear
yards are typically located along the width of the lot (shorter dimension) and
side yards are typically located along the length of the lot (longer
dimension), both regardless of lot and building orientation so as to provide
the greatest amount of buildable area. (See
Subchapter M, Subpart 2.9)
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The administrative head of the Building Inspection
Division of the Engineering and Development Services Department, or their
designee.
   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. See STRUCTURE, PRINCIPAL.
   BUSINESS LICENSE OFFICIAL. The administrative head of the Business License
Division of the Finance and Corporate Services Department, or their designee.
   BUTCHER SHOP. A retail establishment that supplies meat and poultry products
but where meat processing is limited to making cuts of meat from preprocessed
carcasses.
   CALIPER. The diameter of a tree, measured six inches above the ground for
trees up to four inches and 12 inches above the ground for those larger than
four inches. This measurement is commonly associated with proposed, bought, or
newly planted trees.
   CAMPGROUND OR CAMPSITE. A non-residential use of a parcel of land for
temporary overnight use by tents or cabins for which a fee may be charged. Tent
camping areas may include site improvements, such as gravel pads, parking
areas, fire pits, or tent platforms, but may not have permanent utility
hookups. Cabins may have utilities such as electricity, water, sewer,
telephone, or cable television. A CAMPGROUND may incorporate recreational uses
such as, but not limited to, pedestrian and bicycle trails, natural swimming
areas (ponds or lakes, but not swimming pools), picnic areas, and observation
towers.
   CANTEEN. A small restaurant located within a place of work or multi-family
development, intended to serve employees or residents of the principal use.
   CAR WASH (includes SELF-SERVICE CAR WASHES). A building, or portion thereof,
where vehicles and watercraft are cleaned. A car wash may include washing,
drying, vacuuming, and/or tire- filling services.
   CELLAR. See BASEMENT.
   CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS (COA). Document certifying approval that the
proposed actions by an applicant are found to be acceptable in terms of design
criteria relating to an individual property in an historic district.
   CHANGE IN USE. The act of ceasing one land use allowed by §
156.338 and replacing it with another land use allowed by §
156.338; or the addition of one or more land uses to an existing development.
   CHARTER BOAT. A vessel offered for hire or rent for periods of time which
includes, but is not limited to, the service of a captain or crew, or both.
This includes rental boats, sightseeing boats, ferry boats, bareboat charters,
head boats, and other vessels for rent or hire. CHARTER BOATS do not include
water taxis or personal watercraft.
   CLEARCUTTING. The clearing, cutting, or removal of all or a majority of
trees and vegetation from a lot or portion of a lot.
   CLOTHING AND HOME GOODS DONATION BIN. A non-staffed, locked receptacle in
which the public may deposit used clothing and home goods for donation to
community organizations.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13153.png]
   CLUB, LODGE, OR FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION. An incorporated or unincorporated
association for civic, cultural, religious, literary, political, recreational
or like activities, but not including shooting clubs, operated for the benefit
of its members and not open to the general public.
   CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT. A subdivision design technique recognized by the South
Carolina Local Government Comprehensive Planning Enabling Act of 1994, as
amended, that concentrates development in specific areas of a site. It allows
the grouping of residential uses within a subdivision, permitting a reduction
in the otherwise applicable lot size, while preserving substantial open space
on the remainder of the parcel.
   COLD STORAGE. Facilities primarily engaged in the storage of ice and other
goods under refrigeration.
   COMMERCIAL KITCHEN, CATERER, AND BANQUET SERVICES. Kitchen facilities for
the preparation or catering of food to be served off-site and ancillary offices
and other support facilities. This definition includes ghost kitchens,
commissary kitchens, and delivery-only restaurants.
   COMMERCIAL NURSERY OPERATIONS. An establishment where trees, shrubs, vines,
and other plant stock are grown, propagated, and/or stored, for the purpose of
sale or wholesale. Ancillary items, such as mulch, sand, gravel, or similar
materials; and seasonal items, such as Christmas trees and pumpkins, may be
sold in addition to plants, but must clearly be incidental to the primary use.
   COMMERCIAL RECREATION AND ENTERTAINMENT. See RECREATION AND ENTERTAINMENT,
COMMERCIAL.
   COMMISSARY. A permitted retail food establishment that is authorized by the
South Carolina Department of Agriculture to provide a servicing area for mobile
food vending units or mobile food pushcarts for the purposes of storage of
food, supplies, and single-service articles.
   COMMUNITY GARDEN. A grouping of garden plots available for small-scale
cultivation by members of the general public.
   COMMUNITY RECREATION. See RECREATION, COMMUNITY.
   COMMUNITY RESIDENCE. This term has the meaning specified in S.C. Code § 6-
29-770(E), (F), and (G).
   COMMUNITY SERVICE FACILITY. A non-commercial establishment intended
primarily for the benefit and service of the general public of the community in
which it is located. Such facilities may have membership provisions that allow
the general public to join at any time. Examples include, but are not limited
to, community centers, community health clinics, senior centers, East Cooper
Community Outreach facilities, and Meals on Wheels facilities.
   COMPUTING INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDERS, DATA PROCESSING, WEB HOSTING, AND
RELATED SERVICES. Establishments primarily engaged in providing computing
infrastructure, data processing services, web hosting services (except software
publishing), and related services, including streaming support services (except
streaming distribution services) (NAICS 518210).
   CONDOMINIUM. Refers to a form of ownership, not an actual structure. A unit
in a series or in a multi-unit type structure, which may be owned or leased by
an individual, firm, or corporation, that may have common use of all related
activities associated with the structure; or as defined in state law as a
horizontal property regime.
   CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY (CCRC). A community in which there is
furnished, pursuant to a continuing care contract, to two or more persons not
related to the administrator or owner of the facility within the third degree
of consanguinity, board or lodging together with nursing, medical, or other
health-related services, regardless of whether the services or lodging are
provided at the same location or not. It does not include an institution
operating solely as a nursing home or community residential care facility
licensed by the South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control.
A CCRC is licensed by the South Carolina Department of Consumer Affairs. A
“continuing care contract” means a contract to provide board or lodging
together with nursing, medical, or other health-related services:
      (1)   To a person 65 years of age or older at the time the contract is
signed or purchased; or
      (2)   Which provides for services for the life of the person or for more
than one year, including mutually terminable contracts; and
      (3)   Which requires payment of an entrance fee or other fee in return
for a promise of future care.
   CRITICAL AREA LINE. The boundary between the upland and the tidelands and
coastal water critical areas. Critical area lines are determined by South
Carolina Department of Environmental Services Bureau of Coastal Management
staff and are valid for five years from the date of determination. S.C. Code §
48-39-10 defines the terms tidelands and critical area as used in this
definition.
   CROP, GREENHOUSE, HORTICULTURAL, OR HYDROPONIC PRODUCTION. The growing,
harvesting, and/or processing of fruits, vegetables, medicinal plants, and/or
landscape plant materials.
   CULTURAL FACILITY. An establishment providing for the display, preservation,
and/or exhibition of objects of historical or cultural interest. Examples of
this use include, but are not limited to, museums, libraries, historical sites,
botanical gardens, nature exhibitions, environmental education facilities, and
interpretive centers.
   CULTURAL FESTIVALS AND EVENTS. Commemorations, celebrations, or gatherings
of special importance to the community, such as, but not limited to, concerts,
holiday/seasonal events, food festivals, ethnic festivals, craft fairs, and
reenactments.
   DATA CENTER. A facility containing one or more large-scale computer systems
used for data storage and processing for off-site users. Key components of a
data center include routers, switches, firewalls, storage systems, servers, and
application-delivery controllers. Typical supporting equipment includes back-up
batteries and/or power generators, cooling units, fire suppression systems, and
enhanced security features.
   DAYCARE FACILITY. A facility which provides care, protection, and
supervision for children or adults on a regular basis away from their primary
residence for less than 24 hours per day.
   DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT. Abandonment or lack of maintenance that allows a
structure in an historic district to fall into a serious state of disrepair
resulting in the deterioration of any exterior architectural feature that
would, in the judgment of the Historic District Preservation Commission,
produce a detrimental effect upon the character of the historic district as a
whole, or the life and character of the property itself. Examples of such
deterioration include:
      (1)   Deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports;
      (2)   Deterioration of roofs or other horizontal members;
      (3)   Deterioration of exterior chimneys;
      (4)   Deterioration of exterior materials;
      (5)   Ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roof, or foundations,
including broken windows or doors; or
      (6)   Deterioration of any feature resulting in a hazardous condition
that could lead to the claim that demolition is necessary for the public
safety.
   DENSITY. The number of dwelling units per acre of land within the boundaries
of a residential project, including lands or parcels designated for support of
the development. In some zoning districts, density is measured in bedrooms per
acre.
   DESIGN REVIEW BOARD. The Town of Mount Pleasant Design Review Board,
established in accordance with the South Carolina Local Government
Comprehensive Planning Enabling Act. (See Subchapter J)
   DESIGN REVIEW BOARD SECRETARY. The staff person designated to assist the
Design Review Board as specified in §
156.1433 or their designee.
   DESIGN REVIEW PROCESS. The procedure for evaluation of certain developments
to ensure compliance with the requirements of this chapter. Generally, non-
residential, mixed use, and apartment complex developments are subject to this
process; however, the applicability of this process to a particular development
depends upon the specific zoning of the property on which the development is or
will be located.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to or subdivision of improved or
unimproved land, including the construction of or substantial improvements to
buildings or other structures that requires a permit or approval from the town.
DEVELOPMENT includes the placement of manufactured homes, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations.
   DIAGNOSTIC IMAGING CENTER. Establishments primarily engaged in producing
images of a patient generally on referral from a health practitioner. Examples
include computer tomography (CT-scan) centers, medical radiological
laboratories, dental or medical X-ray laboratories, ultrasound imaging centers,
and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) centers.
   DIRECTOR OF ENGINEERING AND DEVELOPMENT SERVICES. The administrative head of
the Engineering and Development Services Department, or their designee.
   DIRECTOR OF PLANNING, LAND USE, AND NEIGHBORHOODS. The administrative head
of the Planning, Land Use, and Neighborhoods Department, or their designee.
   DISTILLERY. A facility used for the commercial purpose of the production of
liquors and similar beverages. The facility may incorporate all aspects of
production including aging, storage, bottling, wholesale sales, warehousing,
and administrative office functions. Retail sales, tasting facilities, and
event facilities may be permitted as part of the facility operations.
   DISTRIBUTION TERMINAL. An establishment engaged in the storage or movement
of goods, such as manufactured products, supplies, equipment, or food. Goods
are generally delivered to other firms or the final consumer, except for some
will-call pickups. There is little on-site sales activity with the customer
present. Also referred to as a distribution center or logistics facility.
   DOCK FOR COMMERCIAL FISHING VESSEL. Docks used by those catching fish or
other marine life for the purpose of selling such fish or marine life at
wholesale or retail.
   DRIVE-THROUGH OR DRIVE-IN SERVICE. A facility designed to permit customers
of an establishment to obtain or consume goods or receive services while
remaining inside a motor vehicle. Curbside drop-off and pick up, where
customers use off-street parking spaces to wait for goods to be loaded or
unloaded from their vehicle, are not considered a DRIVE-THROUGH OR DRIVE-IN
SERVICE.
   DRY STACK WATERCRAFT STORAGE. A facility for storing boats out of water.
This is principally a land operation, where boats are dry stored or “stacked”
until such time as they are transferred to the water for use.
   DWELLING. A residential building that contains one or more dwelling units.
   DWELLING, DETACHED HOUSE. A residential building, other than a manufactured
home, that contains one principal dwelling unit and is not attached to another
principal dwelling unit.
   DWELLING, DUPLEX. A residential building that contains two dwelling units. A
DUPLEX DWELLING may be located on a single lot, with the dwelling units located
either side-by-side or stacked one above the other, or may be located on two
separate lots, with the dwelling units located side-by-side.
   DWELLING, GROUP CARE. A staffed residence providing meals, supervision,
education, counseling, treatment, therapy, and/or other support services for
elderly or physically, emotionally, and/or mentally disabled individuals.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLEX. A single residential building that contains five or
more dwelling units and is located on a single lot. See also APARTMENT COMPLEX.
   DWELLING, QUADPLEX. A single residential building that contains four
dwelling units and is located on a single lot. This dwelling type has the
appearance of a medium- or large-sized detached house, typically with one
shared entry, and is appropriately scaled to fit within moderate density
neighborhoods.
   DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE. One of a series of three or more separate attached
dwelling units that:
      (1)   May or may not have a common roof;
      (2)   Share at least one common wall;
      (3)   Are separate from each other by a fire resistance-rated wall
assembly, as required in the adopted building code; and
      (4)   Are sold as individual lots of record.
   DWELLING, TRIPLEX. A single residential building that contains three
dwelling units and is located on a single lot. This dwelling type has the
appearance of a medium- or large-sized detached house, typically with one
shared entry, and is appropriately scaled to fit within moderate density
neighborhoods.
   DWELLING UNIT. A building or portion of a building arranged or designed to
provide complete independent living facilities for one household, including
permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.
   DWELLING UNIT, ACCESSORY. A separate housing arrangement within, attached
to, or detached from a detached house dwelling, that includes its own dedicated
entrance from the outdoors and a kitchen and bathroom separate from those
contained within the principal structure, and therefore functions as a complete
living unit. The terms “kitchen” and “bathroom” are defined in the Building
Code.
   DWELLING UNIT, COLIVING. A portion of a building containing private living
spaces and shared common areas such as a kitchen, laundry room, and lounge
area. Each private living space includes a bedroom, but may or may not include
a private bathroom. Private living spaces do not include cooking facilities.
Typically, private living spaces within a coliving dwelling unit are leased on
an individual basis. A COLIVING DWELLING UNIT is located in a TRIPLEX DWELLING,
QUADPLEX DWELLING, MULTIPLEX DWELLING, or MIXED USE BUILDING.
   DWELLING, ZERO LOT LINE. A detached house dwelling that has a zero-foot
setback from one side property line.
   EASEMENT. A grant by the property owner of the use of a strip of land for a
specific purpose. Ownership is retained by the property owner, who is typically
responsible for the general upkeep and maintenance of the easement.
   ELIGIBLE IMPROVEMENTS. Additions, renovations, or other changes made to a
dwelling unit that are permanent in nature and clearly add to the long-term
market value of the dwelling unit, such as, but not limited to, additions
containing conditioned space, screened porches, decks, patios (other than
concrete slab), and improvements related to energy and water efficiency. Normal
maintenance, repair work, or improvements that are strictly cosmetic in nature
are not considered eligible improvements. Purchase of household appliances such
as, but not limited to, refrigerators, stoves, and dishwashers, shall not be
considered an ELIGIBLE IMPROVEMENT.
   ENGINEERING AND DEVELOPMENT SERVICES DIRECTOR. The administrative head of
the Engineering and Development Services Department or their designee.
   ENTERTAINMENT AND RECREATION, COMMERCIAL. See RECREATION AND ENTERTAINMENT,
COMMERCIAL.
   ENTERTAINMENT, HIGH-IMPACT. Predominantly large-seating capacity spectator
uses with the potential for high vehicle trip generation and/or which has a
greater potential for nuisance to adjacent properties due to noise, light, or
glare. Examples include, but are not limited to, large-scale event venues and
professional sports venues.
   EQUESTRIAN FACILITY. An establishment where horses are boarded and/or used
for rentals, riding lessons, shows, training, or the like.
   EVENT VENUE. A commercial facility used for the hosting of events such as,
but not limited to, weddings, parties, or meetings, which does not meet the
definition of high-impact entertainment.
   EXTERIOR LIGHTING. For all definitions related to exterior lighting, see
Subchapter H, Part 3, Subpart 3.4.
   FACILITY. A building, structure, or space established for a particular
purpose.
   FAMILY. See HOUSEHOLD.
   FARMERS’ MARKET, TEMPORARY. A temporary retail facility that is open to the
public; that is operated by a governmental agency, a non-profit corporation, or
one or more farmers’ market vendors; and that includes at least three vendors,
all of whom sell agricultural products or value-added agricultural products.
   FINANCIAL INVESTMENT SERVICES. This use group includes the following types
of establishments, as defined in the 2022 North American Industry
Classification System (NAICS):
      (1)   Mortgage and non-mortgage loan brokers (NAICS 522310);
      (2)   Securities and commodity contracts intermediation and brokerage
(NAICS 5231);
      (3)   Portfolio management and investment advice (NAICS 52394);
      (4)   Other financial investment activities (NAICS 52399);
      (5)   Open-end investment funds (NAICS 525910); and
      (6)   Other financial vehicles (NAICS 525990).
   FIRE CODE. The codes adopted by the town in
Chapter 92.
   FLEX SPACE. A facility containing a combination of office and any one or
more of the following uses: warehouse, distribution, and/or showroom
facilities.
   FLOOD PLAIN. Those areas subject to periodic inundation by large floods that
occur with calculable flood frequency, and subject to flooding that may
reasonably be expected to cause damage or hazard of damage sufficient to
justify protection therefrom.
   FLOOR AREA. See AREA, GROSS FLOOR.
   FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR). Expresses the relationship between the amount of
useable floor area permitted in a building or buildings and the area of the lot
on which the building stands. It is obtained by dividing the gross floor area
of a building by the total area of the lot. The diagram below illustrates three
ways that a FAR of 1.0 might be achieved: a one-story building covering the
entire lot, a two-story building covering half the lot, or a four-story
building covering one quarter of the lot. See Figure 156.1681-2.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13155.png]
 
   FLORIST OR FLOWER SHOP. A retail establishment in which the principal
activity is the sale of plants that are not grown on the site.
   FOOTPRINT. See BUILDING FOOTPRINT.
   FORESTRY OPERATIONS, BONA FIDE. BONA FIDE FORESTRY OPERATIONS shall mean
that the property is eligible for, and actually used for forestry or timber
operations, and written application has been approved by the Charleston County
Assessor for the special assessment for agricultural use for the property in
question pursuant to S.C. Code § 12-43-220, S.C. Department of Revenue
Regulation 117-1780.1., and other applicable statutes, rules, and regulations.
   GAS STATION. A place where gasoline is stored only in underground tanks, and
kerosene, lubricating oil, and grease for operation of automobiles, trucks, or
watercraft are offered for sale at retail directly to the public on premises.
   GOLF COURSE. A facility, other than a miniature golf course, for the playing
of golf, at which there may be a clubhouse including restrooms and locker
rooms. A GOLF COURSE may provide additional services customarily furnished such
as swimming pools, tennis courts, play fields, park land, driving ranges, and
related retail sales that may include a restaurant and cocktail lounge.
   GOVERNMENT FACILITY. A building, structure, or space owned, operated, and/or
occupied by a government agency.
   GRADE PLANE. This term has the same meaning given in the Building Code.
   GROCERY STORE. A retail establishment in which the majority of the
building’s floor area is devoted to the sale of food products, including fresh
fruits and vegetables, dairy products, and meats, for home preparation and
consumption. A grocery store carries a broader range of merchandise than a
convenience store.
   GUEST ROOM. Any room in a hotel or boutique hotel containing one or more
beds (excluding pull-out beds) provided for transient guests.
   GUEST SUITE. Two or more guest rooms grouped together within a single
rentable or leasable unit in any hotel or boutique hotel.
   HALF-STORY. See STORY, HALF.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT PRESERVATION COMMISSION. The Town of Mount Pleasant
Historic District Preservation Commission, established in accordance with the
South Carolina Local Government Comprehensive Planning Enabling Act. (See
Subchapter J)
   HISTORIC DISTRICT PRESERVATION COMMISSION SECRETARY. The staff person
designated to assist the Historic District Preservation Commission as specified
in §
156.1433 or their designee.
   HISTORIC PROPERTY. A building, structure, or site designated by Town Council
as a contributing property within an historic district or is located elsewhere
within the town as a singular property worthy of such a designation outside a
historic district.
   HISTORICAL COMMISSION. The Town of Mount Pleasant Historical Commission.
(See Subchapter J)
   HISTORICAL COMMISSION SECRETARY. The staff person designated to assist the
Historical Commission as specified in §
156.1433 or their designee.
   HOME-BASED BUSINESS. An occupation, profession, or trade customarily carried
on by an occupant in a dwelling unit or accessory structure as a secondary use,
which is clearly incidental to the dwelling unit for residential purposes. (See
Subchapter C, Part 4)
   HOSPICE CARE FACILITY. A licensed facility providing palliative and
supportive medical and health services to meet the physical, psychological,
social, spiritual, and special needs of terminally ill patients and their
families in a home-like setting.
   HOSPITAL. A licensed facility that primarily provides in-patient medical,
surgical, or psychiatric care. A hospital may also include out-patient
services, offices, laboratories, meeting areas, teaching facilities, dining
facilities, and maintenance facilities.
   HOTEL (includes MOTEL and EXTENDED STAY). A building or group of attached or
detached buildings containing more than 25 total guest rooms intended for
rental or lease to transients by the day, week, or month, whether individually
or combined in guest suites. A HOTEL shall have at least one full-time employee
on site during daytime hours. A HOTEL typically provides services and amenities
such as daily maid service, restaurant, meeting rooms, conference rooms and/or
recreation facilities.
   HOTEL, BOUTIQUE. A building or group of attached or detached buildings
containing up to 25 total guest rooms intended for rental or lease to
transients by the day, week, or month, whether individually or combined in
guest suites. A BOUTIQUE HOTEL shall have at least one full-time employee on
site during daytime hours. A BOUTIQUE HOTEL also shall provide services and
amenities such as daily maid service and/or recreation facilities.
   HOUSEHOLD. All the people who occupy a dwelling unit. The number of adults
in a household shall not exceed two times the number of bedrooms in the
dwelling unit.
   ICE MANUFACTURING AND SALES. A self-contained facility that produces,
stores, and packages ice for use by the owner or sale to other parties from the
property.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. An area covering the ground that is continuous and made
of non-porous material. This material prevents rainwater from passing through,
impeding soil infiltration. It does not include elevated surfaces designed to
allow rainwater to reach the soil underneath. Examples of impervious ground
cover are a concrete or asphalt slab, sidewalk, swimming pool, building
footprint, street, curbing, and covered decks. Any material is considered
impervious when the Soil Conservation Service (SC) Curve Number is equal to or
greater than 90.
   INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND SERVICES. This use group includes the following
types of establishments, as defined in the 2022 North American Industry
Classification System (NAICS):
      (1)   Software publishers (NAICS 5132);
      (2)   Custom computer programming services (NAICS 541511);
      (3)   Computer systems design services (NAICS 541512); and
      (4)   Computer facilities management services (NAICS 541513).
   INITIAL ZONING. The zoning district applied at the time of annexation of a
lot into the town’s jurisdiction.
   INN. See HOTEL, BOUTIQUE.
   LAYDOWN AREA. A temporary outdoor area associated with an approved
construction project where construction materials and equipment are stored
while the associated construction project is active.
   LIGHTING. For all definitions related to exterior lighting, see
Subchapter H, Part 3, Subpart 3.4.
   LIVE-WORK UNIT. A principally non-residential building containing one
dwelling unit that comprises up to 49% of the gross floor area, with the
remainder of the building containing one non-residential use allowed in the
zoning district.
   LOADING SPACE. A space within the main building or on the same lot,
providing for the standing, loading, or unloading of trucks.
   LOCAL ARTISAN MARKET. A temporary retail facility that includes at least
three vendors, all of whom sell locally handcrafted products.
   LOT. A plot or parcel of land considered as a unit, devoted to a certain use
or occupied by a building or group of buildings permitted in this chapter, and
having its principal frontage upon a street or access in accordance with
municipal regulations, and the customary accessories and open spaces belonging
to the same.
   LOT AREA. See AREA, LOT.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot at the junction of, and fronting on, two or more streets
(but not alleys) at their intersection (lot “A” in Figure 156.1681-3: Lot
Diagram).
   LOT, DEPTH. See §
156.1638.
   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot having a frontage on two streets (but not
alleys), at a point other than at their intersection, as distinguished from
corner lot (lot “C” in Figure 156.1681-3: Lot Diagram).
   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot, having frontage on only one
street other than an alley (lot “B” in Figure 156.1681-3: Lot Diagram).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13157.png]
 
   LOT LINE. The legal boundary of a parcel.
   LOT OF RECORD. An area designated as a separate and distinct parcel of land
on a legally recorded deed and/or approved plat as filed in the official
records of the Charleston County Register of Deeds Office.
   LOT WIDTH. See §
156.1637.
   LOUNGE. See BAR.
   LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID). Low impact development (LID) is an approach to
managing stormwater through systems that use or mimic natural processes for the
infiltration, evapotranspiration, or reuse of stormwater and runoff on the site
where it is generated. LID techniques reduce the amount of unt rea ted ru nof f
dis ch arg ed to surface waters by allowing stormwater to be absorbed and
cleansed by soil and vegetation before flowing into groundwater or surface
water resources. This reduces stormwater maintenance costs and protects water
quality.
   MANUFACTURED HOUSING UNIT. A dwelling unit designed to be transported after
fabrication on its own wheels, or on flatbed or other trailers or detachable
wheels; arriving at the site where it is to be occupied in a dwelling complete
and ready for occupancy, except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations, connection to utilities, and the like. Such housing units shall be
installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation manual; in the
absence of such a manual, such housing units shall be installed in accordance
with all applicable state installation regulations.This definition includes
mobile homes but does not include modular buildings, which are certified as
such by the South Carolina Modular Building Construction Act of 1984, S.C. Code
Title 43, Chapter 43, 1976, as amended.
   MANUFACTURING AND PRODUCTION. Businesses engaged in the processing,
manufacturing, production, compounding, assembly, packaging, treatment or
fabrication of materials and products from processed or previously manufactured
materials. This definition shall include incidental storage, wholesale sales,
and distribution of such products.
   MARICULTURE. A specialized branch of aquaculture involving the cultivation
of marine organisms in salt water, usually by enclosing a portion of a natural
waterway but also in tanks or ponds.
   MARINA. A facility for storage, servicing, fueling, berthing, or securing of
boats.
   MARINE SALVAGE OPERATIONS. The use of any part of a lot, whether inside or
outside of a building, for the storage, dismantling, and/or sale of objects
recovered from waterways.
   MARINE WAREHOUSING. An establishment for the storage, wholesale, and
distribution of manufactured marine equipment, products, and supplies. This
term does not include self-storage facilities or flex space.
   MARKET-RATE HOUSING. Housing priced according to prevailing market trends
and sold with no restrictions on either the sale price or on the buyer's
income.
   MARKETING, DESIGN, AND PUBLISHING SERVICES. This use group includes the
following types of establishments, as defined in the 2022 North American
Industry Classification System (NAICS):
      (1)   Book Publishers (NAICS 513130);
      (2)   Directory and Mailing List Publishers (NAICS 513140);
      (3)   All Other Publishers (NAICS 513199);
      (4)   Interior Design Services (NAICS 541410);
      (5)   Industrial Design Services (NAICS 541420);
      (6)   Graphic Design Services (NAICS 541430);
      (7)   Other Specialized Design Services (NAICS 541490);
      (8)   Marketing Consulting Services (NAICS 541613);
      (9)   Advertising Agencies (NAICS 541810);
      (10)   Public Relations Agencies (NAICS 541820);
      (11)   Media Buying Agencies (NAICS 541830);
      (12)   Indoor and Outdoor Display Advertising (NAICS 5411850);
      (13)   Direct Mail Advertising (NAICS 541860);
      (14)   Advertising Material Distribution Services (NAICS 541870);
      (15)   Other Services Related to Advertising (NAICS 541890); and
      (16)   Marketing Research and Public Opinion Polling (NAICS 541910).
   MEDICAL, DENTAL, AND HOSPITAL EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES MERCHANT WHOLESALERS.
Establishments primarily engaged in the merchant wholesale distribution of
professional medical equipment, instruments, and supplies.
   MEDICAL LABORATORY. Establishments primarily engaged in providing analytic
or diagnostic services, generally to the medical profession or to the patient
on referral from a health practitioner. Examples include blood analysis
laboratories, medical pathology laboratories, medical bacteriological
laboratories, medical testing laboratories, and medical forensic laboratories.
   MIXED USE BUILDING. A building that contains a ground floor devoted to non-
residential uses and one or more upper floors occupied by one or more dwelling
units.
   MOBILE FOOD PUSHCART. A limited food service unit that operates as an
extension of a commissary.
   MOBILE FOOD VENDING UNIT. A fully enclosed mobile kitchen that prepares,
cooks, or serves time/temperature control for safety food as an extension of a
commissary.
   MOBILE FOOD VENDOR. A person selling food from a mobile food vending unit or
a mobile food pushcart. This definition does not include solicitors, peddlers,
or transient merchants.
   MOBILE RETAIL VENDING UNIT. A truck, trailer, pushcart, or similar
conveyance, whether operated under its own power or pushed or towed to a
location, from which non-perishable goods or merchandise are sold to individual
customers.
   MOBILE RETAIL VENDOR. A person selling retail, non-food products from a
mobile retail vending unit. This definition does not include solicitors,
peddlers, or transient merchants.
   MOBILE VENDING UNIT. A term that refers collectively to mobile food vending
units, mobile food pushcarts, and mobile retail vending units.
   MOBILE VENDOR. A term that refers collectively to mobile food vendors and
mobile retail vendors.
   MODULAR BUILDING. Any building of closed construction, regardless of type of
construction or occupancy classification, other than a mobile or manufactured
home, constructed off-site in accordance with the applicable codes and
transported to the point of use for installation or erection. A MODULAR
BUILDING includes the necessary electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilating, and
other service systems necessary for permanent occupancy, and is not designed
for ready removal to another site. A MODULAR BUILDING meets the requirements of
the South Carolina Modular Buildings Construction Act (S.C. Code § 23-43).
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any vehicle that is self-propelled, as defined in S.C. Code §
56-5-130. For purposes of this chapter, this definition includes mopeds.
   MOTOR VEHICLE OR WATERCRAFT SERVICE AND REPAIR. A business involving the
upkeep, maintenance, and/or repair of motor vehicles and/or watercraft.
   NEIGHBORHOOD GATHERING PLACE. An establishment intended for social meetings
and low intensity commercial uses offering services such as, but not limited
to, beauty salons, barber shops, and neighborhood general stores, and in some
cases serving food and drinks. These establishments are generally locally-owned
and operated and are intended to serve the immediate community.
   NIGHTCLUB. See BAR.
   NONCONFORMITY. A lawfully established lot, land use, structure, building,
site feature, or sign that does not conform to the current regulations in this
chapter.
   NURSING HOME. See ASSISTED LIVING.
   OFFICE, GENERAL. Use of a site for business, professional, or administrative
offices, excluding medical offices. Typical uses include real estate,
insurance, management, computer software or information systems research and
development, or other business offices; organization and association offices;
or law, architectural, engineering, accounting, or other professional offices.
Retail sales do not comprise more than an ancillary aspect of the primary
activity of a GENERAL OFFICE.
   OFFICE, MEDICAL. Use of a site for facilities that provide medical
treatment, preventative care, and/or outpatient physical or mental health care
on a routine basis, but that do not provide overnight care or serve as a base
for an ambulance service. MEDICAL OFFICES are operated by doctors, dentists,
psychiatrists, or similar practitioners licensed by the State of South
Carolina. Retail sales do not comprise more than an ancillary aspect of the
primary activity of a medical office. This definition excludes medical
laboratories.
   OPEN SPACE. Land areas retained for use as active or passive recreation
areas or for resource protection in an essentially undeveloped state. OPEN
SPACE areas should be contiguous or connected to each other by a pedestrian and
bicycle path or sidewalk system. OPEN SPACE areas intended for active or
passive recreation use shall be of sufficient size so as to constitute
meaningful and usable space. OPEN SPACE areas may include high ground and
wetland buffer areas, but do not include freshwater or saltwater wetlands.
   OPEN SPACE, NATURAL. An essentially undisturbed area not occupied by any
structure or impervious surface. Pervious pedestrian trails are permitted in
natural open space areas.
   OPHTHALMIC GOODS MERCHANT WHOLESALERS. Establishments primarily engaged in
the merchant wholesale distribution of professional equipment, instruments,
and/or goods sold, prescribed, or used by ophthalmologists, optometrists, and
opticians.
   OUTDOOR DINING. An open-air dining area of an eating and/or drinking
establishment enclosed by three or fewer walls of the building in which the
eating and/or drinking establishment is located. These areas may be open to the
elements and temporarily enclosed by means such as fencing, walls, plastic, or
other enclosing materials and methods due to inclement weather.
   OUTDOOR RETAIL DISPLAY. A limited type of outdoor storage located on the
same lot as a retail sales establishment where merchandise is displayed for
sale.
   OUTDOOR STORAGE. The keeping, other than in a fully enclosed building, of
any goods, materials, or merchandise on a parcel for any period of time. A
“fully enclosed” building includes a roof and walls on all sides, such that
materials and activities located within the building are not visible from
outside the building except through windows and doors.
   PARCEL. A piece of land that can be owned and conveyed. Each parcel in
Charleston County has a unique Parcel Identification (PID) or Tax Map Sequence
(TMS) number.
   PARK. A public or private area of land, with or without buildings, intended
for outdoor active or passive recreational uses.
   PARKING SPACE. The area required for parking one vehicle.
   PARKING SPACE, TANDEM. The arrangement of not more than two parking spaces
in depth, wherein one space is located directly in front of another space, such
that it is necessary to pass through one space in order to enter or leave the
other space.
   PARKING STRUCTURE (includes the terms PARKING GARAGE, PARKING DECK, PODIUM
PARKING, and UNDERGROUND or UNDER-BUILDING PARKING). A structure designed to
accommodate vehicular parking spaces that are fully or partially enclosed or
located on the deck surface of the structure.
   PARKING, SURFACE. Parking areas not located within a building.
   PATIO. A level surfaced area adjacent to a building at finished grade,
without permanent walls or a roof. A PATIO is typically constructed from
concrete, brick, stone, or other masonry material.
   PERSONAL AND BUSINESS SUPPORT SERVICES. Establishments providing specialized
services to individuals and organizations to assist with the maintenance of
their person and effects or organizational needs. Such services include, but
are not limited to, dry cleaners and laundries; tailors, dressmakers, and
alterations shops; cleaning services; beauty and barber salons; medical spas,
including microblading services; photography studios; computer and electronics
repair; and print and copy shops. These uses may also include ancillary retail
sales of products related to the services provided.
   PERSONAL IMPROVEMENT EDUCATION. Establishments providing specialized
instruction and/or training in a particular subject or hobby to students of any
age. Examples of this use include, but are not limited to, fine arts schools,
including music, art, and dance; and driving schools for motor vehicles not
requiring a Commercial Driver's License (CDL).
   PERSONAL WATERCRAFT. A vessel with a hull length of 15 feet or less, having
as its primary source of propulsion an inboard motor powering a jet pump or an
outboard motor with a horsepower rating of less than 15 horsepower. PERSONAL
WATERCRAFT are designed to be operated by a person or persons sitting,
standing, or kneeling.
PERSONAL WATERCRAFT include, but are not limited to, jet skis, wet bikes, surf
jets, and miniature speedboats.
   PERVIOUS SURFACE. A surface covering the ground that consists of porous or
non-compacted loose material that allows water to pass through. Examples are
manufactured pervious pavers and parking spaces, loose gravel, rocks, and sand.
PERVIOUS SURFACES allow water to infiltrate to the underlying soil. PERVIOUS
SURFACES allow rainwater to reach the ground surface directly underneath.
   PET CARE SERVICE. An establishment primarily engaged in providing services
for household pets, such as grooming and training. Animals may be kept in
indoor kennels before and/or after a service, but in no case for more than 24
hours. This definition excludes animal boarding facilities and daycares, animal
shelters, and veterinary clinics.
   PET SUPPLY STORE. A retail establishment primarily engaged in the sale of
products related to the care of household pets, such as food, toys, and
medicines.
   PHARMACY. An establishment primarily engaged in preparing and dispensing
prescription medications.
   PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT. A mixed use development project comprised of
housing of different types and densities and of compatible commercial uses,
such as shopping centers and office parks. A PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT is
established by rezoning prior to development and is characterized by a unified
site design for a mixed use development.
   PLANNING COMMISSION. The Town of Mount Pleasant Planning Commission,
established in accordance with the South Carolina Local Government
Comprehensive Planning Enabling Act. (See
Subchapter J)
   PLANNING COMMISSION SECRETARY. The staff person designated to assist the
Planning Commission as specified in §
156.1433 or their designee.
   PLANNING DIRECTOR. See DIRECTOR OF PLANNING, LAND USE, AND NEIGHBORHOODS.
   PLAT. A map, plan, or layout of a tract of land, or a section or subdivision
of land, indicating the location and boundaries of individual properties.
   PLAZA. A publicly- or privately-owned public space located at ground level,
partially enclosed by one or more buildings or parking areas, and predominantly
open to the sky. A plaza is primarily hardscaped or covered in turf, may also
include shade trees or shade structures and other landscaping, and may
incorporate water features and public art. Figures 156.1681-4 and 156.1681-
5 provide examples.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13159.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13161.png]
 
   POCKET PARK. A small open space available for informal activities in close
proximity to dwellings and/or workplaces that often contains benches or other
seating areas but does not contain buildings. Pocket parks must be designed and
located to be accessible to occupants of the property. Figure 156.1681-
6 provides an example.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fd843b968125d64bddfe300d11175360a399e050/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13163.png]
 
   PORT. A facility for the docking, loading, and unloading of ships.
   PORTABLE OFFICE UNIT. Any small, compact structure used for general or
medical office purposes that is mounted on skids or otherwise constructed so
that it can be readily moved from one location to another without change in
structure or design, with the exception of the foundation or method of support.
   PORTABLE STORAGE UNIT. Any container designed for the storage of personal
property which is typically rented to owners or occupants of property for their
temporary use and which is delivered and removed by truck.
   PRELIMINARY STAFF REVIEW. A non- binding review of an impact assessment or a
proposed new/amended Planned Development District by Department of Planning and
Development staff required prior to formal submittal of the proposal to the
Planning Commission and Town Council.
   PRODUCTION STUDIO. A facility specially equipped for broadcasting, filming,
and/or recording music, motion pictures, television shows, radio programs, and
the like.
   PUBLIC PROJECT. Any project by or for a public agency using real property,
as owner or tenant, that falls within the jurisdiction of the Town of Mount
Pleasant. These public agencies include: agencies and departments of the state;
counties and county agencies and departments; and municipalities and municipal
agencies and departments.
   PUBLIC REALM. All exterior places, linkages, and built form elements that
are physically and/or visually accessible regardless of ownership. These
elements may include, but are not limited to, streets, pedestrian ways,
bikeways, bridges, plazas, nodes, squares, transportation hubs, gateways,
parks, waterfronts, natural features, view corridors, and landmarks. The PUBLIC
REALM is organized into four categories: parks, streetscapes, coastal and
waterfront areas, and public spaces. These categories may have differing
ownership and maintenance arrangements, and are defined as follows:
      (1)   PARKS. Public open spaces within a community intended for active or
passive recreational use.
      (2)   STREETSCAPES. The visual elements of a street, including the road,
sidewalk, street furnishings, trees, and open spaces, that combine to form the
street's character.
      (3)   COASTAL AND WATERFRONT AREAS. All land areas along the water's edge
and the connections between these areas and the streetscape.
      (4)   PUBLIC SPACES. All open areas within a community visible to the
public or for public gathering or assembly.
   PUSHCART. A non-self-propelled vehicle designed to be readily moveable, from
which merchandise or food is sold.
   RECREATION AND ENTERTAINMENT, COMMERCIAL. Any establishment not meeting the
definition of high-impact entertainment or high-impact recreation which
receives a fee in return for providing the general public with an amusing or
entertaining activity including, but not limited to, swimming pools, tennis
facilities, bowling alleys, billiards, laser tag facilities, skating rinks,
indoor go-karts, theatres, movie theatres, gyms, and fitness centers.
   RECREATION, COMMUNITY. Recreational facilities and structures generally
serving the area at large and having a greater impact on its surroundings than
neighborhood recreation. Facilities may or may not charge a fee, but are
generally not commercial establishments. Examples include, but are not limited
to, multiple playing fields or courts, large-tract passive parks, pools,
Alhambra Hall, and the G.M. Darby Building.
   RECREATION, HIGH-IMPACT. Any commercial recreational establishment with the
potential for high vehicle trip generation and/or which has a greater potential
for nuisance to adjacent properties due to noise, light, or glare. Examples
include but are not limited to outdoor go-karts, mini-golf, waterpark, and
driving ranges.
   RECREATION, NEIGHBORHOOD. Recreational facilities and structures generally
serving a small area such as a subdivision and having a low impact on its
surroundings. Facilities are generally not illuminated, and may or may not
charge a nominal fee. Examples include, but are not limited to, courts and ball
fields, playgrounds, and kayak launches.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is built on a single chassis; designed
to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a car, sport-utility vehicle, or
light duty truck; and designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel,
recreational, or vacation purposes. This definition includes pickup campers,
converted buses, tiny houses on wheels, and pop-up campers.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK. A non-residential use of a parcel of land for
temporary overnight use by recreational vehicles for which a fee may be
charged. Recreational vehicle camping areas may involve site improvements, such
as concrete pads, parking areas, or fire pits, but may not include permanent
utility hookups.
   RECYCLING FACILITY. An establishment engaged in the collection, storage,
transfer, and/or processing of recyclable materials. This does not include
collection bins typically seen behind shopping centers or at government
facilities.
   REHABILITATION. The process of returning a property to a state of utility,
through repair or alteration, that makes possible an efficient contemporary
use, while preserving those portions and features of the property significant
to its historic, architectural, and cultural values.
   RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT FACILITY. An establishment in which an organization
conducts investigative activities for the purpose of developing new products,
procedures, or processes, or improving existing products, procedures, or
processes. Such facility may include limited on-site production of related
goods.
   RESIDENTIAL TREATMENT FACILITY. An establishment providing for the
assessment, diagnosis, treatment, and/or care of children, adolescents, or
adults with mental illness, substance abuse, or other behavioral problems.
Services may include educational programs, individual and family counseling
programs, occupational training programs or facilities, and recreational
facilities, all accommodated in a residential setting.
   RESOURCE EXTRACTION. A use involving on-site extraction of surface or
subsurface mineral products or natural resources. Typical uses are quarries,
borrow pits, sand and gravel operations, mining, and soil mining. Specifically
excluded from this use is timber harvesting; silviculture; grading and removal
of dirt associated with an approved site plan or subdivision; or excavations
associated with, and for the improvement of, a bona fide agricultural use.
   RESOURCE PROCESSING AND STORAGE. A use involving on-site separation or
aggregation of mineral products and/or extracted natural resources, such as
mulching or chipping, and/or storage of mineral products and/or extracted
natural resources such as trees, dirt, and similar materials.
   RESTAURANT. An establishment whose principal business is the sale of food
and/or beverages to customers in a ready-to-consume state.
   RETAIL CENTER. Two or more tenants occupying less than 40,000 square feet of
retail space. A retail center may accommodate tenants in individual units
within a single building or within multiple buildings.
   RETAIL SALES. Establishments that form the final step in the distribution of
merchandise. RETAIL SALES establishments are organized to sell goods in small
quantities to the general public for personal or household consumption, though
they may also serve businesses and institutions. Some establishments may
further provide after-sales services, such as repair and installation.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. An area of land not on a lot that is dedicated for public or
private use to accommodate pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular movement and
necessary public utility infrastructure (including, but not limited, to water
lines, sewer lines, power lines, and gas lines). In no case shall a right-of-
way be construed to mean an easement.
   ROOMING HOUSE. See DWELLING, GROUP.
   RURAL COMPOUND. A living arrangement where multiple principal detached
houses are established on one or more lots of record.
   SCDOT ARMS MANUAL. The South Carolina Department of Transportation Access
and Roadside Access Management Standards Manual.
   SEAFOOD PROCESSING. An activity that changes the physical condition of a
seafood product, including heading, gutting, filleting, tailing, cleansing,
butchering, pickling, sating, shucking, or smoking.
   SETBACK. See BUILDING LINE.
   SHOPPING CENTER. A group of at least four tenants occupying 40,000 square
feet of retail space or greater. A shopping center may accommodate tenants in
individual units within a single building or within multiple buildings.
   SHORT-TERM RENTAL.
      (1)   The rental or lease of a residential dwelling unit or portion
thereof for a duration of less than 30 consecutive days; or
      (2)   Home-based business and tourist accommodations, including hotel
(includes motel and extended stay), hotel, boutique (includes inn) and similar
accommodations located on property in a commercial zoning district are not
considered SHORT-TERM RENTALS.
      (3)   This definition shall apply to any and all businesses that
qualified as a bed and breakfast under previous town ordinances.
   SHRUB. Typically a woody perennial that does not achieve tree proportions at
maturity.
   SIGN. For all definitions related to signs, see Subchapter G.
   SIGN PERMIT. See ZONING PERMIT.
   SITE AREA. See AREA, SITE.
   SITE FEATURE. An element on a lot, other than a building, that the Zoning
Code requires as a condition of development or redevelopment. SITE FEATURES
include bufferyards, landscaping, and parking, but exclude signs and exterior
lighting.
   SPECIAL EXCEPTION. Use of property granted only by review and approval of
the Board of Zoning Appeals, subject to the terms and conditions set forth in
the Zoning Ordinance and as determined by the Board.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. See
Chapter 152.
   SPECIALTY FOOD STORE. A retail establishment specializing in the sale of a
specific type or category of foods, such as a bakery, delicatessen, butcher
shop, fish market, ice cream and frozen yogurt shop, bagel shop, coffee and tea
shop, confectionery and candy shop, gourmet food shop, or ethnic or cultural
food shop.
   SPLIT-ZONED LOT. A lot that is located in two or more zoning districts.
   SPORTS COMPLEX. A facility, generally not commercial in nature, with or
without seating for spectators, and providing accommodations for a variety of
individual, organized sports, including but not limited to basketball,
wrestling, soccer, tennis, volleyball, football, baseball, or swimming pool.
Such facility may also provide other regular organized events; health and
fitness club facilities; snack bar; limited retail sales of related sports,
health, or fitness items; and other support facilities.
   STABLE. A structure in which horses or other large animals are kept for the
purposes of boarding, breeding, personal use, or training, provided any
training is limited to those animals being boarded on the property.
   STORY (including BUILDING FLOOR). An articulated, distinct level of
separation in a building or structure located between the finished surface upon
which one may stand and the finished ceiling, having a minimum vertical
distance of seven feet at its apex, specifically including a ground level
component used for parking or storage, and excluding the following: unfinished
attic space without permanent stair access, located within a roof structure,
and used exclusively for storage or building support components such as water
heaters, HVAC components, and the like; and a basement or crawl-space area.
   STORY, HALF. The space under a gabled or hipped roof where the wall plates,
or knee walls, on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than two
feet above the finished floor of such story. The aggregate width of dormers on
a half-story shall not exceed 50% of the width of the exterior wall below the
dormer(s).
   STREET, MAJOR. A public right-of-way, generally containing four or more
travel lanes.
   STREET, PRIMARY. The public or private street, public or private access
easement, drive aisle, or public waterway that a building’s primary façade
typically must face if the building is subject to the design review process
(see
Subchapter I, Part 12). Exceptions may be made in consideration of conditions
such as differences in elevation of the adjacent street and subject property,
historic tree location, the presence of abutting frontage roads, and the width
of required right-of-way bufferyards. The designated reviewing authority
determines the PRIMARY STREET.
   STREETSIDE DINING. These areas shall be located within the activity zone,
and are specifically required to be open air, unconditioned dining, open to the
elements and not enclosed by any means, such as fencing, walls, plastic, or
other enclosing materials and methods; except that awnings shall be allowed.
Temporary planters for landscaping may be used to delineate the dining area,
but may not impede pedestrian access.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected that requires a fixed location on
the ground, or is attached to something having a fixed location on the ground,
including, but not limited to, buildings, manufactured homes, signs,
billboards, backstops for athletic activities, swimming pools, walls, and
fences. The term STRUCTURE shall be construed as if followed by the words “or
part thereof.”
   STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY. A structure located on the same lot as the principal
structure to which it is related and that is clearly incidental to, and
customarily found in connection with, the principal use or structure.
   STRUCTURE FOOTPRINT. See BUILDING FOOTPRINT.
   STRUCTURE, PRINCIPAL. A structure within which the principal use is
conducted.
   SUBSTANTIAL ECONOMIC HARDSHIP. Hardship of a financial or economic nature
that makes it impossible or unnecessarily difficult to maintain an historic
property in accordance with the historic district design guidelines.
   SWEETGRASS BASKET STAND. An open-air stand from which baskets handmade from
locally grown sweetgrass are sold.
   TANDEM PARKING SPACE. See PARKING SPACE, TANDEM.
   TATTOO or TATTOOING. To indelibly mark or color the skin by subcutaneous
introduction of nontoxic dyes or pigments.
   TECHNICAL REVIEW AND CODE COMPLIANCE TEAM. A group of town staff that
reviews certain development proposals for compliance with the Zoning Code, Land
Development Regulations, and other applicable regulations. (See
Subchapter J)
   TERMINAL VISTA. The building or landscape element that is visible at the end
of a street, or along the outside edge of a curve.
   TESTING LABORATORIES AND SERVICES. Establishments primarily engaged in
performing physical, chemical, and other analytical testing services, such as
acoustics or vibration testing, assaying, biological testing (except medical
and veterinary), calibration testing, electrical and electronic testing,
geotechnical testing, mechanical testing, nondestructive testing, or thermal
testing. The testing may occur in a laboratory or on-site.
   THEATER. A building or portion thereof devoted to showing motion pictures,
or for dramatic, dance, musical, or other live performances.
   TINY HOUSE. A detached house dwelling that is 400 square feet or less in
gross floor area, excluding lofts. A “loft” is a floor level located more than
30 inches above the main floor, open to the main floor on one or more sides
with a ceiling height of less than six feet, eight inches and used as a living
or sleeping space.
   TINY HOUSE ON WHEELS. See RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.
   TOWN ENGINEER. The Deputy Director of the Engineering and Environmental
Division of the Engineering and Development Services Department, or their
designee.
   TRAILER. Any vehicle or structure, capable of moving, or being moved, over
streets and highways on its own wheels or on flatbeds or other carriers, that
is designed or utilized to: provide temporary or permanent quarters for the
conduct of a business, profession, trade, or occupation; serve as a carrier of
new or used goods, products, or equipment; or be used as a selling,
advertising, or display device. A TRAILER is not used as a residence or for
permanent sleeping quarters, such as a manufactured home.
   TRANSPORTATION TERMINAL. A facility for loading, unloading, and interchange
of passengers, baggage, and incidental freight or package express between modes
of ground transportation, including bus terminals, truck terminals, and public
transit facilities.
   TRAVEL TRAILER. See RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.
   TREE. Any living, self-supporting, woody perennial plant, usually having one
dominant trunk and a mature height greater than 16 feet.
   TREE, CANOPY. A woody perennial typically capable of achieving heights
exceeding 30 feet at maturity.
   TREE REMOVAL PERMIT. See ZONING PERMIT.
   TREE, UNDERSTORY. A woody perennial with a smaller size at maturity than
canopy species, typically with a size between 16 feet and 30 feet at maturity.
   UNDEVELOPED LOT. A lot that has never been occupied by a structure or a use
without a structure, including a parking lot.
   USE. The purpose or activity for which land or structures are designed,
arranged, intended, occupied, and/or maintained.
   USE, ACCESSORY. See ACCESSORY BUILDING, STRUCTURE, OR USE.
   USE, CIVIC (also USE, INSTITUTIONAL). Utility, educational, recreational,
cultural, medical, protective, governmental, and other uses that provide public
or quasi-public services and are strongly vested with social importance.
Examples include, but are not limited to, the following: city halls; post
offices; police and fire stations; schools; museums; universities; public
parks; meeting halls; libraries; transit centers; and parking structures.
   USE, CONDITIONAL. A use not otherwise permitted in a district, and which
would not be appropriate generally or without restriction throughout a zoning
district, but which, if controlled as to number, area, location, relation to
the neighborhoods, and subject to the conditions noted, would promote the
public health, safety, welfare, order, comfort, convenience, appearance,
proprietary, or general welfare of the town.
   USE, NON-RESIDENTIAL. Any use other than a RESIDENTIAL USE (e.g.,
commercial, retail, office, civic, or institutional use).
   USE, PERMITTED. Any use allowed in a given zoning district without a
requirement for conditional or special exception approval.
   USE, PRINCIPAL. The main or primary purpose for which a building, other
structure, and/or lot is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which they may
be used, occupied, or maintained under this chapter. The use of any other
building, other structure, and/or land on the same lot and incidental or
supplementary thereto and permitted under this chapter shall be considered an
accessory use.
   USE, PUBLIC. A building or property owned or occupied by a use which is open
to all people, without or with minimal restrictions or regard as to membership,
and which is established for their common or general use and enjoyment. A
church is a PUBLIC USE.
   USE, QUASI-PUBLIC. Essentially public (as in services rendered) although
under private ownership or control. Examples of QUASI-PUBLIC USES include
institutional, academic, and community service uses.
   USE, RESIDENTIAL. Any use that includes only dwelling units and their
customary accessory uses, but no other uses.
   USE, SEMI-PUBLIC. A building or property owned or occupied by an
organization, institution, or group of people with written and adopted rules
for membership, that are used or enjoyed primarily by that group.
   USE, TEMPORARY. A use established for a limited duration with the intent to
discontinue such use upon the expiration of the time period. This definition
excludes uses and events customarily associated with the principal land use
(e.g., weddings at a place of worship, sporting events at a stadium).
   VALUE-ADDED AGRICULTURAL PRODUCT. This term is defined in 7 CFR 4284.902:
Definitions (USDA Rural Business-Cooperative Service Value-Added Producer Grant
Program).
   VARIANCE. A modification of the strict terms of this chapter granted by the
Board of Zoning Appeals where such modification will not be contrary to the
public interest, and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and
not as the result of any action on the part of the property owner, a literal
enforcement of the chapter would result in unnecessary and undue hardship.
   VERGE. The typically grassed area located adjacent to the street, between
the back of curb or edge of pavement and the sidewalk.
   VETERINARY CLINIC. An establishment for the care, observation, and/or
treatment of animals and where animals may be boarded indoors during their
convalescence.
   WAREHOUSING FACILITY. An establishment for the storage, wholesale, and
distribution of manufactured equipment, products, and supplies. This term does
not include self-storage facilities or flex space.
   WAREHOUSING, MARINE. See MARINE WAREHOUSING.
   WASTE-RELATED SERVICES. Establishments that receive solid or liquid wastes
from others for disposal on the site or for transfer to another location, uses
that collect sanitary wastes, or uses that manufacture or produce goods or
energy from the biological decomposition of organic material.
   WATER-DEPENDENT. Activities that require access to a water body and which
can be carried out only on, in, or adjacent to a water body.
   WATER-RELATED. Activities not directly dependent upon access to a water
body, but that provide goods or services principally associated with water-
dependent uses.
   WATER TAXI. A vessel offered for hire for the purpose of transporting
passengers to and from properties adjacent to local waterways or between
properties adjacent to local waterways and another vessel. WATER TAXIS do not
include any vessel hired overnight, charter boats, or personal watercraft.
   WHOLESALE SALES. The sale or distribution of merchandise to retailers;
industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional business users; or to
other wholesalers.
   WILD GAME PROCESSING FACILITY. An establishment that renders legally killed
wild animals, fish, and/or game into packaged cuts of meat, meat products, or
other products.
   WINERY. A facility used for the commercial purpose of the production of wine
or similar spirits. The facility may incorporate all aspects of production,
including aging, storage, bottling, wholesale sales, warehousing, and
administrative office functions. Retail sales, tasting facilities, and event
facilities may be permitted as part of the facility operations.
   YARD, FRONT. A yard situated between the front building line and the front
lot line extending the full width of the lot.
   YARD, REAR. A yard situated between the rear building line and the rear lot
line and extending the full width of the lot.
   YARD SALE. The sale of miscellaneous household items from a lot containing
an occupied dwelling unit.
   YARD, SIDE. A yard situated between a side building line and side lot line
and extending from the front yard to the rear yard.
   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The individual designated to administer and enforce
the Zoning Code or their designee.
   ZONING DISTRICT. An area or areas within the limits of the town for which
the regulations and requirements governing use, lot, and bulk for buildings and
premises are uniform.
   ZONING PERMIT. An authorization required prior to establishment of the use
or commencement of development activities. See
Subchapter I, Part 7.
   ZONING MAP. The map or maps that delineate the boundaries of all mapped
zoning districts within the town’s corporate limits which, along with the text
in this chapter, comprises the Zoning Code.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1682 THROUGH 156.1689 RESERVED.
SUBCHAPTER O: BUILDING PERMIT ALLOCATION SYSTEM
§ 156.1690 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the Building Permit
Allocation System (BPAS).
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1691 AUTHORITY.
   (A)   These regulations are adopted for the promotion of the public health,
safety, economy, good order, convenience, and general welfare of the Town of
Mount Pleasant under the authority granted by:
      (1)   S.C. Code Chapter 29 of Title 6 (otherwise known as the South
Carolina Local Government Comprehensive Planning Enabling Act of 1994); and
      (2)   The general police powers of municipalities granted pursuant to the
Constitution of the State of South Carolina and state legislation, including
the Home Rule Act (Act No. 283 of 1975) and S.C. Code § 5-7-30.
   (B)   Furthermore, the provisions of this subchapter shall not be construed
to limit the power and ability of the town to utilize any current laws, codes,
and regulations in substitution of, or in conjunction with, these provisions to
accomplish its intended purpose.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1692 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this subchapter is to create a building permit
allocation system to distribute certain building permits at a reasonable rate
and in a manner intended to limit the pace of construction of certain dwelling
units over a fixed period. The purpose of the system is to respond to a variety
of growth and development forces which affect the town’s ability to meet
community expectations and demands. Some factors and considerations supporting
the need for the BPAS are as follows:
      (1)   The Town of Mount Pleasant is a desirable place to live and work
due to its position in the Greater Charleston metropolitan area. The town’s
convenient location, level and quality of municipal infrastructure and
services, climate, and access to beaches and other recreational areas have
generated continued high and unsustainable levels of residential growth;
      (2)   Like other fast-growing communities, the Town of Mount Pleasant
continues to face infrastructure stresses brought on by continued residential
growth. Maintaining pace with the demands of increasing numbers of housing
remains a significant community issue;
      (3)   Considering the town’s coastal location and physical geography as
defined by the ocean and major rivers, movement of people and goods depends
upon a limited network of major roadways. Growth greatly affects the town’s
road system as daily activities generate traffic and considerable congestion on
primary road corridors which struggle to handle daily traffic volumes,
especially at certain peak periods during each day. This situation is projected
to worsen as the region continues to grow;
      (4)   The rate of growth has outpaced the availability of funding from
the South Carolina Department of Transportation (SCDOT) to install necessary
transportation infrastructure, especially roads;
      (5)   Town revenues do not support construction of needed capital
investments identified in the Capital Improvements Plan (CIP), necessitating
difficult budgeting decisions that Town Council faces. This may also affect
public safety in the event of evacuation in advance of a hurricane or during
another natural emergency;
      (6)   To manage the effects of growth and to assure quality, well-
designed development in the future, the town has commissioned, adopted, and
implemented various studies and plans to identify needs and assist in providing
required infrastructure and services to support its citizenry in a cost-
effective manner, without raising ad valorem taxes. These include new or
updated versions of the Comprehensive Plan, the Long-Range Transportation Plan,
the Capital Improvements Plan, and similar plan documents;
      (7)   The annual CIP assesses the infrastructure needs of the town and
prioritizes capital projects to fund using the town’s goals and objectives,
with the need for infrastructure driven by population growth or changes in the
levels of service; and,
      (8)   If the town’s population rate of growth is not adequately managed,
Town Council may be forced to either significantly increase property taxes to
respond to service and infrastructure demands or reduce the present levels of
service for town facilities and services. Either response will generate
negative financial or quality of life impacts since infrastructure is directly
connected to the quality of life in the town.
   (B)   Intent. In designing and implementing the building permit allocation
system, the town has incorporated appropriate mechanisms to recognize different
categories of residential development, account for already-approved residential
development covered by the lawfully enacted Carolina Park and Liberty Hill
Farms development agreements, provide equity and fairness, allow for reasonable
flexibility, and not exclude the less fortunate from the opportunity for
suitable, reasonably priced housing in the town.
      (1)   These provisions are intended to better manage and address the
effects of growth that have resulted in increased traffic, congestion, and
burdens upon the infrastructure system and the ability of the town to provide
other public services.
      (2)   During the lifespan of the BPAS, the town is fully committed to the
appropriation of funds and the construction and installation of needed capital
improvements which will serve existing and future residents.
      (3)   In implementing the BPAS, the town has sought to devise a plan that
does not disrupt existing residential development patterns in the town and
which utilizes a means of distributing permits that recognizes and reasonably
accommodates, without undue delay, prior expenditures and expectations of
owners and developers of property.
      (4)   The BPAS is intended to manage the construction of dwelling units
through the allocation of residential building permits. Detached house, duplex,
and townhouse residential units represent individual dwelling units and
therefore require one permit for each unit. Because multiplex dwellings require
a single building permit for each building constructed, regardless of the
number of units within each building, the plan of distribution takes this into
account. While each building only requires a single building permit for
construction, an individual permit allocation shall be assigned to each
separate dwelling unit in a multiplex dwelling.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1693 JURISDICTION; APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The regulations in this subchapter shall apply to any building permit
application for a residential dwelling unit to be placed on a vacant lot or
parcel in the corporate limits of the Town of Mount Pleasant on which a
residence(s) did not exist as of the date of adoption of this system.
   (B)   The permits issued pursuant to this system pertain to new residential
construction only and include buildings that meet the definitions of DETACHED
HOUSE DWELLING, DUPLEX DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE DWELLING, TRIPLEX DWELLING, QUADPLEX
DWELLING, MULTIPLEX DWELLING, and ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT contained in this
chapter.
   (C)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to affect or otherwise
limit the approved use, plans, and construction of a dwelling unit(s) for which
a building permit has already been issued prior to the effective date of these
provisions.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1694 IMPLEMENTATION AND ADMINISTRATION OF BUILDING PERMIT ALLOCATION
SYSTEM.
   (A)   The BPAS shall be implemented so that the demands of growth are met in
as timely a manner as possible.
   (B)   For purposes of this subchapter, an allocation is equivalent to a
building permit. No separate application for an allocation is required prior to
submission of a building permit application.
   (C)   The administration of the BPAS is the responsibility of the Town of
Mount Pleasant Director of Planning, Land Use, and Neighborhoods. The Director
is authorized to issue and maintain explanatory materials, necessary forms and
applications, and appropriate procedures to effectively administer this
subchapter.
   (D)   The Town Planning Director shall ensure that the Department processes
complete applications and issues building permits in a timely manner, maintains
appropriate records and data, and effectively administers any amendments to
this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1695 AVAILABILITY AND ALLOCATION OF PERMITS.
   (A)   The overall number of residential building permits allocated under
this program is established by the Town Council to maintain a more sustainable
rate of growth and avoid any spikes or peaks in residential construction. The
distribution of permit allocations will be handled utilizing different dwelling
unit categories as outlined in §
156.1696.
   (B)   Permits shall be issued on a semi-annual basis in the chronological
order in which applications are received (commonly referred to as “first come,
first serve”) by the Department of Engineering and Development Services.
   (C)   One-half of the allocated permits will be available on January 1 and
the other half will be made available on July 1 of each year. Each six-month
period represents an allocation cycle.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1696 PERMIT ALLOCATIONS.
   (A)   Dwelling unit types. The number of new dwelling units allocated for
the duration of this program shall be managed using different categories of
dwelling unit types, with categorical limits on the respective number of
permits.
      (1)   Category A, detached house, townhouse, and duplex dwellings. On an
annual basis, a total number of permits shall be made available for the
construction of buildings meeting the definition of DWELLING, DETACHED HOUSE;”
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE; and DWELLING, DUPLEX.
      (2)   Category B, accessory dwelling unit. On an annual basis, a total
number of permits shall be reserved and made available exclusively for the
construction of buildings meeting the definition of ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT.
      (3)   Category C, triplex, quadplex, and multiplex dwellings. During the
term of the program, a total number of permits shall be made available for the
construction of buildings meeting the definition of DWELLING, TRIPLEX;
DWELLING, QUADPLEX; and DWELLING, MULTIPLEX. This category is independent of
the form of ownership and includes units known as “condominiums” and/or in a
“horizontal property regime” as defined by state law.
   (B)   Established allocations and limitations on number of applications.
      (1)   Exclusive of the dwelling units already allowed by the Carolina
Park and Liberty Hill Farms development agreements, the annual number of
available residential permits is established at a total of 600 dwelling units
to yield a more manageable average annual growth rate. Annual allocations for
Categories A and B are provided in
Table 156.1696-1: Dwelling Type Categorical Allocations, 2024-2029. The number
of triplex, quadplex, and multiplex allocations for the duration of the program
and the total allocation for all unit types is illustrated in Table 156.1696-2:
Program Totals, 2024-2029.
      (2)   Regardless of the total number of available allocations established
in this section, the number of permit applications that may be submitted for
any single development/subdivision or combination of phases in a single
development/subdivision shall be limited to no more than 25 per semi-annual
allocation cycle for the Category A (Detached House, Townhouse, and Duplex)
dwelling types.
 
Table 156.1696-1: Dwelling Type Categorical Allocations, 2024-2029
                               January – JunJuly – DecembeAnnual Total
Detached house, townhouse, and 240            240             480
duplex dwelling units
Accessory dwelling units       10             10              20
Totals                         250            250             500
 
 
Table 156.1696-2: Program Totals, 2024-2029
Dwelling Type                             Total Number of Permits Available
Detached house, townhouse, and duplex     2,400
dwelling units
Accessory dwelling units                  100
Triplex, quadplex, and multiplex dwelling 500
units
Total                                     3,000
 
   (C)   Management of permit allocations. Any permits allocated for a given
cycle but not issued during that cycle shall be carried over and will be made
available with the next or subsequent allocation cycles. Alternatively, if the
number of permit applications exceeds the available amount of building permits
during an allocation cycle, such applications shall maintain their position on
a waiting list and shall be administered during the next allocation cycle.
   (D)   Transfer of allocations prohibited. If all permits are not issued
during any allocation period, available permits identified in the established
categories of dwelling units in division (A) above shall not be transferred
between categories to another type of dwelling unit.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1697 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Application requirements and specific procedures will be maintained on
file in the office of the Building Official.
   (B)   Permit requests will be considered for completed applications only.
   (C)   Applications for a building permit will be accepted at any time during
the allocation cycle, starting on the first day of a semi-annual allocation
cycle.
   (D)   If the number of building permit applications exceeds the available
supply for the semiannual allocation cycle, no further permits will be issued.
   (E)   Each permit application shall be made pursuant to a specific set of
plans for a specific lot or parcel. Plan substitutions are not allowed. Minor
revisions are allowed only to plans under review or that have been issued a
building permit upon approval of the Building Official. Substantial revisions
may require resubmittal.
   (F)   Permits will be issued only in the applicant’s name.
      (1)   For purposes of this system, the applicant is the owner of record
of the lot for which the permit is sought and who has a present possessory
interest in the lot, to include the right of unfettered access and authority to
convey.
      (2)   For purposes of this system, an applicant and any person, firm,
corporation, partnership, or other entity in which the applicant holds an
interest, shall be considered the same applicant. For purposes of this system,
an applicant and his or her spouse and unemancipated children under 21, shall
be considered the same applicant.
      (3)   Proof of ownership and such other information as may be reasonably
requested to determine an applicant’s eligibility for a permit must be supplied
upon request. Proof of ownership, including, but not limited to, affidavits
detailing information such as business relationships and membership in entities
like LLCs and corporations, may be routinely required. The town will consider
substance, not mere form, in the interpretation of this section to ensure that
an applicant is an owner, in law and in fact.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1698 COMMENCEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Construction authorized under permits issued pursuant to this
allocation system shall commence within six months from the date the Building
Official issues the building permit. Otherwise, the permit will become invalid
and be made available within the allocation cycle.
   (B)   Construction may be considered to have begun upon the initiation of
site work and foundation construction, provided additional improvements
progress in a reasonable timeframe toward completion of the project.
   (C)   A lapse of construction activities for a period of six months shall
invalidate the permit and the allocation will become available as a new
allocation under this system.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1699 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Additions, renovations, or replacement. Permit allocation does not
apply to additions or renovations to an existing residential building.
Replacement of a residential building on a lot where one has existed within the
past five years from the date of application is also exempt from permit
allocation.
   (B)   Affordable housing units. For purposes of this system, housing units
to provide dwellings for either low income or lower income employees in the
workforce are not included in the allocation specified in this subchapter and
are in addition to the number of annual permits regulated by this subchapter.
      (1)   These units are intended to provide affordable housing ownership
opportunities for persons whose incomes are either:
         (a)   Less than 80% of the area median family income (AMI); or
         (b)   Range between 80% and 120% of the area median family income
(AMI) for the Charleston/North Charleston metropolitan statistical area.
      (2)   The monthly mortgage payments for the owner of the dwelling unit
shall not exceed 28% of 80% of the gross median family monthly income as
reflected in the sale price using the Fannie Mae Foundation Mortgage Calculator
(or comparable methodology), assuming a 10% down payment and a specified
interest rate. The specified interest rate shall be determined by selecting the
lowest 30-year fixed mortgage rate reported by area lending institutions at the
time when the updated U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development income
limits become available.
      (3)   The income limits and maximum sales prices for low income families
and owner-occupied dwelling unit established by the U.S. Census Bureau, the
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), and the Fannie Mae
Foundation, shall be used to determine the provision of low income or lower
income workforce housing. The maximum sale price shall be updated yearly,
commencing in 2023, as the current U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development income limits become available.
      (4)   Applying similar federal requirements in Title 26 US Code § 42 to
qualify for low-income housing credits, the dwelling unit must remain at the
affordable workforce housing price for ten years. Resale of affordable
workforce dwelling units shall be limited by deed restriction to the original
sales price, adjusted for inflation, and to a purchaser eligible, as described
in this section, for a period of not less than ten years after issuance of the
certificate of occupancy. Funding sources and other factors may require a
longer term of afford ability. The increase permitted for inflation shall be
based upon the increase in the Consumer Price Index (CPI).
      (5)   Affidavits will be required that set forth the sale prices of the
units and verify that the units are, in fact, available to workforce housing
purchasers, and will initially be owned and occupied by persons qualified per
the provisions of this section.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1700 MONITORING AND EVALUATION.
   (A)   Town Council shall evaluate the system twice per year. This evaluation
shall include an assessment of the need for specific annual allocations,
progress on installation of programmed capital improvements, effect on low
income or affordable workforce housing, and all other aspects of the system.
   (B)   To facilitate the evaluation, the Director of Planning, Land Use, and
Neighborhoods shall provide a report to Town Council setting forth the number
of permits sought, the number of permits issued, a description of any
significant administrative problems which arose over the assessment period, the
progress of the implementation of the Capital Improvements Program, any
recommendations for changes or revisions to this subchapter to improve its
effectiveness or administration, and such other relevant information as they
may deem useful or that the Council may request.
   (C)   Town Council may adjust or modify the total allocation of permits or
the categorical allocations.
   (D)   Town Council may terminate the program at any time based upon the
results of an assessment or other conditions that suggest the need to eliminate
the system.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1701 APPEALS.
   Appeals from the provisions of this system are made directly to the Town
Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant to the procedure outlined in other sections of
this chapter, with the criteria for the granting of a variance those set forth
in
Subchapter I, Part 15.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1702 LIBERAL CONSTRUCTION.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall be liberally construed to
effectively carry out its stated purposes, which are found and declared to be
in the furtherance of the public health, safety, economy, convenience, and
general welfare for the harmonious, orderly, and progressive development of
land within the town.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§ 156.1703 SEVERABILITY; CONFLICT.
   (A)   All provisions are severable, such that if any provision or the
administration of this system is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions or applications of this system that can still be given effect.
   (B)   In the event of a conflict with other provisions in this Code, the
provisions contained in this subchapter shall be controlling.
(Ord. passed 1-14-25)
§§ 156.1704 THROUGH 156.1709 RESERVED.
CHAPTER 157: DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT CODE
Section
   
157.010   Short title; legislative findings and intent; authorization for
development agreements; provisions are supplemental to those extant
   
157.020   Definitions
   
157.030   Town of Mount Pleasant authorized to enter into development
agreements; approval of governing body required
   
157.031   Developers are subject to established procedures
   
157.040   Developed property must contain certain number of acres of highland;
permissible durations of agreements for differing amounts of highland content
   
157.045   Timeframe for submittal of proposed development agreement
   
157.050   Public hearings; notice and publications
   
157.060   What a development agreement must provide; what it may provide; major
modification requires public notice and hearing
   
157.070   Agreement and development must be consistent with comprehensive plan
and land development regulations
   
157.080   Law in effect at time of agreement governs development; exceptions
   
157.090   Periodic review to assess compliance with agreement; material breach
by developer; notice of breach; cure of breach or modification or termination
   
157.100   Amendment or cancellation of development agreement by mutual consent
of parties or successors in interest
   
157.110   Validity and duration of agreement entered into prior to
incorporation or annexation of affected area; subsequent modification or
suspension by town
   
157.120   Developer to record agreement within 14 days; burdens and benefits
inure to successors in interest
   
157.130   Agreement to be modified or suspended to comply with later-enacted
state or federal laws or regulations
   
157.140   Rights, duties, and privileges of gas and electricity suppliers, and
of town with respect to providing same, not affected; no extraterritorial
powers
   
157.145   Applicability to Town of Mount Pleasant of constitutional and
statutory procedures for approval of debt
   
157.150   Invalidity of all or part of § 157.140 invalidates ordinance
   
157.160   Agreement may not contravene or supersede building, housing,
electrical, plumbing, road codes and street specifications or gas code;
compliance with such code if subsequently enacted unless explicitly approved by
Town Council
   
157.170   Assignments
§ 157.010 SHORT TITLE; LEGISLATIVE FINDING AND INTENT; AUTHORIZATION FOR
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS; PROVISION ARE SUPPLEMENTAL TO THOSE EXTANT.
   (A)   This ordinance may be cited as the "Town of Mount Pleasant Development
Agreement Ordinance."
   (B)   The town finds:
      (1)   The lack of certainty in the approval of development can result in
a waste of economic and land resources, can discourage sound capital
improvement planning and financing, can cause the cost of housing and
development to escalate, and can discourage commitment to comprehensive
planning.
      (2)   Assurance to a developer that upon receipt of its development
permits it may proceed in accordance with existing laws and policies, subject
to the conditions of a development agreement, strengthens the public planning
process, encourages sound capital improvement planning and financing, assists
in assuring there are adequate capital facilities for the development,
encourages private participation in comprehensive planning, reduces the
economic costs of development, allows for orderly planning of public facilities
and services and allows for the equitable allocation of the cost of public
services.
      (3)   Because the development approval process involves the expenditure
of considerable sums of money, predictability encourages the maximum efficient
utilization of resources at the least economic cost to the public.
      (4)   Public benefits derived from development agreements may include,
but are not limited to, affordable housing, design standards, and on and off-
site infrastructure and other improvements. These public benefits will be
negotiated in return for the vesting of development rights for a specific
period.
      (5)   Land planning and development involve review and action by multiple
governmental agencies, the use of development agreements may facilitate the
cooperation and coordination of the requirements and needs of the various
governmental agencies having jurisdiction over land development.
      (6)   Development agreements will encourage the vesting of property
rights by protecting such rights from the effect of subsequently enacted local
legislation or from the effects of changing policies and procedures of local
government agencies which may conflict with any term or provision of the
development agreement or in any way hinder, restrict or prevent the development
of the project. Development agreements will provide a reasonable certainty as
to the lawful requirements that must be met in protecting vested property
rights, while maintaining the authority and duty of government to enforce laws
and regulations which promote the public safety, health, and general welfare of
the citizens of our town.
   (C)   It is the intent and responsibility of the Town Council to encourage a
stronger commitment to comprehensive and capital facilities planning, ensure
the provision of adequate public facilities for development, encourage the
efficient use of resources, and reduce the economic cost of development.
   (D)   This intent is effected by authorizing the town to enter into
development agreements with developers, subject to the procedures and
requirements of this chapter.
   (E)   This chapter must be regarded as supplemental and additional to the
powers conferred upon the town by other laws and must not be regarded as in
derogation of any powers existing on the effective date of this chapter.
(Ord. 99056, passed 12-14-99)
§ 157.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The officially adopted Master Plan of the town along
with all implementing ordinances, goals, strategies, and Official Town Map, all
enacted by the town pursuant to Title 6 of the South Carolina Code on April 13,
1999 and any subsequent amendments thereto.
   DEVELOPER. A person, including a governmental agency, who intends to
undertake any development and who has legal or equitable interest in the
property to be developed.
   DEVELOPMENT. The carrying out of a building activity or mining operation,
the making of a material change in the use or appearance of any structure or
property, or the dividing of land into three or more parcels. DEVELOPMENT, as
designated in a law or development permit, includes all other development
customarily associated with it unless otherwise specified. When appropriate to
the context, DEVELOPMENT refers to the act of developing or to the result of
development. Reference to a specific operation is not intended to mean that the
operation or  activity, when part of other operations or activities, is not
development. Reference to particular operations is not intended to limit the
generality of this item.
   GOVERNING BODY. The Town Council of the town or any other chief governing
body of a unit of a local government, however designated.
   LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION. Ordinances and regulations enacted by the
appropriate governing body for the regulation of any aspect of development and
includes a local government zoning, rezoning, subdivision, building
construction, or sign regulations or any other regulations controlling the
development of property.
   LAWS. All ordinances, resolutions, regulations, comprehensive plans, land
development regulations, policies and rules adopted by the town, affecting the
development of property and includes laws governing permitted uses of the
property, governing density, and governing design, improvement, and
construction standards and specifications, except as provided in section 6-31-
140(A) of the South Carolina State Code.
   LOCAL GOVERNMENT. The town of Mount Pleasant or the governmental entity of
the same or the governmental entity of the State, county, municipality, or
region established pursuant to law which exercises regulatory authority over,
and grants development permits for land development or which provides public
facilities.
   LOCAL PLANNING COMMISSION. The town of Mount Pleasant Commission established
pursuant to Title 6 of South Carolina Code or any other like entity established
for other local governments pursuant to the South Carolina Code.
   MASTER PLAN MAP. The officially adopted Town Map as part of the
Comprehensive Plan.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, business or land trust, estate, trust,
partnership, association, two or more persons having a joint or common
interest, state agency, or any legal entity.
   PROPERTY. All real property subject to land use regulation by a local
government and includes the earth, water, and air above, below, or on the
surface, and includes any improvements or structures customarily regarded as a
part of real property.
   PUBLIC FACILITIES. Major capital improvements, including, but not limited
to, transportation, sanitary sewer, solid waste, drainage, potable water,
educational, parks and recreational, and health systems and facilities.
(Ord. 99056, passed 12-14-99)
§ 157.030 TOWN OF MOUNT PLEASANT AUTHORIZED TO ENTER INTO DEVELOPMENT
AGREEMENTS; APPROVAL OF GOVERNING BODY REQUIRED.
   The town has established procedures and requirements, as provided in this
chapter to Title 6 of the South Carolina Code of Laws, to consider and enter
into development agreements with developers. Adevelopment agreement must be
approved for the town by the adoption of an ordinance.
(Ord. 99056, passed 12-14-99; Am. Ord. 05085, passed 12-14-05)
§ 157.031 DEVELOPERS ARE SUBJECT TO ESTABLISHED PROCEDURES.
   Developers will be subject to the requirements of established town
procedures and policies to facilitate timely review and approval.
(Ord. 99056, passed 12-14-99)
§ 157.040 DEVELOPED PROPERTY MUST CONTAIN CERTAIN NUMBER OF ACRES OF HIGHLAND;
PERMISSIBLE DURATION OF AGREEMENTS FOR DIFFERING AMOUNTS OF HIGHLAND CONTENT.
   The town may enter into a development agreement with a developer for the
development of property as provided in this chapter, provided the property
contains at least 25 acres or more of highland. Development agreements
involving property containing no more than 250 acres of highland shall be for a
term not to exceed five years. Development agreements involving property
containing 1,000 acres or less of highland but more than 250 acres of highland
shall be for a term not to exceed ten years. Development agreements involving
property containing 2,000 acres or less of highland but more than 1,000 acres
of highland shall be for a term not to exceed 20 years. Development agreements
involving property containing more than 2,000 acres may be for such term as the
town and the developer shall elect.
(Ord. 99056, passed 12-14-99; Am. Ord. 05085, passed 12-14-05)
§ 157.045 TIMEFRAME FOR SUBMITTAL OF PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT.
   The proposed development agreement documents and all supplemental material,
if any, shall be submitted in the appropriate quantity and with the required
fee to the Office of the Corporation Counsel no later than 56 days from the
date of the first public hearing, whether conducted by the Planning Commission
at the Town Council’s discretion, or by the Town Council itself.
(Ord. 15042, passed 6-9-15)
§ 157.050 PUBLIC HEARINGS; NOTICE AND PUBLICATION.
   (A)   Before entering into a development agreement, the town shall conduct
at least two public hearings. At the option of Town Council, the initial public
hearing may be held by the Mount Pleasant Planning Commission. Public notice of
the day, time, and place of the second public hearing must be announced at the
first public hearing.
   (B)   (1)   Notice of intent to consider a development agreement must be
advertised in a newspaper of general circulation in the county where the local
government is located.
      (2)   The notice must specify the location of the property subject to the
development agreement, the development uses proposed on the property, and must
specify a place where a copy of the proposed development agreement can be
obtained. The town must make copies of the proposed development agreement
available to the public for a reasonable charge.
      (3)   Any developer pursuing a development agreement with the town is
required to provide ten complete copies to the town of any proposed agreement
for review by the public at no charge.
   (C)   In the event that the development agreement provides that the local
government shall provide certain public facilities, the development agreement
shall provide that the delivery date of such publicfacilities will be tied to
defined completion percentages or other defined performances standards to be
met by the developer.
(Ord. 99056, passed 12-14-99; Am. Ord. 05085, passed 12-14-05)
§ 157.060 WHAT A DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT MUST PROVIDE; WHAT IT MAY PROVIDE; MAJOR
MODIFICATION REQUIRES PUBLIC NOTICE AND HEARING.
   (A)   A development agreement must include:
      (1)   A legal description of the property subject to the agreement and
the names of its legal equitable property owners;
      (2)   The duration of the agreement. However, the parties are not
precluded from extending the termination date by mutual agreement or from
entering into subsequent development agreements;
      (3)   The development uses permitted on the property, including
population densities and building intensities and height;
      (4)   A description of public facilities that will service the
development, including who provides the facilities, the date any new public
facilities, if needed will be constructed, and a schedule to assure public
facilities are available concurrent with the impacts of the development;
      (5)   A description, where appropriate, of any reservation or dedication
of land for public purposes and any provisions to protect environmentally
sensitive property as may be required or permitted pursuant to laws in effect
at the time of entering into the development agreement;
      (6)   A description of all local development permits approved or needed
to be approved for the development of the property together with a statement
indicating that the failure of the agreement to address a particular permit,
condition, term or restriction does not relieve the developer of the necessity
of complying with the law governing the permitting requirements, conditions,
terms, or restrictions;
      (7)   A finding that the development permitted or proposed is consistent
with the town's comprehensive plan and land development regulations;
      (8)   A description of any conditions, terms, restrictions, or other
requirements determined to be necessary by the local government for the public
health, safety, or welfare of its citizens; and
      (9)   A description, where appropriate, of any provisions for the
preservation and restoration of historic structures.
      (10)   Any subsequent development agreements will be subject to public
hearing requirements.
      (11)   A detailed schedule of payments due to the town of all monies owed
in addition to specifics of any bonding requirements, if applicable, will be
included.
   (B)   A development agreement may provide that the entire development or any
phase of it be commenced or completed within a specific period of time. The
development agreement must provide a development schedule including
commencement dates and interim completion dates at no greater than five year
intervals; provided, however, the failure to meet a commencement or completion
date shall not, in and of itself, constitute a material breach of the
development agreement, but must be judged based on the totality of the
circumstances. The development agreement may include other defined performance
standards to be met by the developer. If the developer requests a modification
in the dates as set forth in the agreement and is able to demonstrate and
establish that there is good cause to modify those dates, those dates must be
modified by the local government. A major modification of the agreement may
occur only after public notice and a public hearing by the local government.
   (C)   If more than one local government is made party to an agreement, the
agreement must specify which local government is responsible for the overall
administration of the development agreement.
   (D)   The development agreement also may cover any other matter not
inconsistent with this chapter not prohibited by law.
(Ord. 99056, passed 12-14-99)
§ 157.070 AGREEMENT AND DEVELOPMENT MUST BE CONSISTENT WITH COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
AND LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS.
   A development agreement and authorized development must be consistent with
the town comprehensive plan and land development regulations.
(Ord. 99056, passed 12-14-99)
§ 157.080 LAW IN EFFECT AT TIME OF AGREEMENT GOVERNS DEVELOPMENT; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Subject to the provision of § 157.140 and unless otherwise provided by
the development agreement, the laws applicable to development of the property
subject to a development agreement, are those in force at the time of execution
of the agreement.
   (B)   Subject to the provisions of § 157.140 the town may apply subsequently
adopted laws to a development that is subject to a development agreement only
if the town has held a public hearing and determined:
      (1)   The laws are not in conflict with the laws governing the
development agreement and do not prevent the development set forth in the
development agreement;
      (2)   They are essential to the public health, safety or welfare and the
laws expressly state that they apply to a development that is subject to a
development agreement;
      (3)   The laws are specifically anticipated and provided for in the
development agreement;
      (4)   The town demonstrates that substantial changes have occurred in
pertinent conditions existing at the time of approval of the development
agreement which changes, if not addressed by the town, would pose a serious
threat to the public health, safety, or welfare; or
      (5)   The development agreement is based on substantially and materially
inaccurate information supplied by the developer.
   (C)   The section does not abrogate any right preserved by § 157.140 or that
may vest pursuant to common law or otherwise in the absence of a development
agreement. Specifically, the authority to tax at any time shall not be
abrogated.
(Ord. 99056, passed 12-14-99)
§ 157.090 PERIODIC REVIEW TO ASSESS COMPLIANCE WITH AGREEMENT; MATERIAL BREACH
BY DEVELOPER; NOTICE OF BREACH; CURE OF BREACH OR MODIFICATION OR TERMINATION
OF AGREEMENT.
   (A)   Pursuant to §
157.040, periodic review by the Zoning Administrator is required at least every
12 months, at which time the developer must be required to demonstrate good
faith compliance with the terms of the development agreement. Annual findings
by the Zoning Administrator will be reported to Town Council and the Planning
Commission in public meetings.
   (B)   If, as a result of a periodic review, the town finds and determines
that the developer has committed a material breach of the terms or conditions
of the agreement, the Town shall serve notice in writing, within a reasonable
time after the periodic review, upon the developer setting forth with
reasonable particularity the nature of the breach and the evidence supporting
the finding and determination, and providing the developer a reasonable time in
which to cure the material breach.
   (C)   If the developer fails to cure the material breach within the time
given, then the town unilaterally may terminate or modify the development
agreement; provided, that the town has first given the developer the
opportunity:
      (1)   To rebut the finding and determination; or
      (2)   To consent to amend the development agreement to meet the concerns
of the town with respect to the findings and determinations.
(Ord. 99056, passed 12-14-99)
§ 157.100 AMENDMENT OR CANCELLATION OF DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT BY MUTUAL CONSENT
OF PARTIES OR SUCCESSORS IN INTEREST.
   A development agreement may be amended or canceled by mutual consent of the
parties to the agreement or by their successors in interest.
(Ord. 99056, passed 12-14-99)
§ 157.110 VALIDITY AND DURATION OF AGREEMENT ENTERED INTO PRIOR TO
INCORPORATION OR ANNEXATION OF AFFECTED AREA; SUBSEQUENT MODIFICATION OR
SUSPENSION BY TOWN.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in §
157.130 and subject to the provisions of § 157.140, if a newly- incorporated
municipality or newly-annexed area comprises territory that was formerly
unincorporated, any development agreement entered into by a local government
before the effective date of the incorporation or annexation remains valid for
the duration of the agreement, or eight years from the effective date of the
incorporation or annexation, whichever is earlier. The parties to the
development agreement and the municipality may agree that the development
agreement remains valid for more than eight years; provided, that the longer
period may not exceed 15 years from the effective date of the incorporation or
annexation. The parties to the development agreement and the municipality have
the same rights and obligations with respect to each other regarding matters
addressed in the development agreement as if the property had remained in the
unincorporated territory of the country.
   (B)   After incorporation or annexation the municipality may modify or
suspend the provisions of the development agreement if the municipality
determines that the failure of the municipality to do so would place the
residents of the territory subject to the development agreement, or the
residents of the municipality or both, in a condition dangerous to their health
or safety, or both.
   (C)   This section applies to any development agreement which meets all of
the following:
      (1)   The application for the development agreement is submitted to the
local government operating within the unincorporated territory before the date
that the first signature was affixed to the petition for incorporation or
annexation or the adoption of an annexation resolution pursuant to Chapter 1 or
3 or Title 5 of the South Carolina Code; and
      (2)   The local government operating within the unincorporated territory
enters into the development agreement with the developer before the date of the
election on the question of incorporation or annexation, or, in the case of an
annexation without an election before the date that the municipality orders the
annexation.
(Ord. 99056, passed 12-14-99)
§ 157.120 DEVELOPER TO RECORD AGREEMENT WITHIN 14 DAYS; BURDENS AND BENEFITS
INURE TO SUCCESSORS IN INTEREST.
   Within 14 days after the town enters into a development agreement, the
developer shall record the agreement with the registrar of mesne conveyance or
clerk of court in the country where the property is located. The burdens of the
development agreement are binding upon, and the benefits of the agreement shall
inure to, all successors in interest to the parties to the agreement,
consistent with any determination made by the town pursuant to §
157.170 hereunder.
(Ord. 99056, passed 12-14-99)
§ 157.130 AGREEMENT TO BE MODIFIED OR SUSPENDED TO COMPLY WITH LATER-ENACTED
STATE OR FEDERAL LAWS OR REGULATIONS.
   In the event state or federal laws or regulations, enacted after a
development agreement has been entered into prevent or preclude compliance with
one or more provisions of the development agreement, the provisions of the
agreement must be modified or suspended as may be necessary to comply with the
state or federal laws or regulations.
(Ord. 99056, passed 12-14-99)
§ 157.140 RIGHTS, DUTIES, AND PRIVILEGES OF GAS AND ELECTRICITY SUPPLIERS, AND
OF TOWN WITH RESPECT TO PROVIDING SAME, NOT AFFECTED; NO EXTRATERRITORIAL
POWERS.
   (A)   The provisions of this act are not intended nor may they be construed
in any way to alter or amend in any way the rights, duties, and privileges of
suppliers of electricity or natural gas or of municipalities with reference to
the provision of electricity or gas service, including, but not limited to the
generation, transmission, distribution, or provision of electricity at
wholesale, retail or in any other capacity.
   (B)   This chapter is not intended to grant the town or agency thereof any
authority over property lying beyond its corporate limits.
(Ord. 99056, passed 12-14-99)
§ 157.145 APPLICABILITY TO TOWN OF MOUNT PLEASANT OF CONSTITUTIONAL AND
STATUTORY PROCEDURES FOR APPROVAL OF DEBT.
   In the event that any of the obligations of the town in the development
agreement constitute debt, the local government shall comply at the time of the
obligation to incur such debt becomes enforceable against the local government
with any applicable constitutional and statutory procedures for the approval of
this debt.
(Ord. 99056, passed 12-14-99)
§ 157.150 INVALIDITY OF ALL OR PART OF § 157.140 INVALIDATES CHAPTER.
   If §
157.140 or any provision therein or the application of any provision therein is
held invalid, the invalidity applies to this chapter in its entirety, to any
and all provisions of this chapter, and to this end, the provisions of §
157.140 of this chapter are not severable.
(Ord. 99056, passed 12-14-99)
§ 157.160 AGREEMENT MAY NOT CONTRAVENE OR SUPERSEDE BUILDING, HOUSING,
ELECTRICAL, PLUMBING, ROAD CODES AND STREET SPECIFICATIONS OR GAS CODE;
COMPLIANCE WITH SUCH CODE IF SUBSEQUENTLY ENACTED UNLESS EXPLICITLY APPROVED BY
TOWN COUNCIL.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a development agreement adopted
pursuant to this chapter must comply with any building, housing, electrical,
plumbing, gas and flood codes subsequently adopted by the town in compliance
with applicable state law. Such development agreement may not include
provisions which supersede or contravene the requirements of any building,
housing, electrical, plumbing, gas, and flood codes adopted by the town.
(Ord. 99056, passed 12-14-99)
§ 157.170 ASSIGNMENTS.
   The town may permit the assignment of rights under a development agreement.
The town's consent may be conditioned on the proposed assignee's demonstration
of his/her ability to perform the obligations of the development agreement with
regard to the property conveyed to the assignee. The town may set out specific
requirements in this regard as deemed appropriate.
(Ord. 99056, passed 12-14-99)
CHAPTER 158: EXCAVATION AND CONSTRUCTION ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
Section
   
158.01   Applicability
   
158.02   Definitions
   
158.03   Relocation of utilities at cost of the owner
   
158.04   Responsibility for utility services
   
158.05   Required permits and approvals
   
158.06   SCDOT maintained roads
   
158.07   Uniformity of traffic control methods
   
158.08   Specifications for excavation, backfilling, and restoration of service
   
158.09   Definition of emergency and permit required for emergency cuts
   
158.10   Suspension of permit upon failure to comply
   
158.11   Performance bond
   
158.12   Indemnification
   
158.13   Police powers
 
   
158.99   Penalty
§ 158.01 APPLICABILITY.
   Any person, firm, or corporation owning and operating or hereafter
installing and operating any utility within the right-of-way of any public
street or on any public property situated within the town, or any person, firm,
or corporation performing any repair, excavation, construction or installation
of any appurtenance in any street right-of-way or on any public property shall
do so in accordance with the terms and conditions provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 16049, passed 7-27-16)
§ 158.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EXCAVATION AND CONSTRUCTION. Includes installation, repair, and replacement
of driveways and sidewalks, the installation, repair, and replacement of all
public utilities and other utilities, and other projects involving construction
activities over, upon, or beneath rights-of-way or public streets or on any
public property within the Town of Mount Pleasant municipal limits.
   MINOR REPAIRS. Work personally performed by property owners to existing
sidewalks or driveways located on public streets abutting their property. MINOR
REPAIRS may include crack repair, removal and replacement of existing driveways
to the same line and grade, or resurfacing. MINOR REPAIRS exclude any street
curb cut work.
   RIGHT-OF-WA Y or PUBLIC STREET. All of that area presently used, owned, or
dedicated to or by the town and/or the South Carolina Department of
Transportation (SCDOT) for a street, including sidewalks, curbs, gutters,
driveway aprons, and all other areas of the right-of-way, whether or not
physically incorporated in the street, in addition to any property owned by the
town or state.
   ROUTINE MAINTENANCE. Periodic repair or replacement of existing utility
poles, transformers, cables, and similar facilities. ROUTINE MAINTENANCE
excludes any street curb cut work.
   STREET CURB CUT WORK. Work done to or through the actual street surface or
curb and gutter section.
(Ord. 16049, passed 7-27-16)
§ 158.03 RELOCATION OF UTILITIES AT COST OF THE OWNER.
   (A)   In the event of the abandonment, widening, repair, installation,
construction, or reconstruction by or for the town and/or SCDOT of any road,
bridge, culvert, traffic signal, street light, water distribution system,
sewage collection system, storm drain system, or any other town facility within
a street right-of-way, the owner of any utility shall move, relocate, or renew
such facility, upon request of the town, when necessary for public safety and
welfare and when a suitable site is available, all at the cost and expense of
the owner of such utility.
   (B)   The town shall provide reasonable notice to the affected utility
owner.
(Ord. 16049, passed 7-27-16)
§ 158.04 RESPONSIBILITY FOR UTILITY SERVICES.
   (A)   In the event pavement, drainage or other street damage or deficiency
is caused by settlement, leakage, rupture, or other action related to the
utility, the repairing of such damages will be the sole responsibility of the
developer or the utility owner and shall be repaired without cost to the town.
   (B)   A developer shall cause to have installed all water and sewer prior to
acceptance of roads or streets by the municipality.
      (1)   All underground utility services under base and paving must be
installed prior to placing curb and gutter base and paving, and shall be buried
to a depth to insure free use of future equipment without damage to utility
services.
      (2)   All utilities not under pavement shall also be buried to a depth to
insure free use of equipment in the future without damage to the utility.
      (3)   Location of utility poles.
         (a)   All utility poles will be located a minimum distance of 20 feet
from the centerline of minor streets or roads.
         (b)    Higher classifications of streets shall require increased
distances as determined by the Director of Engineering and Development Services
or designee.
         (c)   In areas where streets or roads require ditch sections for
drainage purposes, utility poles will be installed at sufficient distances from
the centerline to insure no interference with the construction or maintenance
of the ditches.
   (C)   In the event that future phases of development construction result in
damages to underground utility mains or services, the repairing of such damages
will be the sole responsibility of the developer and shall be repaired without
cost to the municipality.
   (D)   Whenever any entity performing any excavation in a street, alley, or
other public place fails to properly refill or maintain the same, in the sole
discretion of the town, for a period of two years, the municipality may cause
necessary repairs or maintenance to be performed, and the cost thereof shall be
charged to the entity or against the performance bond, as provided in §
158.11.
(Ord. 16049, passed 7-27-16; Am. Ord. 21043, passed 5-11-21)
§ 158.05 REQUIRED PERMITS AND APPROVALS.
   (A)   Encroachment permit required.
      (1)   Before performing repairs, excavation or construction or any
similar work in any public right-of-way, public easement or on any public
property, an encroachment permit (hereinafter referred to as "permit") shall be
obtained from the  Town of Mount Pleasant Engineering and Development Services
Department, except in those instances otherwise provided for in this chapter.
      (2)   A permit shall not be required for minor repairs or regular
maintenance activities.
      (3)   A permit shall not be required for maintenance and repair of
residential driveways that tie into existing street curb and gutter and that do
not require modifications of the same.
   (B)   Prior approval required for street cut. The installation or repair of
utilities that require the cutting of street pavement shall be allowed only
with prior approval of the town.
      (1)   No new or resurfaced street or road shall be cut within five years
from its completion.
      (2)   Provision of new services may be considered for exceptions.
      (3)    Exceptions must be approved by the Director of Engineering and
Development Services or his or her designee.
      (4)   In compliance with §
158.09, bonafide emergency utility repairs may be made as required.
      (5)   Once approval has been given, no person, firm, or corporation shall
cut or dig in the town for the purpose of connecting with water, sewer, gas, or
other mains or pipes in the streets, or for any other purpose by digging or
cutting more than halfway across such street until the half which has been cut
or dug up shall have been backfilled or plated over with street traffic plates
so that one half of the passageway of the street shall always remain open and
free for the uninterrupted passage of traffic.
      (6)   Traffic plates shall be used when restoring the pavement cut to
allow traffic movement during the period of time when the flowable fill
concrete is curing to the point where the complete street surface can be
restored.
      (7)   Where a request is made to cut the pavement, the following minimum
information shall be furnished:
         (a)   Statement of the requirement for a cut in the pavement.
         (b)   Detail of cut for acceptable backfill or flowable fill concrete
as per SCDOT/town requirements.
         (c)   Length of time trench is to remain open. Trench shall be steel-
plated while open.
         (d)   Traffic detour plans and procedures for handling traffic during
construction. See requirements of §
158.07.
         (e)   Written notification to Mount Pleasant Police Department and the
Town Roadway Inspector a minimum of three business days prior to commencement
of work.
   (C)   Submittals required for new construction.
      (1)   For new construction, an applicant shall submit two sets of project
construction plans at the time of filing an application for a permit.
      (2)   Plans will not be required for routine maintenance and service
installation.
   (D)   Construction plans to be reviewed in timely manner.
      (1)   The construction plans shall be reviewed in a timely manner and a
permit issued only after the plans and subsequent revisions are determined
acceptable to the town.
      (2)   The utility owner shall be solely responsible for the engineering
and design of its project, and the integration of its maintenance and
construction responsibilities.
   (E)   Road and lane closure plans.
      (1)   A road closure plan, detour plan, and/or lane closure plan is
required for any work that requires a road to be closed or detoured, or a lane
to be closed.
      (2)   Notice of plan shall be given to the town's Communications Officer,
in writing, a minimum of three business days prior to commencement of work.
      (3)   A copy of the plan must be submitted as part of the permit
application.
   (F)   Requirements to be met before work can commence. Except in the case of
emergencies as defined in §
158.09, no work shall commence until the permittee has:
      (1)   Obtained a utility location request number from Palmetto Utility
Protection Service;
      (2)   Met the minimum three business day notice requirement; and
      (3)   Met all state requirements.
   (G)   Permit with conditions.
      (1)   In order to expedite the issuance of a permit, a permit may be
issued with conditions on construction and work hours initialed on the face of
the permit in lieu of requiring revisions in the plans.
      (2)   Upon issuance of the permit, one set of construction plans marked
"approved" will be returned to the utility.
   (H)   Fee.
      (1)    The fee for a permit for work performed under this chapter shall
be paid in accordance with the Engineering and Development Services Department
fee schedule. The fee includes permit review, revisions to permit review,
inspection of ongoing work and final inspection.
      (2)   If the work for which a permit has been issued is canceled, the
town will refund the amount paid, if requested prior to beginning of any work
and no later than the date on which the permit expires.
      (3)   Waiver of permit fee.
         (a)   The town may waive the permit fee for all work performed by a
governmental agency or utility company, whether this work is performed by
employees of a governmental agency or by a private firm or corporation under
contract with the governmental agency.
         (b)   However, such governmental agency, utility company, private firm
or corporation under contract therewith shall not be relieved of the
responsibility for obtaining a permit for work covered in this chapter.
   (I)   Additional requirements.
      (1)   All permits shall be kept at the place of excavation while the work
is being done, and exhibited whenever called for by any person having an
authority to examine such permits.
      (2)   There shall be no more than one half the width of any street or
alley opened or obstructed at any one time.
      (3)   Tunneling shall not be allowed and no authorized underground
construction shall be injured or interfered with.
      (4)   All portions of the place excavated shall be put in as good
condition as before the excavation was made.
(Ord. 16049, passed 7-27-16; Am. Ord. 21043, passed 5-11-21)
§ 158.06 SCDOT MAINTAINED ROADS.
   A town encroachment permit shall not be required for work on SCDOT
maintained roads. In the event that a road or lane closure is necessary the
party performing the work shall provide a copy of the approved SCDOT
encroachment permit to the Town Roadway Inspector. Additionally, the party
performing the work shall notify, in writing, the Mount Pleasant Police
Department and the Town Roadway Inspector a minimum of three business days
prior to commencement of work. Work on SCDOT maintained roads shall not exempt
any party from complying with applicable Town of Mount Pleasant ordinances or
regulations.
(Ord. 16049, passed 7-27-16)
§ 158.07 UNIFORMITY OF TRAFFIC CONTROL METHODS.
   (A)   For the purpose of providing uniformity of traffic control methods,
procedures, and devices for the use in connection with street and highway
construction and maintenance operations, the town hereby adopts the current
edition and the latest revision of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices for Streets and Highways, as published by U.S. Department of
Transportation Federal Highway Administration, as the governing criteria for
the design, placement, and use of traffic control devices for street and
highway construction and maintenance operations within the town.
   (B)   Every person, firm, or corporation making or causing to be made any
construction ditch or any other excavation, road maintenance, utility
maintenance, or utility construction in a street right-of-way or on any public
property shall do so in careful, prudent, and professional manner so as to
properly safeguard and protect the work site and to prevent injury to persons
or property in at least the following manner.
      (1)   It is required that for every excavation made on public property,
proper safeguards shall be provided against injury to the public, barricades
shall be provided at five-foot distance, and such barricades shall completely
encircle all open excavations or trenches. When approved, steel plates of
sufficient strength may be used to cover excavation to prevent blocking of
streets.
      (2)   By providing and maintaining adequate light to disclose to the
public the existence of any construction in the street, whether night or day.
      (3)   By conforming to the barricade installations, traffic flow
controls, and lighting as required the latest edition and revisions of the
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, as
published by U.S. Department of Transportation Federal Highway Administration.
      (4)   No work will be permitted within the street during peak traffic
periods, 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday, unless it is determined by the Director of Transportation that the work
will not contribute to the disruption of traffic patterns or safety.
      (5)   An exception to division (B)(4) will be made for emergency work as
defined in §
158.09 hereunder.
(Ord. 16049, passed 7-27-16)
§ 158.08 SPECIFICATIONS FOR EXCAVATION, BACKFILLING, AND RESTORATION OF
SERVICE.
   (A)   The width of a trench cut shall be kept to the minimum width necessary
to install and properly tamp
around the pipe or any new installation.
      (1)   If rock or adverse soil conditions are encountered and shoring is
required, then the trench cut shall be of sufficient additional width to
provide for the protection of the workers and proper installation of the pipe
or other structure.
      (2)   Excavations shall comply with applicable Department of Labor Safety
and Health Standards for Excavations.
   (B)   (1)   Longitudinal installations of all drain, water, sewer or gas
pipes shall be installed within rights-of-way or easements of the town to a
minimum cover depth of three feet. The minimum cover depth under pavement shall
be four feet below the lowest point of the roadway cross section.
      (2)   Exceptions may be made where required by unusual conditions on a
case by case basis by the Town Roadway Inspector.
   (C)   When soil conditions permit and there are no conflicting utilities,
gas, water, telephone, electric, and cable TV service lines shall be installed
through a jacking or boring process.
      (1)   Sewer service lines should be installed through a jacking or boring
process.
      (2)   However, in the event the jacking procedure is attempted and
unsuccessful, then the pipe may be installed using an open cut procedure, with
approval by the Town Roadway Inspector.
   (D)   Before backfilling of any street cut, the contractor shall request an
inspection by the Town Roadway Inspector.
   (E)   The backfill shall be flowable fill concrete as per Section 210 of the
2007 edition, or the latest revision, of the SCDOT's Standard Specifications
for Highway Construction.
   (F)   (1)   Prior to completing the backfill operation in all streets in the
town, pavement shall be cut 12 inches on each side of the trench and a minimum
depth of two inches.
      (2)   The excavation area shall be paved with a minimum of four inches of
hot mix asphalt.
   (G)   All material shall meet the specifications of the current edition, or
latest revision, of SCDOT's Standard Specifications for Highway Construction.
   (H)   Where the existing pavement sub-base is soil, soil cement, or crushed
stone, the base for the permanent pavement repair in all streets shall consist
of a minimum of eight inches of flowable fill concrete or acceptable soil
backfill as per ASTM D1557.
      (1)   Where the existing pavement base is concrete, the permanent
pavement repair shall consist of a minimum of ten inches of flowable fill
concrete or acceptable soil backfill as per ASTM D1557.
      (2)   If the existing pavement surface is asphalt or tar and gravel, then
the permanent pavement repair shall consist of four inches of asphalt.
      (3)   Where sidewalks are cut, the entire section shall be removed and
replaced from the nearest joints and curb.
   (I)   (1)   The entire surface of asphalt roadways will be overlaid on all
longitudinal cuts.
      (2)   Where numerous random utility cuts are made, the street or lane
shall be resurfaced for its entire width, if so determined by the Director of
Transportation.
   (J)   (1)    No cuts will be permitted to be opened if, in the opinion of
the Director of Engineering and Development Services, the cut cannot be
backfilled and resurfacing restored within a reasonable amount of time, or if
traffic flows cannot be maintained.
      (2)   Exceptions will be made for emergencies as defined in §
158.09 hereunder, with due notice to the town's Director of Engineering and
Development Services in the form of a traffic control plan and schedule to
complete roadway repair.
   (K)   If any pavement, drainage or other street damage or deficiency is
caused by settlement, leakage, rupture, or other action related to the utility,
the town may take such corrective action as it deems appropriate and charge the
permittee for such costs, including the restoration of such excavation, or give
notice to the permittee to restore such excavation or pavement within ten days
of such receipt of notice or be in violation of this section.
(Ord. 16049, passed 7-27-16; Am. Ord. 21043, passed 5-11-21)
§ 158.09 DEFINITION OF EMERGENCY AND PERMIT REQUIRED FOR EMERGENCY CUTS.
   (A)   The term EMERGENCY shall mean the repair of a utility that must be
made to restore service, to avoid property damage, or to eliminate danger to
the public.
   (B)   Notice of an emergency pavement cut shall be given to the town by
telephone during normal business hours.
      (1)   If the cut is made after normal business hours, then notification
shall be given at the beginning of the next business day.
      (2)   An application will be made for a permit for all emergency cuts
within 72 hours after the cut has been made.
      (3)   All other provisions of this chapter shall apply to emergency cuts.
(Ord. 16049, passed 7-27-16)
§ 158.10 SUSPENSION OF PERMIT UPON FAILURE TO COMPLY.
   (A)   If a person performing construction fails to perform the construction
in accordance with the conditions of the permit or the requirements of this
chapter or existing ordinances of the town, the permit may be suspended and
work stopped until such time as the person performing the work gives assurances
to the town of his or her ability and intention to complete the work in
accordance with the conditions of the permit and this chapter and the other
code provisions of the town.
   (B)   Any stop work notice shall be delivered, in writing, to the
representative of the person, firm, or corporation performing the work, and
shall state the reasons for such notice.
   (C)   The town reserves the right to require a performance bond, if deemed
necessary by the Director of Transportation.
(Ord. 16049, passed 7-27-16)
§ 158.11 PERFORMANCE BOND.
   (A)   (1)    Before any permit required by §
158.05 is issued, the Director of Engineering and Development Services may
require the applicant for such permit to submit to the town a bond with
corporate surety, payable to the municipality and conditioned on restoration by
the applicant of all streets, alleys, or other public places covered by the
permit to as good condition as before the excavation work shall have been
commenced, and to maintain all safeguards required by this subchapter from the
time of beginning work under such permit until such restoration has been made.
      (2)   Such bond shall be in such amount as the Director of Transportation
considers adequate to protect the interests of the municipality.
   (B)   In lieu of bond, the Director of Engineering and Development Services
may require the applicant to deposit with the town such amount in letter of
credit, cashier's check or other surety, conditioned as provided in division
(A)(1) above.
(Ord. 16049, passed 7-27-16; Am. Ord. 21043, passed 5-11-21)
§ 158.12 INDEMNIFICATION.
   (A)   Prior to undertaking any work in conjunction with the permit, the
applicant shall provide the town certificates of insurance to protect the
interests of the public, the town, and contractor involved with the work.
      (1)   Insurance for public liability and property damage, including
vehicle coverage, shall be in effect with a limit of the work.
      (2)   Insurance for public liability and property damage, including
vehicle coverage, shall be in effect with a limit of not less than $1,000,000.
      (3)   The certifications shall contain a provision that coverage will not
be canceled unless at least 30 days prior written notice is given to the town.
   (B)   The applicant shall provide workmen's compensation for the workers
involved.
   (C)   To the fullest extent permitted by law, the applicant shall indemnify
and hold harmless the town from and against liability, claims, damages, losses
and expenses, including attorneys' fees, arising out of or resulting from the
work.
   (D)   Should the applicant wrongfully cause damage to the property of the
town or others, the applicant shall, upon notice, promptly repair, settle or
resolve the damage to the satisfaction of the parties involved.
(Ord. 16049, passed 7-27-16)
§ 158.13 POLICE POWERS.
   Any permittee shall at all times be subject to all lawful exercise of the
police powers of the town, including but not limited to, all powers regarding
zoning, supervision of construction, control of the public streets and right-
of-way, and the like.
(Ord. 16049, passed 7-27-16)
§ 158.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who shall violate the requirements of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000 or to
imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or both.
(Ord. 16049, passed 7-27-16)
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to South Carolina Code
References to 1981 Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO SOUTH CAROLINA CODE
S.C. Section Code Section
S.C. Section                          Code Section
Title 5, Ch. 1                        157.110
                                      156.1112,
Title 5, Ch. 3                        156.1114,
                                      157.110
5-7-10 et seq.                        114.01
                                      10.99,
                                      114.01,
5-7-30                                115.01,
                                      138.01,
                                      156.1691
5-7-140(B)                            140.16
5-7-240                               35.10
5-7-250                               30.47
5-11-10 et seq.                       30.01
5-11-30                               30.07
5-15-10 et seq.                       36.21
5-15-61                               36.22
5-21-50                               31.044
5-21-110                              Ch. 40
5-21-120                              Ch. 40
5-21-130                              Ch. 40
5-25-20                               33.01
5-25-160 - 5-25-210                   33.06,
                                      150.097
5-27-120                              Ch. 95
5-27-130                              Ch. 95
5-27-150                              Ch. 95
5-39-10                               91.20
5-39-410 - 5-39-430                   91.20
5-39-440                              91.20
Title 6                               157.020,
                                      157.030
6-1-110                               156.1088
6-1-330                               52.02
6-1-400 et seq.                       110.20
6-1-410                               110.11,
                                      110.16
6-1-530                               114.06
6-1-700 - 6-1-770                     115.01
6-1-730                               115.04
6-1-1020(D)                           154.14
6-1-1050                              154.09
6-4-5 et seq.                         32.30,
                                      32.32
Title 6, Ch. 7                        152.01,
                                      155.002
Title 6, Ch. 9                        154.04
Title 6, Art. 9, Ch. 1                154.02
                                      156.003,
Title 6, Ch. 29                       156.1078,
                                      156.1434,
                                      156.1691
6-29-310 et seq.                      156.1445,
                                      156.1446
6-29-510(E)                           156.1126,
                                      156.1140
6-29-520(A)                           156.1127
6-29-720                              156.005
6-29-720(C)(4)                        156.161
                                      156.161,
6-29-740                              156.1156,
                                      156.1336
6-29-770(E)                           156.1681
6-29-770(E), (F), and (G)             156.1681
6-29-780 - 6-29-860                   156.1456
6-29-780 et seq.                      156.1455
                                      156.1209,
6-29-825                              156.1299,
                                      156.1329
                                      156.1465,
6-29-870 et seq.                      156.1466,
                                      156.1475
6-29-880                              156.1254,
                                      156.1269
6-29-890                              156.1254,
                                      156.1269
                                      156.1254,
6-29-900 et seq.                      156.1269  
                                      156.1284
6-29-960                              156.1592
6-29-1145                             155.084,
                                      156.048
6-29-1510 et seq.                     151.001
6-31-140(A)                           157.020
Title 7                               Ch. 36
7-13-190(C)                           36.20
Title 8, Ch. 13                       38.04
8-1-10 et seq.                        31.001,
                                      Ch. 37
8-13-1300(7)                          44.03
9-1-10 - 9-1-1970                     37.20
9-3-20 et seq.                        37.21
9-3-550                               37.21
Title 12                              Ch. 40
12-21-2720(A)(1)                      Ch. 110, App. A
12-21-2720(A)(2)                      Ch. 110, App. A
12-21-2720(A)(3)                      Ch. 110, App. A
12-21-2720(B)                      Ch. 110, App. A
12-21-2728                            Ch. 110, App. A
12-21-2746                            Ch. 110, App. A
12-23-210                             Ch. 110, App. A
12-37-10 et seq.                      40.02
12-43-220                             156.007
12-45-180                             52.10
12-56-10 et seq.                      40.20
14-25-5 et seq.                       35.01
14-25-5                               35.01
14-25-25                              35.02
14-25-45                              35.05
14-25-65                              35.99
14-25-75                              35.99
14-25-95                              35.07
14-25-105                             35.07
14-25-125                             35.08,
                                      35.09
14-25-145 - 14-25-185                 35.08
14-25-155                             35.04
15-1-20                               10.06
15-1-30                               10.05
15-1-40                               10.05
15-1-50                               10.05
16-3-610                              132.20
16-5-10 et seq.                       Ch. 41
16-5-50                               134.02
16-7-10 - 16-7-40                     41.06
16-11-520                             131.02
16-11-700                             10.20,
                                      50.10
16-13-30                              131.03
16-13-110                             131.04
16-15-90                              133.01
16-15-305 - 16-15-445                 133.02
16-17-520                             132.02
16-19-10 - 16-19-160                  130.02
16-23-410                             132.20
Title 20, Art. 13, Sub-art. 11, Ch. 7 138.05
20-7-2700                             138.05
Title 20, Art. 13, Sub-art. 11, Ch. 7 138.05
20-7-2700                             138.05
23-9-30                               33.10
23-9-310 - 23-9-470                   33.13
23-43                                 156.1681
25-1-1840                             41.06
Title 30, Ch. 1                       39.05
Title 30, Ch. 4                       156.1434
30-4-10 et seq.                       43.01
30-4-40(2)                            43.01
30-4-40(3)                            43.01
30-4-70                               30.34
30-4-80                               156.1082
30-4-80(A)                            30.35
31-15-10 et seq.                      Ch. 150
31-18-20                              132.21
Title 38, Ch. 7                       110.02,
                                      Ch. 110, App. A
38-45-10                              Ch. 110, App. A
38-45-60                              Ch. 110, App. A
Title 38, Ch. 53                      110.02
38-7-16                               Ch. 110, App. A
38-7-20                               110.02
Title 38, Ch. 45                      110.02,
                                      Ch. 110, App. A
Title 40, Ch. 21                      155.005
Title 40, Ch. 22                      153.008
Title 43, Ch. 43                      156.1681
44-1-90                               Ch. 93
44-1-170                              Ch. 93
44-7-130                              138.05
44-53-370(d)(3)                       135.01
44-95-10 et seq.                      138.01,
                                      138.05
44-95-20(4)                           138.05
Title 47                              90.85
Title 48                              155.004
48-14-10 et seq.                      153.003
48-14-10 - 48-14-120                  52.02
48-14-20                              52.03
48-39-10                           156.621,
                                      156.1681
                                      140.02,
                                      140.05,
Title 50                              140.06,
                                      140.10,
                                      140.13
50-21-30(C)(1)                        140.02
50-21-30(C)(2)                        140.16
Title 56, Ch. 5                       70.01
56-3-10 et seq.                       Ch. 70
56-5-30                               Ch. 70
56-5-120                              70.01
56-5-130                              70.01,
                                      156.1681
56-5-170                              33.11,
                                      70.01
56-5-270                              70.01
56-5-280                              70.01
56-5-390                              70.01
56-5-400                              70.01
56-5-410                              70.01
56-5-420                              70.01
56-5-430                              70.01
56-5-440                              70.01
56-5-450                              70.01
56-5-460                              70.01
56-5-470                              70.01
56-5-480                              70.01
56-5-500                              70.01
56-5-510                              70.01
56-5-520                              70.01
56-5-530                              70.01
56-5-540                              70.01
56-5-550                              70.01
56-5-570                              70.01
56-5-580                              70.01
56-5-590                              70.01
56-5-600                              70.01
56-5-610                              70.01
56-5-710                              Ch. 70
56-5-710(3)                           Ch. 94
56-5-740                              70.02
56-5-760                              71.002
56-5-790                              70.05
56-5-800                              70.04
56-5-1210                             71.030
56-5-1210 - 56-5-1360                 Ch. 71
56-5-1220                             71.031
56-5-1230                             71.032
56-5-1240                             71.033
56-5-1250                             71.034
56-5-1260                             71.035
56-5-1270                             71.034,
                                      71.035
56-5-1520                             71.053,
                                      71.054
56-5-1830                             71.055
56-5-1840                             71.056
56-5-1850                             71.057
56-5-1860                             71.058
56-5-1930                             71.059
56-5-1960                             71.060
56-5-2120                             71.080
56-5-2150                             71.080
56-5-2160                             71.081
56-5-2170                             71.082
56-5-2180                             71.083
56-5-2310                             71.100
56-5-2320                             71.101
56-5-2330                             71.102
56-5-2350                             71.103
56-5-2360                             71.104
56-5-2530                             72.02
56-5-2570                             72.08
56-5-2740                             72.09
56-5-2770                             71.065
56-5-2920                             71.050
56-5-2950                             71.051
56-5-3180                             71.013
56-5-3410 - 56-5-3500                 72.19
56-5-3450                             71.009
56-5-3810                             71.063
56-5-3820                             71.005
56-5-3850                             71.061
56-5-4100                             71.020
56-5-4110                             71.021
56-5-4410                             71.001
56-5-4450 - 56-5-5140                 71.001
56-5-5020                             132.03
56-5-6200                             70.99
57-1-110                              Ch. 155, App. B § 6
57-7-20                               95.06
57-25-10                              96.01
Title 58, Art. 20, Ch. 9              110.02
58-9-2200                             Ch. 110, App. A
58-9-2230                             156.538,
                                      156.539
Title 61                              113.01
61-40-10                              113.20
                                      
 
REFERENCES TO 1981 CODE
1981 Code Section 1996 Code Section
1981 Code Section        1996 Code Section
Art. II intro            155.020
Art. III intro           155.005
10.01                    10.01
10.02                    10.04
10.03                    10.05
10.04                    10.06
10.05                    10.07
10.06                    10.18
10.07                    10.10
10.08                    10.08
10.09                    10.09
10.10                    10.11
10.11                    10.12
10.12                    10.14
10.13                    10.15
10.14                    10.16
10.15                    10.19
10.16                    10.21
10.17                    10.22
10.99                    10.99
11.01                    11.01
30.01                    30.01
30.02                    30.02
30.03                    30.03
30.04                    30.04
30.05                    30.05
30.06                    30.06
30.07                    30.07
30.16                    30.21
30.17                    30.22
30.18                    30.23
30.19                    30.24
30.20                    30.25
30.21                    30.26
30.22                    30.27
30.23                    30.28
30.24                    30.29
30.31                    30.30
30.32                    30.31
30.33                    30.32
30.34                    30.45
30.35                    30.46
30.36                    30.47
30.37                    30.48
30.38                    30.49
30.39                    30.34,
                         30.50
30.41                    30.51
30.42                    30.52
30.43                    30.53
30.50                    30.65
30.51                    30.66
30.52                    30.67
30.53                    30.68
30.54                    30.69
30.55                    30.70
30.57                    30.71
30.58                    30.72
30.60                    32.01
30.62                    32.03
30.64                    32.04
30.65                    32.05
30.66                    32.06
30.67                    32.07
30.68                    32.08
30.71                    32.10
31.01                    31.001
31.02                    31.002
31.06                    31.003
31.07                    31.004
31.08                    31.005
31.09                    31.006
31.10                    31.007
31.20                    31.020
31.21                    31.021
31.22                    31.022
31.30                    31.040
31.31                    31.041
31.32                    39.05
31.33                    31.042
31.34                    31.043
31.35                    31.044
31.38                    31.045
31.39                    31.046
31.42                    31.047
31.50                    31.070
31.51                    31.071
31.60                    31.080
31.61                    31.081
31.71                    150.050
31.73                    31.081
31.75                    72.19
31.78                    33.10
33.01                    33.01
33.02                    33.03
33.04                    33.06
33.05                    33.04
33.06                    33.05
33.07                    33.07
33.08                    33.09
33.09                    33.11
33.13                    33.13
33.61                    32.02
34.01                    34.01
34.02                    34.04
34.03                    34.02
34.04                    34.03
34.05                    34.05
34.06                    34.06
34.07                    34.07
35.01                    35.01
35.02                    35.02
35.03                    35.03
35.04                    35.05
35.05                    35.99
35.06                    35.06
35.07                    35.07
35.08                    35.08
35.09                    35.04
35.10                    35.09
35.11                    35.10,
                         35.99
36.01                    36.01
36.02                    36.02
36.03                    36.03
36.04                    36.04
36.05                    36.20
36.06                    36.21
36.07                    36.22
36.08                    36.23
36.10                    36.24
36.12                    36.40
36.13                    36.41
36.14                    36.42
36.16                    36.43
36.17                    36.44
37.03(A)                 37.02
37.03(B)                 31.072
37.10                    37.20
37.11                    37.21
39.01                    39.01
39.02                    39.02
39.03                    39.03
39.04                    39.04
39.05                    39.05
39.06                    39.06
39.07                    39.07
39.08                    39.08
39.09                    39.09
40.01                    51.182
40.02                    51.183
40.03                    51.184
40.04                    51.185
40.05                    51.186
40.06                    51.181
40.07                    51.180
40.08                    51.187
51.1.01                  51.001
51.2.01                  51.090
51.2.02                  51.091
51.2.05                  51.094
51.3.01                  51.110
51.3.02                  51.111
51.3.03                  51.112
51.3.04                  51.113
51.4.01                  51.130
51.4.02                  51.131
51.4.03                  51.132
51.4.04                  51.133
51.4.05                  51.134
51.4.06                  51.135
51.4.07                  51.136
51.5.01                  51.150
51.5.02                  51.151
51.5.03                  51.152
51.5.04                  51.153
51.5.05                  51.154
51.5.06                  51.155
51.5.07                  51.156
51.5.08                  51.157
51.5.09                  51.158
51.6.01                  51.114
51.6.02                  51.115
51.6.03                  51.116
51.6.04                  51.117
51.6.05                  51.118
51.7.01                  51.170
51.7.02                  51.171
51.7.03                  51.172
51.8.01                  51.173
51.8.02                  51.174
51.8.03                  51.175
70.01                    70.01
70.02                    70.02
70.03                    70.03
70.04                    70.04
70.05                    70.05
70.06                    71.001
70.07                    71.002
70.08                    71.003
70.09                    71.004
70.10                    71.005
70.11                    71.006
70.12                    71.007
70.13                    71.008
70.14                    71.009
70.15                    71.010
70.16                    71.011
70.17                    71.012
70.18                    71.020
70.19                    71.021
70.20                    71.013
70.30                    71.030
70.31                    71.031
70.32                    71.032
70.33                    71.033
70.34                    71.034
70.35                    71.035
70.99                    70.99
71.01                    71.050
71.02                    71.051
71.03                    71.052
71.04                    71.053
71.05                    71.054
71.06                    71.055
71.07                    71.056
71.08                    71.057
71.09                    71.058
71.10                    71.059
71.11                    71.060
71.12                    71.061
71.13                    71.062
71.14                    71.063
71.15                    71.064
71.16                    71.065
71.17                    71.066
71.25                    71.080
71.26                    71.081
71.27                    71.082
71.28                    71.083
71.35                    71.100
71.36                    71.101
71.37                    71.102
71.38                    71.103
71.39                    71.104
72.01                    72.01
72.02                    72.02
72.03                    72.03
72.04                    72.04
72.05                    72.05
72.06                    72.06
72.07                    72.07
72.08                    72.08
72.09                    72.09
72.10                    72.10
72.11                    72.11
72.12                    72.12
72.13                    72.13
72.14                    72.14
72.15                    72.15
72.16                    72.16
72.17                    72.17
72.18                    72.18
74.01                    112.01
74.02                    112.02
74.03                    112.03
74.04                    112.03
74.05                    112.04
74.06                    112.05
74.07                    112.06
74.08                    112.20
74.08a.                  112.24
74.08d.,h.               112.21
74.08e.                  112.23
74.08f.,v.,w.,ww.        112.28
74.08g.,p.,u.,rr.        112.30
74.08i.                  112.38
74.08j.,b.,c.,k.,l.      112.22
74.08m.,n.,o.            112.25
74.08q.,r.,s.,bb.        112.27
74.08t.                  112.35
74.08x.,y.,z.,aa.        112.26
74.08cc.,dd.,ee.,ff.,gg. 112.31
74.08hh.,mm.             112.32
74.08ii.                 112.35
74.08jj.,kk.,ll.         112.29
74.08nn.,oo.,pp.,vv.     112.33
74.08qq.                 112.34
74.08ss.,tt.             112.36
74.08uu.                 112.37
74.09                    112.07
90.01                    90.01
90.02                    90.02
90.03                    90.85
90.04                    90.86
90.05                    90.87
90.06                    90.20
90.07                    90.21
90.08                    90.22
90.09                    90.23
90.10                    90.24
90.11                    90.25
90.12                    90.26
90.13                    90.27
90.14                    90.28
90.15                    90.29
90.16                    90.30
90.17                    90.31
90.18                    90.31
90.29                    90.54
90.30                    90.65
90.31                    90.66
90.32                    90.67
90.33                    90.68
90.34                    90.69
90.35                    90.70
90.36                    90.71
90.37                    90.72
91.01                    91.01
91.03                    91.02
91.04                    91.03
91.05                    91.04
91.06                    91.05
91.15                    91.20
91.16                    91.21
91.18                    91.22
91.19                    91.23
92.01                    41.01
92.02                    41.02
92.03                    41.03
92.04                    41.04
92.05                    41.05
92.06                    41.06
92.07                    41.07
92.08                    41.08
93.01                    92.01
93.10                    92.30
93.11                    92.31,
                         92.32
93.12                    92.33
94.01                    50.10
94.02                    93.07
94.03                    93.07
94.05                    93.99
94.10                    50.01
                         50.02,
                         50.03,
                         50.06 -
                         50.09,
94.11(A)                 50.20,
                         50.23 -
                         50.25,
                         50.27,
                         50.28,
                         50.41
94.11(B)                 50.40
94.99(A)                 93.99
94.99(C)                 50.99
94A.01                   136.01
94A.02                   136.02
94A.03                   136.20
94A.04                   136.21
94A.05                   136.22
94A.06                   136.23
94A.07                   136.24
94A.08                   136.25
94A.09                   136.26
94A.10                   136.26
94A.11                   136.40,
                         136.41
94A.13                   136.42
94A.14                   136.43
94A.15                   136.44
94A.16                   136.27
94A.17                   136.28
94A.18                   136.29
94A.19                   136.29
94A.20                   136.30
94A.21(A)                136.55
94A.21(B)                136.56
94A.21(C)                136.57
94A.21(D)                136.58
94A.22                   136.99
95.01                    93.01
95.02                    93.02
95.03                    93.03
95.05                    93.05
95.06                    93.06
95.15                    93.20
95.16                    93.21
95.17                    93.22
95.18                    93.23
95.19                    93.24
97.01                    95.01
97.02                    95.02
97.03                    95.03
97.04                    95.04
97.05                    95.05
97.06                    95.06
97.07                    95.07
97.08                    95.08
97.09                    95.09
97.40                    158.05
97.41                    158.14
97.42                    158.07
98.01(A)                 40.01
98.01(B)                 40.04
98.02                    40.06
98.04                    40.07
98.05                    40.05
98.15                    40.02
98.25                    40.03
99.01                    155.072
99.02                    155.072
99.03                    155.072
99.04                    155.072
99.05                    155.072
100.01                   111.01
100.02                   111.02
100.03                   111.03
100.04                   111.04
100.06(b)                111.21
100.06(c)                111.20
100.06(d)                111.20
100.06(e)                111.21
100.06(g)                111.22
100.11                   111.31
130.01                   131.01
130.02                   131.02
130.03                   131.03
130.04                   131.05
130.05                   131.06
130.06                   131.07
130.99                   130.99
131.01                   132.01
131.02                   132.02
132.01                   133.01
132.02                   133.02
133.01                   134.01
133.02                   134.02
133.03                   134.03
133.04                   134.04
134.01                   132.20
134.02                   132.21
135.01                   130.01
135.02                   113.01
135.03                   113.02
135.04                   113.03
135.05                   113.04
135.06                   130.02
135.07                   130.03
135.08                   130.04
136.01                   135.10
136.02                   135.11
136.03                   135.12
136.04                   135.13
136.04 - 136.07          135.99
136.05                   135.14
136.06                   135.15
136.07                   135.16
136.08                   135.17
136.09                   135.18
136.10                   135.19
137.01                   131.04
138.01                   135.01
139.01                   113.20
139.02a.,b.              113.21
139.03                   113.22
139.05                   113.23
139.07a.                 113.24
150.01.3                 92.18
150.1.2                  92.17
150.10                   150.095
150.11                   150.096
150.12                   150.097
150.13                   150.098
150.14                   150.099
150.23                   150.100
150.53                   150.050
150.54                   150.052
150.55                   150.053
150.61                   150.054
150.68                   150.051
150.69                   150.050
150.99                   150.999
152.01a.                 152.01
152.01b.                 152.02
152.01c.,d.              152.03
152.02                   152.04
152.03a.                 152.05
152.03b.                 152.06
152.03c.                 152.40
152.03d.                 152.07
152.03e.                 152.08
152.03f.                 152.09
152.03g.                 152.10
152.03h.                 152.99
152.04a.                 152.50
152.04b.                 152.41
152.04c.                 152.51
152.04d.                 152.52,
                         152.53
152.05a.                 152.20
                         152.21 -
152.05b.                 152.24,
                         152.26
152.05c.                 152.27
154.01                   155.001
154.02                   155.002
154.03                   155.003
154.04                   155.004
154.10                   155.021
154.11                   155.023
154.12                   155.025
154.13                   155.027
154.14                   155.028
154.15                   155.026
154.16                   155.029
154.20                   155.022
154.21                   155.024
154.22                   155.026
154.23                   155.030, Ch. 155, App. A, § 1
154.30                   155.045
154.31                   153.008,
                         155.046
154.32                   155.048
154.33                   155.048
154.34                   153.045,
                         155.050
154.36                   153.041,
                         155.051
154.37                   155.053
154.40                   155.044
154.41                   155.071
154.42                   155.048
154.43                   153.041,
                         155.051
154.44                   155.053
154.50                   Ch. 155, App. B, § 1
154.51                   Ch. 155, App. B, § 2
154.53                   Ch. 155, App. B, § 3
154.54                   Ch. 155, App. B, § 5
154.55                   Ch. 155, App. B, § 6
154.56                   Ch. 155, App. B, § 7
154.57                   Ch. 155, App. B, § 8
154.57B                  Ch. 155, App. B, § 10
154.58                   Ch. 155, App. B, § 11
154.59                   Ch. 155, App. B, § 12
154.70                   155.086
154.71                   155.999
154.72                   155.087
155.84                   155.047
                         155.048,
155.94                   155.049,
                         156.108
156.001                  155.048,
                         Ch. 155, App. B, § 13
156.002                  155.048
156.003                  155.048
156.004                  155.005
                         153.041,
156.005                  155.005,
                         155.051
156.006                  155.005
156.007                  158.04
156.008                  155.048
156.009                  155.048
156.010                  155.048
156.011                  153.041,
                         155.051
                         153.041,
156.012                  155.051,
                         Ch. 155, App. B, § 14
156.013                  155.025
156.014                  155.051,
                         155.052
156.015                  155.051,
                         155.052
156.016                  155.025
156.017                  155.005
159.01                   51.135
159.02                   51.092
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.  Date Passed Code Section
                      72.04,
—       9-10-62     130.03,
                      130.04
—       10-1-62     150.096
—       7-19-65     150.096
—       12-8-69     158.05,
                      158.07
—       12-7-70     37.02
—       6-24-74     150.050 -
                      150.054
—       4-5-76      150.100
—       8-23-76     30.02,
                      30.04
—       12-6-76     50.41
—       5-9-77      113.02
—       10-10-77    92.01
—       1-16-78     150.099
                      30.02,
—       3-6-78      30.06,
                      36.22,
                      36.23
—       5-8-78      30.04
—       2-11-79     31.021
                      31.040,
—       3-5-79      33.04,
                      34.02,
                      150.095
—       8-13-79     155.047
—       4-7-80      93.07,
                      93.99
—       5-12-80     36.22
                      135.10 -
—       2-8-82      135.19,
                      135.99
                      131.03,
—       11-7-83     132.02,
                      155.072
                      152.01 -
                      152.10,
                      152.20 -
—       3-5-84      152.24,
                      152.26,
                      152.27,
                      152.40,
                      152.99
—       11-5-84     32.05
—       12-10-84    31.042,
                      31.080
                      31.022,
                      31.040,
                      31.070,
—       9-9-85      31.080,
                      33.04,
                      34.02,
                      150.095
—       5-5-86      131.04,
                      135.01
—       7-7-86      35.02
—       8-11-86     30.65
                      31.080,
                      31.081,
—       9-8-86      152.05 -
                      152.10,
                      152.40,
                      152.99
—       9-9-86      32.10
—       11-10-86    30.21
—       2-9-87      92.01
—       5-11-87     30.21
—       3-9-87      156.104,
                      156.302
                      50.02,
                      50.03,
                      50.06 -
                      50.09,
                      50.20,
—       6-23-87     50.23 -
                      50.25,
                      50.27,
                      50.28,
                      50.40,
                      50.41,
                      50.99
—       12-29-87    30.21
                      152.41,
—       3-5-88      152.50 -
                      152.53
—       4-12-88     36.04,
                      36.22
—       6-6-88      36.23
                      136.01,
                      136.02,
                      136.20 -
                      136.30,
—       7-12-88     136.40 -
                      136.44,
                      136.55 -
                      136.58,
                      136.99
                      152.01 -
                      152.03,
—       9-13-88     152.05 -
                      152.10,
                      152.40,
                      152.99
                      30.06,
                      30.29,
                      30.34 ,
—       10-11-88    32.01,
                      32.02,
                      32.05,
                      32.07
—       3-14-89     92.17,
                      92.18
—       5-9-89      30.46
—       1-9-90      36.20,
                      36.23
—       4-10-90     36.22
—       9-11-90     30.06
—       10-9-90     32.05,
                      32.07
                      152.01 -
                      152.10,
                      152.20 -
                      152.24,
                      152.26,
—       6-11-91     152.27,
                      152.40,
                      152.41,
                      152.50 -
                      152.53,
                      152.99
—       12-10-91    36.24
—       12-10-91    51.180 -
                      51.187
                      111.01 -
                      111.04,
                      111.20 -
—       12-17-91    111.22,
                      111.31,
                      152.04,
                      152.20,
                      152.21
                      152.22 -
—       12-17-91    152.24,
                      152.26, 
                      152.27
                      111.20,
—       3-10-92     111.21,
                      111.23
92-3A-1-G 3-25-92     150.095,
                      150.096
92-3A-2-G 3-25-92     32.05
                      50.02,
                      50.03,
                      50.06 -
                      50.09,
                      50.20,
—       4-14-92     50.23 -
                      50.25,
                      50.27,
                      50.28,
                      50.40,
                      50.41
                      152.01 -
                      152.04,
                      152.20 -
                      152.24,
—       5-19-92     152.26,
                      52.27,
                      152.41,
                      152.50 -
                      152.53
                      153.008,
                      153.041,
                      153.045,
                      153.051,
                      155.001 -
                      155.005,
                      155.020 -
                      155.030,
                      155.044 -
                      155.053,
                      155.071,
—       6-9-92      155.086,
                      155.087,
                      155.999,
                      Ch. 155, App. A, § 1,
                      Ch. 155, App. B, §§ 1,
                      2,
                      4,
                      6 -
                      8,
                      10 -
                      14,
                      158.04
                      111.01 -
                      111.04,
—       7-14-92     111.20 -
                      111.22,
                      111.31 
—       10-13-92    32.02,
                      32.07
                      31.081,
                      33.10,
—       12-8-92     35.10,
                      35.99,
                      72.19,
                      150.050
                      150.002,
—       1-12-93     152.41,
                      152.50 -
                      152.53
                      153.041,
—       2-9-93      155.048,
                      155.051,
                      Ch. 155, App. B, § 13
                      30.28,
                      39.01 -
—       3-9-93      39.09,
                      92.30 -
                      92.32
                      51.001,
                      51.090,
                      51.091,
                      51.094,
                      51.110 -
—       4-19-93     51.118,
                      51.130 -
                      51.136,
                      51.150 -
                      51.158,
                      51.170 -
                      51.175
93018     5-11-93     113.20 -
                      113.24
93019     5-11-93     51.092
93021     5-11-93     30.50 -
                      30.53
                      112.01 -
93039     8-10-93     112.07,
                      112.20 -
                      112.38
93048     9-14-93     35.99
                      90.01,
                      90.02,
                      90.20 -
                      90.31,
93050     10-12-93    90.54,
                      90.65 -
                      90.72,
                      90.85 -
                      90.87
                      153.041,
93066     2-8-94      153.045,
                      155.050,
                      155.051
93077     1-11-94     30.06,
                      36.21
94003     2-8-94      30.46
94040     9-22-94     35.02
95012     4-11-95     155.048,
                      155.049
95035     8-7-95      32.11
95067     12-8-95     36.42
                      114.01 -
96014     3-12-96     114.07,
                      114.98,
                      114.99
96023     5-14-96     114.04
                      111.01,
                      111.02,
96033     6-18-96     111.20,
                      111.23,
                      111.30
96041     9-20-96     35.02
96049     11-12-96    155.053
97001     2-11-97     155.025
97024     4-8-97      132.21
97050     12-2-97     157.010 -
                      157.170
97063     11-7-97     32.12
                      111.01 -
                      111.04,
97082     1-13-98     111.20 -
                      111.23,
                      111.30,
                      111.31
98006     3-10-98     155.053
98031     6-22-98     92.33
98053     12-8-98     132.04
                      32.01,
98055     1-12-99     32.05,
                      32.07,
                      32.12
99003     2-9-99      130.05,
                      130.06
99005     2-9-99      31.022,
                      31.023
                      50.01,
                      50.02,
99011     4-13-99     50.20,
                      50.23 -
                      50.27
                      153.041,
                      155.001,
                      155.003,
                      155.004,
99012     4-21-99     155.021,
                      155.022,
                      155.047 -
                      155.049,
                      155.051,
                      155.053
                      153.041,
99016     6-8-99      153.050,
                      155.051,
                      Ch. 155, App. B, § 15
99018     6-8-99      36.20,
                      36.23
99020     7-13-99     155.023
99039     9-21-99     36.23,
                      36.24
                      Ch. 155, App. A, § 1,
                      Ch. 155, App. B, §§ 1,
                      2,
99055     11-9-99     4 -
                      6,
                      8,
                      10 -
                      12
99056     12-14-99    Ch. 157
99060     1-11-00     Ch. 96
                      150.001,
99072     1-11-00     150.002,
                      150.019,
                      150.097
00012     2-8-00      51.092
                      153.041,
                      153.051,
                      155.005,
00035     7-11-00     155.051,
                      155.052,
                      Ch. 155, App. B, §§ 1,
                      2,
                      12
00038     7-11-00     150.002
00039     7-11-00     150.003
00045     8-8-00      35.11
00048     9-12-00     92.32
                      112.01,
                      112.05,
                      112.21,
00049     12-12-00    112.22,
                      112.25,
                      112.27,
                      112.28,
                      112.33
00052     9-12-00     155.022
00054     9-22-00     150.200
00056     11-14-00    153.045,
                      155.050
                      153.041,
                      155.020,
                      155.023,
00063     1-9-01      155.048,
                      155.051,
                      155.087,
                      Ch. 155, App. B, §§ 1,
                      7
00064     1-9-01      155.048,
                      155.049
00071     1-9-01      150.002
00072     1-9-01      152.04
01002     1-31-01     30.46
01023     5-8-01      150.001
01031     6-12-01     90.54
01032     6-12-01     31.023
01038     6-25-01     35.02
                      115.01 -
01039     7-10-01     115.07,
                      Ch. 115 App. A
                      92.01,
01044     8-14-01     92.02,
                      92.17,
                      92.18
01055     10-9-01     158.07
01060     11-13-01    33.01 -
                      33.13
02004     3-12-02     92.17
                      94.01 -
02005     3-12-02     94.16,
                      94.99
                      150.070 -
02014     4-9-02      150.076,
                      Ch. 150, App. A
02027     6-11-02     150.001
                      153.008,
                      153.041,
                      153.045,
                      153.050,
                      153.051,
                      155.001 -
                      155.005,
                      155.020 -
                      155.030,
                      155.044 -
02045     7-9-02      155.053,
                      155.071,
                      155.072,
                      155.086,
                      155.087,
                      155.999;
                      Ch. 155, App. A, § 1, and App. B, §§ 1,
                      2,
                      4 -
                      8,
                      10 -
                      15
                      111.02,
                      111.22,
02058     12-10-02    111.23,
                      111.30,
                      111.31
02068     1-14-03     155.021
03001     2-11-03     113.02,
                      113.20
03007     3-11-03     112.27
03018     5-13-03     150.001
03019     6-10-03     158.05
03035     7-8-03      30.51
03051     9-9-03      150.002
03056     10-14-03    37.03
03057     10-14-03    152.24
                      137.01 -
03078     1-13-04     137.04,
                      137.99
                      50.02,
04005     5-11-04     50.03,
                      50.20
04017     5-11-04     50.29
04042     8-10-04     35.02
04056     10-12-04    152.06
04064     12-14-04    150.001
04065     12-14-04    32.01,
                      32.13
04078     1-11-05     152.04
                      74.01 -
05027     6-14-05     74.04,
                      74.99
                      155.021,
05035     6-14-05     155.023,
                      155.085
05037     6-14-05     31.023
05038     6-14-05     150.001
05075     10-12-05    152.05,
                      152.06
05076     11-9-05     31.023
05084     11-9-05     75.01 -
                      75.05
                      157.030,
05085     12-14-05    157.040,
                      157.050
05096     1-11-06     32.13
06001     2-15-06     30.35
06003     2-15-06     31.023
                      153.041,
06016     4-12-06     153.051,
                      155.051,
                      155.052
06025     5-10-06     76.01 -
                      76.03
06027     5-10-06     155.048
                      116.01 -
06069     2-13-07     116.04,
                      116.07
06078     12-12-06    112.33
07003     2-13-07     31.030 -
                      31.033
                      138.01 -
07007     6-12-07     138.11,
                      138.99
                      155.049,
                      155.051,
                      155.088,
07015     6-12-07     Ch. 155, App. B, §§ 3,
                      4,
                      7,
                      8
07033     6-12-07     36.21
                      152.04,
07037     6-12-07     152.24,
                      152.26
07040     6-19-07     150.001
                      153.001 -
                      153.009,
                      153.020 -
                      153.024,
                      153.040 -
                      153.053,
                      153.070,
07045     8-14-07     153.080,
                      153.090,
                      153.100,
                      153.110,
                      Ch. 153, App. A, App. B, § 1,
                      Ch. 155, App. B, §§ 1,
                      12,
                      13,
                      15
                      152.04,
                      152.20,
                      152.22 -
07055     9-11-07     152.24,
                      152.26,
                      152.50,
                      152.51
07063     10-9-07     150.002
07073     11-13-07    138.11
08021     4-8-08      155.084
08027     6-11-08     36.30
08048     9-10-08     150.001
08068     2-10-09     140.01 -
                      140.13
08069     12-9-08     30.21
08070     12-9-08     90.01
08071     12-9-08     138.03,
                      138.08
08076     1-14-09     31.081
08080     1-14-09     42.01 -
                      42.04
                      36.30,
09014     4-14-09     36.40,
                      36.41
09019     4-14-09     150.110,
                      154.09
                      141.01 -
09034     7-14-09     141.03,
                      141.99
09035     7-14-09     138.03,
                      138.06
09057     8-12-09     150.001
                      30.06,
                      36.20,
09064     10-13-09    36.23,
                      36.30,
                      36.41 -
                      36.43
                      155.047,
09088     1-13-10     155.048,
                      156.106,
                      156.201
10003     3-10-10     112.33
10004     3-10-10     90.01,
                      90.71
10008     4-13-10     51.092
10050     10-12-10    35.02
10060     11-9-10     132.20
10071     12-14-10    155.023
                      51.001 -
                      51.018,
                      51.030 -
                      51.032,
                      51.050 -
                      51.058,
                      51.070 -
                      51.077,
11011     2-8-11      51.090 -
                      51.094,
                      51.110 -
                      51.118,
                      51.130 -
                      51.136,
                      51.150 -
                      51.158,
                      51.170 -
                      51.175
11014     3-8-11      141.03
                      117.01,
                      117.02,
11018     4-12-11     117.04 -
                      117.06,
                      117.08
11027     4-12-11     50.23
                      150.001 -
                      150.003,
11046     7-12-11     150.019,
                      150.050 -
                      150.054
11050     7-12-11     155.029
                      51.018,
11058     9-13-11     51.180 -
                      51.187
11076     11-4-11     30.21,
                      30.29
12039     6-12-12     32.06
                      155.047,
12074     11-13-12    156.007,
                      156.052,
                      156.106
12077     11-13-12    97.01 -
                      97.03
12078     12-11-12    Ch. 110, App. A
12081     12-11-12    150.001
12090     1-8-13      32.20 -
                      32.23
13012     3-12-13     132.21
                      153.009,
                      153.022,
                      153.040 -
                      153.042,
                      153.053,
                      153.100,
                      Ch. 153, App. B, § 1,
13027     6-11-13     155.022,
                      155.024 -
                      155.026,
                      155.048,
                      155.049,
                      155.051,
                      155.088,
                      Ch. 155, App. B, §§ 1 -
                      15
13028     6-11-13     150.001
13040     8-13-13     36.22
13081     1-14-14     112.33
14025     4-8-14      150.002
                      32.20 -
                      32.23,
14047     8-12-14     155.004,
                      155.029,
                      155.047,
                      155.048
14090     1-13-15     138.03
14093     1-13-15     32.14
14094     1-13-15     32.12
14095     1-13-15     30.35
15025     4-14-15     97.01 -
                      97.03
15026     4-14-15     116.01 -
                      116.07
                      141.01 -
15027     4-14-15     141.03,
                      141.99
16008     2-10-16     71.014
16009     2-10-16     112.05
16011     2-10-16     30.35
16012     2-10-16     30.36
                      155.004,
16038     6-15-16     155.047,
                      155.048
                      92.01,
16057     8-10-16     92.17,
                      92.18
                      155.004,
                      155.005,
                      155.020 -
                      155.029,
                      155.044,
16082     10-11-2016  155.048 -
                      155.053,
                      155.072,
                      155.086,
                      155.999; Ch. 155, App. A, § 1, and
                      App. B, §§ 6,
                      13
16083     10-11-2016  150.002
16095     11-8-2016   150.001
16099     11-8-2016   51.115
                      154.01 -
17009     4-3-17      154.07,
                      154.99,
                      Ch. 154, App. A
17017     5-9-17      150.002
17028     6-13-17     92.30
17038     9-14-17     43.01
                      32.02 -
                      32.04,
17064     1-10-18     32.06,
                      32.08,
                      32.11 -
                      32.14
                      44.01 -
18009     2-14-18     44.03,
                      44.99
18010     2-14-18     38.01 -
                      38.09
18017     3-14-18     138.03
                      53.01 -
18024     4-16-18     53.07,
                      53.99
18033     5-9-18      114.06
18035     6-14-18     32.23,
                      150.003
                      152.04 -
                      152.06,
                      152.20,
                      152.22,
18039     6-14-18     152.23,
                      152.26,
                      152.51,
                      152.52,
                      152.99
18044     10-9-18     98.01 -
                      90.09
18045     10-9-18     99.01 -
                      99.06
                      154.01 -
18068     10-9-18     154.17,
                      154.99,
                      Ch. 154, App. A
                      112.01 -
18069     12-9-18     112.07,
                      112.20 -
                      112.38
18075     11-13-18    155.054
18077     11-13-18    53.04,
                      53.06
18086     11-13-18    156.326
18087     11-13-18    43.01
18088     11-13-18    40.20
                      150.025 -
18103     1-8-19      150.030,
                      153.110
                      30.29,
19016     4-9-2019    30.33 -
                      30.36,
                      30.46
19017     4-9-2019    53.01,
                      53.06
19029     5-14-2019   155.048
19034  �5-14-2019   36.22
19041     6-11-2019   30.35
19052     8-13-2019   51.013
19060     9-10-2019   40.21
19081     12-11-2019  150.001
                      90.01,
20007     3-11-2020   90.20,
                      90.88
20008     2-19-2020   32.15
20016     3-11-2020   30.35
20042     8-14-2020   156.431,
                      156.432
20049     9-11-2020   156.151,
                      156.162
20052     9-11-2020   92.01
                      154.03,
20053     9-11-2020   154.09,
                      154.12;
                      Ch. 154, App. A
                      152.04,
                      152.05,
                      152.11,
20065     11-10-2020  152.22,
                      152.23,
                      152.26,
                      152.28
20071     1-12-2021   140.14,
                      140.15
21015     3-9-2021    41.03
21024     4-13-2021   132.04
21025     4-13-2021   30.35
21029     5-11-2021   152.27
                      31.002,
                      31.005,
                      31.022,
21030     5-11-2021   31.040 -
                      31.047,
                      31.080,
                      31.081
21031     5-11-2021   116.02 -
                      116.06
21034     5-11-2021   39.05
21035     5-11-2021   42.01-
                      42.04
21036     5-11-2021   51.181
                      150.027,
21037     5-11-2021   150.030,
                      150.096
21038     5-11-2021   152.22
                      153.009,
                      153.042,
                      153.044 -
21039     5-11-2021   153.046,
                      153.051,
                      153.070,
                      153.080
                      154.09,
21040     5-11-2021   154.12;
                      Ch. 154, App. A
                      155.004,
                      155.005,
                      155.021 -
                      155.029,
                      155.044,
21041     5-11-2021   155.048,
                      155.050 -
                      155.052,
                      155.072,
                      155.999;
                      Ch. 155, App. A
                      158.04,
21043     5-11-2021   158.05,
                      158.08,
                      158.11
21044     6-8-2021    30.35
21057     8-10-2021   42.05
21058     8-10-2021   112.33
21059     8-10-2021   52.01 -
                      52.14
                      110.01 -
21064     9-14-2021   110.21,
                      Ch. 110, App. A,
                       Ch 110, App. B
21074     11-9-2021   153.050
21076     12-15-2021  116.03
21077     1-11-2022   32.03
21078     1-11-2022   32.11
22009     2-8-2022    152.27
22034     6-24-2022   51.092
22044     7-13-2022   30.36
22048     8-12-2022   117.01 -
                      117.08
22049     3-14-2023   132.03
                      154.03,
22053     10-21-2022  154.09;
                      Ch. 154, App. A
22057     11-14-2022  30.35,
                      30.36
22064     12-15-2022  92.01,
                      150.001
22065     1-10-2023   43.02
22067     1-10-2023   136.31
22068     1-10-2023   136.02
                      155.054,
23006     2-14-2023   156.173,
                      156.201
                      31.090,
                      42.05,
                      50.02 -
                      50.10,
                      50.20 -
                      50.29,
                      50.40,
                      50.41,
                      50.99,
                      51.180,
                      51.181,
                      51.187,
23016     5-9-2023    93.01 -
                      93.03,
                      93.05 -
                      93.07,
                      95.03,
                      95.07,
                      136.57,
                      136.99,
                      150.050,
                      150.051,
                      150.053,
                      150.097,
                      153.041,
                      155.048
                      73.01,
                      73.02,
                      73.15, -
                      73.20,
23023     9-15-2023   73.30 -
                      73.35,
                      73.45 -
                      73.50,
                      73.99
                      110.02,
23036     12-12-2023  Ch. 110, App. A,
                      Ch. 110, App. B
23038     1-11-2024   10.23
23039     1-11-2024   136.44,
                      136.99
                      152.04,
                      152.20,
24004     2-15-2024   152.50,
                      152.51,
                      155.051
24009     3-14-2024   30.65
                      140.01 -
                      140.03,
                      140.07,
24013     4-10-2024   140.11,
                      140.12,
                      140.14 -
                      140.17
24014     4-16-2024   53.01
                      150.002,
24018     5-16-2024   153.100,
                      155.052
24021     6-12-2024   155.054
                      100.01 -
24030  �13-2024     100.04,
                      100.99
24036     12-16-2024  152.04,
                      152.20
24037     12-16-2024  40.21
                      156.001 -
                      156.011,
                      156.020 -
                      156.025,
                      156.035 -
                      156.041,
                      156.055 -
                      156.062,
                      156.080 -
                      156.083,
                      156.090 -
                      156.095,
                      156.105 -
                      156.109,
                      156.115,
                      156.116,
                      156.125 -
                      156.128,
                      156.160 -
                      156.164,
                      156.180 -
                      156.189,
                      156.200 -
                      156.203,
                      156.215 -
                      156.218,
                      156.230 -
                      156.235,
                      156.250 -
                      156.256,
                      156.300 -
                      156.305,
                      156.315 -
                      156.320,
                      156.325,
                      156.326,
                      156.335 -
                      156.338,
                      156.345 -
                      156.384,
                      156.420 -
                      156.424,
                      156.435,
                      156.436,
                      156.445 -
                      156.453,
                      156.470 -
                      156.476,
                      156.485 -
                      156.487,
                      156.495 -
                      156.499,
                      156.515 -
                      156.524,
                      156.535 -
                      156.552,
                      156.560 -
                      156.568,
                      156.580 -
                      156.588,
                      156.600 -
                      156.609,
                      156.620 -
                      156.628,
                      156.640 -
                      156.645,
                      156.650 -
                      156.654,
                      156.660,
                      156.661,
                      156.670 -
                      156.673,
                      156.700 -
                      156.710,
                      156.730 -
                      156.732,
                      156.740 -
                      156.742,
                      156.755 -
                      156.760,
                      156.770 -
                      156.775,
                      156.785,
                      156.786,
                      156.810 -
                      156.816,
                      156.825 -
                      156.828,
                      156.835,
                      156.845,
                      156.846,
                      156.860 -
                      156.866,
                      156.880 -
                      156.883,
                      156.890 -
                      156.904,
                      156.915 -
                      156.917,
                      156.925 -
                      156.930,
                      156.940 -
                      156.951,
                      156.965 -
                      156.981,
—       1-14-2025   156.990 -
                      156.996,
                      156.1010,
                      156.1011,
                      156.1020,
                      156.1021,
                      156.1035 -
                      156.1041,
                      156.1055, 156.1066,
                      156.1075 -
                      156.1088,
                      156.1095 -
                      156.1101,
                      156.1110 -
                      156.1120,
                      156.1125 -
                      156.1135,
                      156.1140 -
                      156.1150,
                      156.1155 -
                      156.1165,
                      156.1170 -
                      156.1180,
                      156.1185,
                      156.1186,
                      156.1200 -
                      156.1210,
                      156.1215 -
                      156.1226,
                      156.1230 -
                      156.1240,
                      156.1245 -
                      156.1255,
                      156.1260 -
                      156.1270,
                      156.1275 -
                      156.1285,
                      156.1290 -
                      156.1300,
                      156.1305 -
                      156.1315,
                      156.1320 -
                      156.1330,
                      156.1335 -
                      156.1345,
                      156.1350,
                      156.1370,
                      156.1390,
                      156.1395,
                      156.1396,
                      156.1405,
                      156.1406,
                      156.1415 -
                      156.1417,
                      156.1430 -
                      156.1436,
                      156.1445,
                      156.1446,
                      156.1455 -
                      156.1457,
                      156.1465,
                      156.1466,
                      156.1475 -
                      156.1478,
                      156.1485 -
                      156.1487,
                      156.1495 -
                      156.1498,
                      156.1515 -
                      156.1518,
                      156.1525,
                      156.1526,
                      156.1535 -
                      156.1548,
                      156.1555 -
                      156.1558,
                      156.1565 -
                      156.1568,
                      156.1575 -
                      156.1579,
                      156.1590 -
                      156.1592,
                      156.1600,
                      156.1605,
                      156.1606,
                      156.1610,
                      156.1611,
                      156.1615,
                      156.1616,
                      156.1620,
                      156.1621,
                      156.1625 -
                      156.1627,
                      156.1630,
                      156.1631,
                      156.1635 -
                      156.1638,
                      156.1645 -
                      156.1651,
                      156.1660,
                      156.1661,
                      156.1675,
                      156.1676,
                      156.1680,
                      156.1681,
                      156.1690 -
                      156.1703
24041     1-21-2025   32.30 -
                      32.32
                      151.001 -
25012  �11-2025     151.005,
                      154.08
25029     7-10-2025   154.07
                      73.20,
25036     8-18-2025   73.34,
                      73.99
                     
 
