CODE OF ORDINANCES
of
RICHLAND COUNTY,
SOUTH CAROLINA
CONTAINING THE
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE COUNTY
2025 S-23 Supplement
This supplement is current through Ordinance No. 033-25HR
Published by Order of the County Council, 1984
Republished by Order of the County Council, 1997
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
(800) 445-5588
www.amlegal.com
OFFICIALS
of
RICHLAND COUNTY, SOUTH CAROLINA
Jesica Mackey
Chair
Derrek Pugh
Vice Chair
Jason Branham
Derrek Pugh
Tyra Little
Paul Livingston
Allison Terracio
Don Weaver
Gretchen Barrron
Tish Dozier Alleyne
Jesica Mackey
Cheryl D. English
Chakisse Newton
Council Members
Leonardo Brown
County Administrator
Patrick Wright
County Attorney
Elizabeth McLean
Chief Deputy County Attorney
Anette Kirylo
Assistant Clerk of Council
 
PREFACE
   This Code is a codification of the ordinances of Richland County, South
Carolina, of a general and permanent nature. As expressed in the Adopting
Ordinance, the Code supersedes all such ordinances not included therein or
recognized as continuing in force by reference thereto.
   The chapters of the Code are arranged in alphabetical order and the sections
within each chapter are catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie
related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant provisions of
the state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and
setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this
volume. The source of each section is indicated by the history note appearing
in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that
the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the
Code. By use of the Comparative Table also appearing in the back of the volume,
any ordinance included herein can be readily found in the Code.
Numbering System
   The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state
and local government codes. Each section number consists of two component parts
separated by a dash, the figure before the dash representing the chapter number
and the figure after the dash indicating the position of the section within the
chapter. Thus, the first section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-1 and the twelfth
section of chapter 14 is 14-12. Under this system, each section is identified
with its chapter, and, at the same time, new sections or even whole chapters
can be inserted in their proper places, simply by using the decimal system for
amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three
sections that would logically come between sections
3-3 and 3-4 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 3-3.1,
3-3.2 and 3-3.3, respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner.
If the new materials is to be included between chapters 3 and 4 it will be
designated as chapter 3.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical
arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles
and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles,
may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case
of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject,
the next successive number being assigned to the article or division.
Index
   The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item
has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in
lay phraseology, others in legal terminology and still others in language
generally used by government officials and employees. There are numerous cross
references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user
to the particular item in which he is interested.
Acknowledgments
   The publishers are most grateful to T. Cary McSwain, County Administrator,
Brenda Fuller, the former Clerk of Council, Michielle Cannon-Finch, Interim
Clerk of Council, Larry C. Smith, Esquire, Interim Richland County Attorney,
Kathryn Y. Jones, Assistant to the County Attorney, Tibor Giffel, Director of
the Office of Procurement, Donna Cannon-Abdullah and Joseph Albers, of the
Office of Procurement, Gail Stanley, Planning Director, and Ralph Pearson,
County Engineer, for their generous assistance in the reprinting of this Code.
   Most grateful thanks is given to Lois A. Mitchell, Brenda H. Cooke, and
Jeffrey Punn, which, without their dedication and extraordinary legal and
clerical skills, the reprinting of this Code Book would not have been possible.
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
STATE OF SOUTH CAROLINA
COUNTY COUNCIL FOR RICHLAND COUNTY ORDINANCE NO. 1137-84HR
   An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code of Richland County, South
Carolina; Establishing the Same; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances
Not Included Therein; Providing for the Manner of Amending and Supplementing
Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become
Effective.
   NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNTY COUNCIL OF RICHLAND COUNTY, IN
COUNCIL ASSEMBLED AND BY AUTHORITY OF THE SAME, THAT:
   Section I. That the Code of Ordinances, consisting of Chapters 1 to 25, each
inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Code of Ordinances, Richland
County, South Carolina" which Code shall supersede all general and permanent
ordinances of the county adopted on or before the same date as Ordinance No.
999-82 to the extent provided in section 2 hereof.
   Section II. That all provisions of such Code shall be in full force and
effect from and after April 3, 1984, except that the adoption of this Code
shall not affect the effective date of Ordinance 954-82, which shall remain
January 1, 1984, and all ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the
County adopted on final passage on the same date as or before Ordinance No.
999-82 and not included in such Code or recognized and continued in force by
reference therein, are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of
such Code.
   Section III. That the repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be
construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a
subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance.
   Section IV. That unless another penalty is expressly provided, a violation
of any provision of such Code, or any provision of any rule or regulation
adopted or issued pursuant thereto, shall be punished by a fine of not more
than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or by imprisonment for not more than thirty
(30) days, as provided in Sec. 1-8. General penalty, continuing violations. of
such Code.
   Section V. That any and all additions and amendments to such Code, when
passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the county council to make
the same a part of such Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code,
so that reference to such Code shall be understood and intended to include such
additions and amendments.
   Section VI. That in case of the amendment of any section of such Code for
which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in Sec. 1-8.
General penalty, continuing violations. of such Code shall apply to the section
as amended, or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty,
other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section
in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be
held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically
repealed therein.
   Section VII. A copy of such Code shall be kept on file in the office of the
clerk of council preserved in looseleaf form, or in such other form as the
clerk of council may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of
the clerk of council or someone authorized by him, to insert in their
designated places all amendments or ordinances which indicate the intention of
the county council to make the same a part of such Code, when the same have
been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from such Code all
provisions which may from time to time be repealed by the county council. This
copy of such Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the
same.
   Section VIII. It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by
additions or deletions, any part of or portion thereof, or to alter or tamper
with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of Richland
County to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be
punished as provided in Sec. 1-8. General penalty, continuing violations. of
the Code of Ordinances of Richland County, and in Section IV of this ordinance.
   Section IX. This ordinance shall become effective on April 3, 1984.
                           RICHLAND COUNTY COUNCIL
                           BY:                                            
                           James C. Leventis, Chairman
Introduced, February 21, 1984
Second Reading, March 6, 1984
Final Reading, April 3, 1984
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 1-1. How Code designated and cited.
   The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections
shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, Richland County,
South Carolina" and may be so cited. Such ordinances may also be cited as the
"Richland County Code."
(Code 1976, § 1-1001)
Sec. 1-2. Definitions and rules of construction; generally.
   In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the county, the
following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed unless
inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council or the text clearly
requires otherwise:
   Generally. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained
in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and
meaning of the county council may be fully carried out. Terms used in this
Code, unless otherwise specifically provided, shall have the meanings
prescribed by the statutes of the state for the same terms. If not defined in
the statutes or this Code, terms shall have their commonly accepted dictionary
meanings.
   In the interpretation and application of any provisions of this Code, they
shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the
public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any
provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter
than the general provisions imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the
greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling.
   In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the county, all
things and places therein referred to, shall, unless a contrary intention
appear, be construed to mean things and places situated in the county or
employed by or appertaining to the county.
   Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be
sufficient.
   Clerk. The word "clerk" shall mean the clerk of the county council.
   Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, and if the last
day is a Sunday or a legal holiday, that shall be excluded.
   Council, county council. The words "the council" or "the county council"
shall mean the county council for Richland County, South Carolina.
   County. The word "county" shall be construed to mean the County of Richland
in the State of South Carolina.
   County limits shall mean the legal boundaries of Richland County.
   Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of
a department or some other county officer or employee to do some act or perform
some duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or
other officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the
required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section
specify otherwise.
   Gender. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and
neuter.
   Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority
of such persons or officers.
   Keeper and proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and
include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships,
whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee.
   Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month.
   Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
   Number. Words used in the singular shall include the plural and words used
in the plural shall include the singular number.
   Oath, swear, sworn. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an
affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted
for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be
equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed."
   Officer, official. Whenever reference is made to any officer or official the
reference will be taken to be to such officer or official of Richland County.
   Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any
part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the
entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land.
   Person. The word "person" shall include a corporation, firm, partnership,
association, organization, and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an
individual.
   Personal property. The words "personal property" include every species of
property except real property, as herein defined.
   Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next
before and next after, respectively.
   Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property.
   Real property, real estate. The words "real property" and "real estate"
shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
   Roadway. The word "roadway" shall mean that portion of a street improved,
designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.
   Shall, may. The word "shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
   Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street or road
between the curbline, or the lateral lines of the roadway where there is no
curb, and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
   Signature, subscription. The words "signature" and "subscription" include a
mark when the person cannot write, when such mark is witnessed by a longhand
signature.
   State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the
State of South Carolina.
   Street, road. The words "street" and "road" shall include avenues,
boulevards, highways, alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges and the approaches
thereto and all other public thoroughfares in the county, and shall mean the
entire width thereof between opposed abutting property lines; it shall be
construed to include a sidewalk or footpath, unless the contrary is expressed
or unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of
the county council.
   Tenant or occupant. The words "tenant" or "occupant" applied to a building
or land shall include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such
building or land, whether alone or with others.
   Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as
the past and present.
   Week. The word "week" shall be construed to mean seven (7) days.
   Written or in writing. The words "written" or "in writing" shall include
printing and any other mode of representing words and letters.
   Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year.
(Code 1976, §§ 1-1002, 1-1003)
Sec. 1-3. Catchlines of sections.
   The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type
are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and
shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of
the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
(Code 1976, § 1-1004)
Sec. 1-4. Effect of repeal or expiration of ordinances.
   (a)   The repeal of an ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any
provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued, any offense
committed, any penalty or punishment incurred or any proceeding commenced
before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired.
   (b)   When an ordinance which repealed another shall itself be repealed, the
previous ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect.
(Code 1976, § 1-1005)
Sec. 1-5. Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances.
   The provisions appearing in this Code, insofar as they are the same as those
previously adopted by the council, shall be considered as continuations thereof
and not as new enactments.
(Code 1976, § 1-1006)
Sec. 1-6. Severability of parts of Code.
   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the council that the sections,
paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if
any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be
declared unconstitutional or invalid by judgment or decree of a court of
competent jurisdiction such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect
any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of
this Code.
(Code 1976, § 1-1007)
Sec. 1-7. Supplementation of Code.
   (a)   By contract or by county personnel, supplements to this Code shall be
prepared and printed quarterly, unless otherwise authorized or directed by the
county council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive parts of
permanent and general ordinances passed by the county council during the period
covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages
of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code
and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or
partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have
been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the
latest ordinance included in the supplement.
   (b)   In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which
have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from
reprinted pages.
   (c)   When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the
person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make
formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included
in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them in a
unified Code. For example, the codifier may:
      (1)   Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
      (2)   Provide appropriate catchlines, headings, and titles for sections
and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes
in such catchlines, headings, and titles;
      (3)   Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be
inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change
existing section or other subdivision numbers;
      (4)   Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to
"this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or
to "sections         to          " (inserting section numbers to indicate the
sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance
incorporated into the Code); and
      (5)   Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the
original meaning of ordinance sections or the alphabetical arrangement of new
chapters inserted into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any
change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the
supplement or already embodied in the Code.
   Cross reference(s)--Codification, indexing and distribution of ordinances, §
2-44.
Sec. 1-8. General penalty, continuing violations.
   (a)   Wherever in this Code, or in any ordinance of the county any act is
prohibited or is declared to be unlawful or an offense or misdemeanor, or the
doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be
unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, and no specific penalty is provided
for the violation thereof, the violation of any such provision of this Code, or
any such ordinance, shall be subject to a fine not exceeding five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment not exceeding thirty (30) days.
   (b)   Each day any violation of this Code, or any such ordinance,
resolution, rule, regulation or order shall continue, shall constitute, except
where otherwise provided, a separate offense.
(Code 1976, § 1-1008; Ord. No. 017-01HR, § I, 4-3-01)
   Cross reference(s)--Motor vehicles and traffic,
Ch. 17; offenses,
Ch. 18.
Sec. 1-9. Altering Code.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or
deletions any part or portion of this Code; or to insert or delete pages or
portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner
whatsoever, which will cause the law of the county to be misrepresented
thereby.
Sec. 1-10. Certain ordinances and resolutions not affected by Code.
   Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed
to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following ordinances
or resolutions, which are not included herein:
      (1)   Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment
of money for the county, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county
or any evidence of the county's indebtedness;
      (2)   Any appropriation ordinance or resolution providing for the levy of
taxes or for an annual budget, or prescribing salaries for county officers and
employees;
      (3)   Any ordinance or resolution granting any franchise, permit or other
right;
      (4)   Any ordinance or resolution approving, authorizing or otherwise
relating to any contrary, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument;
      (5)   Any ordinance or resolution authorizing or otherwise relating to
any public improvement project or work;
      (6)   Any temporary or special ordinance or resolution or ordinance or
resolution of limited interest or transitory nature or emergency ordinances;
      (7)   Ordinance No. 954-82, relating to waste management;
      (8)   Ordinance No. 781-81, relating to a fire commission;
      (9)   Ordinance No. 434-77, relating to volunteer fire departments;
      (10)   The appendix to Ordinance No. 760-80;
      (11)   Any ordinance adopted on the same date as or after Ordinance No.
999-82;
      (12)   Any ordinance dealing with rules of procedure for the county
council;
and all such ordinances and resolutions are hereby recognized as continuing in
full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein.
(Ord. No. 1165-84, § II, 7-1-84; Ord. No. 1166-84, § II, 7-1-84)
   Editor's note--Ord. No. 954-82, relating to waste management, has been
codified in Supp. No. 1, primarily as Art. II of Ch. 12. Ord. Nos. 1165-84 and
1166-84 repealed Ord. Nos. 772-81 and 866-81, respectively, which had been
included in subsection (8).
Sec. 1-11. No contract of employment or property interest in employment is
created by the Richland County employee handbook or by the Richland County
ordinances.
   Nothing in the Richland County Code of Ordinances nor the county employee
handbook creates a contract of employment or property interest in employment.
   Only the county council may enter into a contract of employment. No other
person has the authority to make oral or written assurances regarding
employment which are not consistent with these ordinances.
(Ord. No. 1858-89, § 1, 4-4-89)
Sec. 1-12. Commissioned officers.
   (a)   The county council for Richland County, pursuant to the provisions of
S.C. Code 1976, § 4-9-145, as amended, shall appoint and commission as many
code enforcement officers as may be necessary for the proper security, general
welfare, and convenience of the county. Such code enforcement officers shall be
appointed and commissioned by resolution of the county council. Any and all
proposed resolutions appointing a code enforcement officer shall be placed on
the Consent Agenda of the county council for its approval.
   (b)   The officers appointed and commissioned hereafter shall be vested with
all the powers and duties conferred by law upon constables in addition to
duties imposed upon them by the ordinances of the county. However, no code
enforcement officer commissioned pursuant to this ordinance shall perform a
custodial arrest.
   (c)   The officers appointed and commissioned hereafter shall exercise their
powers on all private and public property within the unincorporated areas of
the county.
(Ord. No. 004-96HR, §§ I--III, 1-2-96; Ord. No. 068-00HR, § I, 11-14-00)
Sec. 1-13. County summons.
   (a)   There shall be made available to the code enforcement officers and
sheriff's department of the county an ordinance summons which complies with the
requirements of S.C. Code, 1976, § 56-7-80 (as amended). The form shall be
substantially the same as the form which is incorporated by reference. (Found
in the permanent ordinance book in the Richland County Clerk of Court's
office).
   (b)   The court administrative department shall be responsible for having
the summons books printed, issuing blank summons books, and keeping a record of
the summons forms assigned to an individual.
   (c)   Any officer issuing an ordinance summons shall be responsible for
forwarding the copy of the summons labeled "court copy" to the appropriate
judicial office within 72 hours of issuing the summons. It shall also be the
issuing officer's responsibility to keep the copy of the summons labeled
"officer copy" until the appointed hearing time. After all action concerning
the summons has been concluded, the issuing officer shall turn the "officer
copy" of the summons in to the court administrative department within 72 hours.
   (d)   The court administrative department shall be responsible for keeping
the summons forms which have been turned in by law enforcement officers in a
manner which will allow for an annual audit of the summons forms.
(Ord. No. 005-96HR, §§ I--IV, 1-2-96)
Sec. 1-14. Sunday work prohibition suspended.
   Pursuant to South Carolina Senate Bill 375, the Sunday work prohibition as
provided in Chapter 1, Title 53, is hereby suspended in Richland County;
subject to all rights granted to employees and/or proprietors as provided
therein.
(Ord. No. 051-95HR, § I, 9-5-95)
Sec. 1-15. Naming and labeling of buildings, properties, facilities, and
structures.
   (a)   The county council shall have the authority to name or label all
county-built, county-financed and/or county-owned public buildings, properties,
facilities, or structures. Naming and/or labeling shall be based on the
following guidelines at the sole discretion of county council:
      (1)   Any buildings, property, facility, or structure may be named in
honor of any organization, or deceased or living individual; or
      (2)   In addition to Richland County identification, any building,
property, facility, or structure may be labeled with the geographic location
within the county, such as a municipality, neighborhood, unincorporated
community, or a designation based on common usage by residents or an area, such
as topographical features or historical plat names.
   (b)   The following procedure shall be used to recommend a building,
property, facility, or structure name or label to county council for
consideration:
      (1)   Any council member may make a motion to name or label a building,
property, facility, or structure based on the above guidelines. Such motion
shall be forwarded to the appropriate committee for review and recommendation
to the full council; or
      (2)   Any citizen, community group or organization, or county staff
member, when requested by a citizen or community group or organization, may
initiate a naming or labeling request. In such circumstances:
         a.   Appropriate persons likely to be interested in the name or
labeling of the building, property, facility, or structure shall be contacted
and encouraged to submit one (l) or more suitable names or geographic label
suggestions. When naming in honor of an organization, or deceased or living
individual, these persons may be parties who donated land for the building,
facility, or structure in question or who made some other similar contribution.
         b.   Once appropriate county staff persons are satisfied that all
relevant sources of input have been exhausted, they will submit all such
information to the county administrator with a staff recommendation as to what
or how the building, property, facility, or structure should be named or
labeled.
         c.   Upon receipt of the staff's recommendation, the county
administrator shall review it and submit the list to the chairman of the
appropriate committee of the county council for inclusion on the agenda of the
next available committee meeting.
         d.   Such committee shall review the staff recommendation and forward
a recommendation of its own to the full county council.
         e.   Upon receipt of the committee's recommendation, county council
shall vote whether or not to give the building property, facility, or structure
such name or label as it deems to be in the best interest of the community as a
whole and of its citizens, and one which reflects the community's history,
geography, leaders, and/or culture.
   (c)   The addition of the name or label should be incorporated at the outset
of construction when appropriate, or added when it is financially feasible to
do so, such as the regularly scheduled re-painting of a building or replacement
sign.
   (d)   Specific labeling shall be submitted by staff and approved by county
council concurrently with the above process.
(Ord. No. 015-09HR, § I, 3-3-09; Ord. No. 019-14HR, § I, 5-20-14)
Sec. 1-16. Payment of legal fees or settlement amounts for entities not created
by County ordinance or whose members are not appointed by Richland County.
   Notwithstanding any other ordinance, Richland County shall not pay the legal
fees incurred by any board, committee, commission or similar entity that is not
created by County ordinance or whose members are not appointed by the Richland
County Council. Further, Richland County shall not pay any legal judgments
ordered against, or any settlement amounts proposed by or on behalf of any
board, committee, commission or similar entity that is not created by County
ordinance or whose members are not appointed by the Richland County Council.
This ordinance only applies to boards, committees, commissions or similar
entities, and does not apply to offices under the direction of County elected
officials or offices under the direction of officials appointed by the Richland
County Council or the Richland County Administrator.
(Ord. No. 002-17HR, § I, 2-7-17)
Sec. 1-17. Home Detention Program.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for a pilot Home
Detention Program in Richland County as an alternative to confinement in the
Alvin S. Glenn Detention Center, in accordance with the Home Detention Act of
1990 (S.C. Code 1976, § 24-13-1510 et seq., as amended).
   (b)   Home Detention Program provided. Pursuant to S.C. Code 1976, § 24-13-
1530, electronic and nonelectronic home detention programs may be used by the
magistrates of Richland County as an alternative to incarceration for low risk,
nonviolent adult and juvenile offenders, as selected by the court. Applications
for home detention by persons who are awaiting trial or by offenders whose
sentences do not place them in the custody of the Department of Corrections may
hereafter be made to the magistrates of Richland County as an alternative to
incarceration. The county’s home detention program shall comply with all
applicable state and local laws and regulations, including S.C. Code 1976, §
24-13-1510 et seq.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § V, 4-4-17)
CHAPTER 2: ADMINISTRATION*
*Cross reference(s)—Administration of building code, §
6-18 et seq.; administration and enforcement of waste management ordinance, §
12-13; administration of medical indigent care program, §
14-50; administration of water/sewer program, §
24-9; administration and enforcement of erosion and sediment control, §
26-202; administration and enforcement of stormwater management, §
26-203.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 2-1. Memberships.
   The county is hereby authorized to become and remain a member of the state
and professional organizations authorized by the council from time to time.
(Code 1976, § 2-6001)
Sec. 2-2. Fee for criminal record check.
   (a)   Any individual or business requesting a criminal record check by the
county sheriff's department shall pay a fee to be set by the sheriff annually
at the beginning of each fiscal year. Such fee shall not exceed the fee charged
by the South Carolina Law Enforcement Division.
   (b)   The fee shall be payable to the county sheriff's department. The
department shall keep an accurate accounting of such fees and shall turn them
over to the treasurer to be deposited in the general fund of the county.
(Code 1976, § 2-2010; Ord. No. 640-80, §§ 1, 2, 1-2-80; Ord. No. 2356-93, § I,
10-19-93)
Secs. 2-3--2-13. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. COUNTY COUNCIL
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 2-14. Compensation of council members.
   The compensation of members of the county council shall be equal to 80% of
the minimum annual salary of an employee of Richard County Government. The
chair of the county council shall, during his/her term as chair, receive in
addition to his/her annual compensation, the sum of 10% of the annual
compensation, to compensate for the additional duties required by such
position. No change in the compensation of the chair and members of county
council shall be effective until the date of commencement of the terms of the
chair and members of council elected at the general election following the
changes.
(Code 1976, § 2-1010; Ord. No. 369-77, §§ 1, 2, 1-2-77; Ord. No. 531-79, § 7,
7-1-79; Ord. No. 828-81, § I, 9-2-81; Ord. No. 002-10HR, § I, 1-5-10; Ord. No.
030-22HR, § I, 11-1-22)
   State law reference(s)--Compensation, S.C. Code 1976, § 4-9-100.
Sec. 2-15. Suspension of salary.
   Upon suspension from office of any elected official or official appointed by
county council, the county council shall immediately suspend the pay of the
official until such time as legal proceedings are concluded. Any official
ultimately cleared of criminal charges shall be entitled to reimbursement for
all pay which he would have received during the time he was under suspension.
(Code 1976, § 2-1011; Ord. No. 521-79, § 1, 3-7-79)
Sec. 2-16. Resignation of members.
   Resignation of members of the council shall be in writing, and no final
action shall be taken thereon by the council until the next regular meeting.
(Code 1976, § 2-1008)
Secs. 2-17--2-27. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. ORDINANCES
   State law reference(s)--Procedures for adoption of ordinances, S.C. Code
1976, §§ 4-9-120, 4-9-130.
Sec. 2-28. General provisions.
   The council shall take legislative action by ordinances which may be
introduced by any member. With the exception of emergency ordinances, all
ordinances shall be read at three (3) public meetings of council on three (3)
separate days with an interval of not less than seven (7) days between the
second and third readings. Unless otherwise provided in the ordinance, all
ordinances shall become effective on the day of the third reading. All
proceedings of council shall be recorded and all ordinance adopted by council
shall be compiled, indexed, codified, published by title and made available to
public inspection at the office of the clerk of council. The clerk of council
shall maintain a permanent record of all ordinances adopted and shall furnish a
copy of such record to the clerk of court for filing in that office.
(Code 1976, § 2-4001; Ord. No. 1600-87, § 1, 5-5-87)
Sec. 2-29. Hearings.
   (a)   Public hearings, upon giving a reasonable public notice, shall be held
before final council action is taken to:
      (1)   Adopt annual operational and capital budgets;
      (2)   Make appropriations, including supplemental appropriations;
      (3)   Adopt building, housing, electrical, plumbing, gas and all other
regulatory codes involving penalties;
      (4)   Adopt zoning and subdivision regulations;
      (5)   Levy taxes; and
      (6)   To sell, lease or contract to sell or lease real property owned by
the county.
   (b)   Not less than fifteen (15) days notice of the time and place of such
hearings shall be published in at least one newspaper of general circulation in
the county.
   (c)   Such notice shall contain provision so as to permit citizens desiring
to be heard at the public hearing an opportunity to notify the clerk of council
at least five (5) days prior to the hearing.
   (d)   The clerk shall prepare a list of citizens who have requested, at
least five (5) days prior to the hearing, to be heard. Such list shall be a
priority list of speakers and the speakers shall be recognized by the chairman
of council in the order in which their requests were received by the clerk;
provided, however, the chairman has the authority to vary the order of
recognition.
   (e)   Citizens not included on the priority list may be allowed to speak
after all scheduled speakers have been recognized.
   (f)   The chairman of council shall announce the public hearing, and state
the rules governing such hearing. The floor shall be opened for comments from
the public.
   (g)   A citizen addressing council should come forward to the podium facing
council, and speak in an audible voice, first giving his/her name.
   (h)   A citizen's comments will be limited to two (2) minutes, or in the
discretion of the chair, extended beyond the two-minute limitation, depending
on the length of the agenda and the number of speakers to be heard The
proponents shall speak first and shall be limited to no more than one hour for
their presentation. The opponents shall follow and shall be limited to no more
than one hour. The time spent in answering questions from council shall not be
counted against the total hour allotted. An addition of no more than thirty
(30) minutes may be allowed each side for rebuttal.
   (i)   Each speaker is requested to sign the docket located at the clerk's
desk, giving his/her name, address, and telephone number.
   (j)   Should written comments be distributed by the speaker to council and/
or the news media, a copy shall be left at the clerk's desk.
(Code 1976, § 2-4002)
Sec. 2-30. Reserved.
Sec. 2-31. Emergency ordinances.
   (a)   An emergency ordinance may be enacted only to meet public emergencies
affecting life, health, safety, or the property of the people. Such an
ordinance may not levy taxes, grant, renew or extend a franchise nor may it
impose or change a service rate.
   (b)   Each emergency ordinance shall contain a declaration that an emergency
exists, defining the emergency, and shall be entitled an "Emergency Ordinance."
   (c)   Emergency ordinances require no readings or prior publications before
adoption by county council.
   (d)   Emergency ordinances require a two-thirds (2/3) affirmative vote of
members present for adoption.
   (e)   An emergency ordinance is effective immediately on the date of
adoption and shall expire automatically on the sixty-first day following the
date of enactment.
   (f)   The clerk of council shall be responsible for indexing and providing
for compilation of the emergency ordinance adopted and shall, with the county
attorney's assistance, cause a copy of the emergency ordinance to be filed in
the office of the clerk of court.
(Code 1976, § 2-4004; Ord. No. 320-76, § 3, 6-16-76)
Sec. 2-32. Purchase.
   All ordinances may be purchased from the clerk's office at a reasonable
price.
(Code 1976, § 2-4005; Ord. No. 320-76, § 4, 6-16-76)
Secs. 2-33--2-38. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. PRESERVATION OF COUNCIL ACTIONS
Sec. 2-39. Formal system of official actions established.
   There is hereby established a formal system to be hereafter employed by the
council of enacting, recording and preserving the official actions of the
council pursuant to the authority vested in it by the Constitution and laws of
the state. No action hereafter taken by the council shall have force and effect
unless the same is accomplished in accordance with this division, except as
otherwise specifically provided by the law of this state or of the United
States.
(Code 1976, § 2-8001)
Sec. 2-40. Permanent enactments, ordinances.
   All permanent enactments, resolutions or official actions taken by the
council intended to have permanent and continuing effect (as a statute or
decree) shall be in the form of and entitled an "ordinance." Such ordinance
shall be in writing, shall have a title accurately stating its purpose, shall
relate to only one subject, shall be divided into sections with appropriate
subtitles, shall be enacted only by majority vote of the whole council in
public session which vote shall be recorded and with no vote by proxy
permitted, shall state the effective date of the ordinance, shall be signed by
the chairman or vice-chairman presiding and attested by the clerk of council;
and shall be serially numbered each calendar year commencing with the number
one for the first ordinance of each year.
(Code 1976, § 2-8002)
Sec. 2-41. Temporary and enabling enactments, regulations.
   All temporary or enabling enactments or official actions taken by the
council intended to have only temporary, or enabling, or regulatory effect (as
rules or directions to carry out the intent of a law of the state or an
ordinance of the council) shall be in the form of and entitled a "regulation."
Such regulation shall be in writing, shall have a heading stating its subject
and a specific reference to the governing statute or county ordinance pursuant
to which it is enacted, shall relate only to matters encompassed by the
controlling statute or ordinance, shall be divided into sections with
appropriate subtitles, shall be enacted in public session by at least a
majority of those members of the council present and voting which vote shall be
recorded with no vote by proxy permitted, shall be signed by the chairman or
vice- chairman presiding and attested by the clerk. A regulation shall be
effective upon the date of enactment unless otherwise specifically provided in
the regulation.
(Code 1976, § 2-8003)
Sec. 2-42. Administrative and routine decisions, actions.
   Any other official decision, proclamation, motion, resolution,
administrative action or routine business involving or requiring consent or
decision of the council shall be entitled an "action." Such action shall
require no special form or content and may be passed by a majority vote of
those members of the council present and voting, in public session or executive
session, except that no vote by proxy shall be permitted. Such action shall be
effective upon its official entry in the minutes of the council, which shall be
a permanent public record.
(Code 1976, § 2-8004)
Sec. 2-43. Preparation, publication and notice.
   Unless waived by a majority vote of those members of the council present and
voting, no ordinance or regulation shall be enacted or promulgated by the
council unless it has been prepared or reviewed by the county attorney, or
other competent attorney approved by the council, and his approval as to form
and legality of the proposed ordinance or regulation is endorsed thereon. All
ordinances, regulations, resolutions and actions of the council shall be deemed
published and public notice thereof shall be effective as of the date the
formalities of enactment hereinabove provided are complied with, and are
entered into the minutes of the council.
(Code 1976, § 2-8005)
Sec. 2-44. Codification, indexing and distribution.
   The council shall provide for permanent codification and preservation of all
ordinances enacted by it. Such codification shall be in printing or other form
of permanent reproduction, shall be arranged in a simple and convenient manner
by subject matter, and shall be indexed in such form as to be easily used and
read by the public. Regulations may be included in such codification, and if so
shall be inserted at the foot of the ordinance pursuant to which they were
promulgated. No codification shall be required of other actions except entry in
the minutes of the council, which minutes shall be a public record. The council
may provide for reproduction and distribution of codified ordinances and
regulations to county officers, to the legislative delegation, and to other
interested persons, and may provide for sale of copies thereof to the public.
(Code 1976, § 2-8006)
   Cross reference(s)--Supplementation of Code, §
1-7.
Sec. 2-45. Prior decisions and actions preserved.
   Whether or not enacted with the formalities herein provided, all prior
decisions, enactments and actions of the council and its predecessor governing
bodies of the county remain in full force and effect except as heretofore or
hereafter overruled, repealed, revoked or amended by law or by subsequent
ordinance, regulation, resolution or action of the council.
(Code 1976, § 2-8006)
Sec. 2-46. Legislative and judicial powers not affected.
   No ordinance, regulation, resolution or action of the council shall purport
to control or affect the legislative and judicial branches of the government of
the county or the state, except those enacted pursuant to specific powers or
duties placed upon the council by the constitution or statute; but shall
otherwise be binding upon all persons lawfully affected thereby.
(Code 1976, § 2-8006)
Sec. 2-47. Amendment and repeal.
   No ordinance, regulation, resolution or action of the council enacted
pursuant to this division may be amended or repealed except by the same formal
procedure and requirements as provided for the enactment thereof.
(Code 1976, § 2-8009)
Sec. 2-48. Preservation and erasure of tape recordings.
   (a)   The clerk or duly authorized representative of council shall be
responsible for recording the proceedings of county council by shorthand,
stenotype and/or electronic recording.
   (b)   The clerk or duly authorized representative shall be responsible for
transcribing said proceedings into the form of minutes for presentation to
county council for approval and/or amendment.
   (c)   The clerk shall maintain the shorthand notes, stenotype tapes and/or
electronic recordings of a meeting for a period of two (2) years from the date
the minutes of such meeting were approved.
   (d)   Upon the expiration of the two-year period, the clerk shall destroy
shorthand notes, stenotype tapes and shall erase and reuse electronic
recordings.
   (e)   All stenotype tapes, shorthand notes and/or electronic recordings
remain the property of the council. Approved minutes of council meetings are
available for public review; however, any individual other than a member of the
county council desiring information from a filed stenotype tape and/or
electronic recording must receive prior permission from the county council
after submitting a written request to the clerk of council. No stenotype tape
and/or electronic recording may be removed from the clerk of council office.
Any listening to such recordings must be done in the presence of the clerk [or]
the clerk's designee. Any member of the county council who desires to listen to
tapes of an executive session may do so upon verbal request to the clerk of
council, but only in the presence of the clerk of council or the clerk's
designee. Under no circumstances shall the tapes of executive session minutes
be reproduced nor shall same be removed from the office of the clerk of
council, except upon favorable vote of a majority of the county council to do
so.
   (f)   All executive session tapes shall be protected from disclosure to any
outside individual or agency as provided for in the Freedom of Information Act
(Section 30-4-10 of the South Carolina Code of Laws, 1976) and shall not be
subject to disclosure pursuant to subpoena, order of the court or otherwise.
(Code 1976, § 2-8010; Ord. No. 1295-85, §§ 1, 2, 5-7-85)
Secs. 2-49--2-54. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. RULES OF PROCEDURE
(RESERVED)
   State law reference(s)--Authority to determine rules of procedure, S.C. Code
1976, § 4-9-110.
Secs. 2-55--2-74. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICES AND OFFICERS
   Cross reference(s)--Elected and special officers, §
2-262 et seq.; planning/building inspection coordinator, §
6-31 et seq.; magistrates, § 7-11 et seq.; election commission,
§ 9-13 et seq.; director of emergency preparedness, § 9.5-4; board of health,
§ 14-11 et seq.; health department, § 14-27 et seq.; recreation commission,
§ 19-11 et seq.; tax assessor, § 23-19 et seq.; board of assessment control, §
23-33 et seq.; board of assessment and appeals,
§ 23-48 et seq.
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 2-75. Department created.
   The office of the county administrator is hereby created as the chief
administrative office of the county with such personnel necessary to assist the
county administrator in affecting the proper and efficient administration of
the affairs of the county government.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § I, 4-4-17)
DIVISION 2. COUNTY ADMINISTRATOR
Sec. 2-76. Position created; term.
   There is hereby created the position of county administrator. The term of
office of the county administrator shall be at the pleasure of the council,
which may, in its discretion, employ the administrator for a definite term.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § I, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-77. Appointment, qualifications and compensation.
   The county administrator shall be appointed solely on the basis of his/her
executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to his/her
actual experience in, and knowledge of, the duties of office as hereinafter
prescribed. At the time of his/her appointment, the county administrator need
not be a resident of the county or of the state. The compensation of the county
administrator shall be fixed by the council by contract.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § I, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-78. Chief administrative officer.
   The county administrator shall be the chief administrative officer of the
county government. He/she shall be responsible to the council for the proper
and efficient administration of the affairs of the county government.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § I, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-79. Powers and duties.
   The powers and duties of the county administrator shall be:
   (1)   To direct and supervise the administration of all county officials and
departments for which the council is responsible, or may hereafter be
responsible, including specifically the construction, maintenance and operation
of all county roads, bridges, drainage, buildings and other public works, and
the care and maintenance of all personal property owned by the county; the
administration of personnel policies, purchase of all supplies and equipment,
finance, accounting, budgeting, payroll, auditing and any other administrative
responsibilities necessary for implementation of the council’s policies;
   (2)   To appoint, and when in his/her discretion the welfare of the county
requires it suspend, discharge, transfer, remove or otherwise deal directly
with all employees for whom council is responsible, excepting the county
attorney, the internal auditor and the clerk of council, and any assistants
thereto, who are appointed directly by the council or who ate employed in the
offices of elected officials and officials appointed by an authority outside
county government as those terms are used in South Carolina Code, 1976, section
4-9-30(7);
   (3)   To see that all ordinances, resolutions and orders of the council and
all laws of the state which are subject to enforcement by him or by officers or
department heads and subject, under this article, to his/her direction and
supervision are faithfully executed;
   (4)   To prepare and submit the annual budget and capital program to the
council and to execute the budget and capital program adopted by the council,
approving all disbursements and expenditures as budgeted and/or authorized by
the council;
   (5)   To confer with and advise all other elected or appointed officials of
the county who are not under the immediate control of county council, but who
receive financial support from the council, such as probate judges,
magistrates, solicitor, sheriff, coroner, auditor, treasurer and the like;
   (6)   To examine regularly at periods fixed by the council the accounts,
records and operations of county boards, commissions, departments, offices, and
agencies which receive appropriations from the council; to make regular,
monthly reports to the council on county fiscal and other affairs as are
appropriate; to keep the council fully advised on the financial conditions and
future needs of the county; and to make such recommendations on county affairs
as he deems necessary;
   (7)   To submit to the council at the end of each fiscal year a complete
report on the finances and administrative activities of the county for the
preceding year; and
   (8)   To execute such other powers and duties as may be prescribed from time
to time by the council.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § I, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-80. Relationships with county employees.
   Neither the council nor any of its members shall direct or request the
appointment of any person to, or his/her removal from, office by the county
administrator or by any of his/her subordinates, or in any manner take part in
the appointment or removal of officers and employees in the administrative
service of the county, except where, by majority vote of council, an inquiry as
to the removal of an officer or employee is demanded. Except for the purpose of
inquiry, the council and its members shall deal with the administrative service
solely through the county administrator, and no member thereof shall give
orders to any county employee or subordinate of the county administrator,
either publicly or privately.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § I, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-81. Bond.
   The county administrator shall be bonded to the county in an appropriate
amount for the faithful performance of the duties as such officer.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § I, 4-4-17)
Secs. 2-82- 2-87. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. OFFICE OF THE COUNTY ADMINISTRATOR; STAFF
Sec. 2-88. Assistant County Administrator.
   There are hereby created three (3) positions of assistant county
administrator. The assistant county administrators shall be selected and
appointed by the county administrator and shall serve at the pleasure of the
county administrator with no definite term of office assigned.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § I, 4-4-17)
Sec 2-89. Qualifications; compensation.
   The assistant county administrators shall be appointed solely on the basis
of merit, including executive and/or administrative qualifications with special
emphasis on education, training, experience and knowledge of the duties of the
office. Preference will be given to individuals with a graduate degree in the
field(s) of public administration, business administration, or some other
related discipline. The assistant county administrators shall be paid an annual
salary as recommended by the county administrator and approved by county
council.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § I, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-90. Responsibilities, powers and duties.
   The duties and responsibilities of the assistant county administrators shall
be:
   (1)   To serve as assistant to the county administrator;
   (2)   To plan and direct budget studies, research projects and manpower
needs;
   (3)   To assist in formulating administrative policies;
   (4)   To represent and speak for the county administrator in meetings with
boards, commissions, citizens groups and officials of various public agencies;
   (5)   To collect, compile and interpret data on policies, functions,
organization structures, forms and procedures relating to the administration of
assigned programs;
   (6)   To seek legal opinions and prepare recommendations supported by
administration research findings;
   (7)   To review departmental reports, proposed programs, supplemental
appropriation requests, personnel requisitions, overtime reports, etc., and
make or direct investigative reports and recommendations as required;
   (8)   To prepare correspondence and reports;
   (9)   To act for the county administrator in his/her absence;
   (10)   To participate in formulating policies and in developing long range
plans; and
   (11)   To perform related work as required and as assigned by the county
administrator.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § I, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-91. Staff and assistants.
   The county administrator may employ such staff and assistants for positions
approved through annual budgetary appropriations by county council as are
deemed necessary by the county administrator to the performance of his/her
duties. They shall be subject to the county personnel system and their
compensation determined accordingly.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § I, 4-4-17)
DIVISION 4. OFFICE OF THE COUNTY ADMINISTRATOR: OFFICES
Sec. 2-92. Departmental Offices.
   The office of the county administrator shall also include the following
offices:
   (1)   Risk Management - The office of risk management is hereby created and
the position of director of risk management, who shall be responsible to the
county administrator to eliminate, minimize and transfer risk exposure as much
as is feasible, and for losses that do occur, to finance and mitigate them in a
manner that is in the best interest of the County, including authority to
negotiate and settle workers’ compensation, general liability, and vehicle
liability claims. Disposition of general liability and vehicle liability claims
shall be accomplished in collaboration with the county attorney.
      (a)   Fleet Management - The office of risk management shall include the
fleet management program. The program shall work to manage Richland County’s
fleet.
      (b)   Occupational Safety - The office of risk management shall include
the occupational safety program. The program shall work to keep Richland County
employees safe at work and ensure OSHA compliance.
   (2)   Public Information - The office of public information is hereby
created and the position of public information director, who shall be
responsible to the county administrator to assist Council and County
departments with media and public outreach efforts; manage Richland County’s
brand to residents, businesses and news outlets through various multi-media
platforms and events.
   (3)   Ombudsman - The office of the ombudsman is hereby created and the
position of ombudsman director, who shall be responsible to the county
administrator to provide informal assistance to citizens and to assist citizens
with county concerns and request for service.
   (4)   Court Appointed Special Advocates - The office of court appointed
special advocates is hereby created and the position of court appointed special
advocates director, who shall be responsible to the county administrator to
advocate for the best interests of abused and neglected children in Richland
County Family Court.
   (5)   Government and Community Services - The office of government and
community services is hereby created and the position of government and
community services director, who shall be responsible to the county
administrator to facilitate improved community outreach, administration of
government services and resolution to community issues.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § I, 4-4-17)
DIVISION 5. COUNTY ATTORNEY
Sec. 2-93. Office established.
   There is hereby established the office of the county attorney, who shall be
the chief legal officer of the county. The county attorney shall be retained
from the membership of the county bar by the county council and shall serve at
its pleasure.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § I, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-94. Eligibility.
   No member of the council or of the county legislative delegation, or any
partner of any such member, shall be retained as county attorney or assistant
county attorney, or perform any service for compensation as an attorney for the
council, any county agency which is funded in whole or in part from county
funds, or for any board, commission, committee, or agency of the county over
which the council has any appointive powers. No member of any county board,
commission, committee, or agency which is funded in whole or in part from
county funds, or any board, commission, committee or agency of the county over
which the council has any appointive powers, or any partner of any such member,
shall be attorney or do any legal work for such board, commission, committee,
or agency; provided, however, that, a partner of such member may serve as
county attorney or as an assistant county attorney.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § I, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-95. Duties and responsibilities.
   The county attorney shall represent and defend the county and all of its
officers in any of the courts of this state or of the United States, shall do
such work in connection with county real estate conveyancing, title work and
bond issues, shall bring all actions and proceedings that may be necessary to
enforce payment and collection of any claims existing in favor of the county or
of any of its officers, boards, or agencies, and shall advise the county
administrator and all county officers and department heads in all matters
wherein they may seek advice or counsel. The county attorney shall meet with
the council whenever requested for the purpose of advising them as to any
matters that may properly come before them.
Sec. 2-96. Compensation.
   The county attorney shall receive compensation for his/her services in the
amount determined by the council. The annual salary of the county attorney
shall constitute his /her total compensation from the county for all of the
services enumerated above, except under unusual circumstances as directed by
council.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § I, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-97. Annual appropriation.
   The council shall establish in the annual operating budget the compensation
of the county attorney. Such budget shall also provide for the compensation of
any assistants employed pursuant to section 2-98 of this division.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § I, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-98. Assistants.
   The county attorney may employ such staff and assistants for positions
approved through budgetary appropriations by council as are deemed necessary to
the performance of the duties of the office.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § I, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-99. Employment of attorney, other than county attorney, by council
agencies.
   No officer, board, commission, committee, or agency in the county appointed
in whole or in part by the council may employ an attorney other than the county
attorney, or agree to pay for services out of public funds without first
obtaining the county attorney’s approval of the employment of such attorney.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § I, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-100. Settlement of claims.
   The county attorney shall have the authority to settle and approve payment
of lawsuits, up to an amount approved by County Council in the annual budget,
or in his/her discretion brings those matters to County Council for its
decision and approval.
   The county attorney shall have the sole discretion to decide whether to file
an appeal or to waive the filing of same in instances.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § I, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-101. Bond.
   The county attorney shall be bonded to the county in an appropriate amount
for the faithful performance of the duties as such officer.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § I, 4-4-17)
DIVISION 6. CLERK OF COUNCIL
Sec. 2-102. Creation; appointment; term of office.
   There is hereby created the office of clerk of council. The clerk of council
shall be appointed by the council and shall serve at the pleasure of the
council.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § I, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-103. Responsibilities; duties.
   The clerk of council shall:
   (a)   Record all proceedings of the council and supply copies of certified
records as appropriate;
   (b)   Distribute copies of the minutes of each meeting to council members
prior to the next meeting;
   (c)   Review reports and records for completeness and accuracy;
   (d)   Prepare ordinances and resolutions for presentation to council and
arrange for their publication as approved by council and as directed by the
county attorney;
   (e)   Attend regular meetings of the council and attend other meetings as
requested;
   (f)   Type reports and recommendations of all council committees or designee
of the clerk;
   (g)   Notify councilmen of all council meetings;
   (h)   Maintain the council calendar;
   (i)   Be custodian of the county seal, minute books and Code of Ordinances;
   (j)   Maintain county files and any records which should be kept for quick
accessibility;
   (k)   Supervise a complete records management system for department;
   (l)   Research materials and supply background information as required;
   (m)   Take follow-up actions on the following matters (including initial
follow-up and subsequent actions necessary to ensure carrying out of council
actions):
      (1)   Easements;
      (2)   Contracts, leases and agreements;
      (3)   Band issues;
      (4)   Damage claims which are submitted to county council for acceptance
or rejection;
      (5)   Ordinances;
      (6)   Resolutions; and
      (7)   Appointments;
   (n)   Prepare council agenda and advise news media of items to be
considered; shall maintain a complete record of all matters pending council
consideration;
   (o)   Act for the county in attesting and certifying official documents;
   (p)   Be responsible for the appointments book; insure appointments are made
in timely fashion in accordance with established procedures;
   (q)   Maintain a record of leases, contracts, agreements, rights-of-way,
grants and bonds;
   (r)   Insure that the overall objective of the council office is achieved in
an efficient manner;
   (s)   Prepare and monitor budget for operating expenses for the clerk of
council office and the council services budget; and
   (t)   File documents, as required, with the clerk of court.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § I, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-104. Compensation; employee status.
   The council shall approve in the annual budget the compensation of the clerk
of council. Such budget shall also provide for assistants to the clerk if
employed pursuant to the following section. The clerk and any assistants shall
be employees of the county and eligible for all insurance, retirement and other
benefits of county employees.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § I, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-105. Assistants.
   The council may appoint such assistant or assistants to the clerk of council
as may be deemed necessary, who shall perform varied secretarial and
stenographic tasks for the council and who shall exercise the duties of the
clerk of council in the event of the clerk’s absence or disability.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § I, 4-4-17)
ARTICLE IV. CODE OF ETHICS
   Cross reference(s)--Compliance with ethics code required, § 2-463.
Sec. 2-106. Declaration of policy.
   The proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials
and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that
government decisions and policy be made in proper channels of the governmental
structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the
public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of
these goals, a code of ethics for all county officials and employees is
adopted. The purpose of this code set out in this article is to establish
guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials and
employees by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the
best interests of the county and by directing disclosure by such officials and
employees of private financial or other interests in matters affecting the
county.
(Code 1976, § 2-3001) (Ord. No. 010-17HR, § II, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-107. Definitions.
   As used in this article:
   Business entity means any business, proprietorship, firm, partnership,
person in representative or fiduciary capacity, association, venture, trust or
corporation.
   Interest means direct or indirect pecuniary or material benefit accruing to
a public officer or employee as a result of a contract or transaction which is
or may be the subject of an official act or action by or with the county except
for such contracts or transactions which by their terms and by the substance of
their provisions confer the opportunity and right to realize the accrual of
similar benefits to all other persons and/or property similarly situated. For
the purposes of this article, a public officer or employee shall be deemed to
have an interest in the affairs of:
   (1)   Any person related to him by blood or marriage in a degree closer than
the second degree of consanguinity or affinity (determined by the civil law
method);
   (2)   Any person or business entity with whom a contractual relationship
exists with the public officer or employee;
   (3)   Any business entity in which the public officer or employee is an
officer, director, or member having a financial interest in, or employed by;
and
   (4)   Any business entity in which the stock of, or legal or beneficial
ownership of, in excess of five (5) per cent of the total stock or total legal
and beneficial ownership, is controlled or owned directly or indirectly by the
public officer or employee.
   Official act or action means any legislative, administrative, appointive or
discretionary act of any officer or employee of the county or any agency,
board, committee or commission thereof.
   Public officer or employee means any person, officer or employee holding a
full-time position by election, appointment or employment in the service of the
county, including members of any board, committee or commission thereof.
(Code 1976, § 2-3002) (Ord. No. 010-17HR, § II, 4-4-17)
   Cross reference(s)--Rules of construction and definitions generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 2-108. Generally.
   The requirements set forth in this article shall constitute a code of ethics
establishing reasonable standards and guidelines for the ethical conduct of
public officers and employees of the county.
(Code 1976, § 2-3003(a)) (Ord. No. 010-17HR, § II, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-109. Interest in contract or transaction.
   (a) No public officer or employee having the power or duty to perform an
official act or action, related to a contract or transaction which is or may be
the subject of an official act or action of the county shall:
   (1)   Have or thereafter acquire an interest in such contract or
transaction; or
   (2)   Have an interest in any business entity representing, advising or
appearing on behalf of, whether paid or unpaid, any person involved in such
contract or transaction; or
   (3)   Have solicited or accepted present or future employment with a person
or business entity involved in such contract or transaction; or
   (4)   Have solicited or accepted or granted a present or future gift, favor,
service or thing of value from or to a person involved in such contract or
transaction, except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section; or
   (5)   Have encouraged, made or accepted any ex parte or unilateral
application or communication where a determination is to be made after a public
hearing and such public employee fails to make the contents of the
communication a part of the record.
   (b)   The prohibition against gifts or favors in paragraph (a)(4) of this
section shall not apply to:
   (1)   An occasional nonpecuniary gift, insignificant in value; or
   (2)   An award publicly presented in recognition of public service; or
   (3)   Any gift which would have been offered or given to him if he were not
an official or employee.
(Code 1976, § 2-3003(b), (c)) (Ord. No. 010-17HR, § II, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-110. Preacquisition of interest.
   No public officer or employee with respect to any contract or transaction
which is or may be the subject of an official act or action of the county or
affected by such contract or transaction shall acquire an interest in such
contract or transaction at a time when the public employee believes or has
reason to believe that it will directly or indirectly be affected by an
official act or action of the county.
(Code 1976, § 2-3003(d)) (Ord. No. 010-17HR, § II, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-111. Disclosure of information.
   No public officer or employee with respect to any contract or transaction
which is or may be the subject of an official act or action of the county
shall, without proper legal authorization, disclose confidential information
concerning the property, government or affairs of the county, or use such
information to advance the financial or other private interest of himself or
others.
(Code 1976, § 2-3003(e)) (Ord. No. 010-17HR, § II, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-112. Incompatible service.
   No public officer or employee shall engage in or accept private employment
or render service, for private interest, when such employment or service is
incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties or would tend to
impair his independence of judgment or action in the performance of his
official duties, unless otherwise permitted by law and unless disclosure is
made as provided in this article.
(Code 1976, § 2-3003(f)) (Ord. No. 010-17HR, § II, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-113. Appearance on behalf of others restricted.
   No public officer or employee, as defined in section 2-107, shall appear on
behalf of any private person, other than himself, his spouse or minor children,
before any county agency or commission. However, a member of the council or any
other elected official may appear before county agencies on behalf of his
constituents in the course of his duties as a representative of the electorate
or in the performance of public or civil obligations.
(Code 1976, § 2-3003(g)) (Ord. No. 010-17HR, § II, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-114. Reserved.
   Editor’s note–Ord. No. 1719-88, § 2, adopted March 1, 1988, deleted § 2-165
in its entirety. Said section pertained to public contracts and was derived
from Code 1976, § 2-3003(h). Ord. No. 010-17HR, § II, adopted April 20, 2017,
subsequently renumbered § 2-165 as § 2-114.
Sec. 2-115. Unauthorized use of public property.
   No public officer or employee shall request or permit the unauthorized use
of county-owned vehicles, equipment, materials or property for personal
convenience or profit.
(Code 1976, § 2-3003(i)) (Ord. No. 010-17HR, § II, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-116. Special treatment.
   No public officer or employee shall grant any special consideration,
treatment or advantage to any citizen beyond that which is available to every
other citizen.
(Code 1976, § 2-3003(j)) (Ord. No. 010-17HR, § II, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-117. Later case interest.
   No public officer or employee shall, after the termination of service or
employment with the county appear before any board, commission, committee or
agency of the county in relation to any case, proceeding or application in
which he personally participated during the period of his service or
employment, or which was under his active consideration; provided, however,
that, this restriction shall not apply after the expiration of one year from
the date of termination of service or employment.
(Code 1976, § 2-3003(k)) (Ord. No. 010-17HR, § II, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-118. Exceptions to article.
   (a)   It shall not be deemed a violation of the standards of this article if
the interest of a public officer or employee in a person or business entity is
a contractual obligation of less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) which has
not been preceded by any other obligation, discharged or existing, between the
parties, and which is not the first in a series of two or more loans or debts
which either of the parties is under an obligation to make or incur.
   (b)   A commercially reasonable loan made in the ordinary course of business
by an institution authorized by the laws of this state to engage in the making
of such loans shall not be deemed to create an interest in violation of this
article.
   (c)   A contract for a commercial retail sale, even though over the value of
five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall not be deemed to create an interest in
violation of this article.
(Code 1976, § 2-3004) (Ord. No. 010-17HR, § II, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-119. Disclosure of interest in legislative action.
   (a)   Any member of the council who has a financial interest or personal
interest in any proposed legislation before the council shall disclose on the
record of the council the nature and extent of such interest.
   (b)   Any other official or employee who has a financial or personal
interest in any proposed legislative action of the council and who participated
in discussion with or gives an official opinion or recommendation to the
council, shall disclose on the record of the council the nature and extent of
such interest.
(Code 1976, § 2-3005) (Ord. No. 010-17HR, § II, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-120. Enforcement.
   (a)   The county administrator shall have the primary responsibility for the
enforcement of this article through his powers of suspension and dismissal
under the personnel ordinance. He shall have the power to investigate any
complaint, to initiate any suit, and to pursue any criminal or civil action on
behalf of the county where he decides such action is appropriate.
   (b)   Any person who believes that a violation of any portion of this
article has occurred may file a complaint with the county administrator, who
may proceed as provided in paragraph (a) of this section. However, nothing in
this article shall be construed to prevent complainants from instituting direct
legal action through the appropriate judicial authority.
(Code 1976, § 2-3006) (Ord. No. 010-17HR, § II, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-121. Advisory opinions.
   (a)   Where any public officer or employee has a doubt as to the
applicability of any provision of this article to a particular situation, or as
to the definition of terms used herein, he may apply to the county attorney for
an advisory opinion. The officer or employee shall have the opportunity to
present his interpretation of the facts at issue and of the applicability of
provisions of this article before such advisory opinion is made.
   (b)   Such opinion shall be deemed advisory and shall not be binding.
However, it shall be deemed that the public officer or employee who sought the
opinion and acted on it did so in good faith, unless material facts were
omitted or misstated in the request for the advisory opinion.
(Code 1976, § 2-3007) (Ord. No. 010-17HR, § II, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-122. Distribution of code of ethics.
   Each public officer and employee elected, appointed or engaged shall be
furnished a copy of this article before entering upon the duties of his office
or employment.
(Code 1976, § 2-3008) (Ord. No. 010-17HR, § II, 4-4-17)
ARTICLE V. COUNTY DEPARTMENTS
DIVISION 1. ANIMAL SERVICES
Sec. 2-123. Creation; director.
   There is hereby created the animal services department, and the position of
animal services director who shall be responsible to the county administrator
to direct and coordinate the operations and activities of the department. The
director shall be appointed by the county administrator and his/her term of
office shall be at the pleasure of the county administrator.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § III, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-124. Qualifications of director; selection; compensation.
   The director of animal services shall possess education, training, and
experience that are commensurate with the industry standards for this position.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § III, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-125. Responsibilities; powers; duties.
   The director of animal services shall supervise the divisions of animal care
and vector control.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § III, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-126. Departmental Divisions.
   The animal services department shall include the following divisions:
   (1)   Animal care - The division shall enforce all the provisions of Chapter
5 of the Richland County Code of Ordinances as it pertains to animal control
and/or care and the manager of the division shall serve as the chief animal
control officer.
   (2)   Vector Control - The division of vector control shall be charged with
the following duties:
      (a)   Management of the mosquito control program, including abatement in
accordance with the policies of the program.
      (b)   Provide technical advice, education and assistance about vectors to
the county’s citizens.
      (c)   Conduct vector-borne disease surveillance and response.
      (d)   Enforce county ordinances related to vector control.
      (e)   Commensal rat abatement in accordance with division policies.
      (g)   Respond to inquiries, investigate complaints, conduct evaluations
to help reduce or eliminate public hazards and nuisance conditions associated
with vectors and disease transmission.
      (h)   Other programs or functions assigned to the department by the
county administrator or county council.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § III, 4-4-17)
DIVISION 2. COMMUNITY PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
Sec. 2-127. Creation; director.
   There is hereby created the community planning and development department,
and the position of community planning and development director who shall be
responsible to the county administrator to direct and coordinate the operations
and activities of the department. The director shall be appointed by the county
administrator and his/her term of office shall be at the pleasure of the county
administrator.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § III, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-128. Qualifications of director; selection; compensation.
   The director of community planning and development shall possess education,
training, and experience that are commensurate with the industry standards for
this position.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § III, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-129. Responsibilities; powers; duties.
   The director of community planning and development shall supervise the
divisions of planning, building, community development, conservation, business
service center, assessor, and register of deeds.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § III, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-130. Departmental Divisions.
   The community planning and development department shall include the
following divisions:
   (1)   Planning - The division of planning is hereby created and the position
of planning manager, who shall be responsible to the community planning and
development director to direct and coordinate the operations and activities of
the division. The planning manager shall be a graduate of an accredited college
or university, preferably with a degree in planning, engineering, architecture
or related field; and shall have had at least five (5) years of responsible,
practical experience in urban planning and/or in a municipal or county
regulatory agency. The planning division shall undertake the permitting and
enforcement provisions of the county’s zoning and land development regulations.
   (2)   Building Inspections - The division of building inspections is hereby
created, and the position of building codes and inspections manager who shall
be responsible to the community planning and development director to direct and
coordinate the operations and activities of the division. The building codes
and inspections manager shall be a graduate of an accredited college or
university, preferably with a degree in engineering, architecture, construction
or related field; and shall have had at least five (5) years of responsible,
practical experience in construction, inspections, administration and/or in a
municipal or county regulatory agency. The manager shall hold South Carolina
registration as a Certified Building Official. The building division shall be
responsible for the permitting and enforcement provisions of the county’s
building code regulations.
   (3)   New Development - The new development division shall be responsible to
the to the community planning and development director to direct and coordinate
the operations and activities of the division
   (4)   Community Development - The division shall administer grants from the
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development to improve low-income
neighborhoods. The community development manager shall be responsible to the
community planning and development director to direct and coordinate the
operations of the division.
   (5)   Conservation - The division of conservation is hereby created, and the
position of conservation manager, who shall be responsible to the community
planning and development director to direct and coordinate the operations and
activities of the division. The conservation manager shall be a graduate of an
accredited college or university, with a master’s degree in environmental or
agricultural science or engineering, hydrology, water resources management or
closely related field; and shall have had at least five (5) years of
responsible, practical experience in the above fields. The conservation manager
shall direct and supervise all functions of the division and implement the
responsibilities of the Richland County Conservation District and Richland
County Conservation Commission. The manager shall consult with and advise the
community planning and development director regarding the conservation and
protection of the county’s natural, cultural and historical resources. The
division shall also interact with federal and State agencies, other counties
and municipalities, institutions of higher education, and not for profit
conservation and environmental organizations to support the responsibilities of
the division, District and Commission.
      (a)   Sustainability Program - The Conservation division shall include
the Sustainability Program. The program shall work to ensure Richland County’s
operations and decision making reflect our commitment to environmental, social
and economic sustainability and to provide innovative solutions to decrease
energy demand through energy efficiency and conservation, create livable
sustainable communities, and promote the green economy.
   (6)   Business Service Center - The business service center division is
hereby created, and the position of manager of the business service center. The
manager of the business service center - and every employee therein - shall
give to the county a surety bond in an appropriate amount for the faithful
performance of his/her duties as such officers; such bond shall be filed in the
office of the clerk of court. The manager of the business service center shall
be responsible to the community planning and development director for the
performance of the duties and responsibilities of the department, which shall
be to:
      (a)   Issue licenses and permits for businesses needing these licenses
and permits by county ordinance to operate lawfully, including, but not limited
to (unless otherwise preempted and/or prohibited by federal or state law):
         1.   Business licenses,
         2.   Fireworks licenses, and/or
         3.   Hazardous Materials permits.
      (b)   Collect the payments, via the internet and/or other convenient
methods, for the aforementioned licenses and permits in subsection (1) above,
as well as for other business fees and taxes (not otherwise preempted and/or
prohibited by federal or state law), including, but not limited to:
         1.   Hospitality Taxes,
         2.   Sewer Fees,
         3.   Sewer Tap fees,
         4.   Water Fees,
         5.   Landfill Fees, and/or
         6.   Solid Waste Fees.
      (c)   Make business forms and information available in many diverse and
convenient ways to assist businesses operate as required by applicable county
ordinances.
      (d)   Inspect and audit businesses for compliance with applicable county
ordinances regarding these licenses, permits, fees, and taxes.
      (e)   Serve as a liaison to the business community on behalf of Richland
County on issues relating to issuances and collections of the Business Service
Center.
      (f)   Serve as the single point of contact for businesses required to
comply with applicable county ordinances.
      (g)   Serve as the catalyst for integrating Business Service Center
services with other county departments, State agencies, and other groups or
organizations.
   (7)   Register of Deeds - The register of deeds division is hereby created,
pursuant to state law, along with the position of register of deeds, such
office to be located in the county courthouse at the discretion of the clerk of
court. The register of deeds shall give to the comity a surety bond in the
value of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for the faithful performance
of his/her duties, such bond to be lodged in the office of the state treasurer.
The register shall be responsible and under the direct supervision of the
community planning and development director, for the performance of the duties
of this office which include, but are not limited to:
      (a)   Directing the division of mesne conveyances and supervising its
staff and activities;
      (b)   Indexing and recording all deeds, conditions, restrictions,
contracts, agreements, descriptions of real estate from the probate judge’s
office, cemetery plots, easements, leases, mortgages on chattel and real
property, satisfactions, assignments, releases, modifications, mechanics’
liens, stabs, federal and employment security commission tax liens, plats and
financial statements under the Uniform Commercial Code; provided, however, that
no deed shall be accepted for recordation unless it bears the tax map number of
the property being conveyed;
      (c)   Maintaining books for recording business establishments, corporate
charters, U.S. military and naval forces discharges;
      (d)   Maintaining a notary public register;
      (e)   Maintaining an index of cross-index books for all instruments of
record logged in the office;
      (f)   Collecting necessary fees for the recording of records as set by
law;
      (g)   Answering requests and giving assistance to those seeking
information from the records of the office;
      (h)   Preparing a division budget; and
      (i)   Rebinding books and records.
   (8)   Assessor - The tax assessor division, and the position of tax
assessor, who shall be responsible to the community planning and development
director to direct and coordinate the operations and activities of the
division. The tax assessor shall be a person with education, training, skills,
and/or experience that is satisfactory to the county administrator. The powers,
duties, and responsibilities of the tax assessor shall be those set forth by
state law.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § III, 4-4-17)
DIVISION 3. DETENTION CENTER
Sec. 2-131. Creation; director.
   There is hereby created the detention center department, and the position of
detention center director who shall be responsible to the county administrator
to direct and coordinate the operations and activities of the department. The
director shall be appointed by the county administrator and his/her term of
office shall be at the pleasure of the county administrator. The manager shall
have the following duties and responsibilities:
   (1)   Operate and manage the county detention center, and any prison camps
or other detention facilities that may be established;
   (2)   Provide for the proper care and custody of all prisoners assigned to
county detention facilities;
   (3)   Be responsible for the effective and efficient operation of the
detention center and any related buildings and grounds;
   (4)   Control all employees under his/her direction and be responsible for
all equipment and supplies needed to operate the detention center.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § III, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-132. Departmental Divisions.
   The detention center department shall include the following divisions:
   (1)   Security - The division of security is hereby created and the position
of security manager, who shall be responsible to the detention center director
to ensure the detention remains secure.
   (2)   Operations - The division of operations is hereby created and the
position of operations manager, who shall be responsible to the detention
center director to facilitate and execute the operation of the detention
center.
   (3)   Programs - The division of programs is hereby created and the position
of programs manager, who shall be responsible to the detention center director
to successful implement the programmatic initiatives of the detention center.
   (4)   Support - The division of support is hereby created and the position
of support manager, who shall be responsible to the detention center director
to support the detention center director and contribute to the effective
functioning of the detention center.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § III, 4-4-17)
DIVISION 4. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OFFICE
Sec. 2-133. Creation; director.
   There is hereby created the economic development office and the position of
director of the economic development office.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § III, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-134. Qualifications of director; selection; compensation.
   The director of the economic development office shall possess education,
training, and experience that are commensurate with the industry standards for
this position.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § III, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-135. Responsibilities; powers; duties.
   The director shall work to assist new companies considering locating in
Richland County and existing companies considering expand their operations. The
office shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
   (1)   Maintain demographic and economic data on Richland County;
   (2)   Conduct building and site tours for prospective companies;
   (3)   Facilitate meetings with existing industry to discuss human resources
and labor force issues;
   (4)   Conduct community tours for prospective companies;
   (5)   Negotiate incentive proposals on behalf of the County.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § III, 4-4-17)
DIVISION 5. EMERGENCY SERVICES
Sec. 2-136. Creation; director.
   There is hereby created the emergency services department and the position
of director of emergency services, who shall be responsible to the county
administrator and who shall direct and coordinate the operations and activities
of the department. The director shall be appointed by the county administrator,
and his/her term of office shall be at the pleasure of the county
administrator.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § III, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-137. Qualifications of director; selection.
   The director of emergency services shall possess education, training, and
experience that are commensurate with the industry standards for this position.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § III, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-138. Responsibilities; powers; duties.
   The director of the department of emergency services shall be the county
fire marshal. The director of the department of emergency services shall
enforce all provisions of this Code of Ordinances pertaining to the operation
of emergency services within the county.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § III, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-139. Departmental Divisions.
   The emergency services department shall include the following divisions:
   (1)   Emergency Medical Services - The emergency medical services division
shall provide county-wide 911 emergency medical services designed to respond to
medical emergencies and to provide initial medical response and/or treatment as
a means of stabilizing accident and/or trauma victims for transportation to
medical facilities for primary, secondary and/or tertiary care or treatment as
may be required.
      (a)   Fees for ambulance services to the general public within the
boundaries of the county and outside of the boundaries of the county shall be
determined from time to time by council.
      (b)   Fees for ambulance services will be limited to the maximum allowed
under the health care insurance plan for each county employee. These fee
schedules are subject to amendment, repeal, or deletion by the county council
from time to time.
      (c)   The county council hereby grants permission for the operation of
private convalescent transport units within the county.
         Private convalescent transport units are any vehicle making
nonemergency calls within the county and to destinations within the county as
scheduled to a physician’s office or hospital for treatment, routine physical
examinations, x-rays, or laboratory tests which is used for transporting within
the county, patients upon discharge from a hospital or nursing home to a
hospital, nursing home or residence, or a vehicle making any other calls
dispatched within the county as nonemergency. Such vehicles are described in
S.C. Code 1976, § 44-61-10 et seq. (as amended).
      (d)   The department of emergency services is hereby authorized to
promulgate and enforce rules and regulations governing and controlling such
private convalescent transport units and the nonemergency ambulances as deemed
by the department to be necessary pursuant to federal, state and applicable
regulating agency requirements.
         Further, all nonemergency private ambulances that originate calls
within the county shall be required to comply with the provisions of this Code
of Ordinances, including the business license ordinance [chapter 16], and
reporting requirements promulgated by the division.
   (2)   Fire - The fire division shall be responsible for providing countywide
fire, services, but not be limited to the following:
      (a)   Coordination and supervision of the development and operation of a
county fire service system in the unincorporated areas and participating
municipalities; to include coordination, supervision, and monitoring or any of
the fire duties which may be contracted out to third parties pursuant to
contract or intergovernmental agreements;
      (b)   Emergency communications;
      (c)   Determine the cause and origin of fires;
      (d)   The provision of assistance to the various units of the fire
service in resolving technical problems;
      (e)   Coordination of the management of all county fire service units;
      (f)   Enforcement of county ordinance and the county fire prevention
code;
      (g)   Coordination of the emergency services department special response
and rescue capabilities.
   (3)   Emergency Management Division - The emergency management division
shall be responsible for ensuring the complete and efficient utilization of all
the county facilities to combat disaster from enemy attack, manmade or natural
disaster; for directing the day-to-day operations of the office and
coordinating the activities of county and city governments during a period of
disaster. The department shall be empowered and required to coordinate with and
render assistance to county and city officials in the development of plans for
the use of all facilities, equipment, manpower and other resources of the
county and the municipalities existing within the county for the purpose of
minimizing or preventing damage to persons or property in disaster situations.
The department shall further direct the efforts of the county emergency
management division in the implementation of the provisions of this subsection.
      The emergency management division shall be the coordinating agency for
all activity in connection with integrated emergency management; and it shall
be the instrument through which the county government shall exercise its
authority under the laws of this state during an attack against this county,
its political subdivisions, or any part of the state, or during manmade or
natural disasters. This subdivision will not relieve the county or any city
department existing within the county of the normal responsibilities and/or
authority given to is by general laws or local resolution or ordinance, nor
will it limit the work of the American Red Cross or other volunteer agencies
organized for relief in natural disaster.
      As used in this subsection:
      Attack shall mean a direct assault against the county, its political
subdivisions, or any part of the state, by forces of a hostile nation,
including assault by nuclear, chemical or biological warfare, espionage or
sabotage.
      County shall mean Richland County, including all municipalities and
political subdivisions.
      Emergency management shall have a broad meaning and shall include
preparations against and relief from the effects of attack on the county, or
any part of the state, by the forces of any enemy nation; and ft shall also
include such activity in connection with manmade or natural disaster as defined
herein. It shall not include any activity that is the responsibility of the
military forces of the United States.
      Emergency management organization shall mean all county and municipal
officials and employees of the county and municipalities, together with those
volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during a disaster, and persons who may,
by agreement or operation of law, be charged with duties incident to the
protection of life and property in foe county, city and towns during times of
disaster.
      Manmade disaster shall mean such disasters as those caused by hazardous
material or radiation accidents or incidents and terrorist activities.
      Natural disaster shall mean any condition seriously threatening public
health, welfare, or security as a result of a severe fire, explosion, flood,
tornado, hurricane, earthquake, or similar natural or accidental cause which is
beyond the control of public or private agencies ordinarily responsible for the
relief of such conditions.
      Volunteer shall mean contributing service, equipment or facilities to the
emergency preparedness organization without remuneration or without formal
agreement or contract of hire. While engaged in such services, volunteer
personnel shall have the same immunities as persons and employees of the county
performing similar duties.
      (a)   The emergency management division shall maintain liaison with the
state and federal authorities, and the authorities of other nearby political
subdivisions, so as to ensure the most effective operation of the emergency
plan. The duties shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
         1.   Development and publication of emergency plans in conformity with
state emergency plans for the immediate use of all of the facilities,
equipment, manpower and other resources of the county for the purpose of
minimizing or preventing damage to persons or property, and protecting and
restoring to usefulness governmental services and public utilities necessary
for the public health, safety, and welfare.
         2.   Control and necessary recordkeeping for funds and property which
may be made available from the federal, state, county and municipal
governments.
         3.   Submission of annual budget requirement to the state, federal and
county governments.
         4.   Signing such documents as are necessary in the administration of
the county emergency preparedness program, to include project applications and
billing for purchases under project applications.
         5.   Coordination of the recruitment and training of the volunteer
personnel and agencies to augment the personnel and facilities of the county
emergency preparedness purposes.
         6.   Through public information programs, education of the civil
population as to the actions necessary and required for the protection of their
persons and property in case of enemy attack or natural disaster.
         7.   Conducting simulated disaster exercise and public practice alerts
to ensure efficient operations of the emergency plans and to familiarize
residents of the county and municipalities with civil defense regulations,
procedures and operations.
         8.   Coordination of the activity of all other public and private
agencies engaged in any emergency preparedness programs.
         9.   Negotiation with owners or persons in control of building or
other property for the use of such buildings or property for emergency
management purposes, and designating suitable buildings as public fallout
shelters.
         10.   Development of a community shelter plan.
         11.   Assumption of such authority and conducting such activity as may
be necessary to promote and execute the emergency operations plan.
      (b)   The chairman of the county council shall be responsible for meeting
the problems and dangers to the county and its municipalities and their
residents resulting from disasters of any origin and may issue proclamation and
regulations concerning disaster relief and related matters which during an
emergency situation shall have the full force and effect of law.
      (c)   In accordance with annex K of the emergency plan, emergency
shelters may be opened during an emergency and may be housed at schools,
churches and other locations. The type and location of an emergency will
determine which shelters will be opened. After shelters are opened, the public
will be notified and given instructions through the public information officer.
      (d)   Notwithstanding any other provision of the law, authority in an
emergency in the county shall be determined by the current County Code of
Ordinance and the County Emergency Plan.
      (e)   A state of disaster may be declared by the chairman of the county
council with the knowledge of officials of the affected municipalities if he
determines that a disaster has occurred, or that the
         threat thereof is imminent, and extraordinary emergency measures are
deemed necessary to cope with the existing or anticipated situation. Once
declared, that state of emergency shall continue until terminated by the
chairman of county council. All proclamations of a disaster issued pursuant to
this section shall indicate the nature of the disaster, the area or areas
affected, the conditions which required the proclamation of the disaster, and
the conditions under which it will be terminated. In addition to any other
powers conferred by law, the county and municipal governments may, under the
provisions of this subsection:
         1.   Suspend existing laws and regulations prescribing the procedures
for conduct of county or municipal business if strict compliance with the
provisions of any statutes, order, rule or regulation would in any way prevent,
hinder or delay necessary action in coping with the emergency.
         2.   Utilize all available resources of county and municipal
government as reasonably necessary to cope with a disaster emergency.
         3.   Transfer the direction, personnel or functions of county and
municipal departments and agencies or units thereof for purposes of
facilitating or performing emergency services as necessary or desirable.
         4.   Compel performance by government officials and employees of the
duties and functions assigned in the county emergency plan.
         5.   Contract, requisition and compensate for goods and services from
private sources.
         6.   Direct evacuations of all or part of the population from any
stricken or threatened area within the county or municipality if such action is
deemed necessary for preservation of life or other disaster mitigation,
response or recovery.
         7.   Prescribe routes, modes of transportation and destinations in
connection with evacuations.
         8.   Control ingress and egress to and from a disaster area, the
movement of persons within the area and the occupancy of premises therein.
         9.   Suspend or limit the sale, dispensing or transportation of
alcoholic beverages, firearms, explosives and combustibles.
         10.   Make provisions for the availability and use of temporary
housing.
         11.   Suspend or limit nonemergency activities and prohibit public
assemblies.
         12.   Implement curfews during declared disaster events.
      (f)   All employees of departments, commissions, boards, institutions and
other agencies of the county and municipalities who are designated as civil
emergency forces shall cooperate with the emergency management division in the
formulation of the county emergency plan shall comply with the requests of the
manager of emergency management personnel when such requests are issued
pursuant to the provisions of this subsection. County and city personnel shall
include in such plans the restoration of governmental services and public
utilities necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the general public.
      (g)   All such civil emergency forces shall notify the director of
emergency services of conditions in the county or municipalities resulting from
enemy attack or natural disaster, and they shall inform the director of any
conditions threatening to reach the proportions of a natural disaster as
defined herein.
      (h)   County and municipal employees assigned to duty as part of the
civil emergency forces pursuant to the provisions of this subsection shall
retain all the rights, privileges and immunities of their employment and shall
receive the compensation incident to that employment.
      (i)   The director of emergency services may at any time make the
appointment of volunteer citizens to augment personnel in the time of
emergency. Such volunteer citizens may be enrolled as civil emergency
volunteers in cooperation with the heads of the county or municipal department
affected, and they shall be subject to the rules and regulations set forth by
their department for such volunteers.
      (j)   The director may appoint volunteer citizens or from the personnel
of a civil emergency service for which the county or municipalities have no
counterpart He may also appoint volunteer citizens as public shelter managers,
who, when directed by the director, shall open public shelters and take charge
of all stocks of food, water and other supplies and equipment stored in the
shelter, admit the public according to the community shelter plan; and take
whatever control measures are necessary for the protection and safety of the
occupants.
      (k)   The director of emergency services may appoint and permit
volunteers to operate privately owned vehicles to respond to disasters and
emergencies using lights and sirens after first meeting the established rules
and criteria promulgated by the emergency services department for volunteer
privately owned vehicle response.
      (l)   The emergency services department public information officer shall
serve as public information officer for the emergency management division.
      (m)   This subsection is an exercise by the county and city of their
governmental authority for the protection of the public peace, health and
safety; and county or municipal agents and representatives, or any individual,
receiver firm, partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, or any of the
agents thereof in good faith carrying out, complying with, or attempting to
comply with any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the
provisions of this subsection shall not be liable for any damage sustained by
persons or property as a result of such activity.
      (n)   Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who
voluntarily and without compensation grants the county the right to inspect,
designate and use the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or
premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an authorized civil
emergency practice exercise shall not be civilly liable for the death of or
injury to any person on or about such real estate or premises under such
license, privilege or other permission, or for loss of or damage to the
property of such person.
      (o)   It shall be unlawful for any persons to violate any of the
provisions of this subsection or the regulations issued pursuant to the
authority contained herein or willfully to obstruct, hinder or delay any member
of the civil emergency organization in the enforcement of the provisions of
this subsection or any regulation issued thereunder. Any violation of this
subsection shall be considered as a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine
of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or confinement of not more than
thirty (30) days.
   (4)   Hazardous Materials Division - The hazardous materials division shall
include, but not be limited to the location, identification, monitoring and/or
control of all hazardous/toxic waste(s) existing in or transported through the
county. Such control shall include the permitting and enforcement of all
relevant codes and the coordination of effort with other county and public
agencies assigned public safety responsibilities in the field of hazardous/
toxic wastes.
   (5)   Emergency 911 Communications.
      (a)   Funding for emergency 911 telephone system. It is the desire of
Richland County Council to shorten the time and to simplify the methods
required for a resident of Richland County to request and to receive emergency
aid. It is the further intent of the County Council to provide funding by which
to allow operation, maintenance and enhancements of E911 by levying a monthly
charge of fifty (50) cents upon each local exchange access facility subscribed
by telephone subscribers whose local exchange access lines are in the area
served by or which would be served by the E911 service and/or system of
Richland County.
      (b)   E911 Service fee, billing and collection.
         1.   The E911 Service Fee shall include charges as may be required by
the Service Suppliers and agreed upon by Richland County and such charges for
support, planning, operation and current or future enhancements that are
required by Richland County and outlined in South Carolina Code Sections 23-47-
10 through 80.
         2.   A monthly charge shall be levied upon each local exchange access
facility subscribed to by telephone subscribers whose local exchange access
lines are in the area served by or which would be served by the 911 service
and/or system of the jurisdiction of the county as provided for in this
section, in amounts permitted by the State of South Carolina, provided mat the
amount of such levy shall be set forth precisely in each annual, or
supplemental budget ordinance as appropriate, together with a provision
providing that such charges were tax enforceable under South Carolina Code 23-
47-50(B). Said E911 Service Fee rate shall include funding for only such
expenses and costs as are authorized under provisions of South Carolina Code
Section 23-47-40(A), (B), and (D) as amended from time to time, as may be
approved by the Richland County Council attendant to the normal adoption of the
County’s Ordinary and Capital Budgets. Said budget shall clearly delineate the
estimated E911 Service Fee revenue and the associated expense, and sources of
revenue and authorized expenses from sources other than the E911 Service Fee,
by budget account and line item.
         3.   The E911 Service Fee shall be uniform and not vary according to
the type of local exchange access.
         4.   Coin operated telephones are toll free 911 calls, but certain
locations, such as detention centers or institutions may be denied access to
911 at the discretion of the emergency services director. Other coin operated
telephones where it can be clearly justified as not being in the public
interest to continue or have access to 911 may also be denied such access.
         5.   Service Suppliers shall remit to Richland County E911 Service Fee
Collections within 45 calendar days following the end of the month of
collections of such funds and, upon receipt of a monthly bill from the Service
Supplier, Richland County will remit payment.
         6.   An audit and budget reconciliation shall be conducted annually.
The audit shall comply with the requirements of the South Carolina Code Section
23-47-50(E).
      (c)   Accounting and management.
         1.   As provided in South Carolina Code Section 23-47-50(C), Richland
County is responsible for the collection of delinquent accounts having access
to the E911 system. The emergency services director and finance director shall
cause procedures to be established with the Service Supplier and shall forward
such information to the appropriate authority for collection procedures.
         2.   The emergency services director is responsible within Richland
County for the administration of this section and South Carolina Code Sections
23-47-10 through 80.
      (d)   Addressing and road name. All road naming activity shall be
coordinated
         with the public works department, the planning division of the
Community Planning and Development Department and if applicable the City of
Columbia Public safety is of the highest priority and road names contribute
significantly to the efficiency of the emergency response system.
      (e)   It shall be a violation for any person to misuse or abuse the 911
system or to make a false 911 call. Any person in violation of this section
shall be subject to the penalties set forth in (f).
      (f)   Penalties. Any person who shall violate any provision of this
section, including the provisions of South Carolina Code Title 23, Chapter 47,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction of such offense, shall be
fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more
than thirty (30) days, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses
involved in the case. Each and every day or portion thereof during which any
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § III, 4-4-17)
DIVISION 6. FINANCE
Sec. 2-140. Creation; director.
   There is hereby created the finance department and the position of director
of finance, who shall be responsible to the county administrator and who shall
direct and coordinate the operations and activities of the department. The
department shall be responsible for all facets of finance administration
including budget preparation and budgetary control, accounting, financial
reporting, and other related financial/fiscal activities. It shall be
responsible also for insurance; payroll and leave administration; and, in
cooperation with the department of human resources, shall be responsible for
development and implementation of a personnel data and information management
system; and such other responsibilities as may be assigned by the county
administrator. The director of finance shall give to the county a surety bond
in the value of thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) for the faithful
performance of his/her duties as such officer, such bond to be filed in the
office of the clerk of court.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § III, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-141. Qualifications of director; selection.
   The director of finance shall possess the education, training, and
experience that are commensurate with the industry standards for this position.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § III, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-142. Responsibilities; powers; duties.
   The director of finance shall be the chief administrative finance officer of
the county, responsible to the county administrator for the performance of his/
her duties and responsibilities which shall be to:
   (1)   Direct the finance department and supervise its staff and activities;
   (2)   Approve all warrants issued by officers of the county and draw drafts
in payment thereof;
   (3)   Maintain current accounts of all county budget expenditures and make
periodic reports thereon as required by the county administrator;
   (4)   Maintain a current inventory of all county property, real and
personal; and collect and account for all income from rental or sale of same;
   (5)   Receive all requests from county offices and agencies in excess of
budget allowances, and prepare recommendations for the county administrator to
submit to the council for consideration thereof;
   (6)   Obtain and supervise contracting and payments for all insurance on
county property, including liability and related insurance;
   (7)   Cooperate with the county council treasurer, attorney and other
officers concerned in the preparation and sale of all county bond issues and
other long-term financial transactions;
   (8)   Cooperate with the county auditor, treasurer and other county officers
in securing annual and special audits of all county accounts as required by law
or directed by council; and
   (9)   Serve as the trust officer of the county and be granted authority to
sign necessary documents and create accounts for the proper maintenance of such
funds, provided that such procedures shall be approved by the county
administrator.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § III, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-143. Departmental Divisions.
   The finance department shall include the following divisions:
   (1)   Accounting - There is hereby created the division of accounting and
the position of accounting manager, who shall be responsible to the finance
director to prepare annual financial statements and other financial reports as
required or requested by federal and state agencies, County Council,
Administration, or financial markets.
   (2)   Budget - There is hereby created the division of budget and the
position of budget manager, who shall be responsible to the finance director to
create and maintain the County’s Annual Budget.
   (3)   Procurement - There is hereby created the division of procurement and
the position of procurement manager. The procurement manager shall be a person
with education, training and/or experience in purchasing, contract
administration, and inventory. The division of procurement shall be responsible
for the following:
      (a)   Purchasing all supplies, materials, equipment, and contractual
services required by county agencies and performing the purchasing-related
functions required of the director of procurement herein;
      (b)   Negotiating contracts for professional services and submitting them
for approval and award as provided herein;
      (c)   Using standard specifications wherever they are applicable to
purchase orders and contracts and ensuring compliance with such specifications
through adequate inspection of deliveries;
      (d)   Transferring between agencies, supplies, materials and equipment
which are no longer needed by a holding agency but which can be used by the
receiving agency;
      (e)   Exchanging, trading in or selling those supplies, materials and
equipment which are surplus, obsolete or unused and which, are found by the
county administrator not to be required for public use;
      (f)   Developing, with the approval of the county attorney as to legal
sufficiency, standard forms and conditions for invitations to bid, requests for
proposals, purchase orders, and contracts; developing and prescribing the use
by agencies of other forms required in carrying out the provisions of this
article; and amending or eliminating any such forms;
      (g)   Upon request of the council, and subject to its approval of each
transaction, performing all delegable functions in connection with acquisition
and disposal of real property;
      (h)   Acting as the procurement, purchasing and contracting agent for all
officers, offices and agencies of the county, subject to regulations
promulgated by the council and approval authority of the director of finance;
      (i)   Establishing and maintaining a central purchasing warehousing and
supply system for all county offices and agencies, providing for requisition of
materials and supplies by county offices and agencies authorized by the
council;
      (j)   Placing, with a newspaper to be determined pursuant to the
requirements of Chapter 2, Article X, “Purchasing,” of this Code, all requests
for advertising by a county agency or department. Any agency or department
requiring advertisement shall prepare the advertisement and present same to the
division of procurement for the purposes of processing it for publication. The
division of procurement shall have the responsibility of determining the most
practical and least costly medium of advertising. In connection with this
subsection, the office of procurement shall provide each county agency and
department a schedule of processing time allowance so mat the requesting agency
or department will be assured of the actual date of publication of the
advertisement. However, any advertising which is not paid for with county
funds, or for which the county is reimbursed by a private individual or
company, may be exempt from the provisions of this subsection;
      (k)   Other duties as directed by the director of finance or county
administrator.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § III, 4-4-17)
DIVISION 7. HUMAN RESOURCES
Sec. 2-144. Creation; director.
   The department of human resources is hereby created and shall be responsible
for the development and implementation of a modern personnel program employing
whatever resources and assistance are needed from the finance department. The
human resources department shall be managed by the director of human resources
who shall be responsible also for administrative and legislative research,
economic and community development, public affairs, data information
management, and such other responsibilities as may be assigned by the county
administrator. The director of the human resources department shall be bonded
to the county in an appropriate amount for the faithful performance of the
duties as such officer.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § III, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-145. Qualifications of director; selection.
   The director of human resources shall possess the education, training, and
experiences that are commensurate with the industry standards for this
position.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § III, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-146. Responsibilities; powers; duties.
   The duties and responsibilities of the director of human resources shall be:
   (1)   To serve as personnel director and, as such to plan, organize, direct
and coordinate the personnel program of the county;
   (2)   To formulate and recommend operating policies and procedures to the
county administrator for the effective administration of the county’s personnel
program;
   (3)   To direct and control the county’s research resources and activities
serving the administrative and legislative branches of the government;
   (4)   To provide leadership and support in the areas of economic and
community development and, in so doing, establish effective liaison and working
relationships with all appropriate private and public enterprises as related to
economic and industrial development, and with all appropriate civic groups/
associations, as related to community development;
   (5)   To administer a program of public affairs and, to that end, establish
effective relationships with the media and the general public through the
development of viable public information programs;
   (6)   To organize, direct, and administer management information and word
processing programs assigned to receive, store and provide organizational data
and information on a timely and well-organized basis as a service to the entire
organization; and
   (7)   To perform such other related work as may be required and as assigned
by the county administrator.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § III, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-147. Departmental Divisions.
   The human resources department shall include the following divisions:
   (1)   Compensation, Benefits, and Classification - This division shall
manage the compensation, benefits and classification related services for the
human resources department.
   (2)   Operations - This division shall manage the operations of the human
resources department.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § III, 4-4-17)
DIVISION 8. INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Sec. 2-148. Creation; director.
   There is hereby created the information technology department and the
position of director of information technology, who shall be responsible to the
county administrator and who shall direct and coordinate the operations and
activities of the department. The director shall be appointed by the county
administrator, with the term of office being at the pleasure of the county
administrator. The department shall be responsible for all providing the
technological vision and leadership to deploy the appropriate technology that
will contribute towards an enriched community and providing timely, efficient,
effective, and proactive technology support to the employees of Richland
County.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § III, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-149. Qualifications of director; selection.
   The director of information technology shall possess the education,
training, and experiences that are commensurate with the industry standards for
this position.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § III, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-150. Departmental Divisions.
   The information technology department shall include the following divisions:
   (1)   Network & Telecommunications - This division shall ensure a secure and
fully resilient technical environment that supports all of the county’s
software, hardware, mobile, and cloud technologies, as well as future
technologies. The division shall be responsible for the telecommunication
system(s) serving the entire organization, including wired and wireless, VOIP
phone system, cell phones, data lines, cabling, and the county’s tower at Fort
Jackson, The division is also responsible for mission critical cybersecurity.
The division shall propose new or amended county policies as needed to ensure
that the county responds to new threats and / or opportunities. The division
shall also partner with other local / state agencies and private industry to
expand broadband to citizens in Richland County.
   (2)   Business Systems - This division shall provide proactive, realistic,
and fiscally sound solutions to short, middle and long-range business goals
whenever application software and / or project management can facilitate. The
division shall develop new business software, oversee vendor software, perform
feasibility studies and research, confer with departments to identify business
needs and desired outcomes, perform business analysis, project management, QA /
QC, and application training. The division will prepare procurement
solicitations for new vendor systems and oversee implementation projects from
start to finish, The division shall oversee and support all business software,
from small on-department systems, to enterprise-wide software systems. The
division also provides a county-wide training program for all county employees
on various software tools to enhance productivity and on cybersecurity best
practices. The division shall also manage the county website’s technical
platform.
   (3)   GIS - The division of geographic information system (GIS), as well as
the manager of GIS, is hereby established to furnish various county departments
with tools to measure, model, and map data regarding geographically related
phenomena While data, in and of itself, cannot assist in making decisions or
policy, the information created from such data is a valuable tool in executing
county business. As a work product, the data will be used to produce thematic
information that can be combined to assist county personnel in the decision-
making process.
      GIS data will be continuously updated and improved as technology and
county capabilities improve. The county council understands that to sustain the
county’s utility and effectiveness, data must be maintained. The county council
also recognizes that the nature of accurate local data and the potential of GIS
are reflected in the value of spatial data to entities other than Richland
County. Thus, to provide for costly maintenance of the GIS and to lessen the
burden of annual budget requests, system data elements will be available for
purchase pursuant to an established fee schedule. Such fee schedule may be
modified below from time to time by council.
      (a)   For the purposes of this section, and unless the context
specifically indicates otherwise, the following general terms shall have the
meanings designated below:
         Applicant. Any person who submits a request for GIS products or
services.
         Customer. Any applicant who executes a contract for GIS products or
services, or purchases copies of standard system products, custom hard copy
system products, digital data, technical assistance, or other products or
services.
         Data. Recorded quantitative and qualitative observational measurements
and facts.
         Data steward. The person, or his/her designee, responsible for the
maintenance and security of GIS data elements within a particular county
department.
         Geographic Information System (GIS) is an organized collection of
computer
         hardware, software, geographic data, and personnel designed to
efficiently capture, store, update, use, analyze, and display all forms of
geographically referenced material.
         Information. The result(s) obtained from processing, classifying, or
interpolating data.
         Open records. Standard system products as defined herein and non-
digital source documents.
         Standard system products. Paper products generated from GIS databases
for internal use and for foe purpose of meeting requests submitted under
current state law concerning open records.
         Subscriber. Customer who purchases GIS service or products on a
regular, frequent, and on-going basis.
      (b)   Data and information distribution.
         1.   Information derived from the county GIS and presented in a
geographic context may be made available to the public via the Internet.
Furthermore, standard system products will be made available on digital media
or, if requested, in hard copy pursuant to S.C. Code 1976, § 30-4-30, as
amended.
         2.   All GIS-related data requests must be approved by both the data
steward of the department in possession of such data and the GIS division of
the information technology department. Once approved, the GIS division is
responsible for filling the request. All GIS data customers must enter into a
non-transferable data license agreement with the county. Each license agreement
shall identify limitations in the use of county GIS data and shall indemnify
and hold harmless Richland County, its elected officials, officers, agents, and
employees from loss, damage, or other liability arising from the use of the
data.
         3.   A fee shall be collected from customers for copies of GIS data.
An initial fee schedule of individual data elements will be reviewed by county
council. The fee schedule will include a description of each thematic data
element to be sold, distribution format, file format, and unit pricing
information. The county administrator, as necessary, may update the fee
schedule. Regardless of changes in data product fees, a county GIS data fee
schedule will be submitted annually to the county council as an informational
update. For good cause, the county administrator may waive or reduce fees for
GIS data when such actions result in serving the best interest of the county.
         4.   Customers requesting data on a regular basis may request to
receive data at a subscription rate, but must enter into a nontransferable data
license agreement with the county.
         5.   All GIS-related information constituting a public record, as
defined by S.C. Code 1976, § 30-4-20, as amended, may be provided at no charge
via Internet access or at a minimal charge if such information is in digital or
hard copy format The minimal fees for digital or hard copy public record
information shall be included in the approved fee schedule.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § III, 4-4-17)
DIVISION 9. OPERATIONAL SERVICES
Sec. 2-151. Creation; director.
   There is hereby created the support services department and the position of
director of support services, who shall be responsible to the county
administrator and who shall direct and coordinate the operations and activities
of the department. The support services department shall be responsible to
administer the internal or housekeeping needs of the county government. It
shall be responsible for the maintenance, custody and security of the entire
physical plant and all of the support services required to keep the plant and
all equipment at an acceptable level of operation and usability. The office
shall be managed by the director of support services and shall be responsible
also for coordinating a program of records management through the county
archivist, and for such other responsibilities as may be assigned by the county
administrator. The director of support services shall be bonded to the county
in an appropriate amount for the faithful performance of the duties as such
officer.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § III, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-152. Qualifications of director; selection.
   The director of support services shall possess the education, training, and
experiences that are commensurate with the industry standards for this
position.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § III, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-153. Responsibilities; powers; duties.
   The duties and responsibilities of the director of support services shall
be:
   (1)   To develop and implement a comprehensive program of maintenance,
custody and security for the county’s physical plant, including all buildings
and faculties owned and operated by the county government;
   (2)   To formulate and submit to the county administrator recommendations
for continued improvement and effective utilization of the county’s physical
plant;
   (3)   To establish a working relationship and liaison with all department
and agency heads relative to their specific operational and/or space office
requirements and needs;
   (4)   To provide assistance for all county departments and agencies to
obtain auxiliary and/or housekeeping support and services;
   (5)   To coordinate through the county archivist, a program of records
management designed to serve all county departments and agencies; and
   (6)   To perform such other related work as may be required and so assigned
by the county administrator.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § III, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-154. Departmental Divisions.
   The support services department shall include the following divisions:
   (1)   Facilities and Grounds - This division shall perform routine
maintenance on Richland County owned facilities and grounds.
   (2)   Central Services -This division shall manage and operate the Richland
County mailing services.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § III, 4-4-17)
DIVISION 10. PUBLIC WORKS
Sec. 2-155. Creation; director.
   There is hereby created the public works department and the position of
director of public works, who shall be responsible to the county administrator
and who shall direct and coordinate the operations and activities of the
department. The director shall be appointed by the county administrator, and
his/her term of office shall be at the pleasure of the county administrator.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § III, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-156. Qualifications of director; selection.
   The director of public works shall possess the education, training, and
experiences that are commensurate with the industry standards for this
position.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § III, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-157. Responsibilities; powers; duties.
   The director of public works shall be responsible for the custody, security
and maintenance of public works and physical properties of the county and shall
be responsible to and under the supervision of the county administrator in the
performance of his/her duties.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § III, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-158. Departmental Divisions.
   The public works department shall include the following divisions:
   (1)   Administration - This division shall coordinate all department-level
administrative support, including personnel management, safety, training,
standardization, finance, budget, payroll, material management, procurement,
and geographic information services (GIS).
   (2)   Engineering - This division, which shall be managed by a registered
professional engineer, shall provide engineering services in support of county
operations and infrastructure development, including the management and
coordination of capital improvement projects.
   (3)   Stormwater - This division shall provide stormwater management
services in support of positive public drainage and “receiving water” quality.
   (4)   Roads and Drainage - This division shall maintain and improve the
county road maintenance network and drainage infrastructure.
   (5)   Airport - This division shall manage the Jim Hamilton Owens Airport
operations.
   (6)   Solid Waste - This division shall provide residential collection of
municipal solid waste (MSW) and recyclable materials within the unincorporated
county, provide limited construction & demolition (C&D) landfill services,
manage the Solid Waste stream within the county, and promote cost-effective
recycling.
   (7)   Special Services - This division shall be responsible for:
      (a)   Effectively managing a labor pool of community service and inmate
labor personnel in support of county operations, such as picking up trash along
the road right of ways and beautifying the community through a clean sweep
program; and
      (b)   Helping communities become self-sufficient through sponsoring
community cleanups; and
      (c)   Holding community forums to address participants’ questions about
the clean sweep program and neighborhood cleanups.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § III, 4-4-17)
DIVISION 11. TRANSPORTATION PENNY
Sec. 2-159. Creation; director.
   There is hereby created the transportation penny department and the position
of director of the transportation penny department, who shall be responsible to
the county administrator and who shall direct and coordinate the operations and
activities of the department. The director shall be appointed by the county
administrator, and his/her term of office shall be at the pleasure of the
county administrator. The transportation penny department shall manage all
items of the Transportation Penny Program approved by voters in November 2012.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § III, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-160. Qualifications of director; selection.
   The director of the transportation penny department shall possess the
education, framing, and experiences that are commensurate with the industry
standards for this position.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § III, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-161. Responsibilities; powers; duties.
   The duties and responsibilities of the director of the transportation penny
department shall be:
   (1)   To develop and implement the Richland County Transportation Program
   (2)   Serve as the liaison with the South Carolina Department of
Transportation on all joint transportation projects
   (3)   Coordinates all transportation projects with the Central Midlands
Council of Governments
   (4)   Oversees design and construction of all transportation projects
   (5)   Coordinate and manage the distribution of transportation program
information to the Transportation Advisory Committee
   (6)   Study and pursue outside funding sources for the Richland County
Transportation Program.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § III, 4-4-17)
DIVISION 12. UTILITIES
Sec. 2-162. Creation; director.
   There is hereby created the department of utilities and the position of
director of utilities, who shall be responsible to the county administrator and
who shall direct and coordinate the operations and activities of the
department. The director shall be appointed by the county administrator, and
his/her term of office shall be at the pleasure of the county administrator.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § III, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-163. Qualifications of director; selection.
   The director of utilities shall possess education, training, and experiences
that are commensurate with the industry standards for this position.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § III, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-164. Responsibilities; powers; duties.
   The utilities department shall be responsible for enforcing all the
provisions of Chapter 24, Utilities, and Chapter 24.5, Special Sewer Assessment
Districts, of the Richland County Cade of Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § III, 4-4-17)
Sec. 2-165. Departmental Divisions.
   The utilities department shall include the following divisions:
   (1)   Administration - This division shall coordinate all department level
administrative support, including personnel management, standardization,
finance, budget, payroll, material management and procurement.
   (2)   Operations - This division shall provide professional operation of
county water and wastewater treatment facilities, laboratory facilities and
shall administer provisions of the county’s pre-treatment program.
   (3)   Maintenance - This division shall manage, maintain, and improve all
county utility systems, including facilities, grounds, water and sewer lines
and associated apparatus.
   (4)   Engineering - This division shall provide engineering services in
support of county utility operations and infrastructure development, including
the management and coordination of capital improvement projects funded by both
public and private sources. Also develops and maintains the department mapping
and geographic information system.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § III, 4-4-17)
DIVISION 13. VECTOR CONTROL
Sec. 2-166. Creation; director.
   There is hereby created the department of Vector Control and the position of
director of Vector Control. The director shall be appointed by and report to
the county administrator, and his/her term of office shall be at the pleasure
of the county administrator.
(Ord. No. 039-15HR, § II, 9-15-15)
Sec. 2-167. Staff; personnel; compensation.
   The director of Vector Control shall have such staff and assistants as are
necessary to the operation of the department and the performance of his/her
duties. They shall be subject to the county personnel system and their
compensation determined accordingly.
(Ord. No. 039-15HR, § II, 9-15-15)
Sec. 2-168. Responsibilities; powers; duties.
   Vector Control, and such employees of the department as are assigned to it,
shall be charged with the following duties:
   (a)   Management of the mosquito control program.
   (b)   Provide technical advice and assistance about vectors to the county’s
citizens.
   (c)   Conduct vector-borne disease surveillance and response.
   (d)   Enforce county ordinances related to vector control.
   (e)   Other programs or functions assigned to the department by the county
administrator or county council.
(Ord. No. 039-15HR, § II, passed 9-15-15)
ARTICLE VI. ELECTED AND SPECIAL OFFICERS
   Cross reference(s)--Administrative offices and officers, §
2-75 et seq.
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 2-262. Salaries of certain elected officials.
   (a)   The following elected officials shall be excluded from the County's
pay and classification plan: auditor, clerk of court, coroner, probate judge,
sheriff, and treasurer.
   (b)   The salary of the auditor, clerk of court, coroner, sheriff, and
treasurer shall be determined through the County’s budget process, and does not
include any supplemental appropriations from the state of South Carolina or
from any other source.
   (c)   Each year elected officials listed in (b) above shall receive a pay
increase commensurate with the percentage increase of the Consumer Price Index
(CPI) over the previous year, which number is distributed to the County from
the State Department of Revenue through the South Carolina Association of
Counties for budgetary purposes, but not to exceed 4% for that year; provided,
however, elected officials' salaries shall be reviewed at the same time that
other County positions are reviewed for market comparisons, but in no event
longer than three years. If it is determined that an elected official's salary
is higher than others surveyed in similar sized counties, the elected official
shall not receive a CPI pay increase for the first year following such review.
Pay increases, when applicable, shall take effect starting with the first pay
period in July.
   (d)   Upon re-election, the elected officials listed in (a) above, shall
receive a 5% pay increase, which shall take effect at the beginning of the new
term of office.
   (e)   A newly elected official, or an individual appointed to fill an
existing term of office, shall receive the salary of the previous incumbent,
but shall not receive the 5% pay increase that re-elected officials receive.
(Ord. No. 1261-85, § I, 1-8-85; Ord. No. 080-00HR, § I, 12-19-00; Ord. No. 057-
05HR, § I, 9-6-05; Ord. No. 028-07HR, § I, 3-20-07)
Sec. 2-263. Employment authority of elected and appointed officials.
   This section shall apply to elected officials and officials appointed by an
authority outside county government as those terms are used in S.C. Code 1976,
§ 4-9-30(7), as amended, February 24, 1988.
   An employee employed in a department or agency under the direction of an
elected official or an official appointed by an authority outside county
government serves at the pleasure of such official.
   A statement from such official that it is no longer his pleasure that an
employee be his employee is sufficient grounds for termination.
(Ord. No. 1858-89, § IV, 4-4-89)
Secs. 2-264--2-267. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. CLERK OF COURT
   Cross reference(s)--Courts,
Ch. 7.
   State law reference(s)--Clerks of court, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-17-10 et seq.
Sec. 2-268. Election; bond.
   The clerk of court shall be elected at each alternate general election;
reckoning from the election in the year 1976. His bond shall be in the penal
sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00).
(Code 1976, § 3-3031)
   State law reference(s)--Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, §§ 14-17-10, 14-
17-40.
Sec. 2-269. Powers and duties.
   (a)   Generally. The clerk:
      (1)   Shall be clerk of all courts of record held in the county, except
where the General Assembly provides for the election of a clerk with a like
term of office for each or any other of the courts of record; and
      (2)   Shall take possession of the sheriff's office and papers therein
when such office is vacant until the coroner or a new sheriff takes charge.
   (b)   Relationships to council. The clerk shall return to the council
annually by October thirty-first an account, upon oath, in duplicate, of all
fines and forfeitures inflicted in his court during the preceding year and of
the amounts had and received by him and of the manner in which such fines were
disposed of. The clerk and any other officer of the county required by law to
maintain or keep records and record papers may have records photographed or
microphotographed. The indexes required by law to be maintained shall continue
to be required.
   (c)   Council's powers and duties. The council shall request the attorney
general or solicitor, as the case may be, to sue for and recover two hundred
dollars ($200.00) from the clerk if he fails to render the required account.
(Code 1976, § 3-3032)
Sec. 2-270. Certain fees for county courts.
   The clerk of court shall collect in advance the applicable fees as specified
in S.C. Code 1976, § 8-21-310, upon the initial filing of any proceeding or
appeal and no such proceeding or appeal shall be filed until such fee is paid.
(Code 1976, § 3-3033; Ord. No. 458-77, § 1, 11-2-77)
Sec. 2-271. Alternative Method of Selecting and Impaneling Grand Juries.
   (a)   Findings:
      (1)   County Council finds that the South Carolina Legislature has passed
Act Number 373 of 1998, approved by the Governor on May 26, 1998, which
provides for an alternative method of selecting and impaneling grand juries and
grand jurors.
      (2)   County Council finds that the current case load and the length of
time that persons serve as grand jurors under the current system causes
personal hardship on many members of the grand jury, thus warranting the
adoption of the alternative method set forth in the above-referenced Act.
      (3)   County Council finds that the adoption of the alternative method
would be in the best interests of the county.
   (b)   The alternative method for selecting and impaneling grand juries and
grand jurors in Richland County set forth in Article 17 of Chapter 7 of Title
14 of the Code of Laws of South Carolina (1976, as amended) is hereby adopted
as the method to be used in Richland County.
(Ord. No. 007-01HR, § I, 2-6-01)
Secs. 2-272--2-276. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. COUNTY CORONER
   Cross reference(s)--Health generally,
Ch. 14.
   State law reference(s)--County coroners, S.C. Code 1976, 17-5-10 et seq.
Sec. 2-277. Election; bond.
   The county coroner shall be elected at each alternate general election
reckoning from the election in the year 1976. His bond shall be in the penal
sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
(Code 1976, § 3-3021)
Sec. 2-278. Powers and duties.
   (a)   The coroner:
      (1)   May not engage in other gainful employment;
      (2)   May appoint one or more deputies, approved by the circuit judge, to
serve at the coroner's pleasure;
      (3)   May not be appointed jailer or deputy sheriff by a sheriff;
      (4)   May order an autopsy or post-mortem examination;
      (5)   Shall examine witnesses with respect to causes of deaths and
determine probable blame against living persons;
      (6)   Shall issue burial permits;
      (7)   May punish for contempt by fine of not exceeding twenty dollars
($20.00) or imprisonment for not exceeding twenty-four (24) hours;
      (8)   Shall assume the vacant office of sheriff until the vacancy is
filled. In the presence of the clerk of court or county jailer, he shall make a
list of the prisoners in the jail, to be signed by himself and the jailer and
filed in the clerk's office and in the coroner's book;
      (9)   Shall serve as court officer in cases in which the sheriff is a
party; and
      (10)   Shall execute all legal orders directed to him by the council or
its chairman and receive the same fees and costs as allowed in other cases.
   (b)   Relationships to council. The coroner shall execute all legal orders
directed to him by the council or its chairman and receive the same fees and
costs as allowed in other cases.
   (c)   Council's powers and duties. The council and its chairman may issue
legal orders to the coroner.
(Code 1976, § 3-3022)
Secs. 2-279--2-282. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. SHERIFF
Subdivision A. Generally
Secs. 2-283--2-285. Reserved.
Subdivision B. Reserved.
   Editor's note--Subdivision B, §§ 2-286--2-296, derived from Ord. No. 1909, §
1, adopted Sept. 5, 1989, was repealed by § II of Ord. No. 2027-90, adopted
Oct. 2, 1990. See § 2-227 et seq.
Secs. 2-286--2-299. Reserved.
DIVISION 5. COUNTY TREASURER
   Cross reference(s)--Finances generally, §
2-514 et seq.; purchasing, §
2-590 et seq.
   State law reference(s)--Election of treasurer where county has council-
administrator form of government, S.C. Code 1976, § 4-9-60; county treasurers,
§ 12-45-10 et seq.
Sec. 2-300. Election, oath and bond.
   The county treasurer shall be elected at each alternate general election
reckoning from the election in the year 1978. Before entering upon the duties
of his office he must take and subscribe to the oath of office prescribed by
the state constitution. The governor may require from such officer such bond as
he may deem necessary, not less, however, than thirty thousand dollars
($30,000.00).
(Code 1976, § 3-3001)
Sec. 2-301. Term of office.
   The county treasurer shall hold office for four (4) years and until his
successor is elected and qualified. His term of office shall commence on the
first day of July following his election. When the treasurer for any reason
fails to complete his term of office, his successor shall be appointed
initially for the unexpired portion of the term for which his predecessor was
elected.
(Code 1976, § 3-3002)
   State law reference(s)--Term, effect of failure to complete, S.C. Code 1976,
§ 12-45-20.
Sec. 2-302. Suspension and removal from office.
   The county treasurer shall be subject to suspension and removal from office
by the governor upon the same grounds and in the same manner as prescribed in
S.C. Code 1976, section 12-39-30, in relation to county auditors.
(Code 1976, § 3-3003)
   State law reference(s)--Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 12-45-30.
Sec. 2-303. Deputies; collection, etc., of fees.
   The treasurer is authorized to designate an employee or employees in any
office, agency or department of the county, where the fees charged by such
department are presently paid directly to the treasurer, as a deputy treasurer
to collect and remit the fees to the county treasurer to the end that all fees
may be paid and collected in the office, agency or department where the service
is performed. The fees shall be collected, receipted for, and remitted,
pursuant to regulations prescribed or approved by the council. Employees in any
department collecting fees shall be bonded.
(Code 1976, § 3-3004)
Sec. 2-304. Powers and duties; relationships to council.
   (a)   The treasurer:
      (1)   Shall collect and disburse school moneys;
      (2)   May deposit county funds with a bank or trust company in an amount
in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) if such company executes an
indemnity bond in favor of the county in the amount equal to the deposit or
makes an assignment of bonds or notes in face amount equal to the amount of the
deposit. This requirement does not apply if the deposit is insured or secured
by authority of the United States;
      (3)   May purchase government bonds with funds not subject to the payment
of current expenses or current accounts. He may exchange such bonds for the
obligations of the county, provided there is no loss to the county;
      (4)   Shall collect delinquent taxes and issue tax executions for taxes,
assessments and penalties against the property of defaulting taxpayers;
      (5)   Shall receive assistance without additional compensation from the
sheriff and deputies, magistrates, and constables;
      (6)   Has the powers of county sheriffs for the collection of delinquent
taxes and may appoint deputies for such purposes;
      (7)   Shall report unlisted or wrongly valued property to the county
auditor;
      (8)   Shall assist the auditor in striking improper names from the tax
books;
      (9)   Shall assist the forfeited land commission in disposing of property
and may employ an attorney to assist him;
      (10)   Shall make reports on executions;
      (11)   Shall make a report at least quarterly to the county legislative
delegation;
      (12)   Shall handle title, deed and legal matters of the forfeited land
commission;
      (13)   Shall render an annual report to the delegation for the forfeited
land commission;
      (14)   Shall post bond of at least thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00);
      (15)   Shall receive money borrowed in anticipation of taxes and shall
countersign the obligation;
      (16)   Shall publish the annual tax rates in a newspaper;
      (17)   Shall have taxes collected from persons residing in another
county;
      (18)   Shall keep a cash book of the school fund;
      (19)   May deposit money not necessary for current expenses in a bank or
may invest it in shares of an insured building and loan association, or in
obligations of the state or the United States. When such money is deposited in
a bank at interest, he may require a guaranty bond;
      (20)   May not receive any commissions for paying out school funds;
      (21)   Shall make a monthly report to the comptroller general of
collections for the fiscal year, disbursements and cash on hand;
      (22)   Shall make an annual report to the court of general sessions;
      (23)   Shall notify the county auditor when he is ready to make an annual
settlement; and
      (24)   Shall collect taxes reported to him by the auditor as due.
   (b)   Relationships to council. No claim audited and allowed by the council
or clerk of court for fees of witnesses and jurors shall be paid by the
treasurer unless presented to him for payment within five (5) years from the
date it is audited and allowed. This provision does not apply to bonded debts.
   The treasurer may not pay an order of the council unless drawn in conformity
with subparagraph (c)(1) below. When money is borrowed in anticipation of
taxes, the council and treasurer shall keep it or the specific purpose thereof.
The treasurer shall report to the council on the first day of each month the
amount and character of funds collected for the county. He shall report to the
council on the fifteenth day of each month an itemized statement of collection
and disbursements, by school districts, made for the previous calendar month on
account of any special tax in a school district and the balances remaining in
such fund; he shall also report the total amounts received from other taxes not
collected for any special school district.
   (c)   Council's powers and duties. The council:
      (1)   Shall draw orders on the treasurer, under its seal, countersigned
by its secretary or clerk, for all accounts against the county which it has
allowed, after the monthly report of the treasurer has been received by the
council and he has reported adequate funds in the treasury. The council shall
inform the treasurer of the orders drawn, in whose favor, the amount and the
order in which they are drawn; and
      (2)   May delegate to the county treasurer the responsibility for
depositing, investing or reinvesting money that is not necessary for current
expenses.
(Code 1976, § 3-3005)
Secs. 2-305--2-310. Reserved.
DIVISION 6. COUNTY AUDITOR
   Cross reference(s)--Finances generally, §
2-514 et seq.; purchasing regulations, §
2-590 et seq.
   State law reference(s)--County auditors, S.C. Code 1976, § 12-39-10 et seq.;
election of auditors, § 4-9-60.
Sec. 2-311. Election, term and bond.
   The county auditor shall be elected to a term of four (4) years and until
his successor is elected and qualified at each alternate general election
reckoning from the election in the year 1978, and the governor may require such
bond from such officer as he may deem necessary. When the auditor for any
reason fails to complete his term of office, his successor shall be appointed
initially for the unexpired portion of the term for which his predecessor was
elected.
(Code 1976, § 3-3011)
Sec. 2-312. Oath.
   Before entering on the duties of his office the auditor must take the oath
prescribed by the state constitution.
(Code 1976, § 3-3012)
   State law reference(s)--Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 12-39-20.
Sec. 2-313. Suspension and removal from office.
   When the county auditor shall, during a recess of the senate, be shown, by
evidence satisfactory to the governor, to be guilty of misconduct in office or
crime or for any reason shall become incapable or legally disqualified to
perform his duties, the governor may suspend such officer and designate some
suitable person to perform, temporarily, the duties of such office until the
next meeting of the senate and until the case shall be acted upon by the
senate.
(Code 1976, § 3-3013)
   State law reference(s)--Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 12-39-20.
Sec. 2-314. Powers and duties; relationships to council.
   (a)   The auditor:
      (1)   May administer oaths;
      (2)   Shall receive tax returns;
      (3)   Shall make annual lists of real property owners;
      (4)   Shall make out descriptions of tracts of real property;
      (5)   Shall list taxable real property and personal property and the
owner's name;
      (6)   Shall offer to the state archives department tax duplicates that
are more than ten (10) years old and may destroy them if not accepted thereby;
      (7)   Shall apply a ten (10) per cent penalty to unreturned personal
property;
      (8)   Shall apply a twenty (20) per cent penalty to unreturned real
estate and new structures;
      (9)   Shall examine persons regarding their property;
      (10)   Shall keep a record of sales and conveyances of real property;
      (11)   Shall keep an abatement book for every abatement of taxes granted
and allowed;
      (12)   Shall preserve original tax returns for five (5) years; and
      (13)   Shall settle annually with the county treasurer and notify the
foreman of the grand jury, and the comptroller general of the date thereof. The
auditor shall certify the settlement sheets.
   (b)   Relationships to council. No later than September thirtieth of each
year, the auditor shall transmit to the comptroller general and the council an
abstract of the property in each district of the county. The auditor shall
notify the council of the day of the annual settlement between the auditor and
the treasurer.
   State law reference(s)--Reports in cases of special levy, S.C. Code 1976, §
12-39-160.
   (c)   Council's powers and duties. The council:
      (1)   Shall annually produce in the office of the county auditor the
claims allowed and ordered paid by it and shall vouch each amount presented by
the treasurer for a credit in his settlement with the auditor for the amount of
county and school taxes charged against him on the treasurer's duplicate for
each year;
      (2)   Shall sign the settlement sheets of the auditor and treasurer and
receive from the comptroller general a copy of his report concerning such
settlement; and
      (3)   Shall provide office space and funds for expenses.
(Code 1976, § 3-3014)
Secs. 2-315--2-325. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
   Cross reference(s)--County employee grievance committee, § 2-478; airport
commission, § 3-7 et seq.; building codes board of appeals, §
6-75 et seq.; election commission, §
9-13 et seq.; board of health, §
14-11 et seq.; county public library board of trustees, §
15-1 et seq.; historic preservation commission, §
20-11; board of assessment control, § 23-33 et seq.; board of assessment
appeals, §
23-48 et seq.
   State law reference(s)--Authority to establish boards, commissions, etc.,
S.C. Code 1976, § 4-9-30(6); planning commissions, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-29-310
et seq.; Riverbanks Parks Commissions, S.C. Code 1976, § 51-13-10; county
hospitals, S.C. Code 1976, § 44-7-610 et seq.
Sec. 2-326. In general.
   All provisions of this article shall apply to the boards, commissions, and
committees enumerated in this article, as well as to all other boards,
committees and commissions appointed and/or created by Richland County Council.
Except as otherwise provided by law or by the council, such boards and
commissions shall elect a chairman and a vice- chairman and shall prescribe
their own rules of procedure. Such boards and commissions may establish such
bylaws, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with ordinances of the council
or applicable state law, as they deem appropriate and necessary for the conduct
of their affairs. Copies thereof shall be filed with the clerk.
(Ord. No. 015-11HR, § I, 3-1-11)
Sec. 2-327. Terms of service.
   (a)   The members of such boards, commissions and committees shall not serve
more than two (2) consecutive terms; provided, however, that upon service of
two (2) consecutive terms a member may be eligible for reappointment after one
year from the date that member's appointed term was supposed to have ended.
Specifically, if a member's term has expired and that member remains in service
as a "holdover" due to the fact that his or her successor has not been
appointed, the one year referenced herein begins to run when that member's term
was supposed to have ended, not when the member's actual service ends, to
include service that occurs due to the non-appointment of a successor member.
Provided, however, that an individual serving in an executive position on a
county board, commission, or committee shall be allowed to complete the term
for that position when the individual’s term on the board, commission expires
prior to the expiration of the executive appointment Further provided, regional
boards, commissions and committees are exempt from the two (2) consecutive term
limits requirement whenever the other jurisdiction(s) appointing said members
do not limit the number of terms held by their appointee(s).
   (b)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Article, any member
serving on a board, commission or committee may continue to serve until such
time as an advertisement has appeared in the local newspaper and a successor
has been duly appointed; provided, however, the term of an elected member (who
is serving on a board, commission or committee) ends when such member is no
longer serving in the capacity of an elected member.
(Ord. No. 015-11HR, § I, 3-1-11; Ord. No. 018-18HR, § I, 4-17-18)
Sec. 2-328. Removal from service.
   In the event that any appointee to a board, committee, or commission misses
five out of twelve meetings of the board, committee, or commission to which he
has been appointed, he shall automatically lose his membership, and his seat
shall be declared vacant. The chairman of the board, committee or commission
shall notify the chairman of county council, in writing, upon any of its
members accumulating five absences out of twelve meetings. The county council
may, in its discretion, waive enforcement of this provision in the case of
illness, death of a family member, court appearance, or other similar
circumstances, beyond the control of the appointee. In addition, the members of
such boards and commissions may be removed for cause by majority vote of the
council. The provisions of this section shall be applicable to the boards,
committees, and commission enumerated in this article, as well as to any other
board, committee or commission appointed by the Richland County Council.
(Ord. No. 015-11HR, § I, 3-1-11)
Sec. 2-329. Concurrent service on multiple boards, etc., prohibited.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no one shall be
permitted to serve on more than one board, committee, or commission at any one
time; provided, however, that in the event a person was serving, on February 2,
1977, on more than one board, committee, or commission, he shall be allowed to
continue to serve until the expiration of his term on one or more boards,
committees, or commissions brings him into compliance with this section. After
that time, he shall not be allowed to serve on more than one board, committee,
or commission at the same time.
(Code 1976, § 2-7002; Ord. No. 015-11HR, § I, 3-1-11)
Sec. 2-330. Quarterly attendance records.
   The chairperson of each board, commission or committee shall provide the
county council with an attendance record. Such attendance record shall be
provided quarterly, with the first quarter beginning in January of each year.
(Ord. No. 1569-86, § 2, 12-30-86; Ord. No. 015-11HR, § I, 3-1-11)
Sec. 2-331. Determination of credit for attendance at meeting(s).
   In order to receive credit for attendance at a meeting, a member must be
present during at least 50 percent of said meeting.
(Ord. No. 1569-86, § 3, 12-30-86; Ord. No. 015-11HR, § I, 3-1-11)
Sec. 2-332. Boards, commissions and committees created.
      The following boards, commissions and committees are hereby established
and recognized:
   (a)   The Board of Trustees of the Columbia Township Auditorium.
   (1)   The board shall consist of seven (7) members residing in the county,
appointed by the council for a term of five (5) years.
   (2)   The board shall perform all duties provided by law.
   (b)   The Richland County Planning Commission.
   (1)   The commission shall consist of not less than five (5) or more than
nine (9) members, appointed by the council for a term of four (4) years. Any
person who is appointed to the commission after September 1, 2006 must reside
in Richland County. In appointing members to the commission, council shall give
due consideration as to whether applicants live in an incorporated or
unincorporated area of the County.
   (2)   The commission shall perform all duties provided by law.
   (c)   The Richland-Lexington Riverbanks Parks Commission.
   (1)   Two (2) members of the commission shall be appointed by the council,
for a term of six (6) years.
   (2)   The commission shall perform all duties provided by law.
   (d)   The Board of Trustees of the Richland Memorial Hospital.
   (1)   The board shall consist of 14 members and the chief and vice chief of
staff shall serve ex officio. Each member of the board shall be appointed by
the county council for a term of four years, or until his or her successor is
appointed. Provided, however, the terms of all current board members shall
expire on December 31st of the last year of their current term. Thereafter,
each term of office shall begin on January 1st of the first year, and expire on
December 31st of the fourth year.
   (2)   The board shall perform all duties provided by law.
   (e)   The Economic Development Commission. The commission shall consist of
twelve (12) members, of which three (3) shall be appointed by the council for a
term of three (3) years. Other appointive bodies include Lexington County,
Fairfield County, Chamber of Commerce and city council with each nomination to
be confirmed by all appointive bodies. Meetings at call.
   (f)   East Richland Public Service District. The public service district
shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the governor upon the
recommendation of the county council for five (5) year terms. Members shall be
electors or residents of the district, and at least one member shall be a
resident of each incorporated municipality within the districts. Meetings at
call.
   (g)   Richland County Youth Commission.
   (1)   Creation. There is hereby created the Richland County Youth
Commission, which shall be appointed by majority vote of the county council and
shall function in an advisory capacity. The commission shall be comprised of
concerned citizens from diverse backgrounds who are committed to improving the
quality of life for young people in Richland County. This advisory commission
shall be an advocate for the youth of this county.
   (2)   Membership. The youth commission shall consist of thirteen (13)
members, all of whom shall be residents of the county; at least one (1) member
to be appointed from the clergy; at least one (1) member to be a representative
of the South Carolina Department of Youth Services, upon recommendation of the
commissioner; at least one (1) member from the Richland County Sheriff’s
Department, upon recommendation by the Richland County Sheriff; at least one
(1) member who is a resident of Richland County School District One; at least
one (1) member who is a resident of Richland County School District Two; two
(2) members attending high school (grades 9-12) in Richland County; and the
remaining six (6) members at large.
   (3)   Terms. The term of office of each commissioner shall be for a period
of four (4) years, or until his successor is appointed and qualified; however,
the initial appointment shall be made in staggered terms. The six candidates
receiving the most votes shall be appointed for four (4) years, and the five
(5) remaining candidates shall be appointed for two (2) years.
   (4)   Structure. The commission shall develop and adopt its own bylaws,
subject to final approval by the county council. The commission shall elect
annually a chairman, vice-chairman, secretary, and treasurer.
   (5)   Meetings. The commission shall meet at such times and places as
provided in its bylaws but shall hold at least one (1) meeting each month. All
meetings shall be conducted pursuant to, and in compliance with, the South
Carolina Freedom Act.
   (6)   Duties and responsibilities.
      a.   Identify youth-related problems or potential problems. In this
regard, the commission shall:
         1.   Become well informed on the problems facing youth in the
community;
         2.   Coordinate with other local groups/agencies who serve youth, such
as private, nonprofit agencies or government groups;
         3.   Hold public forums, conduct community surveys, contact local law
enforcement personnel, and meeting with community leaders;
         4.   Actively seek youth involvement and input.
      b.   Implement a program to increase the awareness of the general
population and elect officials of the needs and problems facing youth and their
families. In this regard, the commission shall:
         1.   Support the efforts of other organizations in publicizing youth
Issues and problems; and
         2.   Become advocates for improvement of services and programs for
youth.
         3.   Research successful model youth programs and make recommendations
to county council for consideration and implementation in the county.
         4.   Seek and administer federal, state and private funding for
commission operations and for projects proposed by the commission pursuant to
the powers enumerated herein.
   (h)   Richland County Conservation Commission.
   (1)   Creation. There is hereby created a commission to be known as the
Richland County Conservation Commission, which shall have the structure,
organization, composition, purposes, powers, duties, and functions established
hereinbelow.
   (2)   Structure, organization, and composition of commission.
      a.   The Richland County Conservation Commission shall consist of 11
members. Each member of Richland County Council shall appoint one person to
represent their respective Council district, and the term of the member of the
Commission shall be coterminous with the term of the appointing Council member.
Provided, however, that if a vacancy shall occur on Council, the member of the
Commission appointed by the vacating Council member shall complete his/her
term.
      b.   Officers of the Commission shall consist of a Chairman, Vice
Chairman, Secretary-Treasurer, and such other officers as may be elected by a
majority vote of the Commission. The officers of the Commission shall be
elected by the Commission each year for terms of office that shall commence on
January 1 of the following year. Officers shall serve terms of one (1) year and
shall continue in office until their successors are elected and qualify.
      c.   The members of the Commission, including officers, shall serve
without pay but may be reimbursed for travel and other incidental expenses
incurred in connection with the Commission’s responsibilities; however, such
reimbursement shall be subject to compliance with ordinances, policies and
procedures established by the Richland County Council governing the
reimbursement of expenses for county boards, agencies and commissions.
   (3)   Parliamentary procedure; minutes. The Commission shall adopt by-laws
and rules of procedure, which are not inconsistent with Roberts Rules of Order,
the laws of the State of South Carolina, and the Richland County Code of
Ordinances. The Commission shall maintain records and minutes of its
proceedings and meetings.
   (4)   Meetings; attendance. The Commission shall meet at least quarterly.
The chairman or a majority of the members of the Commission may call a special
meeting of the Commission at any time. A member of the Commission who shall be
absent for 50% or more of the meetings of the Commission during any 24-month
period shall be deemed to have forfeited their membership and shall be removed
without further action by the Commission or the County Council.
   (5)   Ex-officio members. The Commission may, by majority vote of the
members, elect ex- officio members of the commission for terms of one (1) year.
Ex-officio members of the commission may participate in discussions of policy
or other matters of importance to the Commission but shall not be permitted to
vote on any other matter coming before the commission. Ex-officio members of
the Commission shall not be counted in determining the existence of a quorum at
any meeting of the commission.
   (6)   Purposes and objectives. The purposes and objectives of the Richland
County Conservation Commission shall be as follows:
      a.   To promote the conservation of natural resources;
      b.   To promote the development and preservation of historical resources;
      c.   To promote passive, outdoor, nature- based recreation;
      d.   To promote tourism, emphasizing the natural, cultural, and
historical resources of Richland County;
       e.   To promote efforts to improve the appearance of Richland County;
      f.   To educate the public as to the benefits of conservation;
      g.   To foster civic pride in the beauty and nobler assets of the county;
      h.   To, in all ways possible, assure a functionally efficient and
visually attractive county in the future;
      i.   To support policies that protect the general appearance of all
buildings, structures, landscaping and open areas of the county; and
      j.   To undertake such studies, plans, activities, and projects as may,
from time to time, be assigned to the Commission by the County Council.
   (7)   Plan for protection; list of significant resources.
      a.   The Commission shall prepare and submit annually to the County
Council a plan for the protection of significant resources in the county. Such
plan shall include a list of significant natural, cultural, or historical
resources in the county, which are recommended to the County Council for
acquisition, lease, or development. A financing strategy shall accompany each
recommendation, with emphasis being placed upon minimizing the utilization of
public monies and maximizing the utilization of other sources, such as grants,
public donations, etc.
      b.   The plan may provide various recommendations and approaches for the
protection of natural, cultural, or historical properties or resources,
including:
         1.   Purchase of resources for public ownership or other protective
ownership;
         2.   Purchase of resources for resale;
         3.   Acquisition of conservation easements to protect resources;
         4.   The development of, access to, or restoration of properties or
resources;
         5.   Acceptance by donation or bargain sale of properties or
resources;
         6.   The negotiation of leases or conservation easements;
         7.   The maintenance, preservation, protection, identification or
development of natural, cultural or historical properties or resources;
         8.   Other plans, methods, or approaches for the identification,
acquisition, purchase, lease, preservation, protection or development of
natural, cultural or historical properties or resources.
      c.   Provided, however, that the power of eminent domain shall not be
exercised by the Council nor the commission for the acquisition of any property
recommended for protection by the commission. Any purchase, lease, acceptance,
acquisition, protection, development, or maintenance of land, as referenced in
subsection b.(
1-8) above, shall only be received from a willing property owner who
voluntarily consents to such participation.
      d.   The Richland County Council may adopt the list of significant
resources submitted by the commission, in whole or in part, and may add to or
delete additional properties and significant resources to the list of
significant resources submitted by the commission. The list shall be reviewed
and, if necessary, amended not less than annually by the commission. No assets
or revenues allocated or appropriated to the Richland County Conservation
Commission Fund shall be used to acquire, purchase, lease, protect, preserve,
identify, or develop property not included on the list of significant resources
approved by the County Council. Provided, however, property owners may notify
the commission, in writing, that they do not want the commission to consider
their property for preservation and/or protection. The commission shall
maintain a file of such written notifications, and those properties shall not
be considered for inclusion on the list of significant resources that is
submitted to the County Council.
      e.   The plan for the protection or preservation of significant resources
in the county may include plans and recommendations for the protection of the
following resources:
         1.   Open space and significant scenic views;
         2.   Prime agricultural land;
         3.   Recreation land for hunting, fishing, water access, and trails;
         4.   Wildlife habitat;
         5.   Sensitive ecological land;
         6.   Historic buildings, sites, or landscapes;
         7.   Other properties or resources determined by the County Council to
be significant for natural, cultural, or historical preservation.
      f.   In the process of developing the plan, the commission shall have the
authority to coordinate activities of volunteers, organizations, business and
corporate entities and government agencies for the identification,
conservation, preservation and development of natural, cultural and historical
resources in the county; encourage such planning activities and development as
may be necessary or advisable to promote, identify, acquire, lease, conserve,
maintain and develop natural, cultural and historical resources in the county;
and, in conjunction with cultural and other agencies, entities or individuals,
identify, acquire, lease, maintain, preserve and develop natural, cultural and
historical resources in the county.
   (8)   Conservation easements.
      a.   Any landowner desiring to obtain an endorsement by the Richland
County Council for the granting of a conservation easement to a qualified
organization, exclusively for conservation purposes, shall submit an
application to the Commission, along with the appropriate user fee as described
in subparagraph d. below.
      b.   Upon review of the application, the Commission shall prepare a
report for Council concerning the features and characteristics of the subject
property and the conservation easement. The report to Council shall:
         1.   Identify the conservation values of the parcel that justify the
interest by Richland County. Conservation values are characteristics of
property, which because of their ecological, historic, scenic, or open space
value, are essential to the continued integrity of Richland County; and
         2.   Indicate that the conservation easement protects in perpetuity
all aspects of the parcel with conservation value; and
         3.   Indicate that any developments proposed by the owner on non-
conservation aspects of the parcel would not disturb the conservation values of
the parcel; and
         4.   Indicate that the Donee organization to hold the easement has
sufficient credibility and resources to adequately monitor and enforce the
easement and has been approved by the Commission.
      c.   Upon receipt of this report, County Council shall make a finding
that such easement furthers a “significant public benefit”. No conservation
easement shall be accepted or endorsed unless the easement fulfills a
“significant public benefit”, defined as:
         1.   Recreation or education of the public (this requires that the
public have free access to the land); or
         2.   Protection of an important watercourse or natural habitat of
fish, wildlife, or plants; or
         3.   Preservation of historically important land or structures; or
         4.   Preservation of open space for the scenic enjoyment of the public
or pursuant to a clearly delineated governmental conservation policy; provided
that such preservation will yield a significant public benefit, such as:
            (i)   Furthering a county or municipal green space plan, of which
the donor’s conservation easement will be an integral part; or
            (ii)   The easement will protect open space, the view of which can
be and is enjoyed by the public from vantage points on adjacent or nearby
property (e.g. from a road or adjoining public land), and that the protection
of this viewshed will yield a significant public benefit.
      d.   In order to offset the costs incurred by the Commission and Council
in evaluating the application for endorsement and in making the actual
endorsement, each applicant shall pay a required user fee to the County. Such
user fee shall be an amount equal to 2% of the appraised value of the property
being donated for conservation purposes, as reflected in the records of the
Richland County Tax Assessor, or five hundred ($500.00) dollars, whichever is
greater.
   (9)   Richland County Conservation Commission Fund.
      a.   The Richland County Conservation Commission Fund is hereby
established as a separate and segregated fund for the purpose of funding
projects and activities of the Richland County Conservation Commission approved
by the Richland County Council. Such fund shall consist of all funds
appropriated by the Richland County Council, all gifts of land, cash or other
assets made to the county for the purposes and objectives stated herein, and
all other grants or other public or private revenues or gifts, with interest
thereon, for such purposes.
      b.   The Richland County Council may make annual appropriations to the
fund, and all funds appropriated shall be used solely and exclusively for the
purposes stated herein. Unexpended or unused assets and funds shall be
maintained in the Richland County Conservation Commission Fund and used solely
for the identification, acquisition, lease, protection, maintenance and
development of natural, cultural and historical property and resources
identified on the list of significant resources developed by the Richland
County Conservation Commission. Fund balances not expended during any fiscal
year shall be carried forward for the identification, acquisition, lease,
protection, preservation or development of resources listed on the commission’s
list of significant resources.
      c.   All property or interests in property to be used by or for the
Richland County Conservation Commission Fund shall be transferred to the county
by the persons or entities owning title thereto, and all real property used,
acquired or leased for commission purposes shall be owned, purchased, leased,
held, conveyed, or disposed of in the name of the county by the Richland County
Council. All such property or interests in property shall be listed on a fixed
asset ledger, which shall be maintained. Such ledger shall show the value of
property or interests in property acquired, leased, held, owned, preserved,
protected, maintained, or developed, in whole or in part, from funds allocated
from the Richland County Conservation Commission Fund.
   (i)   Reserved.
   (j)   Richland County Hospitality Tax Advisory Committee.
   (1)   Creation. There is hereby created a Richland County Hospitality Tax
Advisory Committee.
   (2)   Membership. The Richland County Hospitality Tax Advisory Committee
shall consist of five (5) members who shall be appointed by majority vote of
the Council. All members must be interested citizens residing in the County,
and at least two members must be representative of the restaurant industry.
   (3)   Responsibilities. The Richland County Hospitality Tax Advisory
Committee shall review applications of those entities who are seeking funding
from the County Promotions portion of hospitality tax funds. The Committee will
then make recommendations to County Council for the allocation and distribution
of such funds.
   (4)   Terms of Members; Election of Chairperson; Meetings.
      (a)   The Committee members shall serve a term of two years or until his
or her successor is appointed.
      (b)   The Committee shall elect a chairperson.
      (c)   The Committee shall meet at such times and places as determined by
the Chairperson, but shall hold at least one meeting each calendar year. The
County Administrator shall assign staff to assist the Committee in making its
recommendations to County Council. All meetings of the Committee shall be
conducted in compliance with the South Carolina Freedom of Information Act.
   (k)   Richland County Transportation Study Commission.
   (1)   Creation. There is hereby created a Richland County Transportation
Study Commission.
   (2)   Membership. The Richland County Transportation Study Commission shall
consist of thirty-nine (39) members who shall be appointed as follows: 11
members, 1 from each member of County Council; 7 members, 1 from each member of
Columbia City Council; 4 members, of which 1 shall be appointed by Lexington
County Council, 1 shall be appointed by West Columbia City Council, 1 shall be
appointed by Cayce City Council, and 1 shall be appointed by the Springdale
Town Council; and 17 members, as recommended by the Richland County Rules and
Appointments and approved by a majority vote of Richland County Council. No
elected officials shall be appointed to this Commission.
   (3)   Terms of Members; Sub-Committees; Election of Chairperson; Meetings.
      (a)   A Commission member shall serve a term of two (2) years or until
his or her successor is appointed.
      (b)   The Commission shall consist of four (4) sub-committees, and an at
large membership, as follows:
         1.   An Executive sub-committee, which shall be composed of seven (7)
members; and
         2.   A Greenways and Bike Paths sub- committee, which shall be
composed of seven (7) members; and
         3.   A Roads sub-committee, which shall be composed of ten (10)
members; and
         4.   A Transit sub-committee, which shall be composed of fourteen (14)
members.
         5.   In addition, sixteen (16) members shall be appointed as at-large
members; provided that fifteen (15) of the at-large members shall also be
appointed to one of the sub-committees referenced above.
      (c)   The Commissions chairperson, co- chairperson, and those members to
serve on the Executive sub-committee of the Commission, shall be appointed by a
majority vote of Richland County Council.
      (d)   Each sub-committee shall elect a chairperson by a majority vote of
its respective membership.
      (e)   The Commission shall meet at such times and places as determined by
the Chairperson, but shall hold at least one meeting each calendar month. All
meetings of the Commission shall be conducted in compliance with the South
Carolina Freedom of Information Act.
   (4)   Responsibilities. The Richland County Transportation Study Commission
shall study the long-range transportation needs of Richland County, including
the current bus system and other modes of public transit. The Commission shall
also assess the highway and road improvements that are needed to alleviate
congestion that will allow people and goods to move through the County
efficiently. This study shall include incentives for development throughout the
County that is conducive to public transit, and shall include projects to
alleviate congestion, including, but not limited to, Lower Richland Connector
and Clemson Road. In addition, the Commission shall develop a plan to make
Richland County more pedestrian and bicycle friendly. The Transportation Study
Commission shall submit an interim report to Richland County Council in May
2007 and in November 2007. A final report shall be submitted to Richland County
Council in May 2008. Copies of these reports shall be submitted to all local
governments within the service area. Any consulting services that may be needed
to assist the Commission with their responsibilities shall be managed by the
Richland County Procurement Department (for example, RFPs). The Executive
Committee of the Commission shall review the applications and make a
recommendation to Richland County Council before a contract is awarded.
   (l)   Richland County Business Service Center Appeals Board.
   (1)   Creation. There is hereby created a Richland County Business Service
Center Appeals Board.
   (2)   Membership. The Business Service Center Appeals Board shall consist of
five members who shall be appointed by majority vote of the Council. The five-
member board shall be comprised of no more than three and no less than two
Certified Public Accountants, no more than two and no less than one member of
the S.C. Bar Association, and no more than two and no less than one other
business person, defined as a person who either owns their own business or has
an executive role in a business. All members must be interested citizens
residing in Richland County.
   (3)   Responsibilities. The Richland County Business Service Center Appeals
Board shall serve as the appeals function expounded in the Richland County Code
of Ordinances, Chapter 16, Article I. The Board will hear appeals resulting
from any person aggrieved by a final assessment, charge backs from an audit, or
a denial of a business license by the License Official. In that capacity and as
a finder of fact, the Appeals Board shall have the following responsibilities:
      a.   Adopting procedures relating to the execution of the Appeal’s Board
function;
      b.   Receiving written appeals from businesses;
      c.   Holding meetings to receive testimony by the business, the Business
Service Center official, and any other official approved by the Appeals Board;
      d.   Reviewing and analyzing the information presented in the testimonies
provided;
      e.   Making a factual conclusion as to the issue in question based upon
the review and analysis; and
      f.   Writing a formal determination regarding the decision made as to the
issue in question.
   (4)   Terms of Members; Election of Chairperson; Meetings.
      a.   The term of office of the chairperson and each member of the Appeals
Board shall be four (4) years. However, in making the initial appointments, two
members shall be appointed for an initial term of four years, two members for
an initial term of three years, and one member shall be appointed for an
initial term of two years. Thereafter, their successors shall be appointed for
terms of four years, or for the balance of any unexpired term. Members may be
reappointed for a consecutive, second term, for four years. After this second
term, a member may be reappointed for a third term, but only after two years
has elapsed from the last day of the last term served. The County Council may
terminate for just cause any Board members’ terms of office.
      b.   The Committee shall elect a chairperson.
      c.   The Committee shall meet whenever an appeal is made, at such times
and places as determined by the Chairperson.
   (m)   Appointment of members of county athletic commission.
   (1)   The county council, pursuant to the provisions of Act No. 48 of 1991,
hereby assumes the appointive powers over the county athletic commission. There
shall be five (5) members of the commission who shall be appointed as follows:
      a.   One member who resides in County Council District 1, 2, or 7;
      b.   One member who resides in County Council District 8 or 9;
      c.   One member who resides in County Council District 3 or 4;
      d.   One member who resides in County Council District 5 or 6;
      e.   One member who resides in County Council District 10 or 11.
   (2)   The members of the commission shall be appointed for four year terms
and until their successors are appointed qualify.
   (n)   Duties of local emergency planning committee. The duties of the
Richland County Local Emergency Planning Committee are hereby expanded to
include the following:
   (1)   Ensure the full implementation of the Superfund Amendments and Re-
authorization Act of 1986 (SARA), Title III be accomplished as quickly as
possible.
   (2)   Make recommendations for hazardous materials code uniformity within
Richland County and all municipalities within Richland County.
   (3)   Review environmental impact statements submitted by business handling
environmentally sensitive materials.
   (4)   Develop facility inspection frequency recommendations based on
inventory and release history.
   (5)   Make recommendations to insure the cooperation of all public safety
and inspection agencies before, during, and after hazardous materials
inspections.
   (6)   Make recommendations on planning and zoning ordinances for industries
that produce, store, or transport hazardous materials. Develop recommendations
for safe distances between residential areas and hazardous industries.
   (7)   Explore the possibility of adjacent jurisdictions adopting interlocal
agreements, with mutual review of projects with regional impact.
   (8)   Develop recommendations for financial responsibility requirements for
industries that manufacture, store, or transport hazardous materials.
   (9)   Develop a system of regulating local transportation of hazardous
materials within the provisions of state and federal law.
   (10)   Develop a system to assist the facility planning process and require
such a document be on file with the local emergency planning committee.
   (11)   Develop an outline for the permitting process of environmentally
sensitive business.
   (12)   Conduct a study of crimes against the environment.
   (13)   Develop a cost recovery program to assist state and local government
to recover cost expended in hazardous materials incidents.
   (14)   Explore shortfalls and gaps in hazardous waste regulations.
   (o)   Disabilities and special needs board.
   (1)   Board. There is hereby created the Richland/Lexington County
Disabilities and Special Needs Board with powers, duties, responsibilities, and
functions set forth herein.
   (2)   Purpose. It is the purpose of the Richland/ Lexington County
Disabilities and Special Needs Board to develop, provide, coordinate, improve
and operate community based programs serving persons with disabilities and
special needs or other related disabilities with a view toward developing their
respective mental, physical and social capacities to their fullest potential.
   (3)   Membership. The board shall be composed of fifteen (15) members, at
least five (5) of whom shall be resident electors. The board shall be appointed
by the governor of the State of South Carolina upon recommendation of the
majority of the county legislative delegation. Persons with a demonstrated
interest and background in disabilities and special needs and/or human services
shall be recommended for appointment.
   (4)   Terms. The terms of the members shall be for four (4) years until
their successors are appointed and qualify, except that of the first appointed:
One (1) shall be appointed for one (1) year; two (2) for two (2) years; two (2)
for three (3) years; and two (2) for four (4) years. Vacancies shall be filled
for any unexpired terms in the same manner as original appointments. Any member
may be removed by the appointing authority for neglect of duty, misconduct or
malfeasance in office or for missing three (3) consecutive meetings after being
given a written statement of reasons and an opportunity to be heard.
   (5)   Meetings and requirements. The board shall open all regular meetings
to the general public. No fewer than four (4) meetings per year shall be held.
Special meetings may be called, with reasonable notice given to other members.
   (6)   Bylaws. The board will establish its own bylaws. On an annual basis,
it will elect a chairperson, a vice-chairperson, a secretary and a treasurer.
   (7)   Insurance. The board will maintain at all times, workers compensation
insurance on its employees and a policy of liability insurance in the amount of
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) covering all employees and board members.
The premiums for this coverage shall be the responsibility of the board.
Richland County shall be listed as an insured under the policy of liability
insurance. The board shall furnish a copy of the current insurance policies to
county council and will keep current copies of the policies on file at all
times.
   (8)   Duties. The board shall:
      a.   Be the administrative, planning, coordinating, evaluative, and
review body of services to persons in the county who are mentally retarded or
have other related disabilities; the board shall be funded in part or in whole
by appropriations for the South Carolina Department of Disabilities and Special
Needs.
      b.   Submit an annual plan and projected budget to the South Carolina
Department of Disabilities and Special Needs for approval and consideration of
funding.
      c.   Review and evaluate, on at least an annual basis, county mental
retardation and related disability services provided pursuant to this ordinance
and report its finding and recommendations to the South Carolina Department of
Disabilities and Special Needs and county council.
      d.   Promote and accept local financial support for Richland County
programs from funding sources such as businesses, individuals, industrial and
private foundation, voluntary agencies, governmental and other lawful sources
and promote public support from municipal and county sources.
      e.   Employ personnel and expend its budget for the direct delivery of
services or contract with those services vendors necessary to carry out county
mental retardation or related disability service programs, which shall meet
those specifications prescribed by the South Carolina Department of
Disabilities and Special Needs.
      f.   Plan, arrange, and implement working agreements and contract with
other human service agencies, both public and private, and with educational and
judicial agencies.
      g.   Provide the South Carolina Department of Disabilities and Special
Needs and the county council with such records, reports, and access to its
sponsored services as the South Carolina Department of Disabilities and Special
Needs and the county council may require and submit its sponsored services and
facilities to licensing requirements of the South Carolina Department of
Disabilities and Special Needs of the licensing requirements of other state or
local agencies having such legal authority.
      h.   Buy, sell, mortgage, pledge, encumber, lease, rent, and contract
with respect to real and personal property, from funds payable out of any
revenues of the county disabilities and special needs board, and shall not
obligate the full faith, credit, and taxing power of the county.
      i.   Provide a public forum to which individuals or groups may present
any concerns or appeal a dispute or disagreement with a provided agency or
service.
   (p)   Duties of the Midlands Commission on homelessness.
   (l)   The Midlands Commission shall be appointed from the civic and business
community and shall be composed of seven (7) persons, each of whose leadership
has demonstrated an interest in the needs of the homeless population of central
South Carolina. Three (3) of the members of the Commission shall be appointed
by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Columbia and four (4) of the
members of the Commission shall be appointed by the County Council of the
County of Richland, State of South Carolina. One of the four members of the
Commission appointed by the County of Richland shall be the designee of the
Consortium For The Homeless serving cental South Carolina. The members shall
serve for terms of three (3) years and until their successors are appointed and
qualified, except that the first appointments shall be as follows: three (3)
for three (3) years; two (2) for two (2) years; and two (2) for one (1) year.
No Commission member shall be eligible for appointment following service as a
Commissioner for one (1) year following the expiration of any full term of
service as a Commissioner.
   (2)   Immediately upon the appointment of the Commission, it shall organize
by electing one of its number as Chair, a second as Vice Chair, and a third as
Secretary. The officers of the Commission shall hold office for terms of one
(1) year and until their successors shall be chosen and qualified. It shall be
the duty of the Commission to see that a record of the appointees to the
Commission shall be filed in the office of the Clerk of County Council for
Richland County, and the office of the Clerk of the City Council of Columbia,
so as to indicate the persons holding office as members of the Commission and
the duration of their respective terms. No member of the Commission shall
receive any compensation for his or her services as a member of the Commission.
Membership on the Commission shall not be construed to be an office of honor or
profit.
   (3)   Duties.
      a.   To act as an advocate for the needs of the homeless population in
central South Carolina;
      b.   To identify resources necessary to address the needs of the homeless
population of central South Carolina;
      c.   To encourage coordination in the planning for and delivery of
services to the homeless population in central South Carolina.
      d.   To the greatest extent possible, work in conjunction with the
Consortium for the homeless and other entities serving the needs of the
homeless.
      e.   To conduct its affairs in a fiscal year beginning July 1 and ending
June 30. As shortly after close of its fiscal year as may be practicable, an
audit of its affairs shall be made. Copies of such audit, incorporated into an
annual report of the Commission, shall be filed with the Clerk for the County
Council of Richland County, State of South Carolina, and the Clerk for the City
Council of Columbia, State of South Carolina.
   (4)   Reasonable administrative assistance to the Commission shall be
provided for by the City of Columbia in conjunction and cooperation with the
County of Richland.
   (5)   Any action required of the Commission may be taken at any meeting of
the Commission, regular or special, and at any such meeting a majority of the
members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of
transacting the business of the Commission.
   (q)   Internal Audit Committee.
   (1)   Creation. There is hereby established an Internal Audit Committee
which shall have the structure, organization, composition, purposes, powers,
duties, and functions established below.
   (2)   Membership; terms. The Internal Audit Committee shall be comprised of
five members of Council (the Council Chair, the A&F Committee Chair, the D&S
Committee Chair, the Economic Development Committee Chair, and the Rules and
Appointment Committee Chair), two citizens appointed by a majority vote of the
Council at large, and an employee appointed by the County Administrator. The
citizens' and the employee's terms shall be one year in length, with up to
three term renewals permitted. The Council members' terms shall be for as long
as they serve in the capacity of Council Chair or Committee Chair.
   (3)   Duties and responsibilities.
      a.   The Internal Audit Committee shall develop with the Internal
Auditor, for recommendation to the full Council for approval by majority vote,
an audit schedule (which shall include areas to be reviewed, their priority and
the timelines for completion), audit progress, audit follow-up, and special
needs; and shall work to assure maximum coordination between the work of the
Internal Auditor and the needs of the chief executive officer, the legislative
body, and any other contractually hired auditors, as necessary or appropriate.
      b.   The Internal Audit Committee shall review, for recommendation to
Council for approval by majority vote, all areas of County operations for which
County funds are levied, collected, expended, or otherwise used. This includes
departments or offices reporting to the County Administrator, departments or
offices headed by elected or appointed officials, millage agencies,
legislatively appointed Commissions receiving County funding, nonprofit
organizations receiving grant monies from County funds, and any other
organization receiving any type of funding for any purpose from the County.
      c.   The Internal Audit Committee shall oversee the responsibilities of
the Internal Auditor, as stated in the negotiated contract with the Internal
Auditor.
      d.   The Internal Audit Committee shall present to the full Council a
written report regarding each audit conducted by the Internal Auditor following
the Internal Auditor's report to the Internal Audit Committee for each audit.
Additionally, in conjunction with the budget process, the Internal Audit
Committee shall annually present to the full Council a written summary report
regarding the audits, progress, findings, and any other appropriate information
relating to the internal audits conducted during the past fiscal year following
the Internal Auditor's summary report to the Internal Audit Committee.
      e.   The Internal Audit Committee shall annually review the Internal
Auditor and anyone else working in such a capacity for adherence to government
auditing standards in conducting its work to ensure quality service and
independence as defined by those standards. (These are the federal Government
Accounting Office's “Yellow Book” standards). A subsequent report of the
Committee's findings shall be presented to Council for their information.
   (r)   Bond Review Committee.
   (1)   Creation. There is hereby established a Richland County Bond Review
Committee which shall have the structure, organization, composition, purposes,
powers, duties, and functions established below.
   (2)   Membership; terms. The Bond Review Committee shall be comprised of
five members, as follows: two shall be county employees designated by the
County Administrator, two shall be Council members designated by the County
Council Chair, and one shall be a bond counsel representative. A member shall
serve a term of two (2) years or until his or her successor is appointed. In
addition, the County Auditor and the County Treasurer shall serve on the
Committee ex officio, with all the same rights, duties, and responsibilities as
a Committee member.
   (3)   Duties and responsibilities.
      a.   The Bond Review Committee shall review and make recommendations to
the County Council regarding the issuance of Debt Obligations and the
management of outstanding debt in accordance with the County Debt Policy.
      b.   The Bond Review Committee shall consider all issues related to
outstanding and proposed Debt Obligations; including, but not limited to, all
matters affecting or relating to the creditworthiness, security and repayment
of the proposed Debt Obligations, such as procurement of services for debt
sales and administration, structure, repayment terms and covenants of the
proposed Debt Obligation.
      c.   The Bond Review Committee shall periodically review county debt
policies and make recommendations where appropriate.
      d.   The Bond Review Committee shall review all capital projects proposed
to be financed with debt for compliance with the Debt Policy, and will make
recommendations to the County Administrator as to the appropriate structure of
such debt. In formulating its recommendations, the Committee shall consider:
         1.   Legality and availability of revenue for the repayment of such
debt;
         2.   Impact of such debt on the county's debt capacity;
         3.   Ongoing operational impact analysis to consider additional
requirement after project completion on the county's operating budget;
         4.   Impact analysis of debt service requirements to the total county
debt obligation over life of debt;
         5.   Review post-project analysis to evaluate actual benefit received
in comparison to estimates;
         6.   Review compliance on all outstanding bond covenants and
requirements of the bond resolutions; and
         7.   Other relevant factors.
      e.   The Bond Review Committee shall present findings and recommendations
to Council during project discussions.
   (s)   Richland County Complete Streets Commission.
   (1)   Creation. There is hereby created a Richland County Complete Streets
Commission, hereinafter known as the Commission, or RCCSC.
   (2)   Membership. The Commission shall consist of nine (9) members, with one
representative from each of the following general interest groups: one (1)
representative from the South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental
Control (DHEC); one (1) representative from the American Association of Retired
People (AARP) regional office; one (1) representative from neighborhood
advocacy interests; one (1) representative from the Central Carolina Realtors
Association; one (1) representative from the Homebuilders Association of
Greater Columbia; one (1) representative from cycling advocacy interests; one
(1) representative from the Richland County municipalities; and one (1)
representative from Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) advocacy interests.
In addition, the South Carolina Department of Transportation (SCDOT) District
One Office Administrator or his/her designee shall serve on the Commission.
All members shall serve without compensation, and shall be appointed by the
Richland County Council.
   (3)   Terms of Members; Election of Chairperson; Meetings.
      a.   Initially, three (3) members shall be appointed for a one year term;
three (3) members for a two year term; and three (3) members for a three year
term. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for a three year term. The initial
appointments shall be as follows:
         1.   Three year terms for the ADA advocacy representative; Central
Carolina Realtors Association representative; and the DHEC representative; and
         2.   Two year terms for the AARP representative; the municipal
representative; and the cycling advocacy representative; and
         3.   One year term for the residential neighborhood advocacy
representative; the District One SCDOT representative; and the Homebuilders
Association of Greater Columbia representative.
         4.   After the initial appointments, each new appointment shall be for
a three year term.
         5.   Appointments to a vacancy shall be for remainder of the
representative's current term.
      b.   The Commission shall annually elect a chairperson and a vice-
chairperson by a majority vote of its respective membership.
      c.   The Planning and Development Services Department shall provide
administrative support to the Commission.
      d.   The Commission shall meet monthly during the second week of the
month and shall not begin before 5:00 PM. The Chairman may call a special
meeting at any time with a minimum seven (7) days notice to the members.
      e.   All meetings of the Commission shall be conducted in compliance with
the South Carolina Freedom of Information Act.
   (4)   Duties. The Commission shall review and comment regarding proposals to
implement the Richland County Complete Streets Program Goals and Objectives,
adopted July 6, 2010, and as may be periodically amended thereafter. Said
proposals may include, but are not limited to, regulations and/or procedures
to:
      a.   Improve cycling and pedestrian facilities and safety; and
      b.   Complete a comprehensive sidewalk improvement program for County
Council consideration by June 2012; and
      c.   Create CMRTA Park-n-Ride facilities; and
      d.   Preparation of a countywide ADA Transition Plan for County Council
consideration by June 2014; and
      e.   Develop measures in an attempt to reduce pedestrian and cycling
accidents; and
      f.   Other duties as may be assigned by the County Council.
   (5)   Procedures. The Richland County Complete Streets Commission shall
adopt Rules of Procedure by which meetings and activities of the Commission
will be conducted no later than ninety (90) days after its first scheduled
meeting. Such Rules shall not conflict with Robert's Rules of Order, the
general and permanent statutes of the State of South Carolina, and Richland
County ordinances.
   (t)   Richland County First Steps Partnership Board.
   (1)   The County Council, pursuant to Act 81 of 2023, shall appoint, upon
recommendation from the county library board, one (1) member of the Richland
County Public Library System staff shall serve on the Richland County First
Steps Partnership Board.
   (2)   The member shall perform all duties and be subject to the rules of the
committee provided by law.
(Code 1976, § 2-7001; Ord. No. 1533-86, § 1, 10-7-86; Ord. No. 1591-87, § 2, 3-
3-87; Ord. No. 2060-90, §§ I--III, 12-18-90; Ord. No. 2141-91 HR, § 1, 10-15-
91; Ord. No. 2153-91, § I, 11-5-91; Ord. No. 2159-91, § 1, 12-3-91; Ord. No.
2189-92, §§ I, II, 3-3-92; Ord. No. 2209-92, §§ II--VI, VII, 5-5-92; Ord. No.
2379, § I, 12-7-93; Ord. No. 086-94, §§ I--III, 12-6-94; Ord. No. 075-97HR, 9-
10-98; Ord. No. 045-98HR, § I-- V, 11-17-98; Ord. No. 032-01HR, § II, 5-1-01;
Ord. No. 035-01HR, § I, 5-1-01; Ord. No. 017-02HR, § I, 6-4-02; Ord. No. 053-
03HR, § I, 9-16-03; Ord. No. 082-04HR, § I, 11-16-04; Ord. No. 001-05, § I, 1-
4-05; Ord. No. 018-05HR, § I, 4-5-05; Ord. No. 014-06HR, § I, 2-21-06; Ord. No.
077-06HR, § I, 7-18-06; Ord. No. 091-06HR, § 4, 10-3-06; Ord. No. 022-07HR, §
I, 3-20-07; Ord. No. 050-07HR, § I, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 079-07HR, § I, 10-2-07;
Ord. No. 029-08HR, § I, 6-3-08; Ord. No. 015-11HR, § I, 3-1-11; Ord. No. 017-
11HR, § I, 3-15-11; Ord. No. 068-11HR, § I, 12-13- 11; Ord. No. 034-13HR, §§ I,
II, 7-2-13; Ord. No. 018-16HR, § I, 5-17-16; Ord. No. 040-23HR, § II, 9-19-23)
Secs. 2-333--2-339. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. RESERVED
   Editor’s note--Ord. No. 030-09HR, § I, effective May 19, 2009, repealed
former Art. VII, §§ 2-340--2-513, relative to personnel regulations. Future
personnel regulations can be found in the Richland County Employee Handbook and
the Richland County Human Resources Guidelines which shall be adopted by the
Richland County Council by Resolution.
ARTICLE IX. FINANCES
   Cross reference(s)--County treasurer, §
2-300 et seq.; county auditor, §
2-311 et seq.
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Secs. 2-514--2-531. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. APPROPRIATIONS
   Cross reference(s)--Director of finance and budget, §
2-117 et seq.
Sec. 2-532. Budget preparation--Duties of director of finance and budget.
   (a)   To provide background information upon which department heads can base
their budget estimates and appropriations requests, the director of finance and
budget shall:
      (1)   Have budget revenue and expenditure worksheet forms and capital
outlay request forms printed;
      (2)   Post revenues for the preceding year to budget revenue worksheets
from the audit report;
      (3)   Post expenditures for the preceding year to budget expenditure
worksheets from the audit report;
      (4)   Post estimated revenues for the current year to budget revenue
worksheets from the current year budget;
      (5)   Post appropriations for the current year to budget expenditure
worksheets from the current year budget; and
      (6)   Transmit the above forms to department heads.
   (b)   Using department heads' worksheets to produce a balanced budget for
submission to the county administrator, the director of finance and budget
shall:
      (1)   Receive budget worksheets and supporting papers from department
heads;
      (2)   Review and adjust estimates of revenues and expenditures for the
current year after conferring with department heads if necessary;
      (3)   Estimate fund balances to be appropriated in the coming fiscal year
by deducting total estimated expenditures from the total estimated revenues in
each fund for the current year;
      (4)   Review and adjust revenue estimates and appropriation requests for
the coming fiscal year, again conferring with department heads if considered
desirable;
      (5)   Consider tax rate, tax levy and distribution of taxes among funds
needed to produce revenue required in the coming year; and
      (6)   Produce a balanced budget with revenues and appropriated surplus
equaling appropriations and present it to the county administrator.
(Code 1976, § 6-2001)
Sec. 2-533. Same--Duties of department heads, boards or commissions and other
offices or agencies supported in whole or in part by the county.
   In order to prepare for transmittal to the county administrator detailed
estimates of current and projected revenues, current expenditures and requested
appropriations, each department head, each board or commission and each other
office or agency supported in whole or in part by the county, including the
county treasurer and the county auditor, shall:
      (1)   Receive capital outlay request forms from the director of finance;
      (2)   Receive budget revenue and expenditure worksheets from the director
of finance;
      (3)   Enter estimated revenues for the entire current year on budget
revenue worksheets;
      (4)   Enter estimated expenditures for the entire current year on budget
expenditure worksheets;
      (5)   Enter estimated revenues for the coming year on budget revenue
worksheets;
      (6)   Detail requests for capital outlay appropriations on capital outlay
request worksheets with subtotals for each account affected;
      (7)   Transfer subtotals from (6) above to appropriations requested for
the same accounts on corresponding budget expenditure worksheets;
      (8)   Complete remainder of appropriation requests for the coming year on
budget expenditure worksheets; and
      (9)   Transmit all forms to the director of finance and budget in
accordance with the budget calendar adopted by council.
(Code 1976, § 6-2002)
Sec. 2-534. Same--Duties of county administrator.
   Using budget worksheets prepared by the director of finance and budget, the
county administrator shall:
      (1)   Receive budget worksheets and supporting data from the director of
finance and budget.
      (2)   Review and adjust revenue estimates and appropriation requests and
adjust as considered desirable.
      (3)   Prepare balanced budget. In no event shall the expenditures
recommended by the county administrator in the general fund budget exceed the
receipts estimated, in taking into account the estimated cash surplus or
deficit at the end of the current fiscal year, as provided in the preceding
section, unless the county administrator shall recommend an increase in the
rate of ad valorem taxes on real estate and tangible personal property or other
new or increased taxes or licenses within the power of the county council to
levy and collect in the ensuing fiscal year the receipts from which will make
up the difference.
      (4)   Prepare budget message. The budget message shall contain the
recommendations of the county administrator concerning the fiscal policy of the
county, as description of the important features of the budget plan, and
explanation of all salient changes in each budget submitted, as to estimated
receipts and recommended expenditures as compared with the current fiscal year
and the last preceding fiscal year, and a summary of the proposed budgets
showing comparisons.
      (5)   Have the budget printed and bound.
      (6)   Present the budget to council in accordance with the budget
calendar adopted by council. At the same time that he submits the general fund
budget, the county administrator shall introduce in the council a general fund
appropriation ordinance. The appropriation ordinance shall be based on the
general fund budget but need not be itemized further than by departments and
the major operating units thereof, and by bureaus, boards, commissions, offices
and agencies submitting separate budget estimates, and by the principal objects
of expenditure. At the same time the county administrator shall also introduce
any ordinance or ordinances altering the tax rate on real estate and tangible
personal property or levying a new tax or altering the rate of any other tax
necessary to balance the general fund budget as heretofore provided. The
hearing on the budget plan as a whole, as provided in section
2-535, shall constitute the hearing on all ordinances referred to in this
section, and the appropriation ordinances for each.
      (7)   Make available budgets for inspection and publication of the budget
message. The county administrator shall cause the budget message to be
reproduced for general distribution at the time of its submission to the
council and sufficient copies of the general fund, school, and utility budgets
to be made to supply copies to each member of the council and a newspaper of
general circulation in the county, and two (2) copies to be deposited in the
office of the clerk of council where they shall be open to public inspection
during regular business hours.
(Code 1976, § 6-2003; Ord. No. 589-79, §§ 2--5, 10-17-79)
Sec. 2-535. Budget adoption and amendments after adoption.
   (a)   Public hearings. The public hearing on the budget shall be held prior
to second reading of said budget. After the conclusion of the public hearing,
the council may insert new items of expenditure or may increase, decrease or
strike out items of expenditures in the general fund budget, except that no
item of expenditure for debt service or other provision of law shall be reduced
or stricken out. The council shall not alter the estimates of receipts
contained in such budget except to correct omissions or mathematical errors.
   State law reference(s)--Public hearing requirements prior to adoption of
budget, S.C. Code 1976, § 4-9-130.
   (b)   Supplemental appropriations. If during the fiscal year, the county
administrator certifies that there are available for appropriation revenues in
excess of those estimated in the budget, the council, by ordinance and after
public hearings, may make supplemental appropriations for the year up to the
amount of the excess.
   (c)   Emergency appropriations. (See South Carolina Code 1976, section 4-9-
130, last paragraph, concerning appropriations for public emergencies.)
   (d)   Reduction of appropriations. If at any time during the fiscal year, it
appears probable to the county administrator that the revenues available will
be insufficient to meet the amount appropriated, he shall report to the council
without delay, indicating the estimated amount of the deficit, any remedial
action taken by him and his recommendations as to any other steps to be taken.
The council shall then take further action as it deems necessary to prevent or
minimize any deficit and for that purpose it may by ordinance reduce one or
more appropriations.
   (e)   Transfer of appropriations. At any time during the fiscal year, the
county administrator may transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation
balance among programs within a department, office or agency and, upon request
by the county administrator, the council may by ordinance transfer a part or
all of any unencumbered appropriation balance from one department, office or
agency to another.
   (f)   Adoption of the general fund budget. The council shall, in no event,
adopt a general fund budget in which the total of expenditures exceeds
available revenues. If, for any reason, the council fails to adopt the general
fund budget, the general fund appropriation ordinance and such ordinances
providing for additional revenues as may be necessary to put the budget in
balance on or before the first day of July, the general fund budget in effect
for the previous fiscal year shall be the general fund budget on a monthly
basis beginning on the first day of July until the general fund budget shall be
adopted by the council.
   (g)   Effective date of general fund budget; certification; copies made
available. Upon final adoption, the general fund budget shall be in effect for
the ensuing fiscal year. A copy of such budget as finally adopted shall be
certified by the county administrator and chair of council and filed in the
office of the director of finance and budget. The general fund budget so
certified shall be reproduced and sufficient copies thereof shall be made
available for the use of all departments, courts, boards, commissions, offices
and agencies and for the use of interested persons and organizations.
   (h)   Appropriations to lapse. Any portion of an annual appropriation
remaining unexpended and unencumbered at the close of the fiscal year shall
lapse, except that any balance remaining in the funds of the school boards at
the end of the fiscal year shall remain to the credit of those school boards
and an estimate of any such balance shall be included in the school budgets of
the ensuing year as an estimated receipt.
   (i)   Certification of funds; penalties for violation. No payment shall be
made and no obligation incurred by or on behalf of the county except in
accordance with an appropriation duly made; provided that the council shall
have the power to authorize and direct the making of contracts for the
expenditure of funds not appropriated in any budget for the then current fiscal
year, in which event the council shall appropriate the funds in the budget or
budgets for the next fiscal year or years for the performance of the contracts.
No payment shall be made from or obligation incurred against any allotment or
appropriation unless the director of finance and budget shall first certify
that there is a sufficient unexpended and unencumbered balance in such
allotment or appropriation to meet the same; provided that, nothing herein
shall be taken to prevent the advance authorization of expenditures from a
contingency fund. Every expenditure or obligation authorized or incurred in
violation of the provisions of this section shall be void. Every payment made
in violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed illegal and
every official who shall knowingly receive such payment of any part thereof
shall be jointly and severally liable to the county for the full amount so paid
or received. If any elected official, member of a board, or commission, or
employee of the county shall knowingly incur any obligation or shall authorize
or make any expenditure in violation of the provisions of this section or
knowingly take part therein, such action shall be cause for his removal.
(Code 1976, 6-2004; Ord. No. 589-79, §§ 7--10, 10-17-79; Ord. No. 1294-85, § 1,
5-7-85)
Sec. 2-536. Fiscal and tax years.
   The fiscal year for the county shall begin on the first day of July and
shall end on the thirtieth day of June of the succeeding year. The tax year for
taxes levied on real estate, tangible personal property, machinery and tools
shall begin on the first day of January and end on the thirty-first day of
December following, and the tax year for all other taxes shall be fixed by the
council by ordinance. The rates of all taxes and levies, except on new sources
of tax revenue, shall be fixed at the time of adoption of the general fund
budget.
(Code 1976, § 6-2005; Ord. No. 589-79, § 11, 10-17-79)
   Cross reference(s)--Taxation generally.
Ch. 23.
Sec. 2-537. Property tax requests from outside agencies.
   (a)   School operating budgets. It shall be the duty of the school boards to
file their operating budget estimates with the county administrator or with the
director of finance and budget in accordance with the budget calendar adopted
by council. The action of the council on the school budgets shall relate to its
total only, and the school boards shall have authority to expend in their
discretion the sum appropriated for their use, provided that if they receive an
appropriation greater or less than their original request, they shall forthwith
revise their estimates of expenditures and adopt appropriations in accordance
therewith. The school boards shall have power to order during the course of the
fiscal year transfers from one item of appropriation to another.
   (b)   Agencies financially supported in whole or part through property
taxes. It shall be the duty of the agencies to file their operating budget
estimates with the county administrator or with the director of finance and
budget in accordance with the budget calendar adopted by council. The action of
the council on the agency budgets shall relate to its total only and the
agencies shall have authority to expend in their discretion the sum
appropriated for their use, provided that if they receive an appropriation
greater or less than their original request, they shall forthwith revise their
estimates of expenditures and adopt appropriations in accordance therewith. The
agencies shall have power to order during the course of the fiscal year
transfers from one item of appropriation to another.
   (c)   Ceiling for funding agencies financially supported in whole or in part
by Richland County. The council shall, prior to beginning budget deliberations,
establish a ceiling for funding outside agencies for the next fiscal year. Said
ceiling shall be established by a percentage of the total budget appropriation
for the operation of county government or by a fixed dollar amount. The ceiling
established pursuant to this section shall not be amended except by vote of
two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the county council.
(Code 1976, § 6-2006; Ord. No. 589-79, § 12, 10-17-79; Ord. No. 1850-89, § I,
3-21-89)
   Cross reference(s)--Taxation generally,
Ch. 23.
Sec. 2-538. Debt service requirements reported by county auditor.
   The county auditor will prepare a schedule of funds required, by bond or
note category, to meet bond principal and interest requirements for the ensuing
year. This schedule will be made available to the county administrator, in
accordance with the budget calendar adopted by council, for inclusion in the
budget presented to the county council.
(Code 1976, § 6-2007; Ord. No. 589-79, § 13, 10-17-79)
Sec. 2-539. Appropriation and fund allotments.
   After the current expense budgets have been adopted, and before the
beginning of the fiscal year, the head of each department and each board,
commission, office and agency shall submit to the county administrator in such
form as he shall prescribe a work program which shall show the requested
allotments of the appropriations for such department, board, commission, office
or agency for the entire fiscal year by monthly or quarterly periods as the
county administrator may direct. Within thirty (30) days after council adoption
of the budget the county administrator shall approve, with such department,
board, commission, office or agency and shall file the same with the director
of finance and budget, who shall not authorize any expenditure to be made from
any appropriation except on the basis of approved allotments, providing that
such allotments shall be in conformity with the salaries established by the pay
and classification ordinance and the laws of the state relating to obligatory
expenditures for any purpose. The aggregate of such allotments shall not exceed
the total appropriation available to each such department, board, commission,
office or agency for the fiscal year. An approved allotment may be revised
during the fiscal year in the same manner as the original allotment was made.
If, at any time during the fiscal year, the county administrator shall
ascertain that the revenue cash receipts of the general fund for the year, plus
any cash surplus available from the preceding year, will be less than the total
appropriations to be met from such receipts, he shall reconsider the work
programs and allotments of the departments, boards, commissions, offices and
agencies, and, subject to the laws of the state relating to obligatory
expenditures for any purpose, revise the allotments so as to forestall the
incurring of a deficit; provided, however, that, there shall be no reduction in
salaries except by ordinance.
(Code 1976, § 6-2008; Ord. No. 589-79, § 14, 10-17-79)
Sec. 2-540. Reserve for permanent public improvements.
   The council may, by ordinance, establish a reserve fund for permanent public
improvements and may appropriate thereto any portion of the general fund cash
surplus not otherwise appropriated at the close of any fiscal year. It may
likewise assign to such fund a specified portion of the ad valorem tax on real
estate and tangible property not to exceed ten cents ($0.10) on each hundred
dollars ($100.00) of the assessed valuation thereof of the whole or part of the
proceeds of any other tax. Appropriations from such fund shall be made only to
finance improvements included in the capital budget.
(Code 1976, § 6-2009; Ord. No. 589-79, § 15, 10-17-79)
Sec. 2-541. Capital improvement program preparation.
   (a)   Prior to preparation of and presentation of the general fund budget to
county council for the ensuing fiscal year, the county administrator shall
submit to the council a capital improvement program of proposed capital
improvement projects, for the ensuing fiscal year and for the four (4) fiscal
years thereafter, with his recommendations as to the means of financing the
improvements proposed.
   (b)   During preparation of the general fund budget, the finance director,
with approval of the county administrator, will select capital improvements for
the ensuing year and for which funding is available. The county administrator
will present the capital budget to council with the operating budget in
accordance with the budget calendar adopted by council.
(Code 1976, § 6-2010; Ord. No. 589-79, § 16, 10-17-79)
Sec. 2-542. Use of county funds to obtain alcoholic beverages prohibited.
   There shall be no direct or indirect purchases from county funds to obtain
alcoholic beverages; provided, however, that alcohol may be purchased for use
in breathalyzer equipment utilized by the Richland County Sheriff's Department.
(Ord. No. 1737-88, § I, 5-3-88)
Sec. 2-543. Salary increases for county employees.
   Any annual salary increase which is proposed during the budget process for a
county employee which amounts to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more shall
first be individually presented to the county council.
   The presentation of the proposed salary increase shall include the
evaluation of the said employee's position and the recommended compensation
therefor as defined pursuant to the current policy and procedure for
classifying and evaluating employee's positions and salaries.
   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code of Ordinances, such an
annual salary increase of a county employee amounting to one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or more shall not be granted at a time other than during the budget
process without prior approval of the county council.
(Ord. No. 2044-90, § I, 12-4-90)
Secs. 2-544--2-547. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. ACCOUNTING AND CONTROL
Sec. 2-548. Systems and procedures.
   Except as now or hereafter provided by law or ordinance to the contrary, all
budgeting, accounting, and other applicable systems and procedures of the
county government shall be, when practical, similar to the "State of South
Carolina Uniform Local Government Accounting System Procedures Manual," a copy
of which shall be on file in the office of the clerk.
(Code 1976, § 6-3001)
Sec. 2-549. Service charge for certain bond issues.
   (a)   Fees. For the use of county facilities and services performed by
members of the county's administrative staff and the county attorney in the
issuance of industrial revenue, pollution control revenue, and hospital revenue
bonds, the county will charge a fee to the industry or hospital facility
benefitted in accordance with the following schedule:
Amount of Issue      County's Fee
Up to $749,999.99      $2,500.00
$750,000.00 to      $2,500.00 plus .002 (1/5
$1,499,999.99         of 1 per cent) of the excess over $750,000.00
$1,500,000.00 to      $4,000.00 plus .001 (1/16
$2,499,999.99         of 1 per cent) of the excess over $1,500,000.00
$2,500,000.00 to      $5,000.00 plus .0005 (1/20
$4,999,999.99         of 1 per cent) of the excess over $2,500,000.00
$5,000,000.00 to      $6,250.00 plus .0004 (1/25 of
$7,499,999.99         1 per cent) of the excess over $5,000,000.00
$7,500,000.00 to      $7,250.00 plus .0002 (1/50 of
$10,000,000.00      1 percent) of the excess over $7,500,000.00
Over $10,000,000.00
(hospital issues only)         By agreement
   (b)   Additional expenses. In addition to the above fees, there shall be
added the actual expenses of county personnel who are required to attend a bond
closing at a location other than in the county.
   (c)   Disposition of fees. Five hundred dollars ($500.00) of the bond fee
shall be paid to the county prior to first reading of the bond ordinance, with
the remainder of the bond fee being due and payable at the time of closing.
This five hundred dollar ($500.00) fee is not refundable. All bond fees shall
be billed and collected by the county finance department. All fees collected
shall be deposited in the general fund of the county.
   (d)   In-state preference. The county council shall consider only those bond
issues being handled by South Carolina attorneys or wherein South Carolina
attorneys have been associated.
(Code 1976, § 6-3002; Ord. No. 294-76, §§ 1, 2, 3-17-76; Ord. No. 956-82, § 1,
9-1-82; Ord. No. 1121-84, §§ 1--4, 2-21-84; Ord. No. 1316-85, § 1, 6-18-85;
Ord. No. 1322-85, § 1, 6-18-85)
   State law reference(s)--Authority to issue industrial revenue bonds, S.C.
Code 1976, § 4-9-30(10).
Sec. 2-550. Surplus fund escrowing.
   The director of finance and budget shall ascertain from the most recent
audit of each agency requesting an appropriation from the county council any
overrun or underrun which could be defined as surplus or unappropriated funds.
If the director determines that the surplus exceeds the estimated or budgeted
amount, the treasurer for the county is directed to reduce the appropriations
derived from current tax collections and to deposit such differences in such
escrow account that might be established by the treasurer of the county.
(Code 1976, § 6-3003; Ord. No. 466-77, § 1, 12-7-77)
Sec. 2-551. Itemized accounting for funds received from noncounty sources.
   (a)   The various departments of the county receive monies from state,
federal, and local governmental entities or other sources in addition to
appropriations from county council. The purpose of this section is to require
each such department of the county receiving such outside funds to account for
those funds before county council appropriates or releases additional funds.
   (b)   Any department of the county which receives funds from state, federal,
or local governmental entities or other sources shall submit to county council,
with such department's request for appropriations from council, an itemized
accounting of all monies received and expended from such sources from the
previous fiscal year as well as an itemized projection of such monies to be
received and expended in the present and upcoming fiscal years including any
salary supplements that are or will be paid to the employees from such other
sources. In addition, each such department shall also submit a list of its
employees by job title, race and sex.
(Ord. No. 1038-83, §§ 1, 2, 4-19-83)
   Editor's note--Ord. No. 1038-83, effective April 19, 1983, did not
specifically amend the Code; therefore, codification of §§ 1 and 2 as § 2-551
has been at the discretion of the editor.
Sec. 2-552. Unused indigent care funds.
   It is hereby provided that all unused monies appropriated by the county
council for the funding of indigent care shall be returned to the county's
general fund at the end of each fiscal year.
(Ord. No. 1120-84, § 2, 2-21-84)
   Editor's note--inclusion of § 2 of Ord. No. 1120-84, effective Feb. 21,
1984, as § 2-552 has been at the discretion of the editor. Section 1 of the
ordinance repealed § 12 of Act 502 of 1959, concerning the same topic.
   Cross reference(s)--Medical indigent care program, §
14-41 et seq.
Secs. 2-553--2-556. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. FINANCIAL REPORTING
   State law reference(s)--Periodic reports to council by county treasurer,
S.C. Code, 1976, §§ 12-45-260, 12-45-280; periodic reports to comptroller
general by county treasurer, § 12-45-270; periodic reports to presiding judge
by county treasurer, § 12-45-220; report of settlement of auditor with
treasurer, § 12-45-310.
Sec. 2-557. Periodic reports.
   To provide periodic reports of the county's financial condition and
progress, the county shall publish balance sheets, revenues statements, and
expenditures and encumbrances statements.
(Code 1976, § 6-4001)
Secs. 2-558--2-563. Reserved.
DIVISION 5. AUDITS
Sec. 2-564. Appointment of certified public accountant or public accountant.
   Not later than thirty (30) days after the beginning of each fiscal year, the
council shall appoint a certified public accountant or public accountant or
firm of such accountants to audit the books and records of all county officials
and agencies and any agency funded in whole by county funds. Two (2) copies of
the audit shall be furnished to the county legislative delegation, and one copy
each shall be furnished the grand jury, the county auditor, the county
treasurer, the clerk of court, and the council. The copy filed in the office of
the clerk of court shall be a public record.
(Code 1976, § 6-6001)
Secs. 2-565--2-570. Reserved.
DIVISION 6. TAX ANTICIPATION NOTES
   Cross reference(s)--Taxation generally,
Ch. 23.
Sec. 2-571. Findings of fact.
    The county council hereby finds and determines that:
      (1)   The fiscal year of the county is July first to June thirtieth of
each respective year:
      (2)   The county council normally levies ad valorem taxes on all taxable
property to provide monies for the operation of the county government prior to,
but to become effective on, July first of each year;
      (3)   Notices for the collection of ad valorem taxes on all taxable
property in the county are normally mailed after September each year;
      (4)   Ad valorem taxes on personal property are payable without penalty
on a staggered basis and ad valorem taxes on real property are payable without
penalty on or before January fifteenth;
      (5)   The cost of conducting the operation of county government must be
met prior to the last respective date on which payment of ad valorem taxes are
payable without penalty;
      (6)   A substantial portion of ad valorem taxes are collected in the
months of December and January;
      (7)   The county often finds that monies to pay for the operation of the
county government, including its agencies and departments, are insufficient and
it is necessary to interimly finance county government until the ad valorem
taxes are collected;
      (8)   Article X, section 14, subsection 8 of the Constitution of the
State of South Carolina, 1895, as amended (the "constitution") authorizes the
several counties of the state to incur general obligation debt in anticipation
of the collection of ad valorem taxes or licenses (tax anticipation notes);
      (9)   South Carolina Code 1976, section 11-27-40(5), authorizes all
political subdivisions of the state to incur general obligation debt in
anticipation of the collection of ad valorem taxes or licenses (tax
anticipation notes) as permitted by subsection 8 of section 14 of new Article
X, of the Constitution of the State of South Carolina, 1895, as amended;
      (10)   It is in the interest of the county to provide a procedure for
borrowing in anticipation of the collection of ad valorem taxes under certain
conditions.
(Code 1976, § 6-7001; Ord. No. 565-79, § 1, 7-25-79; Ord. No. 1518-86, § 1, 9-
2-86)
Sec. 2-572. Purpose; general requirements.
   (a)   Pursuant to the provisions of the state constitution and applicable
statutes, there is hereby authorized to be issued, at one time or from time to
time, tax anticipation notes (the "notes") in anticipation of the collection of
ad valorem taxes when, in accordance with the certificate required under
section 2-575 of this division, it appears that there will be insufficient
funds to pay the cost of operation of county government.
   (b)   The notes shall be dated as of the date of their delivery; shall be
expressed to mature not later than ninety (90) days from the date as of which
such taxes may be paid without penalty; shall bear interest at the rate or
rates per annum to be determined by the chair of the council at the time of the
sale thereof; and shall be payable at such place as shall be determined by the
chair of the council.
   (c)   Both the principal of and interest on the notes shall be payable in
any coin or currency of the United States of America which is, at the time of
payment, legal tender for public and private debts.
   (d)   The notes shall be executed in the name of the county with the manual
signature of the chair of the council and attested by the manual signature of
the clerk of the council under the seal of the council to be affixed thereto.
(Code 1976, § 6-7002; Ord. No. 565-79, § 2, 7-25-79; Ord. No. 1518-86, § 2, 9-
2-86)
Sec. 2-573. Form.
   The notes issued under this division shall be issued in substantially the
form established by the council from time to time.
(Code 1976, § 6-7003; Ord. No. 15-18-86, § 3, 9-2-86)
Sec. 2-574. Payment.
   For payment of the notes and the interest thereon, there are hereby pledged
the ad valorem taxes to be collected by the county and the full faith, credit
and taxing power of the county.
(Code 1976, § 6-7004; Ord. No. 565-79, § 4, 7-25-79; Ord. No. 1518-86, § 4, 9-
2-86)
Sec. 2-575. Procedure.
   When it appears that there will be insufficient funds to pay for the
operation of county government, and prior to the delivery of the notes
authorized by section
2-572 of this division, the treasurer of the county shall furnish to the chair
of the council a certificate setting forth:
      (1)   The current cash position of the county immediately prior to the
delivery of the notes;
      (2)   The projected expenditures by the county for the month in which the
notes are delivered and for each succeeding month thereafter, to and including
the month in which the notes mature or are fully paid;
      (3)   The projected receipts of the county for the same period mentioned
in subparagraph (2) above; and
      (4)   A total of the projected income and cash needs for the overall
operation of the county for the same period mentioned in subparagraph (2) of
this section.
(Code 1976, § 6-7005; Ord. No. 565-79, § 5, 7-25-79; Ord. No. 1518-86, § 5, 9-
2-86)
Sec. 2-576. Disposition of proceeds.
   (a)   The proceeds derived from the sale of the notes issued under this
division shall be deposited by the treasurer of the county to the credit of the
county and shall be used in the manner and for the purposes which the ad
valorem taxes are to be used.
   (b)   The county treasurer is hereby authorized and directed to invest the
proceeds of the notes which are in excess of the current operational
expenditures of the county for periods of thirty (30), sixty (60) or ninety
(90) days at the highest obtainable rate or rates of interest on such
securities as are authorized by applicable laws of the state maturing in the
amounts and at the times so that the operational expenditures of the county may
be paid when due. The earnings on any such investments shall be deposited to
the account of the county in its general fund.
   (c)   The county treasurer shall furnish to the chair of the council
evidence of such investments no later than the last day of the month in which
the notes are delivered, and shall furnish additional evidence, if requested,
to the council on or before the tenth day of each succeeding month thereafter,
to and including the month in which the notes mature or are fully paid.
(Code 1976, § 6-7006; Ord. No. 565-79, § 6, 7-25-79; Ord. No. 1518-86, § 6, 9-
2-86)
Sec. 2-577. Exemption of principal and interest from certain taxes.
   Both the principal of and interest on the notes issued under this division
shall, in accordance with the provisions of section 12-1-60, Code of Laws of
South Carolina, 1976, be exempt from all state, county, municipal, school
district and all other taxes or assessments, direct or indirect, general or
special, whether imposed for the purpose of general revenue or otherwise,
except inheritance, estate or transfer taxes.
(Code 1976, § 6-7007; Ord. No. 565-79, § 8, 7-25-79; Ord. No. 1518-86, § 7, 9-
2-86)
Sec. 2-578. Restricted use of proceeds.
   The county covenants that no use of the proceeds of the sale of the notes
issued pursuant to this division shall be invested in such manner as to cause
the notes to become an "arbitrage bond" as defined in section 103 of the United
States Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended (the "code"), and to that end
the county shall comply department adopted under section 103 of the code
throughout the term of the notes.
(Code 1976, § 6-7008; Ord. No. 565-79, § 8, 7-25-79; Ord. No. 1518-86, § 8, 9-
2-86)
Secs. 2-579--2-589. Reserved.
ARTICLE X. PURCHASING
   Editor's note--Ord. No. 1825-89, § 1, effective Jan. 17, 1989, deleted the
provisions of former Art. X, Divs. 1--6, relative to purchasing, and enacted a
new Art. X to read as herein set out. The provisions of former Art. X derived
from Ord. No. 1068-83, § 1, effective Sept. 6, 1983; Ord. No. 1409-85, §§ 1, 2,
effective Dec. 17, 1985; Ord. No. 1616-87, §§ 2, 4, effective May 19, 1987;
Ord. No. 1717, § 1, effective March 1, 1988; Ord. No. 1719-88, § 1, effective
March 1, 1988; Ord. No. 1729, §§ I, II, effective April 5, 1988; Ord. No. 1744-
88, § I, effective May 17, 1988; and Ord. No. 1802-88, § 1, effective Nov. 1,
1988.
   State law reference(s)--Council to provide for centralized purchasing
system, S.C. Code 1976, § 4-9-160.
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 2-590. Definitions.
   As used in this article:
   Agency and using agency include any department, office, board, commission,
or other organizational unit for which the council has line-item budgetary
authority and whose affairs or funds are under the control of the council.
   Bid means a statement of price, terms of sale and description of commodities
or services offered by a vendor to the county.
   Bidder and vendor are interchangeable terms within this article, and refer
to any person or persons responding to an invitation to bid or a request for
proposals.
   Commodities means tangible items such as materials, supplies, or equipment.
   Contractual services means technical or professional services required by
the county which may include leases and lease agreements covering real
property, goods, services, or combinations thereof; construction, consulting,
or the providing of tangible items, such as material, supplies, or equipment.
This includes, but is not limited to, any telephone, gas, water, electrical
light and power services; towel, window-washing and cleaning services; the
rental of equipment and machinery; and all other types of agreements under
which the contractor provides services which are required by the county
government but not furnished by its own employees; provided, however, that
"contractual services" shall not include legal advertising, and purchases of
space for legal advertising shall not be subject to the provisions of this
article. Contractual services shall be governed by contract instruments under
which the specified services will be provided at an agreed-upon cost for a
specified period of time not to exceed a period of five (5) years.
   Person means one or more individuals, partnerships, associations,
corporations, mutual companies or stock companies.
   Personal services are technical type repairs or service skills including,
but not limited to, janitorial services, office machine repair, elevator
repair, and other such services.
   Request for proposals is a written or published solicitation for proposals
to provide goods, services, lease agreements, or construction as described
therein.
   Responsible vendor includes any vendor who submits a responsive bid or
request for proposal, and has furnished, when requested, information and data
to prove that his financial resources, production of service facilities,
service reputation and experience are adequate to make satisfactory delivery of
the supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services on which he bids or
submits a proposal; and who has not violated, or attempted to violate, any
provisions of this article.
   Responsive vendor includes anyone who submits a bid or proposal to furnish
supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services in conformity with the
specifications, delivery terms and conditions, and other requirements included
in the invitation for bids or requests for proposals.
   Service machine is any machine placed on county property by a private person
which exacts payment for a service or thing.
   Vendors' list means a current file of sources of supply of articles for each
category of commodities repetitively purchased for county use.
(Ord. No. 1825-89, § I, 1-17-89; Ord. No. 2184-92, § I, 3-18-92)
Sec. 2-591. Expenditure of funds from penny sales tax.
   (a)   When Richland County (the "county") is engaged in a purchase involving
only the expenditure of funds raised from the penny sales tax referendum passed
November 6, 2012, the county council may, upon a vote of the majority of its
members, exempt any specific procurement which county council determines is of
great county wide significance, from the purchasing procedures of Article X,
Division 2, Competitive Purchasing Policy, §§
2-600 (Procurement of professional services) and
2-601 (Competitive sealed proposals). For purposes of this section,
"determination" means county council's majority vote that a specific
procurement is of such great county wide significance that it is exempt from
the provisions of §§
2-600 or
2-601. For purposes of this section "director of procurement" means the
director of procurement or any employee of the Richland County department of
procurement designated by the director of procurement, in consultation with the
county administrator, to handle a solicitation under this section. Any
solicitation so exempted as being of great county wide significance shall
follow the procurement procedure set forth in this section. Any solicitation
procured pursuant to this section is not subject to any other provision of
Article X, Division 2, Competitive Purchasing Policy unless specifically stated
to the contrary herein.
   (b)   For a specific procurement involving professional services which would
otherwise be subject to the provisions of §
2-600, requests for qualifications, for which county council has made a
determination, the procurement shall proceed as set forth below:
      (1)   The director of procurement, in conjunction with any county
employee(s) appointed by the county administrator, shall be responsible for
developing a request for qualifications and shall prepare a government project
cost estimate for use in negotiations, which cost estimation shall remain
confidential until after negotiation and award of a contract. A "request for
qualification" is a written or published solicitation for submittals for the
provision of professional services such as architectural, landscaping or
engineering services, where the contract award is based upon the qualifications
of the offeror for the specific project and cost is not an award criterion. The
request for qualifications must contain, at a minimum, a description of the
scope of the work being requested, the deadline for submission of information,
how prospective offerors may apply for consideration and must require
information on prospective offerors qualifications, experience, and ability to
perform the requirements of the contract.
      (2)   The county administrator shall establish a short-list evaluation
committee (the "committee") of three (3) or more individuals whom he determines
to be qualified to make an informed recommendation to county council as to
offerors qualified to work on the proposed project.
      (3)   The director of procurement, in conjunction with the county
employee(s) appointed by the county administrator, shall prepare a request for
qualifications, which shall include evaluation criteria, developed by the
director of procurement, in conjunction with any county employee(s) appointed
by the county administrator, as they determine appropriate for the specific
project. There are no restrictions on the kind or number of evaluation factors
that may be used, as long as they are stated in the request for qualifications
and relate to the purpose of the procurement. The evaluation criteria shall be
listed in the solicitation in relative order of importance, but the
solicitation shall not publicly list the numerical weighting of each factor.
The request for qualifications shall be submitted to county council for its
approval prior to publication.
      (4)   The notice of the request for qualifications will be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the county and in the South Carolina
Materials Management, South Carolina Business Opportunity publication, which
notice shall include, but not be limited to, the project title, the general
scope of work, a description of all professional services required for that
project, the submission deadline, and how and to whom interested offerors may
submit qualifications for consideration.
      (5)   Offerors shall submit qualification information as required in the
request for qualifications.
      (6)   Qualification submittals shall be opened publicly in the presence
of one (1) or more witnesses at the time and place designated in the request
for qualifications. Only the names of the offering offerors shall be disclosed
at the qualification submittal opening. Contents of the qualification
submittals shall remain confidential and shall not be disclosed during the
negotiation process. Qualification submittals shall be open for public
inspection after contract award, except that proprietary or confidential
information in any qualification submittal that is clearly marked
"confidential" by the offering offeror shall not be disclosed except as
provided in the request for qualifications and allowed by the South Carolina
Freedom of Information Act, S.C. Code 1976, § 30-4-10 and S.C. Code 1976, § 11-
35-410, "Public access to procurement information."
      (7)   Prior to sending the qualifications submittals to the committee,
the director of procurement shall make an initial evaluation to determine
whether the offeror is responsive and responsible, as such terms are defined in
the county ordinance, Chapter 2, Administration, Article X, Purchasing,
Division 1, §
2-590. During its evaluation process, the committee shall bring any issues
regarding the responsiveness or responsibility of any offeror to the attention
of the director of procurement. The director of procurement, in his sole
discretion, shall have the right to waive any minor irregularities or
informalities of a qualifications submittal from the material requirements of
the request for qualifications. A minor informality or irregularity is one
which is merely a matter of form or is some immaterial variation from the exact
requirements of the request for qualifications having no effect or merely a
trivial or negligible effect on total price, quality, quantity, or performance
of the contract, and the correction or waiver of which would not be prejudicial
to other offerors. The director of procurement shall either give the offeror an
opportunity to cure any deficiency resulting from a minor informality or
irregularity in the request for qualifications or waive any such deficiency
when it is to the advantage of the county. If the director of procurement
determines to allow an offeror to cure the deficiency resulting from a minor
informality or irregularity, the offeror shall have five (5) business days from
the date the director of procurement notifies the offeror of any such
deficiency to cure the deficiency. The director of procurement's notification
and offeror's response to the notification shall be in writing. If the offeror
fails to cure the deficiency within the five (5) day notification period,
within the sole discretion of the director of procurement, the offeror will be
rejected and the submittal will not be forwarded to the committee. If the
director of procurement determines to waive such deficiency, it shall be in
writing. If a qualification submittal is incomplete with regards to the
material requirements of the request for qualifications or the offeror is found
to be non-responsive or non-responsible, the offeror will be rejected and the
submittal will not be forwarded to the committee.
      (8)   The committee may conduct discussions, in conjunction with the
director of procurement, with each of the offerors submitting responses to the
request for qualifications which responses appear eligible for contract award
(based upon the evaluation factors) for the purpose of clarification to assure
full understanding of and responsiveness to the requirements of the request for
qualifications. Offerors shall be accorded fair and equal treatment with
respect to clarification and any opportunity for discussion and revision of
qualifications.
      (9)   The committee may conduct interviews with offerors submitting
responses to the request for qualifications as it deems appropriate.
      (10)   Based upon the evaluation criteria, the committee shall select not
more than eight (8) offerors, as directed by county council in its
determination, which, in the committee's judgment, are the offerors whose
qualification package, including the discussions and interviews, if any, are
the most qualified offerors to be forwarded to county council for consideration
of award of the specific project. The committee shall develop a written short-
list report regarding the most qualified offerors, listing the offerors in
alphabetical order. No non-responsive, non-responsible or non-qualified
qualification submittals shall be included in the written short-listed report
to county council.
      (11)   When the committee has completed its written short-list report,
the director of procurement shall forward the report and a copy of each of the
short-listed offerors' qualification submittals to members of county council.
      (12)   Upon receipt of the committee's written short-list report and the
short-listed offerors' qualification submittals, county council, in its sole
discretion, may conduct interviews with each of the short-listed offerors to
seek clarification regarding the offerors' qualification submittals or
additional information from the offerors regarding their respective approach to
the specific project.
      (13)   When county council determines, in its sole discretion, that it
has sufficient information to make its award decision, county council shall
decide which of the offeror's or offerors' qualification submittal or
submittals, if county council intends to select more than one offeror with whom
to contract, is or are in the best interests of the citizens of the county as a
whole. County council's award decision shall be by majority vote with the first
offeror receiving a majority of votes being ranked number one. Once the first
ranked offeror has been identified, county council shall vote to identify the
second ranked offeror by a majority vote. This process shall be repeated until
all of the short-listed offerors have been ranked. In its sole discretion,
county council may award the contract to a single offeror or to multiple
offerors, not to exceed five (5) offerors, as is set forth in the request for
qualifications. When awarding to multiple offerors, the offerors to whom the
contracts are awarded shall be determined by majority vote of county council
voting for up to five (5) offerors.
      (14)   The director of procurement shall request a cost proposal from the
top ranked offeror. Upon receipt of the cost proposal, in its sole discretion,
county council may direct the director of procurement to proceed in any of the
manners indicated below, except in no case may confidential information derived
from qualification submittals and negotiations submitted by competing offerors
be disclosed:
         a.   When awarding to a single offeror, negotiate with the highest
ranking offeror on price, on matters affecting the scope of the contract, so
long as the changes are within the general scope of the request for proposals,
or on both. If a satisfactory contract cannot be negotiated with the highest
ranking offeror, negotiations may be conducted, in the sole discretion of
county council, with the second, and then the third, and so on, ranked offerors
to the level of ranking determined by the county council, in its sole
discretion;
         b.   When awarding a contract to multiple offerors, set the terms of
the contract and give each of the offerors ranked in the top five (5) an
opportunity to agree to meet the terms of the contract;
         c.   When awarding a contract to a single offeror, during the
negotiation process, as outlined in item (a) above, if the director of
procurement is unsuccessful in the first round of negotiations, county council
may reopen negotiations with any offeror with whom the director of procurement
had previously negotiated; or
         d.   Whether awarding to a single offeror or to multiple offerors, the
director of procurement, as directed by county council, may make changes within
the general scope of the request for qualifications and may provide all of the
short-listed offerors an opportunity to submit their best and final offers.
   (c)   For a specific procurement involving professional services that would
otherwise be subject to the provisions of Section
2-601, requests for proposals, for which county council has made a
determination, the procurement shall proceed as set forth below:
      (1)   The director of procurement, in conjunction with any county
employee(s) appointed by the county administrator, shall prepare the request
for proposals for the specific project. A "request for proposal" is a written
or published solicitation for proposals to provide goods, services, or
construction as described therein. Evaluation factors upon which the proposals
will be evaluated by the committee (hereinafter defined) for purposes of making
a written report to county council shall be stated in the request for
proposals. Price may or may not be one of the evaluation factors but it shall
not be the sole basis for evaluation and award of the contract. The pricing in
proposals shall remain confidential until after negotiation and award of a
contract except as provided in the request for proposals and allowed by the
South Carolina Freedom of Information Act, S.C. Code 1976, § 30-4-10 and S.C.
Code 1976, § 11-35-410, "Public access to procurement information." The request
for proposals shall be submitted to county council for its approval prior to
publication.
      (2)   The notice of the request for proposals will be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the county and in the South Carolina
Materials Management, South Carolina Business Opportunity publication, which
notice shall include, but not be limited to, the project title, the general
scope of work, if applicable, a description of the goods, services, or
construction to be provided for that project, the submission deadline, and how
and to whom interested offerors may submit proposals.
      (3)   Proposals shall be opened publicly in the presence of one (1) or
more witnesses at the time and place designated in the request for proposals.
Only the names of the offerors shall be disclosed at the proposal opening.
Contents of the proposals shall not be disclosed during the negotiation
process. Proposals shall be open for public inspection after contract award,
except that proprietary or confidential information in any proposal that is
clearly marked "confidential" by the offering vendor shall not be disclosed
except as provided in the request for proposals and allowed by the South
Carolina Freedom of Information Act, S.C. Code 1976, §§ 30-4-10 and S.C. Code
1976, § 11-35-410, "Public access to procurement information."
      (4)   The request for proposals shall list the evaluation factors
including price, if it is an evaluation factor, in relative order of
importance, but shall not publically list the numerical weighting of each
factor. There are no restrictions on the kind or number of evaluation factors
that may be used, as long as they are stated in the request for proposals and
relate to the purpose of the procurement.
      (5)   The county administrator shall establish a short-list evaluation
committee (the "committee") of three (3) or more individuals whom he determines
to be qualified to make an informed recommendation to county council as to
offerors qualified to work on the proposed project.
      (6)   Prior to sending the proposals to the committee, the director of
procurement shall make an initial evaluation to determine whether the offeror
is responsive and responsible, as each is defined in county ordinance, Chapter
2, Administration, Article X, Purchasing, Division 1, §
2-590. During its evaluation process, the committee shall bring any issues
regarding the responsiveness or responsibility of any offeror to the attention
of the director of procurement. The director of procurement, in his sole
discretion, shall have the right to waive any minor irregularities or
informalities of a proposal from the material requirements of the request for
proposal. A minor informality or irregularity is one which is merely a matter
of form or is some immaterial variation from the exact requirements of the
request for proposals having no effect or merely a trivial or negligible effect
on total price, quality, quantity, or performance of the contract, and the
correction or waiver of which would not be prejudicial to other offerors. The
director of procurement shall either give the offeror an opportunity to cure
any deficiency resulting from a minor informality or irregularity in the
request for proposals or waive any such deficiency when it is to the advantage
of the county. If the director of procurement determines to allow an offeror to
cure the deficiency resulting from a minor informality or irregularity, the
offeror shall have five (5) business days from the date the director of
procurement notifies the offeror of any such deficiency to cure the deficiency.
The director of procurement's notification and offeror's response to the
notification shall be in writing. If the offeror fails to cure the deficiency
within the five (5) day notification period, within the sole discretion of the
director of procurement, the offeror will be rejected and the submittal will
not be forwarded to the committee. If the director of procurement determines to
waive such deficiency, it shall be in writing. If a proposal is incomplete with
regards to the material requirements of the request for proposals or the
offeror is found to be non-responsible or non-responsive, the offeror will be
rejected, and the proposal will not be forwarded to the committee.
      (7)   The committee may conduct discussions, in conjunction with the
director of procurement, with each of the offerors submitting responses to the
request for proposals, which response appears eligible for contract award
(based upon the evaluation factors) for the purpose of clarification to assure
full understanding of and responsiveness to the requirements of the request for
proposals. Offerors shall be accorded fair and equal treatment with respect to
clarification and any opportunity for discussion and revision of proposals.
      (8)   The committee may conduct interviews with offerors submitting
responses to the request for proposals as it deems appropriate.
      (9)   Based upon the evaluation criteria, the committee shall select not
more than eight (8) offerors, as directed by county council in its
determination, which, in the committee's judgment, are the offerors whose
proposals, including the discussions and interviews, if any, are most
advantageous to the county. The committee shall then develop a written short-
list report regarding the offerors whose proposals are most advantageous to the
county, listing the offerors in alphabetical order. No non-responsive, non-
responsible, or non-qualified offeror shall be included in the written short-
list report to county council.
      (10)   When the committee has completed its written short-list report,
the director of procurement shall forward the report and the short-listed
offerors' proposals to members of county council.
      (11)   Upon receipt of the committee's short-list report and the copies
of the short-listed offerors' proposals, county council, in its sole
discretion, may conduct interviews with each of the short-listed offerors to
seek clarification regarding the proposals or additional information from the
offerors regarding their approaches to the specific project.
      (12)   When county council determines, in its sole discretion, that it
has sufficient information to make its award decision, county council shall
decide which of the offeror's or offerors' qualification submittal or
submittals, if county council intends to select more than one (1) offeror with
whom to contract, is or are in the best interests of the citizens of the county
as a whole. County council's award decision shall be by majority vote with the
first offeror receiving a majority of votes being ranked number one. Once the
first ranked offeror has been identified, county council shall vote to identify
the second ranked offeror by a majority vote. This process shall be repeated
until all of the short-listed offerors have been ranked. In its sole
discretion, county council may award the contract to a single offerors or to
multiple offerors, not to exceed five offerors, as is set forth in the request
for proposals. When awarding to multiple offerors, the offerors to whom the
contracts are awarded shall be determined by majority vote of county council
voting for up to five (5) offerors.
      (13)   Whether price was an evaluation factor or not, the county council
in its sole discretion may direct the director of procurement to proceed in any
of the manners indicated below, except that in no case may confidential
information derived from proposals and negotiations submitted by competing
offerors be disclosed:
         a.   When awarding a contract to a single offeror, negotiate with the
highest ranking offeror on price, on matters affecting the scope of the
contract, so long as the changes are within the general scope of the request
for proposals, or on both. If a satisfactory contract cannot be negotiated with
the highest ranking offeror, negotiations may be conducted, in the sole
discretion of county council, with the second, and then the third, and so on,
ranked offerors to the level of ranking determined by the county council in its
sole discretion;
         b.   When awarding a contract to multiple offerors, set the terms of
the contract and give each of the offerors ranked in the top five (5) an
opportunity to agree to meet the terms of the contract;
         c.   When awarding a contract to a single offeror, during the
negotiation process as outlined in item (a) above, if the director of
procurement is unsuccessful in the first round of negotiations, county council
may direct the director of procurement to reopen negotiations with any offeror
with whom it had previously negotiated; or
         d.   Whether awarding to a single offeror or to multiple offerors, the
director of procurement, as directed by county council, may make changes within
the general scope of the request for proposals and may provide all of the
short-listed offerors an opportunity to submit their best and final offers.
   (d)   The county council reserves the right to reject any solicitation, in
whole or in part, issued pursuant to this section and may reject, in whole or
in part, any or all qualifications or proposals submitted pursuant to this
section.
   (e)   Once the county council makes a determination pursuant to section (a)
of the section, offerors and anyone acting on behalf of offerors are prohibited
from contacting, by any means of communication, any county elected official,
county employee other than the director of procurement, or a consultant
advising the county regarding the solicitation about the solicitation or any
portion of the solicitation. If an offeror or anyone acting on behalf of the
offeror contacts a county elected official, county employee or consultant
advising the county on the solicitation, the county elected official, employee,
or consultant shall immediately notify the director of procurement and the
county attorney regarding the name of the individual making the contact, the
name of the offeror on whose behalf the contact was made and the nature of the
contact. Any offeror who contacts a county elected official, a county employee
other than the director of procurement, or a consultant advising the county on
the solicitation regarding the solicitation will not be eligible for award of
the contract and may be subject to suspension or debarment proceedings.
   (f)   Any procurement conducted pursuant to the provisions of this section
is exempt from all other requirements of Article X, Division 2, Competitive
Purchasing Policy, including but not limited to, the protest provisions
therein.
   (g)   The provisions of the South Carolina Freedom of Information Act and
S.C. Code 1976, § 11-35-410 of the South Carolina Consolidated Procurement Code
are applicable to any solicitation undertaken pursuant to this section.
(Ord. No. 017-14HR, 5-6-14; Ord. No. 045-14HR, 9-9-14)
Sec. 2-592. Prohibited contracts.
   (a)   The county and its agencies, as defined in section
2-590 of this article, are prohibited from entering into any contract, lease or
agreement resulting in pecuniary gain for an employee or officer of the county,
or an employee, officer or member of any county agency, as defined in section
2-590 supra. In addition, the county shall be prohibited from entering into a
contract, lease or agreement resulting in pecuniary gain for a member of the
family of an employee or officer of the county or a member of the family of an
employee, officer or member of any county agency, as defined in section
2-590 supra. "Family member" shall be defined as being within the third degree
of consanguinity or affinity.
   (b)   If a contract, lease or agreement has been negotiated through a
process of public notice and competitive bidding, or through a request for
proposals, the existence and degree of the familial relationship has been
disclosed in writing in the original bid or proposal, and it appears that the
award of such contract, lease or agreement would be in the best interest of the
county, the prohibitions set forth in subsection (a) hereinabove may be waived
by a majority vote of county council. Such majority vote is satisfaction that
county council accepts such contract, lease, or agreement by a majority vote,
if it is shown on the record that such familial relationship exists.
(Ord. No. 1825-89, § I, 1-17-89)
Sec. 2-593. Contract authority.
   Purchases in the amount of thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) or less may
be approved by the county administrator. Purchases in excess of thirty thousand
dollars ($30,000.00) shall be reviewed and approved by the county council prior
to acceptance. The county administrator shall have the authority to approve
change orders in an amount not to exceed ten (10) percent of the original
contract price; provided, however, that any change order in excess of ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) shall be reviewed and approved by the county
council. This section shall apply to any contract for goods or services and
shall repeal any other stated contract dollar limitation. Provided, however
that the county administrator shall have the authority to approve contracts in
any amount up to and including one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) when
said contract is for a road-related construction project.
(Ord. No. 1961-90, § II, 3-6-90; Ord. No. 017-97HR, § I, 4-1-97)
Secs. 2-594--2-597. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. COMPETITIVE PURCHASING POLICY
Sec. 2-598. General provisions.
   (a)   All public purchases shall be made in a manner which provides for the
greatest economy for the taxpayer, the fairest selection of vendor, and the
prevention of conflicts of interest. Towards this end, it shall be the policy
of the county that, whenever practical, leases, goods, and services required by
county agencies shall be procured through a competitive purchasing policy which
may be achieved through competitive bidding or through requests for proposals;
provided, however, contracts that are specifically approved by a county
ordinance are exempt from the provisions of this Article.
   Professional services shall be procured as set forth in section
2-600 of this Code, unless otherwise prohibited by law.
   The method of contracting known as "design/build" wherein the successful
vendor shall perform a "turnkey" project to include all architectural,
engineering, construction and other services necessary to provide a complete
facility, is expressly authorized. The contractor shall identify the architects
and engineers he proposes to use in his bid or proposal and shall coordinate
all activities of said architects, engineers, designers, subcontractors,
suppliers and others involved in the project to provide a completed facility
meeting contract requirements, and shall insure compliance with all other
applicable county, state or federal laws. When the "design/build" concept is
utilized through competitive bidding or requests for proposal, then the
requirements that architectural and engineering services be procured under
section
2-600 of this division shall be waived.
   The "design/build" method of contracting shall only be employed when the
county council determines that the utilization of such method is in the best
interest of the county.
   (b)   In case of tie or identical offers, preference shall be given to
businesses and persons located within the county boundaries. In case of tie or
identical offers involving two (2) or more businesses and persons located
within the county, boundaries shall be resolved based on:
      (1)   Completion/delivery period.
      (2)   Previous performance record.
(Ord. No. 1825-89, § I, 1-17-89; Ord. No. 2184-92, § II, 3-18-92; Ord. No.
2090-91, § I, 5-21-91; Ord. No. 020-07HR, § I, 3-20-07)
Sec. 2-599. Placement and operation of vending machines, food services, pay
telephones, facsimile machines, copier or other service machines on county
property.
   (a)   Generally. Subject to any exceptions allowed in this article, all
vending machines, food service machines, or other such service machines to be
placed and operated in any building or on any property owned or occupied by any
department or agency of the county shall be secured through a process of
competitive bidding or requests for proposals, pursuant to the definition or
"vendors list" in section
2-590 and pursuant to section
2-598 of this article.
   (b)   Installation commission basis. Unless specifically excepted by
council, no vending machine, pay telephone or other service machine shall be
purchased by the county. All concessions shall be placed and operated on an
installation/commission basis.
   (c)   Disposition of commission. All commissions earned from any concession
on county property shall be deposited with the county treasurer through the
finance department, to be credited to the general fund.
   (d)   Applicability. This section shall apply to all property owned or
leased by the county, including but not limited to the administration complex,
courthouse, law enforcement center, public works center, environmental solid
waste disposal site, health department, or any other property occupied by any
county department or agency.
   (e)   Exemptions. This section shall not apply to any concession granted to
a blind person or to the state commission for the blind pursuant to the
provisions of South Carolina Code of Laws, 1976, section 1-1-520 and 43-25-70.
The county administrator may grant manual concessions to any handicapped person
in preference to any other person submitting a bid or proposal under the
purchasing regulations. This section shall not apply to concessions operated on
property leased by the county to any other person, firm, corporation or agency.
(Ord. No. 1825-89, § I, 1-17-89)
Sec. 2-600. Procurement of professional services.
   No officer, board, commission, committee or agency in the county receiving
any county funds or appointed in whole or in part by the council may procure
professional services or agree to pay for professional services out of public
funds without first obtaining the approval of the council. Provided, that, in
cases where the amount of outside fees to be paid for said services exceeds
thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00), the approval of the county council shall
be obtained subject to the following provisions:
      (1)   The director of procurement shall be responsible for developing a
description of the proposed project.
      (2)   The director of procurement shall prepare a government project cost
estimate for use in negotiations.
      (3)   The county administrator shall establish a selection committee of
three (3) or more individuals whom he determines to be qualified to make an
informed recommendation as to the most competent firm for the proposed project.
The committee shall determine if services are available from sole source or on
an at-large basis.
      (4)   If sole source is justified and concurrence is received from
council, negotiations shall be initiated with the selected firm.
      (5)   If the selection committee recommends a procurement on an at-large
basis, it shall prepare a formal invitation to firms for submission of
information to be approved by council. The invitation shall be published in a
general circulation newspaper and include, but not be limited to, the project
title, the general scope of work, a description of all professional services
required for that project, the submission deadline, and how interested firms
may apply for consideration.
      (6)   Firms shall submit information of qualifications and experience,
previous related projects and proposed staff.
      (7)   The selection committee shall evaluate each submitting firm in view
of:
         a.   Past performance;
         b.   Ability of professional personnel proposed for the project;
         c.   Location;
         d.   Recent, current and project work loads of the firm; and
         e.   Related experience on similar projects.
   Based upon these evaluations, the selection committee shall select the two
(2) or three (3) firms which, in its judgment, are the most qualified, ranking
in priority order.
      (8)   The selection committee shall submit its written report ranking the
recommended firms to the county council or designated committee for its
evaluation and approval. When it is determined by the council that the ranking
report is final, written notification of the election and order of preference
shall be immediately sent to all of those who responded to the selection
committee's invitation to submit information.
      (9)   The council, or its designee shall negotiate a contract for
services with the most qualified firm at a compensation which is fair and
reasonable to the county. Should the council or its designee be unable to
negotiate a satisfactory contract with this firm, negotiations shall be
formally terminated. Negotiations shall commence in the same manner with the
second and then the third most qualified until a satisfactory contract has been
negotiated. If no agreement is reached with one (1) of the two (2) additional
firms, negotiations shall then be held with the remaining firms, in order of
their competence and qualifications, in the same manner until an agreement is
reached.
      (10)   Engineering firms interested in providing professional services to
Richland County shall submit their qualifications, together with a list of the
types of work for which they would like to be considered, to the county
procurement office. Thereafter, the procurement office shall compile and
maintain an up-to-date list of such firms. A firm may up-date its
qualifications whenever it deems such action necessary.
      (11)   Whenever engineering services are required for a particular
project, a scope of services shall be prepared and advertised for a period of
fifteen (15) days. Any firm which is interested in providing the service shall
submit a letter stating that it wishes to be considered on the basis of its
qualifications on file in the procurement office.
      (12)   A selection committee, established in the same manner as provided
herein for the procurement of all other professional services, shall meet and
select the three most qualified firms, in order of preference, in accordance
with the criteria established in (7) above.
      (13)   Thereafter, the selection committee shall begin negotiations with
the first choice. If a fee acceptable to both parties can be negotiated, a
contract with that firm shall be submitted to the county council. If such a fee
is not negotiated, the committee shall thereafter commence negotiations with
the next choice until an acceptable fee is negotiated.
      (14)   The contract shall thereafter be submitted to the county council
through the normal procedures utilized at the time of submission. If the
council rejects the contract, the committee shall thereafter commence
negotiations with the next choice.
(Ord. No. 1825-89, § I, 1-17-89; Ord. No. 1908-89, § V, 9-5-89; Ord. No. 2114-
91, § I, 7-16-91; Ord. No. 2184-92, § III, 3-18-92)
Sec. 2-601. Competitive sealed proposals.
   Competitive sealed proposals and requests for proposals may be used in the
procurement of goods, services, and construction in the manner provided for
herein.
      (1)   Conditions for use. When the county administrator determines that
the use of competitive sealed bidding in procurement of particular goods,
services, or construction is either not practicable or not advantageous to the
county, it shall instruct the director of procurement or such other persons or
entities as designated by the county council to utilize the competitive sealed
proposals procedure established herein to contract for and procure the
particular goods, services or construction required by the county.
      (2)   Request for proposals. Proposals shall be solicited from at least
three (3) qualified sources, when such sources are reasonably available,
through requests for proposal. A "request for proposals" is a written or
published solicitation for proposals to provide goods, services, or
construction, as described therein. Evaluation factors upon which the proposals
will be evaluated for award of the contract shall be stated in the request for
proposals. Price shall be one of the evaluation factors but it shall not be the
sole basis for award of the contract.
      (3)   Public notice. Public notice of the request for proposals shall be
given at a reasonable time prior to the date set forth therein for the receipt
of proposals. Such notice may include utilization of the vendors list or
publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the county.
      (4)   Receipt of proposals. Proposals shall be opened publicly in the
presence of one (1) or more witnesses at the time and place designated in the
request for proposals. Only the names of the offering vendors shall be
disclosed at the proposal opening. Contents of the proposals shall not be
disclosed during the negotiation process. Proposals shall be open for public
inspection after contract award, except that proprietary or confidential
information in any proposal that is clearly marked "confidential" by the
offering vendor shall not be disclosed without written consent of the offering
vendor.
      (5)   Evaluation factors. The request for proposals shall state the
relative importance of price and of each other evaluation factor but shall not
require numerical weightings of each factor. The evaluation factors shall be
examined with respect to each proposal in determining which proposal is most
advantageous to the county. There are no restrictions on the kind or number of
evaluation factors that may be used, as long as they are stated in the request
for proposals and relate to the purpose of the procurement.
      (6)   Discussions with responsive and responsible offering vendors and
revisions to proposals. Discussions may be conducted with any vendors
submitting a proposal that appears eligible for contract award (based upon the
evaluation factors) for the purpose of clarification to assure full
understanding of and responsiveness to the requirements of the request for
proposals. A contract may be negotiated after an unsuccessful request for
proposal at any time before an award is made provided that:
         a.   Each offering vendor who submitted a proposal under the original
solicitation is notified and given reasonable opportunity to negotiate;
         b.   The negotiated price must be within the limits of available funds
as determined by the county council or its designee.
   Offering vendors shall be accorded fair and equal treatment with respect to
any opportunity for discussion and revision of proposals. Revisions in
proposals may be permitted after their submission and prior to contract award
for the purpose of obtaining best and final offers. In conducting negotiations,
there must be no disclosure of any information derived from proposals submitted
by competing offering vendors.
      (7)   Award. Subject to any exceptions found in this article, the award
shall be made to the responsive and responsible offering vendor whose proposal
is determined to be the most advantageous to the county, taking into
consideration price and the other evaluation factors set forth in the request
for proposals. If the county council or its designee should determine that none
of the proposals is advantageous to the county, the county shall have the
absolute right to reject any and all proposals. The contract file shall contain
the basis on which the award is made and be sufficient to satisfy external
audit.
(Ord. No. 1825-89, § I, 1-17-89; Ord. No. 1908-89, § V, 9-5-89; Ord. No. 2184-
92, § IV, 3-18-92)
§ 2-602 Local vendor preference.
   (a)   Richland County shall apply a local vendor preference (LVP) to all
solicitations, subject to the exclusions herein provided. If a solicitation
specifies the LVP applies to that procurement, the applicability of the
preference to that procurement is conclusively determined by the solicitation.
   (b)   When evaluating pricing for purposes of making an award determination,
the procurement officer shall decrease by five (5%) percent the price of any
bid when the bidder qualifies for the local vendor preference (LVP).
      (1)   A bidder is not qualified for the LVP unless the bidder makes an
affirmative request for the preference as required in the solicitation.
         a.   By submitting a bid and requesting that the LVP be applied to
that bid, a bidder certifies that its bid qualifies for the preference for that
procurement.
         b.   If a bidder is requesting the LVP, the bidder, upon request of
the procurement officer, must provide documentation that establishes the
bidder's qualifications for the preference. Bidder's failure to provide this
information promptly is grounds to deny the preference.
      (2)   Improperly requesting the LVP may result in the bid being deemed
non-responsive, non-responsible and disqualified.
      (3)   If two (2) or more bidders are tied after the application of the
preference, the tie must be resolved by the flip of a coin by the Richland
County procurement director (or his/her designee) and witnessed by the
procurement officer who conducted the solicitation. All bidders who responded
to the solicitation must be invited to attend.
   (c)   A vendor or bidder qualifies for the local vendor preference if it:
      (1)   Maintains an office in Richland County. For the purposes of this
section only, an office is defined as a non-mobile place for the regular
transaction of business or performance of a particular service which has been
operated as such by the bidder or vendor for at least one (1) year before the
bid opening; and
      (2)   Has a valid Richland County business license which was issued at
least twelve (12) months prior to the bid opening date; and
      (3)   Provides proof of payment of all applicable Richland County taxes
and fees, including but not limited to, business license fees, business
personal property taxes, and real property taxes.
      (4)   The submitted bid meets all other requirements of responsiveness
and responsibility as defined in this article.
   (d)   The LVP shall not apply to:
      (1)   An award or bid when the total dollar value of the bid is less than
ten thousand ($10,000) dollars;
      (2)   A single unit of an item with a price in excess of twenty-five
thousand ($25,000) dollars or a single award with a total potential value in
excess of two hundred thousand ($200,000) dollars; or
      (3)   An acquisition of motor vehicles as defined in S.C. Code 1976, §
56-15-10 in the South Carolina Consolidated Procurement Code.
(Ord. No. 076-14HR, § I, 12-9-14)
Secs. 2-603--2-607. Reserved.
Sec. 2-608. Invitation to bid.
   When this procedure is utilized and the estimated cost exceeds fifteen
thousand dollars ($15,000.00), an award based upon an invitation to bid shall
be made according to prescribed procedures from the lowest responsive and
responsible vendor after due notice inviting bids.
   (a)   Notice inviting bids. The director of procurement shall invite bids
through the following methods:
      (1)   Advertisement on a form prescribed by the Richland County
procurement regulations in a newspaper of general circulation in the county,
giving a brief description of the things to be purchased, the time and place
where bids will be opened, and a location or telephone number where bid blanks
and complete specifications may be secured;
      (2)   Posting on a bulletin board at the county courthouse or office of
procurement all the above information, including complete specifications; and
      (3)   Written invitations to bid mailed to all appropriate vendors
included in the vendors list (numbering at least three (3)). The notice
inviting bids shall set forth in detail all requirements and conditions which
will be considered in awarding the contract.
   (b)   Submission of bids. All bids shall be on an official bid form provided
by the office of procurement and shall be sealed and mailed or otherwise
delivered to the director of procurement by the time specified in the
invitation to bid. Late bids shall not be considered unless the delay was
caused by improper handling by county employees. All bids shall be accompanied
by a statement of noncollusion from the vendor.
   (c)   Bid surety. The director of procurement may at his discretion require
a certified or cashier's check or bond as surety; provided, however, that, such
requirement shall be publicized in the invitation to bid and shall apply
equally to all vendors for a given purchase.
   (d)   Opening of bids. All bids shall be opened publicly and tabulated. Such
tabulation shall be available for public inspection during normal business
hours for at least thirty (30) days after the opening of bids.
   (e)   Award of contract. Subject to any exceptions found elsewhere in this
article, all contracts shall be awarded to the lowest responsive and
responsible vendor whose bid complies materially with the specifications
publicized. The director of procurement may, however, refuse all bids and
readvertise for bids, if the public interest would be served thereby; provided,
however, that, if the director of procurement shall refuse all bids, he shall
submit to the county administrator a written explanation of the reasons
therefor.
   (f)   The bids. Before opening of bids, the director of procurement shall
specify a method for awarding contracts if the lowest responsive and
responsible bids are identical in material detail. Such method shall be
approved by the director of procurement but shall otherwise remain confidential
pending the opening of bids. Such method shall be designed to discourage
collusion and restrictions on competition; provided, however, that, if time and
the public interest permit, the director of procurement may readvertise for
bids instead of deciding among identical bids. If the director of procurement
does not suspect that the bids are a result of collusion, he may award the
contract to the firm located, or to the vendor offering goods produced, in the
county.
   (g)   Forfeiture of bid surety. If the successful vendor does not enter into
a contract within ten (10) days after mailing of notice of award of contract,
he shall forfeit any surety which accompanied his bid, unless the county is
responsible for the delay. He shall also be held liable for any cost in excess
of his bid price which the county incurs in purchasing the goods or services
elsewhere.
(Ord. No. 1825-89, § I, 1-17-89; Ord. No. 1908-89, § V, 9-5-89; Ord. No. 1961-
90, § I, 3-6-90)
Sec. 2-609. Contracts, purchases and sales--Open market procedure.
   Subject to any exceptions allowed elsewhere in this article, when an
invitation to bid is utilized for the purchases of supplies, materials,
equipment or contractual services and the estimated costs exceed fifteen
hundred dollars ($1,500.00) but does not exceed fifteen thousand dollars
($15,000.00), the director of procurement shall comply with the procedures
described in section
2-608 of this article except in the following respects: The director of
procurement shall not be required to advertise publicly to invite bids.
Instead, the director of procurement shall invite all appropriate vendors
included in the vendors list (numbering at least three (3)), to submit written
bids; provided, however, that, the director of procurement, may, at his
discretion, require formal notice when such procedure is in the public
interest.
(Ord. No. 1825-89, § I, 1-17-89; Ord. No. 1908-89, § V, 9-5-89)
Sec. 2-610. Same--Solicitation of quotations.
   Subject to any exceptions allowed elsewhere in this article, when an
invitation to bid is utilized for the purchase of supplies, materials,
equipment, or contractual services and the estimated cost exceeds five hundred
dollars ($500.00) but does not exceed fifteen hundred dollars ($1,500.00), the
director of procurement can make solicitations of quotations by telephone. The
director of procurement shall contact vendors on the vendors list (numbering at
least three (3)), and purchase the required goods or services from the lowest
responsive and responsible vendor. The procedure described in sections
2-608 and 2-609 shall not be required; provided, however, that, the director of
procurement may require that vendors submit written bids when such procedure is
in the public interest.
(Ord. No. 1825-89, § I, 1-17-89; Ord. No. 1908-89, § V, 9-5-89)
Sec. 2-611. Same--Purchases through central state purchasing office.
   As an alternative to the procedures described elsewhere in this article, the
director of procurement may purchase any supplies, materials, equipment or
contractual services through the central state purchasing office of the
division of general services; provided, however, that, any such purchases
estimated to cost in excess of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) shall be
approved by the county administrator.
(Ord. No. 1825-89, § I, 1-17-89; Ord. No. 1908-89, § V, 9-5-89)
Sec. 2-612. Same--Purchase negotiations.
   (a)   Generally. In case of emergencies, or when lack of price or product
competition renders the purposes of competitive procurement ineffective, the
director of procurement may purchase supplies, materials, equipment, or
contractual services through negotiation with the vendor.
   (b)   Approval required. Purchase by negotiation shall be made only upon the
approval of the director of procurement when such purchases are estimated to
cost in excess of fifteen hundred dollars ($1,500.00) and only upon the
approval of the county administrator when such purchases are estimated to cost
in excess of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00).
   (c)   When permissible. Purchase by negotiation shall be made only when one
(1) of the following conditions occurs:
      (1)   Items are obtained from only one (1) source, and there are not
acceptable equivalents;
      (2)   Bids or proposals are received, but prices are unreasonable;
      (3)   Emergencies exist. Emergencies shall be deemed to exist when a
breakdown in machinery or in an essential service occurs, or when unforseen
circumstances arise, including delays by contractors, delays in transportation,
or unanticipated volume of work. In such cases, awards can be made without
notice of intent as required in paragraph (e) of this section;
      (4)   A contract already exists on a family of items that must be
compatible;
      (5)   Repair and replacement parts of accessories peculiar to specialized
equipment are needed;
      (6)   Identical bids or proposals are made in a pattern;
      (7)   Resale price maintenance is practiced by manufacturers, such as
exclusive dealerships or other methods which result in only preestablished,
published prices being offered;
      (8)   There are reasonable indications of collusion in the bidding or
proposal process; or
      (9)   Contracts are renewed if provided for in the original bid
invitation or request for proposal;
      (10)   a.   A contract for residential solid waste collection may be
renewed or renegotiated regardless of any terms therein if the county council
determines that renewal to promote continuity of service is in the best
interest of the county. However, if the county council shall elect to solicit
bids or proposals for service for any solid waste collection area, such
procedure shall in all aspects comply with this article as to competitive
procurement, with any responsive and responsible vendor being allowed the
opportunity to offer a bid or proposal. Except as otherwise provided, a
contractor, subcontractor, or other vendor may not be awarded a contract to
service more than three (3) collection areas regardless of whether such
contracts be obtained through renewal, renegotiation, subcontracting,
competitive purchasing procedures, or any other means. Only an existing high
performing collections contractor classified as such by the County Solid Waste
Staff is eligible for a third collection area contract.
         b.   As used in this subparagraph, the term:
            1.   "High performing collections contractor" means an established
Residential/Small Business Curbside Collections contractor who currently
maintains a Service Report Card score of below 0.30 valid complains for each
one hundred households for at least a six-month period.
            2.   "Non-valid complaint" means a service-related complaint
received by County staff that was investigated and found to be inaccurate in
fact regarding a Curbside Collection Contractor in the performance of the
service for which they are engaged. These very often pertain to missed
collection complaints where it was determined that roll carts were not placed
at curbside in a timely manner.
            3.   "Service Report Card" means a monthly compilation of all
service-related complaints received by County staff that were investigated
regarding performance by a Curbside Collection Contractor regarding the
performance of the service for which they are engaged.
            4.   "Valid complaint" means a service-related complaint received
by County staff that was investigated and found to be accurate in fact
regarding a Curbside Collection Contractor in the performance of the service
for which they are engaged. Correction of the complaint before close of
business on the designated collection day negates its occurrence.
   (d)   Records. Written records shall be maintained for a period of three (3)
years of all negotiated bids and proposals. Such records shall include the name
of the vendor, the amount of purchase, the equipment or supplies purchased and
a justification for the negotiated bid or proposal.
   (e)   Notice of intent. When the estimated cost of the supplies, materials,
equipment, or contractual services to be purchased by negotiation shall exceed
fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00), the director of procurement shall
advertise, except in the case of an emergency as defined above, a notice of
intent to award a contract at least one time in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county.
(Ord. No. 1908-89, § V, 9-5-89; Ord. No. 2184-92, § V, 3-18-92; Ord. No. 046-
94, § I, 6-7-94; Ord. No. 085-94 HR, § I, 12-6-94; Ord. No. 050-21HR, § I, 11-
9-21)
Sec. 2-613. Leases; procurement procedure.
   (a)   The director of procurement shall establish a list of any interested
persons, including commercial realtors and realtists who would like to be on
the "Lease Procurement List." The director of procurement shall advertise that
any citizen can be on the "Lease Procurement List" and shall provide
instructions as to how a citizen may apply to be added to the list.
   (b)   The director of procurement, when the county shall need to lease
space, shall specifically describe the lease space needed and mail to each
person on the "Lease Procurement List" such description. Each person receiving
such description shall have thirty (30) days to make a lease proposal to the
county director of procurement.
   (c)   The director of procurement shall review all lease proposals and make
recommendations to the county administrator.
(Ord. No. 1825-89, § I, 1-17-89; Ord. No. 1908-89, § V, 9-5-89)
Sec. 2-614. Petty expenditures revolving fund.
   There is hereby established the petty expenditures revolving fund to be
administered by the director of procurement or his designee. Any purchase
estimated to cost under twenty dollars ($20.00) may, with approval of the
director or his designee, be made from this fund. The director or his designee
shall formulate policies for the disbursement of and accounting for any monies
in this fund.
(Ord. No. 1825-89, § I, 1-17-89; Ord. No. 1908-89, § V, 9-5-89)
DIVISION 3. PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 2-615. Purchase order required.
   Any purchase made with county funds shall be recorded on a purchase order
bearing the quantity and description of each item to be purchased. In the event
that exceptions are made by the director of procurement, a control system shall
be in effect.
(Ord. No. 1825-89, § I, 1-17-89; Ord. No. 1908-89, § V, 9-5-89)
Sec. 2-616. Sales of county property.
   Any items of personal property belonging to the county which are declared by
the county administrator to be obsolete or surplus with an estimated market
value of less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) may be sold by the director of
procurement to any interested person for the estimated market value. In the
event of a retiring county employee who has utilized such personal property
while serving the county, the director of procurement may allow such employee
the first right of refusal to purchase such personal property for the estimated
dollar value.
   The director of procurement shall otherwise ensure that such goods be sold
at public auction pursuant to proper public notice or through sealed or written
bids or proposals in accordance with the provisions herein.
(Ord. No. 1825-89, § I, 1-17-89; Ord. No. 1908-89, § V, 9-5-89)
Sec. 2-617. Purchasing files.
   (a)   List of vendors. The director of procurement shall develop and
maintain a list of vendors who offer supplies, materials, equipment, or
contractual services normally required by county agencies. The director of
procurement shall record on the vendors list any significant history of trade
with a vendor, whether favorable or unfavorable, for the purpose of determining
whether a given vendor is a responsible vendor. The status of a given vendor
may be reviewed from time-to-time by the director of procurement.
   (b)   Catalog file. The director of procurement shall develop and update
from time-to-time a file of catalogues for supplies, materials and equipment
normally required by county agencies.
   (c)   Specifications file. The director of procurement shall develop and
maintain a file reflecting specifications for all standard supplies, materials
and equipment normally used by county agencies. Such specifications shall be
the sole criteria of acceptability for all items of the types for which they
are maintained. Using agencies shall not be allowed to specify additional
characteristics on standard items unless such additional specifications (e.g.
brand, specific color, unusual size, etc.) are justified to the satisfaction of
the director of procurement. The director of procurement shall develop standard
nomenclature for the purpose of communication with using agencies concerning
their requirements.
(Ord. No. 1825-89, § I, 1-17-89; Ord. No. 1908-89, § V, 9-5-89)
Sec. 2-618. Exceptions.
   (a)   Prohibitions against subdivision. No contract or purchase may be
subdivided to avoid the requirements of this article; provided, however, that,
individual items may be purchased from different vendors if:
      (1)   The requirements of sections
2-601, and sections
2-608 through 2-616 are followed with respect to the entire estimated cost of
all items for which bids or requests for proposals are invited; and
      (2)   Such practice is consistent with the terms of the notice inviting
bids or requests for proposals.
   (b)   Award to other than lowest responsive and responsible vendor. A
contract or purchase shall be awarded to the lowest responsive and responsible
vendor unless the director of procurement determines, utilizing the following
factors, that an award to the lowest responsive and responsible vendor will not
be in the best interest of the county.
   Factors to be considered:
      (1)   The ability of the vendor to perform the contract or provide the
goods or services promptly or within the time specified without delay or
interference;
      (2)   The quality, availability and adaptability of the goods or services
for the use of the subject of the contract;
      (3)   The ability of the vendor to provide future maintenance and service
for the use of the subject of the contract;
      (4)   The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid or request
for proposal;
      (5)   The delivery and discount terms of the bid or request for proposal;
      (6)   The convenience of the location where the goods are to be delivered
or picked up or the service is to be rendered;
      (7)   The best interest of the citizens of the county; and
      (8)   Minority procurement requirements.
   (c)   Price escalation clauses. The director of procurement may enter into
contracts containing price escalation clauses upon the approval of the county
administrator; provided that, such escalations may reasonably be expected not
to raise the average price of goods or services higher than prices offered by
other vendors.
   (d)   Cancellation of contracts. The director of procurement shall have the
right to cancel any purchase or contract when the vendor is found to have
violated or attempted to violate the provisions of this article or in any of
the following instances:
      (1)   If the vendor fails to make delivery within the time specified in
the contract;
      (2)   If the vendor fails to provide service when service is part of the
contract;
      (3)   If any supplies, materials or equipment delivered under the
contract are rejected and are not promptly replaced by the vendor (if there are
repeated rejections, the contract may be cancelled, even though the vendor
agrees to replace the items promptly);
      (4)   If the vendor agrees to cancellation; or
      (5)   If the contract is obtained by fraud, collusion, conspiracy or by
any method which is in conflict with statutory or constitutional provisions of
the state.
(Ord. No. 1825-89, § I, 1-17-89; Ord. No. 1908-89, § V, 9-5-89)
Sec. 2-619. Central supplies and services.
   (a)   Generally. The director of procurement or his designee shall maintain
centralized stocks of such items as office supplies, office furniture and
equipment, printing supplies, and gasoline which are normally used by county
agencies.
   (b)   Inventory. The director of procurement shall inventory all such items
periodically, whether by means of physical counts or perpetual records,
verified by periodic physical counts.
   (c)   Accounting. The director of procurement shall maintain central
supplies and services and for each class of such items and related services.
Purchases of items of stock shall be charged to such accounts. When such items
or related services are provided to county agencies, the director of
procurement or his designee shall charge the using department an amount
representing the cost of such items or services, and shall credit an equivalent
amount to the appropriate central supply and service account.
   (d)   Requisitions. Any county agency requiring any goods or services,
whether or not stock is available from central supplies and services, shall
request such by submitting a written requisition to the office of procurement.
Such requisition shall be in that form required by the office of procurement.
(Ord. No. 1825-89, § I, 1-17-89; Ord. No. 1908-89, § V, 9-5-89)
Sec. 2-620. Personal interests.
   (a)   Conflicts of interest. Any purchase or contract within the purview of
this article in which the director of procurement or any officer or employee of
the county is financially interested, directly or indirectly, shall be void;
provided, however, that, before the execution of a purchase or contract the
county administrator shall have the authority to waive compliance with this
section when he finds such interest to be so remote or indirect as to be
inconsequential.
   (b)   Gratuities.
      (1)   Acceptance prohibited. The acceptance of any gratuity in the form
of cash, merchandise, or any other thing with a value exceeding twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) by an employee of the county from any person, firm or
corporation to which any purchase or contract is or might be awarded, shall be
deemed a violation of this article and shall be cause for removal or other
disciplinary action.
      (2)   Offer prohibited. The offer of any gratuity by any actual or
prospective vendor or contractor shall be cause for canceling any contract
involved and for declaring such vendor or contractor an irresponsible vendor.
(Ord. No. 1825-89, § I, 1-17-89; Ord. No. 1908-89, § V, 9-5-89)
Sec. 2-621. Reserved.
   Editor's note--Ord. No. 2184-92, § VI, adopted March 18, 1992, repealed
former section
2-621 in its entirety and enacted sections
2-621.1--2-621.3 as set out hereinbelow. Former section
2-621 pertained to the protest procedure for vendors and derived from Ord. No.
1825-89, § I, adopted Jan. 17, 1989; Ord. no. 1908-89, § V, adopted Sept. 5,
1989.
Section 2-621.1. Authority to resolve protested solicitations and awards.
   (a)   Right to protest. Any actual or prospective bidder, offeror,
contractor, or subcontractor who is aggrieved in connection with the
solicitation or award of a contract may protest to the director of the office
of procurement. The protest, setting forth the grievance, shall be submitted in
writing within ten (10) days after such aggrieved person knows or should have
known of the facts giving rise thereto. No protest shall be considered if filed
more than thirty (30) days after award of a contract. A vendor/contractor who
initiates a protest may be required to reimburse the county for its legal and
administrative costs if the procurement review panel determined that the
protest was frivolous or without merit.
   (b)   Authority to resolve protests. Prior to commencement of formal review,
the director of the office of procurement or designated representative may
administratively settle the protest of an aggrieved bidder, offeror, contractor
or subcontractor. Such settlement shall be consistent with this ordinance and
procurement regulations promulgated by Richland County.
   (c)   Administrative decision. If settlement of a protest shall not be
accomplished within a reasonable time, the director of the office of
procurement shall issue a written decision within ten (10) days following the
determination that settlement is not possible. The decision shall state the
reasons for the action taken.
   (d)   Notice of decision. A copy of the decision under subsection (c) of
this section shall be mailed or otherwise furnished immediately to the
protestant and any other party intervening.
   (e)   Appeal to Richland County procurement review panel. A decision under
subsection (c) of this section shall be final and conclusive, unless within ten
(10) days following its issuance, the person aggrieved thereby shall file
written appeal to Richland County procurement review panel, setting forth the
grounds for same. The protestant may also request an interview with the panel.
Appeal to the procurement review panel shall not stay issuance or execution of
a contract.
   (f)   Review. No later than thirty (30) days from receipt of an appeal, the
review panel shall consider and determine the matter and shall file its written
decision, including findings of fact and conclusions of law. Upon a finding
that the appeal is meritorious, the review panel may direct an award of
contract to the protestant, may require that a contract be re-bid, and may
award reimbursement to the protestant of reasonable bid preparation costs.
   (g)   Judicial review. The review panel decision shall constitute final
administrative review and exhaustion of administrative remedies for purposes of
judicial review in "contested cases" as defined by the South Carolina
Administrative Procedures Act, section 1-23-380 S.C. Code of Laws (1976).
(Ord. No. 2184-92, § VI, 3-18-92; Ord. No. 2355-93, § I, 10-19-93)
Sec. 2-621.2. Authority to debar or suspend.
   (a)   Applicability. This section applies to a debarment for cause from
consideration for award of contracts or a suspension from such consideration
during an investigation where there is probable cause for such debarment.
   (b)   Authority. After reasonable notice of debarment to the person or firm
involved, and a reasonable opportunity for such person or firm to be heard, the
director of the office of procurement shall have the authority to debar a
person from consideration for award of contracts, provided that debarment is in
the best interest of Richland County and is based upon one or more of the
causes recited in (c) of this section. The period of debarment shall be as
prescribed by the director of the office of procurement. The director shall
also have authority to suspend a person from consideration for award of
contracts pending investigation or legal proceedings, provided that doing so is
in the best interest of Richland County and probable cause for debarment
appears to exist. The suspension shall be for a period as prescribed by the
director of the office of procurement.
   (c)   Causes for debarment or suspension. The causes for debarment or
suspension shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   Conviction for commission of a criminal offense as an incident to
obtaining or attempting to obtain a public or private contract or subcontract,
or in the performance of such contract or subcontract;
      (2)   Conviction under state or federal statutes of embezzlement, theft,
forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records, receiving stolen
property or any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity or
professional honesty which currently, seriously and directly affects
responsibility as a county contractor;
      (3)   Conviction under state or federal antitrust laws arising out of the
submission of bids or proposals;
      (4)   Violation of contract provisions, as set forth below, of a
character which is regarded by the director of the office of procurement to be
so serious as to justify debarment action:
         a.   Deliberate failure without good cause to perform in accordance
with the specifications or within the time limit provided in the contract; or
         b.   A recent record of failure to perform or of unsatisfactory
performance in accordance with the terms of one (1) or more contracts;
provided, that failure to perform or unsatisfactory performance caused by acts
beyond the control of the contractor shall not be considered to be a basis for
debarment;
      (5)   Any other cause the director of the office of procurement
determines to be so serious and compelling as to affect responsibility as a
Richland County contractor, including debarment by another governmental entity
for any cause listed herein.
   (d)   Decision. The director of the office of procurement shall issue a
written decision to debar or suspend within ten (10) days from notice that
cause exists. The decision shall state the specific reasons for the action
taken.
   (e)   Notice of decision. A copy of the decision under subsection (d) of
this section shall be mailed or otherwise furnished immediately to the debarred
or suspended person and any other party intervening.
   (f)   Finality of Decision. A decision under subsection (c) of this section
shall be final and conclusive, unless within ten (10) days following its
issuance, the person aggrieved thereby shall file written appeal to the county
procurement review panel, setting forth the grounds for same. The person may
also request an interview with the panel.
(Ord. No. 2184-92, § VI, 3-18-92)
Sec. 2-621.3 Authority to resolve contract and breach of contract
controversies.
   (a)   Applicability. This section applies to controversies between the
county and a contractor or subcontractor when the subcontractor is the real
party in interest, which arise under or by virtue of a contract between them.
This includes without limitation controversies based upon breach of contract,
mistake, misrepresentation or other cause for contract modification or
recision.
   (b)   Authority. The director of the office of procurement is authorized to
settle and resolve a controversy described in subsection (a) of this section.
   (c)   Decision. If such a claim or controversy is not resolved by mutual
agreement, the director of the office of procurement shall promptly issue a
decision in writing within ten (10) days from notice that mutual agreement is
not possible. The decision shall state the reasons for the action taken.
   (d)   Notice of decision. A copy of the decision under subsection (c) of
this section shall be mailed or otherwise furnished immediately to the
contractor.
   (e)   Finality of decision. A decision under subsection (c) of this section
shall be final and conclusive, unless within ten (10) days following its
issuance, the person aggrieved thereby shall file written appeal to the county
procurement review panel, setting forth the grounds for same. The person may
also request an interview with the panel.
(Ord. No. 2184-92, § VI, 3-18-92)
Sec. 2-621.4 Procurement review panel.
   (a)   Creation. There is hereby created the Richland County procurement
review panel (review panel) which shall be charged with the responsibility of
providing an administrative review of formal protests of decisions arising from
the solicitation and award of contracts, the debarment or suspension of a
person from the consideration for award of a contract, a decision concerning
the resolution of a contract or breach of contract controversy, or any other
decision, policy or procedure arising from or concerning the expenditure of
county funds for the procurement of any supplies, services, or construction
procured in accordance with the provisions of this code and regulations.
   (b)   Membership. The panel shall be composed of five (5) members selected
by the county council:
      (1)   One (1) member serving in a public procurement arena, preferably at
management level with state or local government;
      (2)   One (1) member representing the service industry;
      (3)   One (1) member from the construction industry;
      (4)   One (1) member from professional services;
      (5)   One (1) member from the consumer industry.
   (c)   Chairperson and meetings. The panel shall elect a chairperson from
among its members and shall meet as often as necessary to afford a swift
resolution of the controversies submitted to it. Three (3) members present and
voting shall constitute a quorum. Members of the panel shall be paid per diem,
mileage, and subsistence as provided by law for members of boards, commissions,
and committees to be paid from funds appropriated to the county administrator.
   (d)   Administrative support. The county administrator shall provide such
administrative and clerical support as necessary for the orderly transaction of
business by the review panel.
(Ord. No. 2184-92, § VI, 3-18-92; Ord. No. 004-94, § I, 1-4-94)
Sec. 2-622. Centralized purchasing.
   It shall be the policy of the council that, whenever practical, goods and
services required by county agencies shall be procured by the use of
centralized purchasing procedures.
(Ord. No. 1825-89, § I, 1-17-89)
Sec. 2-623. Procedural regulations.
   (a)   Director of procurement to prepare. The director of procurement is
hereby authorized to prepare procedural regulations to amplify the provisions
of this article. Such regulations shall be submitted to the county council for
approval, after which the same shall be incorporated herein by reference and
shall have the force of law. Such regulations may include, but are not limited
to:
      (1)   The procedure for handling bids or proposals, including their
custody and safeguarding; opening and tabulation; rejection and readvertising;
and the procedure for determining the lowest responsive and responsible vendor;
      (2)   The procedure for securing from vendors and prospective vendors the
data necessary to determine whether or not they are responsive and responsible;
      (3)   The procedure for inspection of deliveries of supplies, materials,
equipment and contractual services;
      (4)   The procedure for reporting receipt of deliveries of supplies,
materials, equipment and contractual services;
      (5)   The procedure for submitting requisitions for the supplies,
materials, equipment and contractual services required by the using agencies;
      (6)   The procedure for making emergency purchases;
      (7)   The procedure for control, and safeguarding of supplies, materials
and equipment in storerooms or at storage points;
      (8)   The procedure for determining from heads of using agencies
estimated future requirements for supplies and services needed on a recurring
basis;
      (9)   The procedures for redistribution and disposition of property;
      (10)   Dollar limitations to reflect current marketing and purchasing
procedures; and
      (11)   Such matters as may be necessary to give effect to provisions of
this article and any amendments thereto.
   (b)   Prior to the promulgation, amendment, or repeal of any regulations,
the director of the office of procurement shall:
      (1)   Give notice of a drafting in a local newspaper of general
circulation. The notice shall provide a list of topics to be covered by any
proposed regulation or amendment together with notice of the place and manner
in which interested persons may obtain copies of such proposal.
      (2)   Give at least thirty (30) days' notice in a local newspaper of
general circulation that a proposed regulation or amendment will be submitted
to county council for approval. The notice shall list topics to be covered by
the proposal together with notice of the place and manner in which interested
persons may obtain copies of the proposal and notice of the time, place and
manner in which interested persons may comment upon it. The notice must be
mailed to all persons who have made timely requests for advance notice of
proposed promulgation of regulations.
      (3)   Afford all interested persons reasonable opportunity to submit
data, views, or arguments, orally or in writing. Opportunity for oral hearing
must be granted if requested by twenty-five (25) persons, by a county
subdivision or agency, or by an association having not less than twenty-five
(25) members. Full consideration shall be given to all written and oral
submissions respecting the proposed regulation or amendment.
(Ord. No. 1825-89, § I, 1-17-89; Ord. No. 1908-89, § V, 9-5-89; Ord. No. 2184-
92, § VI, 3-18-92)
Secs. 2-624, 2-625. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. PERFORMANCE BONDS
Sec. 2-626. Formal contract procedure.
   The director of procurement may, at his discretion, require a successful
vendor, when the formal contract procedure for a purchase is being followed, to
furnish surety in the form of a certified or cashier's check or bond for the
faithful performance of the contract in the amount specified in the contract
bid form or request for proposal. Vendors who regularly do business with the
county, however, shall be permitted to file with the county an annual
performance bond in an amount established by the director of procurement. Such
annual bond shall be acceptable as surety in lieu of furnishing surety with
each transaction.
(Ord. No. 1825-89, § I, 1-17-89; Ord. No. 1908-89, § V, 9-5-89)
Sec. 2-627. Open market procedure.
   The director of procurement shall not require vendors, when the open market
procedure for purchases is being followed, to submit performance surety unless,
at his discretion, such performance surety when such procedure is in the public
interest.
(Ord. No. 1825-89, § I, 1-17-89; Ord. No. 1908-89, § V, 9-5-89)
DIVISION 5. NONDISCRIMINATION IN CONTRACT PROCEDURES
   Cross reference(s)--Equal employment opportunity/affirmative action in
county government employment, § 2-411 et seq.
Sec. 2-628. General provisions.
   (a)   Applicability. This division shall apply to all county contracting
agencies and section
2-629 shall be included in every contract hereafter entered into by the county.
   (b)   Compliance. The county administrator or his designee shall be
responsible for the formulation of such rules and regulations as are necessary
to achieve the purposes of this division. The county administrator shall be
responsible for determining whether a contractor or subcontractor is complying
with this division and shall formulate the necessary procedures to ensure
compliance with this division.
(Ord. No. 1825-89, § I, 1-17-89)
Sec. 2-629. Contractor's agreement.
   (a)   During the performance of all contracts with the county, the
contractor agrees that it will not discriminate against any employee or
applicant for employment because of race, color, religion, sex or national
origin.
   (b)   During the performance of all contracts with the county, the
contractor agrees that it will take affirmative action to ensure that
applicants are employed and employees are treated during employment without
regard to their race, color, religion, sex or national origin.
   (c)   During the performance of all contracts with the county, all
solicitations or advertisements for employees placed by or on behalf of the
contractor shall state that all qualified applicants will receive consideration
for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex or national origin.
(Ord. No. 1825-89, § I, 1-17-89)
Sec. 2-630. Access to reports and records.
   The contractor will furnish all information and reports required by the
county administrator pursuant to the rules and regulations and procedures
formulated by the county administrator or his designee and will provide access
to its books and records during any investigation by the county to ascertain
compliance with this division.
(Ord. No. 1825-89, § I, 1-17-89)
Sec. 2-631. Procedure upon noncompliance.
   (a)   In the event that a contractor is not complying with section
2-629, the county administrator or his designee, after notice to the contractor
and an opportunity being given to the contractor to comply with the
requirements of this division, may either terminate or suspend in whole or in
part the contract and declare the contractor ineligible for further county
contracts.
   (b)   The county attorney shall review all terminations or suspensions of
contracts by the county administrator. When the county attorney concurs with
the action of the county administrator, the action of the county administrator
shall be final. When the county attorney does not concur with the action of the
county administrator, the action of the county administrator and the county
attorney shall be brought before county council for final resolution.
   (c)   Any contractor whose contract with the county has been terminated
pursuant to this division; or any contractor that has been suspended pursuant
to this division; or any contractor that has been declared ineligible for
further county contracts may appeal the termination, suspension, or declaration
or ineligibility to county council.
(Ord. No. 1825-89, § I, 1-17-89)
Sec. 2-632. Subcontractor's compliance.
   The contractor shall include the provisions of section
2-629 in every subcontract or purchase order entered into by the contractor for
performance of the contract with the county by a subcontractor.
(Ord. No. 1825-89, § I, 1-17-89)
DIVISION 6. MINORITY PROCUREMENT REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 2-633. General provisions.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this division is to encourage and ensure
greater participation of minority businesses in contracts with the county for
construction, materials, commodities, equipment and rendering of service.
   (b)   Definitions.
      (1)   "Minority business" means any business, whether individually owned,
a partnership, a joint venture, or a corporation which is certified to be
wholly or at least fifty-one (51) percent owned or controlled by members of a
minority group and is a resident business in the state. Those minority
businesses currently listed in the "Minority Business Directory of South
Carolina" shall be considered certified and placed upon the county vendors
list. A minority business may be certified, for the purpose of transacting
business with the county government, through the state office of small and
minority business assistance.
      (2)   "Minority" is an individual or a group that is economically and/or
socially disadvantaged. For the purpose of this section, "minority" means a
United States citizen who is certified as such and a resident of the state.
      (3)   "Socially disadvantaged individuals" means those individuals who
have been subject to racial or ethnic prejudice or cultural bias because of
their identification as members of a certain group.
      (4)   "Economically disadvantaged individuals" means those socially
disadvantaged individuals whose ability to compete in the free enterprise
system has been impaired due to diminished capital and credit opportunities as
compared to others in the same business area who are not socially
disadvantaged.
      (5)   "Minority individuals or groups" include but are not limited to
Black Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians, American Asians, and
women.
(Ord. No. 1825-89, § I, 1-17-89)
Sec. 2-634. Awarding of contracts.
   (a)   The director of procurement will ensure, whenever possible, that every
contract entered into by the county for contractual services, whether awarded
through sealed bids, negotiations or requests for proposals, shall be awarded
on an equitable basis with not less than fifteen (15) percent of each contract
in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) being awarded to minority
businesses.
   (b)   Each contractor, and/or subcontractor, bidding, responding to a
request for proposals or negotiating contracts with the county shall be
required to make a good faith effort to aid the county in accomplishing its
goals by entering into subcontracts or joint ventures with minority businesses.
"Good faith effort" for the purpose of this section means submittal by a
contractor of a list of those minority firms contracted for subcontract or
joint ventures.
   (c)   Each contractor submitting a bid or proposal shall submit a
certificate stating that it has not failed to enter into subcontracts with
persons because of their race, religion, sex, or national origin.
   (d)   Each contractor shall submit with its bid or response to a request for
proposals, a listing of each minority business that it intends to subcontract
with and the work proposed to be performed by such minority business.
(Ord. No. 1825-89, § I, 1-17-89; Ord. No. 1908-89, § V, 9-5-89)
Sec. 2-635. Notice to minority contractors.
   It shall be the responsibility of the director of procurement of the county
to notify minority businesses of the letting of bids or requests for proposals
and purchases of contractual services whenever such notices are given to the
general public.
(Ord. No. 1825-89, § I, 1-17-89; Ord. No. 1908-89, § V, 9-5-89)
Sec. 2-636. Services to be rendered by director of procurement.
   (a)   The director of procurement, with the approval of the county
administrator, shall compile and maintain a comprehensive list of minority
businesses that are eligible to contract with the county.
   (b)   The director of procurement shall seek to locate minority businesses
to provide products and services that are required by the county.
   (c)   The director of procurement shall ensure that there are no artificial
barriers in the county purchasing procedures that prohibit full participation
of minority businesses in contracting with the county.
(Ord. No. 1825-89, § I, 1-17-89; Ord. No. 1908-89, § V, 9-5-89)
Sec. 2-637. Report to the county administrator and county council.
   (a)   The director of procurement shall report annually, in writing, to
county council, through the county administrator, on the number and dollar
value of contracts awarded to minority businesses during the preceding fiscal
year. The report shall include the number of bids and proposals received from
minority businesses; and, if rejected, the reasons for such rejection.
   (b)   The director of procurement shall report annually, in writing to
county council, through the county administrator, the number and dollar value
that should be awarded to minority businesses during the current fiscal year.
   (c)   Whenever the report of contracts to be awarded to minority businesses
during the current fiscal year reflects less than fifteen (15) percent of the
dollar value of contracts to be awarded, the director of procurement shall be
required to submit a minority business utilization plan to county council. The
plan shall include the names of minority firms solicited for county contracts
and the reasons for not meeting the minimum goals.
(Ord. No. 1825-89, § I, 1-17-89; Ord. No. 1908-89, § V, 9-5-89)
Sec. 2-638. Enforcement responsibilities.
   (a)   The county administrator, to ensure compliance with this division,
shall have the authority to require the submission of reports and documentation
from all county divisions that are subject to this division.
   (b)   The director of procurement shall submit quarterly reports to the
county administrator, indicating the status of the county in meeting its
minimum goal of fifteen (15) percent. The director of procurement shall advise
the county administrator of any contractor's noncompliance of this division.
   (c)   Reporting periods are:
      1st Quarter--July 1 through September 30;
      2nd Quarter--October 1 through December 31;
      3rd Quarter--January 1 through March 31; and
      4th Quarter--April 1 through June 30.
(Ord. No. 1825-89, § I, 1-17-89; Ord. No. 1908-89, § V, 9-5-89)
Sec. 2-638.1. Results of noncompliance.
   Any contractor failing to comply with the requirements of this division may
be declared ineligible to participate in future contracts with the county for
one (1) year after the determination that the contractor has violated this
division. Such denial of participation shall be reviewed by the county
administrator and the county attorney and must have their joint approval in
order to be effective.
(Ord. No. 1825-89, § I, 1-17-89)
DIVISION 7. SMALL BUSINESS ENTERPRISE PROCUREMENT REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 2-639. General provisions.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this division is to provide a race- and
gender-neutral procurement tool for the county to use in its efforts to ensure
that all segments of its local business community have a reasonable and
significant opportunity to participate in county contracts for construction,
architectural and engineering services, professional services, non-professional
services, and commodities. The small local business enterprise ("SLBE") Program
also furthers the county's public interest to foster effective broad-based
competition from all segments of the vendor community, including, but not
limited to, minority business enterprises, small business enterprises, and
local business enterprises. This policy is, in part, intended to further the
county's compelling interest in ensuring that it is neither an active nor
passive participant in private sector marketplace discrimination, and in
promoting equal opportunity for all segments of the contracting community to
participate in county contracts. Moreover, the SLBE program provides additional
avenues for the development of new capacity and new sources of competition for
county contracts from the growing pool of small and locally based businesses.
   (b)   Scope and limitations. This SLBE program may be applied by the county
on a contract-by-contract basis to the maximum practicable extent permissible
under federal and state law.
   (c)   Definitions.
      Affirmative procurement initiatives. Refers to any procurement tool to
enhance contracting opportunities for SLBE firms including: bonding/ insurance
waivers, bid incentives, price preferences, sheltered market, mandatory
subcontracting, competitive business development demonstration projects, and
SLBE evaluation preference points in the scoring of proposal evaluations.
      Award. The final selection of a bidder or offeror for a specified prime
contract or subcontract dollar amount. Awards are made by the county to prime
contractors or vendors or by prime contractors or vendors to subcontractors or
sub-vendors, usually pursuant to an open invitation to bid ("ITB") or request
for proposal ("RFP") process. (Contract awards are to be distinguished from
contract payments in that they only reflect the anticipated dollar amounts
instead of actual dollar amounts that are to be paid to a bidder or offeror
under an awarded contract.)
      Bid incentives. Additional inducements or enhancements in the bidding
process that are designed to increase the chances for the selection of SLBE
firms in competition with other firms. These bid incentives may be applied to
all solicitations, contracts, and letter agreements for the purchase of
architectural and engineering services, construction, professional services,
non-professional services, and commodities including change orders and
amendments.
      Centralized bidder registration system ("CBR"). A web-based software
application used by the County of Richland to track and monitor SLBE
availability and utilization (i.e., "spend" or "payments") on county contracts.
      County. Refers to the County of Richland, South Carolina.
      Commercially useful function. An SLBE performs a commercially useful
function when it is responsible for execution of the work of the contract and
is carrying out its responsibilities by actually performing, managing, and
supervising the work involved. To perform a commercially useful function, the
SLBE must also be responsible, with respect to materials and supplies used on
the contract, for negotiating price, determining quantity and quality, ordering
the material, and installing (where applicable) and paying for the material
itself. To determine whether an SLBE is performing a commercially useful
function, an evaluation must be performed of the amount of work subcontracted,
normal industry practices, whether the amount the SLBE firm is to be paid under
the contract is commensurate with the work it is actually performing and the
SLBE credit claimed for its performance of the work, and other relevant
factors. Specifically, an SLBE does not perform a commercially useful function
if its role is limited to that of an extra participant in a transaction,
contract, or project through which funds are passed in order to obtain the
appearance of meaningful and useful SLBE participation, when in similar
transactions in which SLBE firms do not participate, there is no such role
performed.
      Emerging SLBE. An emerging firm that meets all of the qualifications of a
small local business enterprise, and that is less than five (5) years old, but
has no more than five (5) full-time employees and annual gross sales as
averaged over the life of the firm that are less than one million ($1,000,000)
dollars.
      Goal. A non-mandatory annual aspirational percentage goal for SLBE
contract participation is established each year for architectural and
engineering services, construction, professional services, non-professional
services, and commodities contracts. Mandatory percentage goals for SLBE
subcontract participation may be established on a contract- by-contract basis
by either the director of the Office of Small Business Opportunity or a goal
setting committee.
      Goal setting committee. A committee established by the director of the
Office of Small Business Opportunity for the county (including a representative
of the procurement department and a representative of the end-user agency) and
chaired by the director of the Office of Small Business Opportunity that
establishes SLBE program goals and selects appropriate SLBE affirmative
procurement initiatives to be applied to each contract for the county based
upon industry categories, vendor availability, and project-specific
characteristics. The director of the Office of Small Business Opportunity may
establish as many as five (5) separate goal setting committees (i.e., one (1)
for each industry category).
      Good faith efforts. Documentation of the bidder’s intent to comply with
SLBE program goals and procedures, including, but not limited to the following:
(1) documentation within a bid submission or proposal reflecting the bidder’s
commitment to comply with SLBE program goals as established by the director of
the Office of Small Business Opportunity or a goal setting committee for a
particular contract; or (2) documentation of efforts made towards achieving the
SLBE program goals (e.g., timely advertisements in appropriate trade
publications and publications of wide general circulation; timely posting of
SLBE subcontract opportunities on the county web site; solicitations of bids
from all qualified SLBE firms listed in the county’s SLBE directory of
certified SLBE firms; correspondence from qualified SLBE firms documenting
their unavailability to perform SLBE contracts; documentation of efforts to
subdivide work into smaller quantities for subcontracting purposes to SLBE
firms; documentation of efforts to assist SLBE firms with obtaining financing,
bonding, or insurance required by the bidder; and documentation of
consultations with trade associations and consultants that represent the
interests of small and local businesses in order to identify qualified and
available SLBE subcontractors.)
      Graduation. An SLBE firm permanently graduates from the county's SLBE
program when it meets the criteria for graduation set forth in this policy.
      Independently owned, managed, and operated. Ownership of an SLBE firm
must be direct, independent, and by individuals only. Business firms that are
owned by other businesses or by the principals or owners of other businesses
that cannot themselves qualify under the SLBE eligibility requirements shall
not be eligible to participate in the SLBE program. Moreover, the day-to-day
management of the SLBE firm must be direct and independent of the influence of
any other businesses that cannot themselves qualify under the SLBE eligibility
requirements.
      Industry categories. Procurement groupings for county contracts for
purposes of the administration of affirmative procurement initiatives shall be
inclusive of architectural and engineering, construction, professional
services, and nonprofessional services, and commodities procurements. Industry
categories may also be referred to as "business categories."
      Joint venture. An association of two (2) or more persons or businesses
carrying out a single business enterprise for which purpose they combine their
capital, efforts, skills, knowledge and/or property. Joint ventures must be
established by written agreement.
      Local business enterprise ("LBE"). A firm having a principal place of
business or a significant employment presence or a significant business
presence in Richland County, South Carolina. This definition is subsumed within
the definition of "small local business enterprise."
      Non-professional services. Non- construction, non-architectural, and non-
engineering services that are other than professional services, and such
"other" services that do not require any license or highly specialized training
and credentials to perform.
      Office of Small Business Opportunity. The office which shall manage and
administer the SLBE Program (see Section
2-639 et seq.) and shall undertake other functions and duties as assigned by
the county administrator or county council.
      Points. The quantitative assignment of value for specific evaluation
criteria in the selection process.
      Prime contractor. The vendor or contractor to whom a purchase order or
contract is awarded by the county for purposes of providing goods or services
to the county.
      Principal place of business. A location wherein a firm maintains a
company headquarters or a physical office and through which it obtains no less
than fifty percent (50%) of its overall customers or sales dollars, or through
which no less than twenty-five percent (25%) of its employees are located and
domiciled in the County of Richland and/or Richland County.
      Professional services. Any non-construction and non-architectural and
engineering services that require highly specialized training and/or licensed
credentials to perform, such as legal, accounting, scientific, technical,
insurance, investment management, medical, or real estate services.
      Responsive. A firm's bid or proposal conforms in all material respects to
the invitation to bid or request for proposal and shall include compliance with
SLBE program requirements.
      Sheltered market. An affirmative procurement initiative designed to set
aside a county contract bid for bidding exclusively among SLBE firms.
      Significant business presence. A physical office within Richland County
through which a firm obtains no less than fifty percent (50%) of its overall
customers or sales dollars.
      Significant employee presence. Having a physical office within Richland
County and no less than twenty-five percent (25%) of a firm's total number of
full and part-time employees are domiciled in Richland County.
      SLBE certification/re-certification application (SLBE Form-R). This form
shall be completed by small local business enterprises (SLBEs) when applying
for and/or recertifying SLBE status for participation in the county's small
local business enterprise program. This form shall be completed every two (2)
years by certified small local business enterprises by the anniversary date of
their original certification.
      SLBE directory. A listing of the small local businesses that have been
certified by the procurement department for participation in the SLBE program.
      SLBE plan execution certification (SLBE Form-C). The form certifying the
general contractor's intent to use a SLBE subcontractor, verifying that an
agreement has been executed between the prime and the SLBE.
      SLBE schedule for subcontractor participation (SLBE Form-S). This form
must be completed by all non-SLBE firms that subcontract to SLBE firms. A form
must be submitted for each SLBE subcontractor. This form(s) must be reviewed
and approved by the director of the Office of Small Business Opportunity before
contract award.
      SLBE schedule of size standard eligibility requirements. A document
separate and apart from this division, adopted by the county council, which
defines the SLBE size standard eligibility requirements, in number of employees
and annual gross revenue dollars, applicable to the SLBE program. The size
standards shall be reviewed not less than annually and adjusted periodically by
the county council to meet changes in market conditions.
      SLBE unavailability certification (SLBE Form-U). This form demonstrates a
bidder's unsuccessful good faith effort to meet the small, local participation
requirements of the contract. This form will only be considered after proper
completion of the outreach and compliance efforts and methods used to notify
and inform SLBE firms of contracting opportunities have been fully exhausted.
      Small business enterprise ("SBE"). A small business enterprise is any
for-profit enterprise as defined by S.C. Code 1976, Title 33, Chapter 31 that
is not a broker, that is independently owned and operated, that is not a
subsidiary of another business, and that is not dominant in its field of
operation; and that also meets the size standard limitations as adopted and
periodically amended in the SLBE schedule of size standard eligibility
requirements. Once the gross annual receipts of a business exceed the gross
sales average limits, it should no longer be eligible to benefit as an SLBE
firm and should be graduated from the program. The size standards in number of
employees and annual gross revenue dollars should be reviewed annually and
adjusted periodically to meet economic changes. Joint ventures must be
certified on a bid-by-bid basis. The joint venture shall not be subject to the
average gross receipts and employee limits imposed by this section. However,
each individual business participating in the joint venture must be certified
by the procurement department as an SLBE.
      Small local business enterprise ("SLBE"). An independently owned firm
that is not dominant in its industry, and that satisfies all requirements of
being both a "small business enterprise" and a "local business enterprise."
      Spend dollars. Dollars actually paid to prime and/or subcontractors and
vendors for county contracted goods and/or services.
      Subcontractor. Any vendor or contractor that is providing goods or
services to a prime contractor in furtherance of the prime contractor's
performance under a contract or purchase order with the county.
      Suspension. The temporary stoppage of a SLBE firm's participation in the
county's contracting process under the SLBE program for a finite period of time
due to the cumulative contract payments the SLBE received during a fiscal year.
(Ord. No. 049-13HR, § II, 9-17-13; Ord. No. 016-14HR, §§ II, III, 5-6-14; Ord.
No. 050-14HR, § I, 10-21-14; Ord. No. 058-16HR, § II, 12-6-16)
Sec. 2-640. Program objectives and general requirements.
   (a)   To meet the objectives of this program, the county is committed to:
      (1)   Increasing the participation of small local business enterprises
("SLBEs") in county contracting, and, to the extent possible, ameliorating
through race- and gender- neutral means, any disparities in the participation
of minority business enterprises or women business enterprises on county
contracts;
      (2)   Regular evaluation regarding the progress of the program using
accumulated availability and utilization data to determine specific program
provisions that require modification, expansion, and/or curtailment;
      (3)   Establishing one (1) or more goal setting committee(s) ("GSCs") to
provide guidance on the implementation of the rules under this policy;
      (4)   Continuous review and advice of the GSC in administering the policy
and goals herein. The county’s director of the Office of Small Business
Opportunity shall determine the size of each GSC that is to be chaired by the
procurement director. The procurement director shall also appoint the remaining
members of the GSC from the county’s procurement personnel and other county
departments affected by this program; and
      (5)   Providing accountability and accuracy in setting goals and in
reporting program results through the implementation of a mandatory centralized
bidder registration process capable of identifying with specificity the
universe of firms that are available and interested in bidding on and/or
performing on county contracts, and of providing the means of tracking actual
county bids, contract awards, and prime contract and subcontract payments to
registered bidders on the basis of firm ownership status, commodity or sub-
industry codes, firm location, and firm size. Accordingly, prime contractors
and subcontractors will be required to register and input data into the CBR or
other related forms and systems as a condition of engaging in business with the
county.
   (b)   At a minimum, the procurement director shall:
      (1)   Report to the county administrator and the county council on at
least an annual basis as to the county's progress towards satisfying SLBE
program objectives;
      (2)   Formulate program waivers, improvements and adjustments to the GSC
goal-setting methodology and other program functions;
      (3)   Have substantive input in a contract specification review process
to be undertaken in advance of the issuance of county's RFPs and bid
solicitations to ensure that contract bid specifications are not unnecessarily
restrictive and unduly burdensome to small, local, minority- owned, and other
businesses;
      (4)   Receive and analyze external and internal information including
statistical data and anecdotal testimonies it deems appropriate to effectively
accomplish its duties; and
      (5)   Monitor and support the implementation of the rules under this
program, and where appropriate, make recommendations to the county
administrator for approval of changes to established size standards for SLBE
firms, and provide notice of all approved changes to the county council.
   (c)   At a minimum, each goal setting committee shall:
      (1)   Meet as often as it deems necessary to accomplish its duties but
not less than twice annually;
      (2)   Develop the SLBE goal setting methodology to be implemented by the
director of the Office of Small Business Opportunity on a contract-by-contract
basis; and
      (3)   Monitor and support the implementation of the rules under this
program policy.
(Ord. No. 049-13HR, § II, 9-17-13; Ord. No. 058-16HR, § III, 12-6-16)
Sec. 2-641. Eligibility for SLBE program.
   (a)   For the purpose of this program, a firm will be certified as a small
and local business enterprise (SLBE) with the procurement department upon its
submission of a completed certification form (SLBE Form-R), supporting
documentation, and a signed affidavit stating that it meets all of the SLBE
eligibility criteria as set forth below:
      (1)   It is an independently owned and operated for-profit business
concern as defined by S.C. Code 1976, Title 33, Chapter 31 that is not a
broker, that is not a subsidiary of another business, that is not dominant in
its field of operation; whose owners are actively involved in day-to-day
management and control of the business, and that also is performing a
commercially useful function;
      (2)   It meets size standard eligibility requirements for small business
enterprises as adopted and periodically amended in the SLBE schedule of size
standard eligibility requirements;
      Once the gross annual revenues of a business exceed the three (3)-year
average gross annual revenue limits, it should no longer be eligible to benefit
as an SLBE firm and should be permanently graduated from the program. The size
standards in number of employees and annual gross revenue dollars should be
reviewed annually and adjusted periodically to meet changes in market
conditions. Joint ventures must be certified on a bid-by-bid basis. The joint
venture itself shall not be subject to the size standard limitations imposed by
this section. However, each individual business participating in the joint
venture must be certified by the procurement department as an SLBE in order for
the joint venture to receive the benefits of the SLBE program;
      (3)   The firm is a local business enterprise as defined in this division
with a principal place of business or significant employee presence or
significant business presence in Richland County as defined herein;
      (4)   The firm has established its principal place of business or
significant employee presence or significant business presence in Richland
County for at least one (1) year prior to seeking certification as an SLBE; and
      (5)   In the year preceding the date of the initial certification
application, the applicant has not received more than one million ($1,000,000)
dollars in county contract payments as a result of contract awards from the
county achieved through an open competitive bidding process.
   (b)   Upon receipt of SLBE certification or re-certification applications,
the director of the Office of Small Business Opportunity or designated
procurement department staff shall review all enclosed forms affidavits and
documentation to make a prima facie determination as to whether the applicant
satisfies the SLBE eligibility requirements as set forth in this policy.
Applicants determined ineligible to participate as a SLBE shall receive a
letter from the director of the Office of Small Business Opportunity stating
the basis for the denial of eligibility. Applicants determined ineligible shall
not be eligible to submit a new application for one (1) year after the date of
the notice of denial of eligibility.
   (c)   Applicants determined eligible to participate in the SLBE program
shall submit a completed re-certification form (SLBE Form-R) every two (2)
years to the procurement department for review and continued certification.
However, upon application for re-certification, an SLBE firm must be an
independently owned and operated business concern, and maintain a principal
place of business or significant employment presence in Richland County in
accordance with this Section
2-641. To qualify for re-certification, an SLBE's maximum employment numbers
and annual gross revenues average for the three (3) fiscal years immediately
preceding the application for re-certification shall not exceed the size
standard eligibility requirements.
   (d)   In the course of considering the certification or re-certification
status of any SLBE firm, the director of the Office of Small Business
Opportunity or his or her designees shall periodically conduct audits and
inspect the office, job site, records, and documents of the firm, and shall
interview the firm’s employees, subcontractors, and vendors as reasonably
necessary to ensure that all eligibility standards are satisfied and that the
integrity of the SLBE program is maintained.
   (e)   For purposes of this program, a firm will be certified as an emerging
SLBE by the procurement department upon its submission of a completed
certification form (SLBE Form-R), supporting documentation, and a signed
affidavit stating that it meets all of the emerging SLBE eligibility criteria
as set forth below:
      (1)   The firm complies with SLBE criteria as specified above in Section
2-641 (a)(1), (a)(3) and (a)(4);
      (2)   The firm has been in existence for less than five (5) years;
      (3)   The firm has no more than five (5) full-time employees; and
      (4)   The firm's annual gross revenues as averaged over the life of the
firm are less than one million ($1,000,000 dollars).
(Ord. No. 049-13HR, § II, 9-17-13; Ord. No. 016-14HR, § IV, 5-6-14; Ord. No.
050-14HR, § II, 10-21-14; Ord. No. 058-16HR, § III, 12-6-16)
Sec. 2-642. Graduation and suspension criteria.
   (a)   A bidder may not count towards its SLBE or emerging SLBE participation
the amount subcontracted to an SLBE or emerging SLBE firm that has graduated or
been suspended from the program as follows:
      (1)   An SLBE firm shall be permanently graduated from the SLBE program
after it has received a cumulative total of five million ($5,000,000) dollars
of county- funded prime contract or subcontract payments in at least five (5)
separate contracts since its initial certification as an SLBE firm;
      (2)   An SLBE firm shall be permanently graduated from the SLBE program
after its three (3) fiscal year average gross sales exceeds the size standard
eligibility requirements;
      (3)   An SLBE firm shall be temporarily suspended by the director of the
Office of Small Business Opportunity for the balance of any fiscal year after
it has received a cumulative total of one and one-half million ($1,500,000)
dollars in payments as a prime contractor and/or subcontractor for that fiscal
year; provided, however, that the SLBE firm shall be eligible to participate in
affirmative procurement initiatives in the following fiscal year so long as the
firm has not yet satisfied the graduation criteria;
      (4)   An SLBE firm may have its SLBE eligibility permanently revoked by
the director of the Office of Small Business Opportunity if it fails to perform
a commercially useful function under a contract, or if it allows its SLBE
status to be fraudulently used for the benefit of a non-SLBE firm or the owners
of a non-SLBE firm so as to provide the non-SLBE firm or firm owners benefits
from affirmative procurement initiatives for which the non-SLBE firm and its
owners would not otherwise be entitled;
      (5)   An emerging SLBE firm shall be permanently graduated from emerging
SLBE status after it has received a cumulative total of two and one-half
million ($2,500,00) dollars of county-funded prime contracts or subcontract
payments in at least five (5) separate contracts since its initial
certification as an emerging SLBE firm;
      (6)   An emerging SLBE firm shall be permanently graduated from emerging
SLBE status once its three (3)-year average annual gross sales exceeds two
million ($2,000,000) dollars; and
      (7)   An emerging SLBE firm shall be temporarily suspended from emerging
SLBE status by the director of the Office of Small Business Opportunity for the
balance of any fiscal year after it has received a cumulative total of seven
hundred fifty thousand ($750,000) dollars in payments as a prime contractor
and/or subcontractor for that fiscal year; provided, however, that the emerging
SLBE firm shall be eligible to continue participating in affirmative
procurement initiatives as an SLBE firm for the remainder of the fiscal year,
and may also participate in affirmative procurement initiatives as an emerging
SLBE firm in the following fiscal year so long as the firm has not yet
satisfied the graduation criteria for such status.
   (b)   The director of the Office of Small Business Opportunity shall provide
written notice to the SLBE firm or emerging SLBE firm upon graduation or
suspension from the SLBE program, and such notice shall clearly state the
reasons for such graduation or suspension.
(Ord. No. 049-13HR, § II, 9-17-13; Ord. No. 058-16HR, § III, 12-6-16)
Sec. 2-643. Appeals.
   A business concern that is denied eligibility as an SLBE or as an emerging
SLBE, or who has its eligibility revoked, or who has been denied a waiver
request can appeal the decision to the county administrator. A written notice
of appeal must be received by the county administrator within fifteen (15) days
of the date of the decision. Upon receipt of a timely notice of appeal and
request for hearing, the director of the Office of Small Business Opportunity,
or designee (other than the director of the Office of Small Business
Opportunity), shall also participate in a hearing conducted by the county
administrator or the county administrator’s designee soon as practicable. The
decision of the county administrator, or designee, shall be the final decision
of the county.
(Ord. No. 049-13HR, § II, 9-17-13; Ord. No. 058-16HR, § III, 12-6-16)
Sec. 2-644. Affirmative procurement initiatives for enhancing SLBE and emerging
SLBE contract participation.
   (a)   The county in conjunction with the appropriate contract officer and
the director of the Office of Small Business Opportunity may utilize the
following affirmative procurement initiatives in promoting the award of county
contracts to SLBEs or emerging SLBEs.
      (1)   Bonding and insurance waiver. The county, at its discretion, may
waive or reduce the bonding, or insurance requirements depending on the type of
contract and whether the county determines that the bonding and or insurance
requirements would deny the SLBE or emerging SLBE an opportunity to perform the
contract which the SLBE or emerging SLBE has shown itself otherwise capable of
performing.
      (2)   Price preferences. The county may award a contract to a SLBE or
emerging SLBE which submits a bid within ten percent (10%) (inclusive) of a low
bid by a non-SLBE. However, this price preference would not apply if the award
to the SLBE would result in a total contract cost that is, on an annual basis,
more than twenty- five thousand ($25,000) dollars higher than the low bid; nor
would it apply on a contract in which the total contract cost would exceed the
county's budgeted price for the contract.
      (3)   Evaluation preferences. The county may reserve up to twenty percent
(20%) of the total points available for evaluation purposes for respondents to
an RFP to firms that are certified as SLBE or emerging SLBE firms, or to joint
ventures that have SLBE and/or emerging SLBE partners:
         a.   For architectural and engineering, professional services, other
services, and design/build or CM at risk contracts that are awarded based on
evaluation criteria, there shall be SLBE or emerging SLBE participation
criterion for all contracts let at predetermined percentage of the total points
awarded. The determination will be made using the suggested model outlined in
the Point Evaluation Table below:
POINT EVALUATION TABLE
10 Points for SLBE Participation 20 Points for SLBE Participation
POINT EVALUATION TABLE
10 Points for SLBE Participation 20 Points for SLBE Participation
> 51% =10 points                 >51% = 20 points
> 45% = 7 points                 > 45% =17 points
> 40% = 6 points                 > 40% =16 points
> 35% = 5 points                 > 35% =14 points
> 30% = 4 points                 > 30% =12 points
> 25% = 3 points                 > 25% =10 points
> 20% = 2 points                 > 20% = 8 points
> 15% = 1 point                  > 15% = 6 points
                                 > 10% = 4 points
 
         Contractors may be evaluated on their SLBE or emerging SLBE
participation by utilizing the following schedule, which is most often used by
architectural and engineering:
 
 
Points Awarded % of Participation Criteria
5.0    51- 1Proposals by registered SLBE owned and/or controlled firms
4.0   36-50 Majority prime with registered SLBE participation
3.0   30-35 Majority prime with registered SLBE participation
2.0   24-29 Majority prime with registered SLBE participation
0   0-23    Less than the goal for registered SLBE participation
 
   (4)   Mandatory subcontracting.
      a.   The goal selection committee may, on a contract-by-contract basis,
at its discretion, require that a predetermined percentage of a specific
contract, up to forty percent (40%), be subcontracted to eligible SLBEs or to
eligible emerging SLBEs, provided however, that if the prime contractor is a
certified SLBE or emerging SLBE, then the prime contractor shall be able to
count the dollar value of the work performed by its own forces towards
satisfaction of the mandatory subcontracting goal for that contract.
      b.   An SLBE or emerging SLBE prime contractor may not subcontract more
than forty-nine percent (49%) of the contract value to a non-SLBE.
      c.   A prospective bidder on a county contract shall submit at the time
of bid SLBE - Form S providing the name of the SLBE or emerging SLBE
subcontractor or subcontractors and describing both the percentage of
subcontracting by the SLBE or emerging SLBE, and the work to be performed by
the SLBE or emerging SLBE. A bidder may request a full or partial waiver of
this mandatory subcontracting requirement from the director of the Office of
Small Business Opportunity for good cause by submitting the SLBE unavailability
certification form to the director of the Office of Small Business Opportunity
at the time of bid. Under no circumstances shall a waiver of a mandatory
subcontracting requirement be granted without submission of adequate
documentation of good faith efforts by the bidder and careful review by the
director of the Office of Small Business Opportunity. The director of the
Office of Small Business Opportunity shall base his or her determination on a
waiver request on the following criteria:
         1.   Whether the requestor of the waiver has made good faith efforts
to subcontract with qualified and available SLBEs or emerging SLBEs;
         2.   Whether subcontracting would be inappropriate and/or not provide
a "commercially useful function" under the circumstances of the contract; and
         3.   Whether there are no certified SLBE or emerging SLBE firms that
are qualified and available to provide the goods or services required.
      d.   In the absence of a waiver granted by the director of the Office of
Small Business Opportunity, failure of a prime contractor to commit in its bid
or proposal to satisfying the mandatory SLBE subcontracting goal shall render
its bid or proposal non-responsive.
      e.   In the absence of a waiver granted by the director of the Office of
Small Business Opportunity, failure of a prime contractor to attain a mandatory
subcontracting goal for SLBE participation in the performance of its awarded
contract shall be grounds for termination of existing contracts with the
county, debarment from performing future county contracts, and/or any other
remedies available under the terms of its contract with the county or under the
law.
      f.   A prime contractor is required to notify and obtain written approval
from the director of the Office of Small Business Opportunity in advance of any
reduction in subcontract scope, termination, or substitution for a designated
SLBE or emerging SLBE subcontractor. Failure to do so shall constitute a
material breach of its contract with the county.
   (5)   Sheltered market.
      a.   The director of the Office of Small Business Opportunity and the
appropriate county contracting officer may select certain contracts which have
a contract value of five hundred thousand ($500,000) dollars or less for award
to a SLBE or a joint venture with a SLBE through the sheltered market program.
Similarly, the director of the Office of Small Business Opportunity and the
appropriate county contracting officer may select certain contracts that have a
value of fifty thousand ($50,000) dollars or less for award to an emerging SLBE
firm through the sheltered market program.
      b.   In determining whether a particular contract is eligible for the
sheltered market program, the county’s contracting officer and director of the
Office of Small Business Opportunity shall consider: whether there are at least
three (3) SLBEs or emerging SLBEs that are available and capable to participate
in the sheltered market program for that contract; the degree of
underutilization of the SLBE and emerging SLBE prime contractors in the
specific industry categories; and the extent to which the county’s SLBE and
emerging SLBE prime contractor utilization goals are being achieved.
      c.   If a responsive and responsible bid or response is not received for
a contract that has been designated for the sheltered market program or the
apparent low bid is determined in the procurement director’s discretion to be
too high in price, the contract shall be removed from the sheltered market
program for purposes of rebidding.
   (6)   Competitive business development demonstration project.
      a.   With the concurrence of the director of the Office of Small Business
Opportunity, the appropriate county contracting officer may reserve certain
contracts for placement into a competitive business development demonstration
project (“CBD demonstration project”) wherein those contracts require the
purchase of goods or services from an industry that routinely has too few
sources of bidders to provide meaningful or sufficient competition for such
county contracts. The purpose for the placement of a contract into the CBD
demonstration project shall be to encourage the development of new capacity
within an industry to competitively bid on the future supply of specialized
goods or services to the county.
      b.   Contracts reserved for CBD demonstration projects shall be subject
to a request for proposals process whereby the selected firm will be required
to be a joint venture between an established firm or experts in that relevant
industry and an SLBE firm. The scope of work for the selected joint venture
shall include teaching a hands-on curriculum to SLBE firms that have expressed
an interest in diversifying into the relevant industry, in addition to
performing the customary functions of the contract. This curriculum shall
include both administrative skills (e.g. cost estimating, bidding, staffing,
project management) and technical skills (e.g., hands-on demonstration of how
to perform necessary tasks in the field) required to qualify for future county
contracts and to successfully compete in the industry.
      c.   The director of the Office of Small Business Opportunity shall be
required to select SLBE candidate firms for participation on such CBD
demonstration projects on the basis of an assessment of their current
capabilities and their likely success in diversifying into the new relevant
industry once given technical assistance, training, and an opportunity to
develop a performance track record in the industry.
(Ord. No. 049-13HR, § II, 9-17-13; Ord. No. 028-16HR, § I, 7-26-16; Ord. No.
058-16HR, § III, 12-6-16)
Sec. 2-645. SLBE program performance review.
   (a)   The director of the Office of Small Business Opportunity or designee
shall monitor the - implementation of this policy and the progress of this
program. On at least an annual basis, the director of the Office of Small
Business Opportunity or designee shall report to the county administrator and
county council on the progress of achieving the goals established for awards to
certified SLBE and emerging SLBE firms, reporting both dollars awarded and
expended. In addition, the director of the Office of Small Business Opportunity
or designee shall report on the progress in achieving the stated program
objectives, including, but not limited to, enhancing competition, establishing
and building new business capacity, and removing barriers to and eliminating
disparities in the utilization of available minority business enterprises and
women business enterprises on county contracts.
   (b)   The county shall periodically review the SLBE program to determine
whether the various contracting procedures used to enhance SLBE contract
participation need to be adjusted or used more or less aggressively in future
years to achieve the stated program objectives. The county council shall
conduct a public hearing at least once every two years in order to solicit
public comments on the program.
(Ord. No. 049-13HR, § II, 9-17-13; Ord. No. 058-16HR, § III, 12-6-16)
Sec. 2-646. Conflicts.
   To the extent language in this division conflicts with other language in
Article X, the language in this division controls only with respect to
contracts wherein the small local business enterprise program is being applied
by the director of the Office of Small Business Opportunity. In all other
respects, prior language in this article shall remain in full force and effect.
(Ord. No. 049-13HR, § II, 9-17-13; Ord. No. 058-16HR, § III, 12-6-16)
DIVISION 8. COMMERCIAL NONDISCRIMINATION ORDINANCE
Sec. 2-647. General provisions.
   (a)   Statement of policy. It is the policy of the county not to enter into
a contract or to be engaged in a business relationship with any business entity
that has discriminated in the solicitation, selection, hiring or commercial
treatment of vendors, suppliers, subcontractors or commercial customers on the
basis of race, color, religion, ancestry or national origin, sex, age, marital
status, sexual orientation, gender identity, or on the basis of disability or
any otherwise unlawful use of characteristics regarding the vendor's,
supplier's or commercial customer's employees or owners; provided that nothing
in this policy shall be construed to prohibit or limit otherwise lawful efforts
to remedy the effects of discrimination that have occurred or are occurring in
the relevant marketplace.
   (b)   Implementation. The small local business enterprise division shall
implement this ordinance by periodically conducting outreach and distributing
educational materials to the county's contracting and vendor community and
related trade associations to advise such contractors, vendors and prospective
offerors of this ordinance and the procedures to be followed in submitting
complaints alleging violations of this ordinance. The director of procurement,
in consultation with the county attorney, shall promulgate regulations and
procedures to establish due process for the filing of complaints pursuant to
this ordinance, as well as for the investigation of complaints, the conduct of
administrative hearings, the issuance of factual determinations, the
establishment of an appeals process, and the establishment and application of
sanctions and other remedies pursuant to this ordinance. In addition, the
county administrator or designee, the director of procurement, and the county
attorney's office shall insure that the following commercial nondiscrimination
clause language is set forth in, and incorporated into, all the county
contracts that result from formally advertised solicitations:
      (1)   Every contract and subcontract shall contain a nondiscrimination
clause that reads as follows:
         As a condition of entering into this agreement, the Contractor
represents and warrants that it will comply with the County's Commercial
Nondiscrimination Ordinance, as described under Section
2-647 of the Richland County Code of Ordinances. As part of such compliance,
the Contractor shall not discriminate on the basis of race, color, religion,
ancestry or national origin, sex, age, marital status, sexual orientation,
gender identity, or on the basis of disability or other unlawful forms of
discrimination in the solicitation, selection, hiring or commercial treatment
of subcontractors, vendors, suppliers, or commercial customers, nor shall the
Contractor retaliate against any person for reporting instances of such
discrimination. The Contractor shall provide equal opportunity for
subcontractors, vendors and suppliers to participate in all of its public
sector and private sector subcontracting and supply opportunities, provided
that nothing contained in this clause shall prohibit or limit otherwise lawful
efforts to remedy the effects of marketplace discrimination that have occurred
or are occurring in the County's relevant marketplace. Moreover, the Contractor
affirms that it will cooperate fully with any County inquiries regarding
Contractor's compliance with this Ordinance. The Contractor understands and
agrees that a material violation of this clause shall be considered a material
breach of this agreement and may result in termination of this agreement,
disqualification of the Contractor from participating in County contracts, or
other sanctions. This clause is not enforceable by or for the benefit of, and
creates no obligation to, any third party.
      (2)   All formal solicitations issued for county contracts shall include
the following certification to be completed by the offeror:
         The undersigned Offeror hereby certifies and agrees that the following
information is correct:
         In preparing its response on this project, the Offeror has considered
all proposals submitted from qualified, potential subcontractors and suppliers,
and has not engaged in "discrimination" as defined in the County's Commercial
Nondiscrimination Ordinance, Section
2-647; to wit: discrimination in the solicitation, selection or commercial
treatment of any subcontractor, vendor, supplier or commercial customer on the
basis of race, color, religion, ancestry or national origin, sex, age, marital
status, sexual orientation, gender identity, or on the basis of disability or
other unlawful forms of discrimination. Without limiting the foregoing,
"discrimination" also includes retaliating against any person or other entity
for reporting any incident of "discrimination". Without limiting any other
provision of the solicitation for responses on this project, it is understood
and agreed that, if this certification is false, such false certification will
constitute grounds for the County to reject the response submitted by the
Offeror on this project, and terminate any contract awarded based on the
response. As part of its response, the Offeror shall provide to the County a
list of all instances within the immediate past 4 years where there has been a
final adjudicated determination in a legal or administrative proceeding in the
State of South Carolina that the Offeror discriminated against its
subcontractors, vendors, suppliers or commercial customers, and a description
of the status or resolution of that complaint, including any remedial action
taken. As a condition of submitting a response to the County, the Offeror
agrees to comply with the County's Commercial Nondiscrimination Ordinance,
Section
2-647 of the Richland County Code of Ordinances, and further agrees to fully
cooperate with the County in its inquiries relating to compliance with this
Ordinance.
(Ord. No. 016-14HR, § V, VI, 5-6-14)
DIVISION 9. PROMPT PAYMENT REQUIRED
Sec. 2-648. Prompt payment required.
   (a)   Right of county prime contractor and subcontractor to prompt payment.
      (1)   Performance by a prime contractor in accordance with the provisions
of its Richland County contract entitles prime contractor to payment from the
county in a prompt manner. Provided there are no bona fide disputes relating to
the adequacy of performance by the contractor, the county shall pay contractor
no later than thirty (30) days after receipt of a proper invoice from the
contractor that summarizes the services provided or goods delivered to county
by contractor and the cost of same. For each thirty (30)-day interval that
payment from the county is late, contractor shall be entitled to interest
penalty payments from the county equal to five percent (5%) of the late
balance. This late penalty fee payment shall be in addition to the payment of
the undisputed original balance due by the county.
      (2)   Performance by a subcontractor in accordance with the provisions of
its subcontract agreement with county's prime contractor while providing goods
or services on behalf of Richland County entitles subcontractor to payment from
the prime contractor in a prompt manner. Provided there are no bona fide
disputes relating to the adequacy of performance by the subcontractor, the
prime contractor shall pay subcontractor no later than seven (7) days after
prime contractor has received payment from the county for the goods or services
that subcontractor has properly invoiced prime contractor for by summarizing
the goods or services delivered on behalf of the county through the prime
contractor.
         Alternatively, in instances where, through no fault of subcontractor,
prime contractor has not been paid by the county for goods or services rendered
by subcontractor, and more than thirty-seven (37) days have lapsed since prime
contractor received a proper invoice from subcontractor, the prime contractor
shall authorize the county to pay subcontractor's undisputed invoice directly
and to then deduct subcontractor's payment portion from prime contractor's
account receivables due under its contract with the county. For each thirty
(30)-day interval beyond thirty-seven (37) days that payment to subcontractor
is late, subcontractor shall be entitled to an interest penalty fee equal to
five percent (5%) of the late balance. This late penalty fee shall be in
addition to the payment of the undisputed original balance due by the prime
contractor, and shall be payable by either the prime contractor or the county
depending upon which party is responsible for the late payment under these
terms.
      (3)   The county shall place language establishing these prompt payment
terms as described above in (1) and (2) in any county bid solicitation and
resulting contract awarded under county ordinance,
Chapter 2, Administration, Article X, Purchasing, §
2-591 and in each instance wherein the county determines to apply the
provisions of county ordinance,
Chapter 2, Administration, Article X, Purchasing, Division 7 to a solicitation.
In addition, each prime contractor shall be required to include similar prompt
payment flow-down provisions for each tier of subcontractors that perform
services or provide goods on behalf of the county through the prime contractor
or a subcontractor.
      (4)   Any prevailing party that makes a final written demand for payment
and late penalty fees to the responsible party pursuant to this ordinance and
fails to receive payment in full within thirty (30) days, and subsequently
takes legal recourse to enforce these prompt payment provisions, shall also be
entitled to the award of reasonable attorneys' fees by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
   (b)   Grounds on which county, prime contractor, or subcontractor may
withhold application and certification for payment; contract terms unaffected.
      (1)   Nothing in this ordinance prevents the county, the contractor, or a
subcontractor from withholding application and certification for payment
because of the following: unsatisfactory job progress, defective construction
not remedied, disputed work, third party claims filed or reasonable evidence
that claim will be filed, failure of contractor or subcontractor to make timely
payments for labor, equipment, and materials, damage to county, contractor, or
another subcontractor, reasonable evidence that contract or subcontract cannot
be completed for the unpaid balance of the contract or subcontract sum, or a
reasonable amount for retainage.
      (2)   Nothing in this ordinance requires that payments due a contractor
from the county be paid any more frequently than as set forth in the
construction documents, nor shall anything in this ordinance affect the terms
of any agreement between the county and any lender.
   (c)   Failure of contractor or subcontractor to make timely payments. In
addition to the interest on late payments provided in section (a), if any
contractor or subcontractor makes late payments more than three (3) times
during the course of a contract, unless sufficient justification is made to the
county and the county determines not to count the payment as late, the county
can withhold the amount of the late payment due from the contractor to the
subcontractor or to the lower tier subcontractor and make such late payment
directly to the subcontractor or the lower tier subcontractor.
(Ord. No. 029-14HR, § I, 6-3-14)
ARTICLE XI. INQUIRIES AND INVESTIGATIONS
   State law reference(s)--Investigative powers of council, S.C. Code 1976, §
4-9-660.
Sec. 2-649. Short title.
   This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Inquiries and
Investigations Ordinance of Richland County."
(Code 1976, § 2-9001; Ord. No. 526-79, § 1, 3-21-79; Ord. No. 049-13HR, § I, 9-
17-13; Ord. No. 016-14HR, § I, 5-6-14)
Sec. 2-650. Definitions.
   For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section unless a contrary
intention is clearly evident:
   Chair. The person duly selected by the county council to chair the county
council or the vice-chair in the absence of the chair.
   County attorney. The person duly selected by the county council to serve as
county attorney or any member of the staff of the legal department in the
absence of the county attorney.
   Department head. Head of any department of government of the county whether
permanent, temporary or otherwise, acting in the course and scope of his
employment and in his official capacity.
   Employee. Any person officially employed by the county whether permanent,
temporary or otherwise, acting in the course and scope of his employment in his
official capacity. Unless otherwise specified, "employee" shall include the
county administrator and department heads.
   Inquiry. A request for information or a systematic investigation often of a
matter of public interest.
   Investigation. A systematic examination or an official inquiry.
   Major problems or complaints. Those matters relating to the operations of
the county and conduct of employees, department heads and/or other members of
the county family constituting criminal conduct; dereliction of duty; misuse of
county funds, property or personnel; gross abuse of discretion; misfeasance,
malfeasance or nonfeasance.
   Member of council. Any duly qualified and acting member of county council in
his official capacity.
   Member of the general public. Any person, including a member of the county
council not acting in an official capacity.
   Minor problems or complaints. Those matters relating to the operations of
the county and conduct of employees, department heads and/or other members of
the county family not reaching the level of major problems or complaints,
including, but not limited to, road and street repairs, failures to repair,
request for information, missing signs, garbage collection and other services
as well as the conduct and attitude of such employees while in the course and
scope of their employment with the county.
   Public interest. A matter pertaining to the operation and conduct of the
departments and business of the county government.
   Private reprimand. A private censure or reprimand by a majority vote of
council after opportunity for hearing.
   Public reprimand. A public censure or reprimand by a two-thirds (2/3) vote
of council after opportunity for hearing.
(Code 1976, § 2-9002; Ord. No. 526-79, § 2, 3-21-79; Ord. No. 049-13HR, § I, 9-
17-13; Ord. No. 016-14HR, § I, 5-6-14)
   Cross reference(s)--Rules of construction and definitions generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 2-651. Policy.
   It shall be the policy of the county to encourage citizens' inquiries and to
expeditiously resolve their problems and complaints when the public interest is
involved. As a matter of policy, department heads should be given an
opportunity to resolve complaints pertaining to their departments regardless of
whether or not the complaint originates from a member of the general public, an
employee or a member of council. When a member of council receives a citizen's
complaint or is otherwise aware of a problem, he should immediately pass it on
in accordance with the directions and policies set forth herein. It is
anticipated that all county personnel will exercise common sense and good
judgment in dealing with the public and in carrying out their duties and
responsibilities. Employees are expected to act quickly and efficiently with a
view toward realizing a minimum of delay. Nothing contained herein shall be so
construed as to prohibit any member of council, employee or other person from
immediately reporting major problems or complaints to the proper authorities
including the sheriff, the solicitor, the coroner, the state law enforcement
division and/or the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
(Code 1976, § 2-9003; Ord. No. 526-79, § 3, 3-21-79; Ord. No. 049-13HR, § I, 9-
17-13; Ord. No. 016-14HR, § I, 5-6-14)
Sec. 2-652. Conduct of investigations.
   (a)   It shall be deemed a violation of this article and of section 4-9-660
of the 1976 South Carolina Code of Laws for any member of the county council to
individually do any of the following:
      (1)   Commence any official investigation or utilize the manpower or
facilities of the county for any such official investigation without first
obtaining the approval of the county council. For purposes of this article, an
official investigation shall be one which is a systematic investigation,
examination or official inquiry. A request for information shall not be deemed
an official investigation, although council members are encouraged to make such
requests through the county administrator's office.
      (2)   To give orders or instructions to any employee subject to the
direction and supervision of the county administrator.
      (3)   To give orders or instructions to any employee concerning the
hiring, firing, reprimanding, promotion, demotion or other personnel action
concerning any employee subject to, or who will be subject to, the direction
and supervision of the county administrator.
   (b)   It shall not be deemed a violation of this chapter and of section 4-9-
660 of the 1976 South Carolina Code of Laws for a member of council to
individually do any of the following:
      (1)   Contact the proper department head and/or employee concerning
potholes, missing signs, garbage collection or otherwise relate minor problems
and/or complaints directly to the proper person when the public health, welfare
and/or safety is involved.
      (2)   Make a request for public information on behalf of any citizens
although it should be considered that such request ought to be in writing on a
form provided signed by the person who actually seeks the information.
      (3)   Visit departments of the county, observe operations thereof and
generally demonstrate a genuine interest in the operations of the county
government.
   (c)   The council may initiate an investigation of any member of council,
employee or other person by a majority vote of council in regular, special,
executive or open session provided the notice requirements for the particular
type of meeting have been met. Such investigation may be conducted:
      (1)   By the council;
      (2)   By a duly appointed committee of council of no less than five (5)
members;
      (3)   By the county administrator and/or county attorney;
      (4)   By any duly constituted law enforcement agency;
      (5)   By the independent auditing firm;
      (6)   By the chair of council upon the authorization of seven (7) members
of council or in the absence of a majority of council from the confines of the
county. Such authority shall immediately terminate upon the return of a
majority of the council to the confines of the county;
      (7)   By a private C.P.A., attorney and/or investigator upon the
authorization of seven (7) members of council; provided, however, that funds
for such shall be made available as soon as possible under legal budgeting and
appropriating procedure;
      (8)   All such hearings, reports, investigations and minutes thereof
shall be confidential and for council members only until such time as council
has officially disposed of such investigations. In the event eight (8) members
of council vote to seal the investigative record, it shall be a violation of
this article for any member of council, employee, witness or other person to
disclose any proceedings so long as such record remains sealed.
   (d)   Subpoenas.
      (1)   The council, by and through its chair, may for the purposes of this
article, subpoena witnesses, administer or cause to be administered oaths and
examine or cause to be examined such parts of the books and records necessary
to proceedings as relate to investigations and inquiries.
      (2)   In the event a witness fails to comply with any such subpoena, the
council may enforce same by application for writ, show cause or other
proceedings to the court of common pleas for the county.
(Code 1976, § 2-9004; Ord. No. 526-79, § 4, 3-21-79; Ord. No. 049-13HR, § I, 9-
17-13; Ord. No. 016-14HR, § I, 5-6-14)
   State law reference(s)--Freedom of Information Act, S.C. Code 1976, § 30-4-
10 et seq.
Sec. 2-653. Reports.
   Upon the completion of the investigation, however, and by whomever
conducted, each member of council shall receive a confidential copy thereof.
Public release thereof shall not be had until council completes its action
thereon subject to the restraints of section 2-642(c)(8) of this article.
Nothing contained herein shall be construed as an effort to avoid the
requirements of the Freedom of Information Act, South Carolina Code 1976, § 30-
4-10 et seq.
(Code 1976, § 2-9005; Ord. No. 526-79, § 5, 3-21-79; Ord. No. 049-13HR, § I, 9-
17-13; Ord. No. 016-14HR, § I, 5-6-14)
Sec. 2-654. Decisions.
   The council may reach any of the following decisions:
      (1)   No merit to investigation.
      (2)   Results should be referred to appropriate law enforcement,
appointing and/or funding agency.
      (3)   Recommend civil suit.
      (4)   Recommend criminal prosecution.
      (5)   Recommend reprimand of employee.
      (6)   Recommend termination of employee.
      (7)   Public reprimand of member of council by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of
council.
      (8)   Private reprimand of member of council by a majority vote of
council.
(Code 1976, § 2-9006; Ord. No. 526-79, § 6, 3-21-79; Ord. No. 049-13HR, § I, 9-
17-13; Ord. No. 016-14HR, § I, 5-6-14)
Sec. 2-655. Interference with investigation.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder or molest any
person carrying out any phase of any duly authorized investigation in the
performance of his duty or seek to obtain information concerning such
investigation other than as provided herein.
(Code 1976, § 2-9007; Ord. No. 526-79, § 7, 3-21-79; Ord. No. 049-13HR, § I, 9-
17-13; Ord. No. 016-14HR, § I, 5-6-14)
CHAPTER 3: AIRPORT*
Cross reference(s)--Department of public works and utilities, §
2-192 et seq.; buildings and building regulations,
Ch. 6; planning,
Ch. 20; roads, highways and bridges,
Ch. 21; land development regulations,
Ch. 26.
   State law reference(s)--Aeronautics generally, S.C. Code 1976, § 55-1-10 et
seq.; Richland-Lexington Airport District, § 55-11-310 et seq.
ARTICLE I. ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 3-1. In general.
   Richland County shall provide a general aviation airport known as the Jim
Hamilton – LB Owens Airport. The airport shall be part of the National Plan of
Integrated Airport Systems (NPIAS). The primary mission of the airport is to
provide facilities for the safe and efficient use of general aviation aircraft
in support of transportation needs and economic development of the Midlands
area and the State of South Carolina. The secondary mission is to provide a
reliever airport for Columbia Metropolitan Airport (CAE).
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Sec. 3-2. Definitions.
   (Aircraft) noise abatement means those voluntary aircraft operating
procedures developed for use in the vicinity of the airport that minimize the
environmental effects of aircraft noise.
   Airport general manager means the designated county employee who manages the
Jim Hamilton – LB Owens Airport (CUB) on behalf of the airport sponsor.
   Airport overlay district means, per Chapter 26 of the Richland County Code
of Ordinances, Airport Height Restrictive Overlay District. An area surrounding
the airport the purpose of which is to ensure that future land development in
the district is compatible with height restrictions associated with airspace
imaginary surfaces and anticipated and projected aircraft noise levels. Shall
include a map reflecting the district boundaries and other physical
characteristics thereof.
   Airport reference code (ARC) means a system of code numbers and letters
selected for airport planning purposes in accordance with the characteristics
of the aircraft for which an airport facility is intended.
   Airport sponsor means Richland County, the owner of the airport.
   Airspace obstruction (to air navigation) means an object, whether existing
or planned, permanent or temporary, to include natural vegetative growth on
terrain, that penetrates airspace imaginary surfaces. “Obstructions” are
presumed to be hazards to air navigation until a Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) study determines otherwise and must be mitigated by
marking or removal.
   ARFF means aircraft rescue and fire fighting.
   CTAF means common traffic advisory frequency. Utilizes the same designated
frequency as UniCom for the purpose of communication between aircraft.
   Fixed-base operator (FBO) means an entity or person allowed to provide
fixed-based operations by virtue of an agreement with Richland County.
   Minimum standards means those required conditions an operator must meet in
order to provide a commercial service on the airport. These standards are
required in order to establish conditions that ensure safe and efficient
operation of the airport in accordance with FAA rules, regulations, and
guidance as well as industry best practices.
   National Air Transportation Association (NATA) means the public policy group
that represents the interests of the general aviation business community before
the Congress and federal, state and local government agencies.
   National Airspace System (NAS) means the airspace, navigation facilities,
and airports of the United States (U.S.) along with their associated
information, services, rules, regulations, policies, procedures, personnel and
equipment. It includes components shared jointly with the military.
   National Plan of Integrated Airport Systems (NPIAS) means an inventory of
significant U.S. aviation infrastructure assets.
   Part 77 airspace (more fully, 14 CFR, Part 77) means that collection of
imaginary surfaces surrounding an airport runway that establish standards and
notification requirements for objects affecting safe aircraft navigation. This
notification serves as the basis for evaluating the effect of the construction,
facility alteration, or vegetative growth on airborne operating procedures
surrounding the airport.
   Specialized aviation service operator (SASO) means any person or
organization who is authorized to conduct business by virtue of a contract with
the county, but not engaged in business of an aviation nature within the scope
of a fixed-base operator (FBO), or a local operation, as defined herein.
   Universal Communication (UniCom) means a non-government air/ground radio
communication facility which may provide airport advisory services.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Sec. 3-3. Organization.
   The airport shall be assigned to the county department of public works. It
shall be managed by a designated general manager who shall be a county
employee.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Sec. 3-4. Applicability.
   Provisions of this chapter apply to the Richland County Airport Commission,
airport staff, the fixed-base operator (FBO), specialized aviation service
operators (SASOs), aeronautical and non- aeronautical businesses operating at
the airport, airport tenants and their guests, and those planning to develop
properties in close proximity thereto.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Secs. 3-5--3-6. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. RICHLAND COUNTY AIRPORT COMMISSION
   Cross reference(s)--Boards, commissions and committees, §
2-326 et seq.
Sec. 3-7. In general.
   The county council does hereby establish the Richland County Airport
Commission to advise and assist the county council in providing public aviation
facilities and services and to promote aviation as an efficient transportation
mode and a means of broadening the economic base of Richland County.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Sec. 3-8. Composition; terms; officers; meetings.
   (a)   The Richland County Airport Commission shall consist of seven (7)
commissioners to be appointed by the county council; provided, however, that at
least two (2) of the appointees shall be designated as “Community
Representatives” and reside within a two (2) mile radius of the airport. The
following exhibit shows this area:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b8ca58bf1d09401f12aa24500886bd119d34fc76/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6965.png]
 
   Community Representative area (2-mile radius)
   (b)    The term of office of each commissioner shall be for a period of four
(4) years or until his/her successor is appointed and qualified.
   (c)    The commission shall elect a chairman each calendar year. The
chairman shall be the executive head of the commission. The commission shall
choose from among its members a vice chairman, a secretary, and a treasurer.
The positions of secretary and treasurer may be combined into a single position
by vote of the commission.
   (d)   The commission shall meet at such times and places as determined by
the chairman, but shall hold at least one (1) meeting every two (2) months. The
airport general manager shall serve as administrative assistant to the
commission. All meetings of the commission shall be conducted in compliance
with the South Carolina Freedom of Information Act (FOIA).
   (e)   One (1) or more members of the county council shall be assigned by the
chairman of the county council as liaisons to the Airport Commission.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Sec. 3-9. Authority, duties, and responsibilities.
   The commission shall have the following authority, duties, and
responsibilities:
   (a)   To advise the county council on the operation, maintenance, and
development of the Jim Hamilton – LB Owens Airport and to recommend to the
county council such rules and regulations for the operation of the airport as
the commission shall deem advisable.
   (b)   To control itself by the vote of a majority of those voting in
meetings duly called and held. At all meetings of the commission a majority of
its members shall constitute a quorum.
   (c)   To adopt bylaws governing its operation, fixing the duties of its
officers and their terms of office, and the method of handling its affairs. The
bylaws shall not be in conflict with any laws governing the commission.
   (d)   To review and approve initial applications for commercial aviation
operators and flight instruction operations.
   (e)   To consider requests and appeals of tenants regarding continued hangar
occupancy.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Secs. 3-10--3-11. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. FINANCE
Sec. 3-12. In general.
   The airport is a designated enterprise and shall, in accordance with Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA) grant assurances, seek financial self-
sustainment. It shall follow the county’s fiscal year.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Sec. 3-13. Airport Fund.
   The Airport Fund shall be established and maintained in accordance with the
rules and accounting practices of government enterprises. County revenue
generated through airport operations shall sustain this fund.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Sec. 3-14. Rates and fees.
   A master schedule of airport rates and fees shall be published annually in
accordance with the county’s budget process.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Sec. 3-15. Grants.
   Federal and state grant funding opportunities to promote the development and
maintenance of the airport consistent with the airport capital improvement plan
(ACIP) and available local matching funds shall be utilized when appropriate.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Sec. 3-16. Hangar lease agreement.
   Any person desiring to lease a hangar for the storage of an aircraft at the
Jim Hamilton – LB Owens Airport may complete a standard hangar lease agreement
supplied by the county and submit the same to the county’s leasing agent. Such
lease shall be subject to approval by council.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Sec. 3-17. Operating budget.
   The airport general manager shall prepare, on a recurring basis, an airport
operating budget request as part of the county’s budget process. This request
shall be in accordance with guidance provided by the county administrator.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Sec. 3-18. Funding.
   The county council may appropriate and provide to the Airport Fund such sums
of money as a majority of the county council may deem necessary for the
purposes of the airport and its operation and maintenance.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Sec. 3-19. Hangar security deposits.
   A security deposit equal in amount to one (1) month’s rent at the time of
the execution of the initial hangar lease shall be collected from the lessee by
the leasing agent on behalf of the airport sponsor. These funds shall be
maintained and accounted for by the airport sponsor. If all provisions of the
lease are satisfactorily met at the time of termination of the lease, the
original amount of the security deposit shall be promptly refunded to the
lessee.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Sec. 3-20. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. SERVICES
Sec. 3-21. In general.
   The airport shall offer appropriate aviation and support services in order
to ensure the safety and efficiency of the flying public and those patrons
using those facilities.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Sec. 3-22. Minimum standards.
   Airport minimum standards shall be developed and maintained in order to
ensure the quality of operations, facilities, and services at the airport.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Sec. 3-23. Fixed-base operator (FBO).
   (a)   An FBO shall provide these required services on behalf of airport
tenants and patrons:
      (1)   Administering hangar and other airport leases;
      (2)   Operation and maintenance of the airport fuel farm;
      (3)   Dispensing aviation fuel;
      (4)   Staffing the airport terminal during established hours of
operation;
      (5)   Provide aircraft hangar pull-in and pull-out (tug) services for
based aircraft;
      (6)   Operate aviation band radio communications on an assigned UniCom/
CTAF;
      (7)   Removal of disabled aircraft within the runway or runway safety
area (RSA) when authorized in order to restore airport functioning.
   (b)   If consistent with any fixed-based operator agreement with the airport
sponsor, other optional services may be provided as well, as authorized by the
Airport Commission and general manager.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Sec. 3-24. Flight training.
   Flight training provided by certificated flight instructors (CFIs) may be
offered at the airport as an optional service.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Sec. 3-25. Aircraft fueling.
   Aircraft fueling may be provided by properly trained FBO line staff in
accordance with current fire codes and NATA standards. Self-service fuel, if
offered, may be provided to aircraft operators as well. This section shall be
applicable in the future to electrical charging of aircraft if available.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Sec. 3-26. Specialized aviation service operator (SASO).
   Additional aeronautical services may be provided to airport tenants and
patrons by SASO(s) authorized by the airport general manager and the Airport
Commission in accordance with published airport minimum standards.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Sec. 3-27. Weather.
   The airport shall make ground and facilities available for the placement by
others of an automated weather station for the purpose of advising aircraft
operators of current conditions.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Secs. 3-28--3-29. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. AIRPORT OPERATIONS
Sec. 3-30. In general.
   The airport shall operate in a manner that promotes safety, efficiency, and
long-term preservation of its efficacy.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Sec. 3-31. Rules and regulations.
   A comprehensive set of rules and regulations governing the operation of the
airport shall be maintained and published periodically as recommended by the
airport general manager and the Airport Commission and approved by county
council. These shall be incorporated into an Airport Manual.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Sec. 3-32. UniCom/CTAF license.
   A license, issued by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), to operate
UniCom/CTAF in support of airport operations on a designated aviation band
frequency shall be maintained by the airport sponsor.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Sec. 3-33. Clear airspace and obstructions.
   Part 77 airspace surrounding the airport shall be managed through the
maintenance of airport overlay districts (AODs) enacted by the county and the
city. Any obstruction that penetrates this airspace shall be appropriately
mitigated by removal or marking.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Sec. 3-34. Imaginary surfaces.
   Imaginary surfaces that make up Part 77 airspace include the following as
specifically defined in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR):
   (a)   Primary surface;
   (b)   Approach surface (inner and outer);
   (c)   Transitional surface;
   (d)   Horizontal surface;
   (e)   Conical surface.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Sec. 3-35. Avigation easements.
   Avigation easements may be obtained by the airport sponsor as a means of
ensuring that it has the rights necessary to mitigate any obstruction.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Sec. 3-36. Airport overlay districts.
   The county and the city shall enact airport overlay district (AOD)
ordinances in order to ensure compatible surroundings to the airport and its
operation as well as associated airspace.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Sec. 3-37. Noise abatement.
   The airport shall maintain and promote voluntary noise abatement procedures
as a means of promoting harmonious conditions with the airport’s neighboring
commercial and residential communities.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Sec. 3-38. Prohibited operations.
   The following aircraft operations are prohibited at the airport:
   (a)   Parachute jumping. 14 CFR § 105.23 states (for airports without an
operating air traffic control tower), “No person may conduct a parachute
operation, and no pilot in command of an aircraft may allow a parachute
operation to be conducted from that aircraft, over or onto any airport unless
prior approval has been obtained from the management of the airport to conduct
parachute operations over or on that airport.”
   (b)   Stunt flying or aerobatics. No person shall operate an aircraft in a
careless or reckless manner so as endanger the life or property of others by
“buzzing,” diving, or low- altitude flying.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Sec. 3-39. ARFF support.
   ARFF support shall be provided to the airport by the Richland – Columbia
Fire Service. The chief of the fire service shall maintain an adequate cadre of
fire fighters available that have received ARFF training from the South
Carolina Fire Academy or a like facility.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Sec. 3-40. Operating motor vehicles on the airport.
   No privately owned vehicles (POVs) shall enter the airfield (including
Runway 31-13, Taxiway A, and Stub Taxiways A-1 through A-5) without
authorization from the airport general manager or, in his/her absence, senior
airport or FBO staff. Unauthorized access by POVs or pedestrians is subject to
issuance of a citation and a fine. Parking is only authorized in designated
areas.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Secs. 3-41--3-42. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. FACILITIES
Sec. 3-43. In general.
   The airport shall develop and maintain facilities necessary to ensure the
safe, efficient, and financially beneficial operation of the airport.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Sec. 3-44. Terminal.
   A terminal building shall serve as the central location for airport
operations and base for airport staff and the FBO.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Sec. 3-45. Hangars.
   Hangars for the storage of appropriately sized aircraft may be developed,
maintained, and leased. Revenue generated shall be deposited into the Airport
Fund for the ongoing operation, maintenance, and development of the airport. If
demand for hangars exceeds availability, the airport general manager shall
maintain a running hangar waiting list which will serve as a basis for
assignment of hangars on a first come, first served basis as vacancies occur.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Sec. 3-46. Airfield.
   The airfield, and all of its attendant improvements, shall be maintained in
order to achieve safe and efficient aircraft operation commensurate with the
assigned airport reference code (ARC) of this airport. The ARC for the airport
at the time of publication is B-II.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Sec. 3-47. Planning and development.
   Planning and development of the airport shall be in accordance with
policies, procedures, and best practices promulgated by the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA), the South Carolina Aeronautics Commission (SCAC), and the
airport sponsor. An airport master plan, an airport layout plan (ALP), and a
capital improvement plan (CIP) shall be maintained by the airport general
manager and updated as needed from time to time. The services of an airport
planning and engineering consultant may be engaged in order to assist in this
effort.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Sec. 3-48. Construction and demolition of airport facilities.
   Airport facilities shall be constructed and demolished in accordance with
the airport CIP with the concurrence of the county administrator. Development
grant funds from the FAA, the SCAC, or other sources may be used for this
purpose.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Secs. 3-49--3-50. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. TENANTS
Sec. 3-51. In general.
   Tenants may be aircraft owners who are individuals, businesses, or joint
owners. They may also be aeronautical or non-aeronautical businesses or groups
promoting aviation.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Sec. 3-52. Hangar tenants.
   Hangars are developed and leased to tenants for the benefit of general
aviation (GA) operators and the safe and secure storage of their aircraft and
associated accessories. Limitations may be placed on the continued use of
hangars for the storage of aircraft that are not currently airworthy or
flyable.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Sec. 3-53. Aviation organizations.
   Aviation organizations that provide education, fellowship, and advocacy
also, directly or indirectly, support the operation, growth, and development of
the airport consistent with the goals of Richland County Council. They may be
based at the airport and provided meeting space based on availability and
consistent with airport operations and fair market value in the case of leased
space.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Sec. 3-54. Businesses (aeronautical).
   Aeronautical businesses may be an FBO, a SASO, or another business that
functions directly to support the airport or other aviation or aerospace
industries. They may be based at the airport under the provisions of a lease
agreement or other contractual instrument approved by the county council. The
airport general manager shall operate a system by which other commercial
airport operators, such as vendors providing services on behalf of other
tenants, are officially permitted and meet appropriate minimum standards.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Sec. 3-55. Businesses (non-aeronautical).
   Non-aeronautical businesses may be based at the airport under the provisions
of a lease agreement or other contractual instrument approved by the county
council. The airport general manager shall operate a system by which other
commercial airport operators, such as vendors providing services on behalf of
other tenants, are officially permitted and meet appropriate minimum standards.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
ARTICLE VIII. ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 3-56. In general.
   The airport general manager shall be responsible for enforcing all rules and
regulations contained herein and that may be established in the Airport Manual.
Such enforcement shall be conducted in a fair, equitable, and non-
discriminatory manner. The airport general manager shall be commissioned as a
county codes enforcement officer with authority limited to enforcement of this
chapter and regulations contained in the Airport Manual on airport property and
may issue citations for violations thereof.
(Ord. No. 001-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
Sec. 3-57. Reserved.
CHAPTER 4: AMUSEMENTS*
   *Cross reference(s)--Licenses and miscellaneous business regulations,
Ch. 16.
   State law reference(s)--Amusements and athletic contests, S.C. Code 1976, §
52-1-10 et seq.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 4-1--4-10. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. BINGO
   *Editor's note--Ord. No. 2165-91, § I, adopted Dec. 17, 1991, repealed
former Art. II, §§ 4-11--4-17, in its entirety. Former Art. II pertained to the
operation of bingo games and derived from the following: Ord. No. 792-81, §§
II--VIII, 4-15-81; Ord. No. 1046-83, §§ 1--5, 5-17-83; Ord. No. 1520-86, § 1,
9-2-86; Ord. No. 1914-89, § I, 9-19-89.
Sec. 4-11--4-17. Reserved.
CHAPTER 5: ANIMALS *
   *Editor's note–Ord. No. 025-24HR, § I, adopted July 16, 2024, repealed
former Ch. 5, relative to animals and fowl and enacted a new Ch. 5 to read as
herein set out. The provisions of former Ch. 5 derived from Ord. No. 1899-89, §
I, adopted July 31, 1989, and amended by Ord. No. 1907-89, § III, adopted
September 9, 1989; Ord. No. 2091-91, adopted May 27, 1991; Ord. No. 053-00HR, §
I, adopted September 9, 2000; Ord. No. 40-02HR, § I, adopted July 23, 2002;
Ord. No. 67-02HR, § I, adopted November 12, 2002; Ord. No. 041-03HR, § I,
adopted June 3, 2003; and Ord. No. 066-04HR, § I, adopted October 28, 2004.
   Cross reference(s)--Department of animal care, §
2-205 et seq.
   State law reference(s)--Cruelty to animals, S.C. Code 1976, § 47-1-10 et
seq.; sheep-killing dogs, § 47-3-210 et seq.; rabies control, § 47-5-10 et
seq.; uninoculated pets, § 47-5-130; ordinances and regulations for the control
of dogs and other domestic pets, § 47-3-20 et seq.
Sec. 5-1. Definitions.
   Whenever used in this chapter, unless a contrary intention is clearly
evidenced, the following terms shall be interpreted as herein defined.
   Abandon. The owner or custodian's failure to provide for its animal the
necessities of life and well-being or to desert, forsake, or give up absolutely
its animal without securing another owner or custodian. This section does not
include the responsible return of community cats trapped, sterilized, and
returned to the area from which they were trapped.
   Abuse. The act of an owner or custodian who deprives its animal of necessary
sustenance or shelter, or of a person who inflicts unnecessary pain or
suffering upon an animal, or of a person causing these things to be done.
   Animal. In addition to dog and cat, any organism of the kingdom of Animalia,
other than a human being.
   Animal Care Officer. A person employed by the county to enforce the animal
care program.
   Animal Care Facility. A premise designated or selected by the county for the
purpose of impound, care, adoption, or euthanasia of animals held under the
authority of this chapter.
   At large. Not under restraint or confinement.
   Commercial pet breeder. A person, partnership, corporation, association, or
establishment engaged in a business, occupation, profession, or activity in
which one or more dogs are owned, kept, harbored, or boarded and used for a
stud for which a fee is charged and/or used for breeding purposes for which a
fee is charged for the offspring.
   Community Cat, also called "free-roaming cat." A domestic cat that is no
longer in a domesticated environment or one of its descendants and that lives
outdoors full-time and has no known owner. Pets and/or house cats which are
outdoors periodically are specifically excluded from this definition.
   Custodian. A person who, regardless of the length of time, keeps, has charge
of, shelters, feeds, harbors, or takes care of any animal, or is otherwise
acting as the owner of an animal. A custodian is not necessarily the owner.
This definition doe not apply to citizens engaged in humane TNR activity
associated with the trap, sterilize, and return of community cats.
   Dangerous or vicious animal.
   (a)   Dangerous or vicious animal means:
      (1)   An animal which the owner or custodian knows, or reasonably should
know, has the propensity, tendency, or disposition to, without provocation,
attack, cause injury to, or otherwise endanger the safety of human beings,
domestic animals, or livestock;
      (2)   An animal which bites or attacks a human being, domestic animal, or
livestock one or more times without provocation, whether or not such bite or
attack occurs on the premises of the animal's owner;
      (3)   An animal, while not under restraint or confinement, which commits
one or more acts, without provocation, that causes a person to reasonably
believe the animal will bite or attack and cause bodily injury to a human
being, domestic animal, or livestock; or
      (4)   An animal kept or harbored by its owner or custodian primarily, or
in part, for the purpose of animal fighting or which has been trained for
animal fighting.
   (b)   An animal shall not be deemed dangerous or vicious if:
      (1)   The animal bites, attacks, or commits an unprovoked act upon, as
described in subsection (a):
         a.   A human being or animal assaulting its owner or custodian;
         b.   A human being or animal trespassing upon the property of its
owner or custodian. For the purpose of this definition, trespassing means
entering or remaining upon the property of another without permission or legal
privilege; or
         c.   A human being or animal which has abused or tormented it;
      (2)   The animal is protecting or defending its offspring or another
animal; or
      (3)   The animal is acting in defense of an attack upon its owner or
custodian or other person.
   Domestic. To share the genetic makeup and/or physical appearance of its
ancestors which were historically domesticated for human companionship and
service.
   Feral animal. An animal which may be an individual domesticated animal who
is no longer in a domesticated environment, or one of their descendants.
   Fowl. Birds kept for domestic, or utility purposes including, but not
limited to, chickens, hens, roosters, guineas, ducks, geese, turkeys, emus, and
poultry.
   Harboring. Allowing an animal to, regardless of the length of time, remain,
be lodged, or be fed upon or within a premise which the person occupies or
owns. Premises include, but is not limited to, dwellings, buildings, yards, and
enclosures.
   Impound. The humane confinement of the animal by an Animal Care Officer at
an animal care facility.
   Livestock. Cattle, sheep, horses, goats, swine, mules, asses, and other
animals ordinarily raised or used on a farm.
   Owner. A person who:
      (1)   Has a property right in the animal;
      (2)   Keeps or harbors the animal, has it in its care or acts as its
custodian; or
      (3)   Permits the animal to remain on or about premises it owns or
occupies.
   This definition does not apply to citizens engaged in humane TNR activities
associated with trapping, sterilizing, and returning community cats.
   Pet. Domestic dog (canis lupus familiaris) and/or domestic cat (felis
catus). When applicable, pet shall also mean an animal kept lawfully for
pleasure rather than utility or commercial purposes, including fowl.
   Provocation. An act done towards an animal that a reasonable person would
expect to enrage such an animal to the extent the animal would be likely to, or
did, bite, attack, and/or cause bodily injury. Provocation includes, but is not
limited to, teasing, harassing, beating, torturing, injuring, or intentionally
causing pain to an animal. When an animal is attacked on the property of its
owner or custodian by another animal off its owner's or custodian's property,
the attack will be presumed unprovoked, absent clear evidence to the contrary.
Provocation does not include actions on the part of an individual that pertain
to reasonable efforts of self- defense, defense of others, or defense of
another animal.
   Seizure. The removal of an animal from an individual's property or
possession, without the consent of the owner or custodian, by an Animal Care
Officer as a result of a violation or alleged violation of the provisions of
this chapter or to satisfy an order entered by the court.
   Shelter. Unless stated otherwise, a structure reasonably expected to protect
the animal from exposure to the elements of weather or adverse conditions where
such exposure could cause the animal physical suffering or impairment.
   Tether. To fasten, chain, tie, secure, or restrain an animal by a collar or
harness to a dog house, tree, fence, or other stationary object or structure.
Under restraint or confinement. Under restraint or confinement shall mean an
animal that is:
      (1)   On the premises of its owner or custodian indoors;
      (2)   On the premises of its owner or custodian outdoors on a leash or
other similar restraining device or within a fenced-in area;
      (3)   On the premises of its owner or custodian while accompanied by its
owner or custodian; or
      (4)   Off the premises of its owner or custodian while accompanied by its
owner or custodian and is under physical control of such owner or custodian by
means of a leash or other similar restraining device.
   Unincorporated area of the county. The unincorporated area of Richland
County and all areas located in municipalities with which Richland County has
an agreement for animal services.
(Ord. No. 066-04HR, § I, 10-28-04; Ord. No. 005-12HR, § I, 2-7-12; Ord. No.
019-17HR, § 1, 5-2-2017; Ord. No. 025- 24HR, § 1, 7-16-24)
   Cross reference(s)--Rules of construction and definitions generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 5-2. License for dogs and cats; rabies vaccination tags.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, pet shall mean domestic dog and/or
domestic cat.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of a pet to fail to
obtain a current county pet license for a pet over four (4) months of age.
      (1)   The county Animal Services Department shall annually provide a
sufficient number of durable tags suitable for pets, numbered from one (1)
upwards, on which shall be stamped the year and the words "pet license." Such
tags must be worn by all pets within the unincorporated area of the county at
all times.
      (2)   The county Animal Services Department shall maintain the name and
address of each party to whom a license and tag have been issued under the
provisions of this section and shall keep the same on file in the offices of
the department for the purpose of identification.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of a pet over four
(4) months of age to fail to vaccinate the pet and obtain a current rabies
vaccination tag showing that such pet has been vaccinated by a licensed
veterinarian. No license will be issued unless proof of vaccination is shown.
      (4)   A pet owner or custodian who moves into the unincorporated area of
the county for the purpose of establishing residency shall have thirty (30)
calendar days in which to obtain the license.
   (c)   License fees.
      (1)   Annual license fees. Annual license fees for fertile and sterilized
pets shall be established by the county council. Licenses will expire one (1)
year after the date of issue and owners/custodians must renew the license prior
to its expiration.
      (2)   Exemptions from annual license fees. The following owner/custodian
classifications of fertile pets shall be exempt from paying the higher license
fee for fertile pets. These exempt persons shall be required to purchase a
license for their fertile pet and will pay the same license fee as required for
sterilized pets:
         a.   A pet owner or custodian who can furnish a statement from a
licensed veterinarian that the pet, due to health reasons, could not withstand
sterilization surgery;
         b.   An owner or custodian of a purebred pet who can furnish proof of
participation in a nationally recognized conformation or performance event
occurring within the past twelve (12) months; or
         c.   An owner or custodian of a dog currently being used for hunting
purposes who can furnish proof the dog has been properly registered with a
nationally recognized organization which sanctions hunting tests and/or field
trials.
      (3)   An owner or custodian of a dog which is trained to be an
assistance/service dog shall be required to obtain an annual license but shall
not be required to pay a license fee.
(Ord. 025-24HR, § 1, 7-16-24)
Sec. 5-3. Permit for commercial pet breeding.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, pet shall mean domestic dog and
domestic cat. A commercial pet breeder is permitted to operate in the
unincorporated area of the county so long as the breeder obtains from the
county Animal Services Department a commercial pet breeder permit and meets all
other requirements established by federal, state, or local laws. The breeder
permit application process should begin prior to a litter being delivered.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for a commercial pet breeder to fail to obtain a
county commercial pet breeder permit from the county Animal Services
Department. To obtain a commercial pet breeder permit:
      (1)   Before applying for a permit, the applicant must first have
obtained:
         a.   A County Business License issued by the Richland County Business
Service Center; and
         b.   County pet licenses and rabies vaccinations for all pets over
four (4) months of age kept or harbored by the breeder as set forth in Section
5-2 .
      (2)   The permit applicant must complete a commercial pet breeder permit
application. An application is complete when filled out properly and
accompanied by a copy of a valid County business license and proof of pet
licensing and vaccination, where applicable. Incomplete applications will not
be accepted.
      (3)   The permit applicant must pass an inspection. The Animal Services
Department, through its Animal Care Officers, shall conduct an inspection of
the premise upon which the pets are primarily kept to ensure the following
requirements, along with the requirements set forth in Section
5-4 , are met:
         a.   The enclosure or other area(s) where the pets are kept is
constructed in such a manner that pets housed there will be adequately and
comfortably kept in any season of the year;
         b.   The enclosure or other area(s) where the pets are kept is able to
be easily cleaned and sanitized and kept clean and free from accumulations of
feces, filth, mud, and debris;
         c.   Every pet on the premises has constant access to a clean and
fresh water supply and an adequate amount of food appropriate to maintain each
pet's normal condition of health;
         d.   The premise where the pets are kept is set up in such a manner as
to prevent pets from straying beyond their enclosed confines or other areas and
prevents the public and stray animals from obtaining entrance thereto or making
contact with the pets on the premise;
         e.   Permits shall be displayed in a conspicuous place inside of the
physical location shown on the application.
         f.   The above-listed requirements must be maintained throughout the
period of time for which the permit is issued and failure to maintain these
requirements may result in a revocation of the permit.
   (c)   Restrictions.
      (1)   A permit will not be issued to an applicant who has been previously
found guilty of violating any federal, state, or local laws or regulations
pertaining to animal cruelty within five (5) years of the date of application.
      (2)   A permit will only be valid if there also exists a valid business
license and only for the applicant and location listed on the application. The
permit is nontransferable.
      (3)   Any violation or alleged violation of this chapter shall be grounds
for the revocation of the permit. The county Animal Services Department shall
determine, in its sole discretion, whether the permit is to be revoked and
shall communicate the revocation to the breeder in writing. Revocation means
the breeder shall cease all commercial breeding activity until a new valid
permit is issued or the revocation is rescinded and failure to do so will
subject the breeder to penalties. The breeder may appeal the revocation by
submitting to the Animal Services Director a writing setting forth the reasons
for the appeal. Only what is submitted in writing will be considered. The
written appeal must be received by the Animal Services Director within seven
(7) business days of the revocation notice and the Animal Services Director
will review the written appeal and issue its determination to rescind or uphold
the revocation within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of the appeal.
   (d)   The annual fee for a commercial pet breeder permit is non-refundable
and shall be established by county council. The permit shall expire one (1)
year after the date of issue.
   (e)   The county Animal Services Department shall maintain the name and
address of each party to whom a permit has been issued under the provisions of
this section and shall keep the same on file in the offices of the department
for the purpose of identification.
(Ord. 025-24HR, § 1, 7-16-24)
Sec. 5-4. Animal care, generally.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for an owner or custodian to fail to provide its
animals with:
      (1)   Necessary sustenance, such as sufficient good and wholesome food,
in an adequate amount to sustain flesh or permit normal growth and an adequate
amount of clean water that is not sour, filthy, or spoiled. Food and water
should be of the appropriate amounts and type for the species;
      (2)   Proper protection from the weather;
      (3)   Veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering or care for a
diseased, sick, or injured animal;
      (4)   Humane care and treatment. It shall be unlawful for a person to
tease, molest, beat, cruelly treat, torment, overload, overwork, or otherwise
abuse an animal, or cause, instigate, or permit dogfighting or other combat
between animals or between animals and humans; or
      (5)   Proper shelter. Proper shelter for an animal primarily kept
outdoors and unattended includes, but is not limited to:
         a.   Dogs.
            1.   The shelter should be of weatherproof construction, have a
roof, enclosed sides, a doorway, and a solid level floor raised at least two
inches from the ground. There shall be no cracks or openings other than the
entrance except that rainproof openings for ventilation are acceptable in hot
weather.
            2.   The shelter shall be small enough to allow the dog to maintain
warmth and body heat, but large enough to allow the dog to stand, turn around,
and lie down.
            3.   When the real or effective temperature is forty (40) degrees
Fahrenheit or below, a sufficient amount of dry bedding, such as cedar shavings
or straw, must be provided to insulate against the cold and dampness.
            4.   The following is not considered proper shelter: Storage
buildings, sheds, crates, pet carriers, barrels, screened porches, patios, or
balconies, nor the areas under lean-tos, covered porches, decks, vehicles, or
houses.
         b.   Livestock.
            1.   The shelter should provide protection from heavy rain, snow,
and high wind and provide sufficient shade in the summer.
            2.   The shelter for large livestock and healthy horses and cattle
does not have to be manmade. Natural shelters, such as trees, are acceptable.
However, a windbreak must be provided.
            3.   The shelter for small livestock and unhealthy horses and
cattle must be in the form of a barn or pen of sufficient capacity and strength
to properly accommodate the number of animals contained therein.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for a person to leave an untethered pet outdoors
unattended for two (2) continuous hours or longer without access to fresh water
and shelter, as defined in this chapter, regardless of temperature.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for a person to leave an untethered pet outdoors
unattended for thirty (30) minutes or longer during a consecutive four (4) hour
period when:
      (1)   The temperature is below forty (40) degrees Fahrenheit for a
sustained four (4) hour period, unless adequate shelter, as defined in this
chapter, is provided to protect the animal from the elements; or
      (2)   The temperature is above ninety (90) degrees Fahrenheit for a
sustained four (4) hour period, unless adequate shade is provided to protect
the animal from the elements.
   (d)   It shall be unlawful for a person to improperly collar or harness a
pet. Collars and harnesses must be made of leather, nylon, or similar material
and properly fitted for the pet's measurements and body weight so as to not
choke or impede the pet's normal breathing or swallowing and to not cause pain
or injury to the pet. Logger chains, towing chains, and similar items are not
permitted to be used as collars or harnesses. Pet-safe metal collars, chain
collars, prong collars, or choke collars are permitted to be used while the pet
is accompanied by its owner/keeper or custodian.
   (e)   It shall be unlawful for a person to expose an animal to a known
poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that the same shall be
reasonably expected to be eaten by the animal; EXCEPT that it shall not be
unlawful for a person to expose on their own property pest or vermin deterrent
substances to prevent the spread of disease or the destruction of crops,
livestock, or property. In no instance shall a feral or community cat or
domestic animal be considered vermin.
   (f)   It shall be unlawful for a person to fail to remove from a shelter or
confinement area excrement, debris, standing water, or mud. No person shall
fail to keep a shelter or confinement area clean, odor-free, and free of
bloodsucking insects that are carriers of disease.
   (g)   No person, except a licensed veterinarian, shall perform an operation
to crop, notch, or split an animal's ears and/or tail.
   (h)   It shall be unlawful for a person to dye or color artificially an
animal, including fowl, with products not identified as pet-safe or to bring
such dyed or colored animal into the unincorporated area of the county.
   (i)   It shall be unlawful for an owner or custodian to abandon an animal in
the unincorporated area of the county.
(Ord. 025-24HR, § 1, 7-16-24)
Sec. 5-5. Running at large.
   (a)   It is unlawful for an animal to be at large. All animals must be kept
under restraint or confinement and an animal not so restrained or confined will
be deemed unlawfully running at large. This section shall not apply to domestic
cats that have been sterilized or community cats trapped, sterilized, and
returned.
   (b)   Dogs participating in hunting events, obedience trials, conformation
shows, tracking tests, herding trials, lure courses, and other events similar
in nature shall not be considered at large.
   (c)   Dogs properly within the enclosed boundaries of a dog park shall not
be considered at large. A dog park shall mean an enclosed area, owned and/or
operated by the county, a municipality, or private entity, designed, intended,
and used for domestic dogs to play and exercise off-leash in a controlled
environment under the supervision of their owners or custodians.
   (d)   An animal found running at large may be impounded by an Animal Care
Officer and may be redeemed pursuant to Section 5-17 only upon authorization by
the county Animal Services Department, with assurance from the owner or
custodian that proper care and custody will be maintained.
(Ord. No. 066-04HR, § I, 10-28-04; Ord. No. 005-12HR, § V, 2-7-12; Ord. No.
019-17HR, § 1, 5-2-2017; Ord. No. 025- 24HR, § 1, 7-16-24)
Sec. 5-6. Nuisance animals.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for an owner or custodian to keep an animal in
such a manner so as to constitute a nuisance. The actions of an animal
constitute a nuisance when the animal disturbs the rights of, threatens the
safety of, or damages a member of the general public or interferes with the
ordinary use and enjoyment of their property or public property.
   (b)   By way of example, and not of limitation, the following acts or
actions by the owner or custodian of an animal are hereby declared to be a
nuisance and are, therefore, unlawful:
      (1)   Failure to exercise sufficient restraint necessary to control the
animal as required by Section
5-5;
      (2)   Attracting stray and/or feral cats to an area by means of providing
food, water, and/or shelter. This provision does not apply to citizens
performing these acts to trap, sterilize, and return community cats. This
      (3)   Allowing or permitting an animal to damage the property of another
including, but not limited to, turning over garbage containers or damaging
gardens, flowers, or vegetables;
      (4)   Maintaining an animal in a manner which could or does lead to the
animal biting or attacking a human being, domestic animal, or livestock one or
more times without provocation, whether or not such bite or attack occurs on
the premises of the animal's owner;
      (5)   Maintaining animals in an environment of unsanitary conditions
which results in offensive odors or is dangerous to the animal or to the
public's health, welfare, or safety;
      (6)   Maintaining property in a manner that is offensive, annoying, or
dangerous to the public's health, welfare, or safety because of the number,
type, variety, density, or location of the animals on the property;
      (7)   Maintaining an animal that is diseased and dangerous to the
public's health, welfare, or safety;
      (8)   Maintaining an animal that habitually or repeatedly chases, snaps
at, or attacks pedestrians, bicycles, or vehicles; or
      (9)   Failure to keep female animals in heat confined in a building or
secured enclosure in such a manner as will not create a nuisance by attracting
other animals.
   (c)   An animal determined to be a nuisance by an Animal Care Officer may be
caught or seized and impounded pursuant to this chapter and may be redeemed
pursuant to Section
5-17 only upon authorization by the county Animal Services Department, with
evidence presented by the owner or custodian that the situation creating the
nuisance has been abated.
(Ord. 025-24HR, § 1, 7-16-24)
Sec. 5-7. Dangerous or vicious animal.
   (a)   The Animal Services Director or its designee shall have the authority
to determine if an animal is dangerous or vicious. Upon determining an animal
is dangerous or vicious, the Animal Services Director or its designee shall
serve written notice of such determination upon the owner or custodian at their
last known address.
   (b)   The owner or custodian of a dangerous or vicious animal shall properly
confine the animal at all times. Proper confinement is as follows:
      (1)   Dogs.
         a.   If the animal is indoors, the animal must be kept in such a
manner as to prevent the animal from, without provocation, attacking, causing
injury to, or otherwise endangering the safety of individuals or other animals
also located indoors.
         b.   If the animal is outdoors and attended, the animal shall be
muzzled, on a leash or attached to a similar physical restraining device, and
under the physical control of the owner or custodian at all times.
         c.   If the animal is outdoors and unattended, in addition to the
requirements set forth in Section 5-4(a), the animal must be confined in a
locked pen or "run" area that consists of a secured top and at least four (4)
sides which are at least six (6) feet high. The shelter floor must be concrete
or the sides must be buried at least twelve (12) inches in the ground.
         d.   Proper confinement provisions of this subsection shall not apply
to an animal owned by a licensed security company while the animal is
patrolling the premises at the direction of the company. However, when off of
the patrolled premises, the animal shall be properly confined as set forth in
this subsection.
      (2)   Other animals.
         a.   If the animal is indoors, the animal must be kept in such a
manner as to prevent the animal from, without provocation, attacking, causing
injury to, or otherwise endangering the safety of individuals or other animals
also located indoors.
         b.   If the animal is outdoors and attended, the animal must be
restrained on a leash or attached to a similar physical restraining device, and
under the control of the owner or custodian at all times.
         c.    If the animal is outdoors and unattended, the animal must be
confined in a locked pen or "run" area that is set up in such a manner as to
prevent the animal from straying beyond its enclosed confines and prevents the
public and other animals from obtaining entrance into or making contact with
the animal.
         d.   The Animal Services Director may, at its discretion and dependent
upon the type of animal, set forth other reasonable requirements in the
interest of protecting the public's health, welfare, or safety. These
additional requirements shall be communicated to the owner or custodian in
writing.
      (c)   The premises upon which a dangerous or vicious animal is kept or
harbored must have posted a sign visible to the public cautioning the public to
beware of the animal located on the premises. By way of example, and not
limitation, a sign reading "Beware of Dog" or "Beware of Animals" is
sufficient.
(Ord. 025-24HR, § 1, 7-16-24)
Sec. 5-8. Tethering.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful to tether a pet outdoors for two (2) continuous
hours or longer, unless:
      (1)   The pet is older than six (6) months;
      (2)   The tether is a minimum of twelve (12) feet in length and has
swivel-type termination at both ends and the tether weight does not exceed ten
(10) percent of the pet's body weight. Logger chains, towing chains, and other
similar tethering devices are not acceptable;
      (3)   The tether must be attached to the pet with a buckle-type collar or
a body harness. Logger chains, towing chains, and similar items are not
permitted to be used as collars or harnesses. Pet-safe metal collars, chain
collars, prong collars, or choke collars are permitted to be used while the pet
is accompanied by its owner/keeper or custodian;
      (4)   The pet is tethered so as to prevent injury, strangulation, or
entanglement with objects, vegetation, or other tethered animals;
      (5)   The pet has access to fresh water and shelter, as defined in this
chapter;
      (6)   The pet is not sick or injured;
      (7)   Every female confined by a tether and unattended is sterilized; and
      (8)   The temperature is above forty (40) degrees and less than ninety
(90) degrees Fahrenheit, EXCEPT:
         a.   If the temperature is below forty (40) degrees Fahrenheit for a
sustained four (4) hour period, the animal may be tethered for thirty (30)
minutes in a consecutive four (4) hour period so long as adequate bedding and
shelter, as defined in this chapter, are provided to protect the animal from
the elements; or
         b.   If the temperature is above ninety (90) degrees Fahrenheit for a
sustained four (4) hour period, the animal may be tethered for thirty (30)
minutes in a consecutive four (4) hour period so long as shade is provided to
protect the animal from the elements.
(Ord. 025-24HR, § 1, 7-16-24)
Sec. 5-9. Sale of animals.
   (a)   No person shall sell, trade, barter, auction, lease, rent, give away,
or display for commercial purpose, an animal, on any roadside, public right-of-
way, public property, commercial parking lot, or sidewalk adjacent thereto, or
at any flea market, fair, or carnival.
   (b)   No person shall offer an animal as an inducement to purchase a
product, commodity, or service.
   (c)   No person shall sell, offer for sale, or give away a pet under eight
(8) weeks of age, except to surrender to a municipal and/or county animal care
facility or to a licensed pet rescue organization.
   (d)   This section does not apply to licensed pet shops, commercial kennels,
municipal and/or county animal care facilities, and licensed pet rescue
organizations.
(Ord. 025-24HR, § 1, 7-16-24)
Sec. 5-10. Care of animals during transport.
   During the transportation of an animal, the animal must be provided with
adequate space and ventilation, and must not be confined in one area for more
than twenty-four (24) consecutive hours without being adequately exercised,
rested, fed, and watered.
(Ord. 025-24HR, § 1, 7-16-24)
Sec. 5-11.  Injured or diseased animals.
   (a)   Anyone striking a domestic or feral dog or cat with a vehicle shall
notify the county Animal Services Department who will then take action
necessary to make proper disposition of the animal. Vehicle, as defined in this
section, includes all self-propelled and non-self-propelled vehicles, such as
motor vehicles and bicycles.
   (b)   A domestic or feral dog or cat received by an animal care facility in
critical condition from wounds, injuries, or disease may receive sustaining
treatment by a licensed veterinarian until such time as the animal's owner,
custodian, or veterinarian is contacted. Every effort shall be made to
effectuate contact via information obtained from the animal's tag or microchip.
Any such animal in critical condition, as described in this section, may be
euthanized if the owner, custodian, or veterinarian cannot be contacted within
two (2) hours of receipt of the animal. If the animal is in severe pain it may
be euthanized immediately by agreement between the animal care facility
superintendent and a licensed veterinarian.
(Ord. 025-24HR, § 1, 7-16-24)
Sec. 5-12. Removal of excrement.
   The owner or custodian of every animal shall be responsible for the removal
of excretions deposited by their animal on public property, in recreation
areas, or on the private property of another.
(Ord. 025-24HR, § 1, 7-16-24)
Sec. 5-13. Prohibited, exceptions.
   (a)   Except as provided in subsection (b), it shall be unlawful for a
person to publicly display or exhibit, sell, keep, harbor, own, or act as
custodian of:
      (1)   Non-domestic members of the cat family (Felidae);
      (2)   Wolf-dog hybrids, and/or a animal containing any percentage of
wolf;
      (3)   Badgers, wolverines, weasels, skunks, and minks (in the family of
Mustelidae );
      (4)   Raccoons (Procyonidae);
      (5)   Bear (Ursidae);
      (6)   Nonhuman primates which include apes, monkeys, baboons, macaques,
lemurs, marmosets, tamarins, and other species of the order primates
(Haplorrhini);
      (7)   Bats (Chiroptera);
      (8)   Semi-aquatic reptiles in the order of Alligators, crocodiles, and
caimans (Crocodilia);
      (9)   Scorpions (Scorpiones);
      (10)   Constricting snakes of the following species: Reticulated Python
(Python reticulatus), Burmese Python (Python bivittatus), Indian rock Python
(Python molurus), African Rock Python (Python Sebae), and Anaconda (Eunectes
murinus - all types);
      (11)   Venomous reptiles;
      (12)   Lizards over two feet which is a member of the family carnivorous
and frugivorous lizards (Varanidae);
      (13)   Non-domesticated members of the order placental mammals
(Carnivora);
      (14)   Other wildlife not listed;
      (15)   Animals of mixed domestication and feral lineage; or
      (16)   Other animals where its behavior, size, temperament, breed, or
capacity for inflicting serious injury is or may be detrimental to the health,
welfare, or safety of people or animals in the immediate surrounding area.
   (b)   The prohibitions contained in subsection (a) shall not apply in the
following circumstances:
      (1)   The keeping of such animals in a public zoo, a bona fide education
or medical institution, by a humane society, or in a museum where they are kept
as live specimens for the public to view or for the purpose of instruction,
research, or study;
      (2)   The keeping of such animals for exhibition to the public by a bona
fide traveling circus, carnival, exhibit, or show pursuant to properly obtained
federal, state, and/or local licenses and/or permits;
      (3)   The keeping of such animals in a licensed veterinary hospital for
treatment; or
      (4)   The keeping of such animals by a wildlife rescue organization with
appropriate federal, state, and/or local licenses and/or permits obtained from
applicable regulatory bodies.
(Ord. 025-24HR, § 1, 7-16-24)
Sec. 5-14. Seizure and right of entry to protect abandoned, neglected, or
cruelly treated animals.
   (a)   If the owner or custodian does not give permission, the Animal Care
Officer may obtain a search warrant to enter onto privately owned premises of
which an Animal Care Officer suspects a violation of this chapter exists
thereon. Once upon the premises, the officer may examine the animal and may
immediately seize the animal when, in the officer's sole opinion, removal of
the animal from the premises is necessary for the immediate protection of the
animal or the public, and shall issue a uniform ordinance summons to the owner
or custodian.
   (b)   If the animal cannot be seized in a safe and efficient manner, the
Animal Care Officer may tranquilize the animal by use of a tranquilizer gun.
   (c)   After the animal is seized pursuant to this section, the Animal Care
Officer shall petition the appropriate magistrate for a civil hearing and order
pursuant to Section
5-16.
   (d)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as to prohibit the
immediate euthanizing of an animal after the initial seizure and without regard
to a civil hearing or the uniform ordinance summons criminal proceeding when:
      (1)   The animal is determined by the animal care facility superintendent
or its designee, in agreement with a licensed veterinarian, to be a danger to
other animals or persons at the animal care facility, infectious to other
animals, in pain, or near death; or
      (2)   The animal is determined by the animal care facility superintendent
or its designee, in agreement with a licensed veterinarian, to be critically
injured or ill and must be euthanized for humane purposes.
(Ord. 025-24HR, § 1, 7-16-24)
Sec. 5-15. Impounding, surrender.
   (a)   An animal found within the unincorporated area of the county as a
result of a violation or alleged violation by the owner or custodian, whether
known or unknown, of the provisions of this chapter may be caught or seized and
impounded by an Animal Care Officer. If the animal cannot be caught or seized
in a safe and efficient manner, the Animal Care Officer may tranquilize the
animal by use of a tranquilizer gun.
   (b)   When a person is, at the time of an arrest, in charge of an animal,
the county Animal Services Department may take charge of the animal and deposit
the animal in a safe place of custody or impound the animal at its animal care
facility.
   (c)   Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as to prohibit the
immediate euthanizing of an animal after impoundment and without regard to a
civil hearing or the uniform ordinance summons criminal proceeding when:
      (1)   The animal is determined by the animal care facility superintendent
or its designee, in agreement with a licensed veterinarian, to be a danger to
other animals or persons at the animal care facility, infectious to other
animals, or in pain or near death; or
      (2)   The animal is determined by the animal care facility superintendent
or its designee, in agreement with a licensed veterinarian, to be critically
injured or ill and must be euthanized for humane purposes.
   (d)   An owner or custodian may surrender its animal to the animal care
facility upon the completion of a signed surrender form. Upon surrender, the
animal shall become the property of the county Animal Services Department with
title to ownership vested therein and may be placed for adoption or euthanized.
It shall be unlawful for a person to furnish false information on the animal
surrender form.
(Ord. 025-24HR, § 1, 7-16-24)
Sec. 5-16. Civil hearing petition and hearing procedure.
   (a)   Except as provided otherwise in this chapter, an Animal Care Officer
may, upon its own initiative, petition the appropriate magistrate for a civil
hearing when:
      (1)   A person suspected of violating any provision of this chapter is
charged by an Animal Care Officer with such violation; or
      (2)   An Animal Care Officer finds an animal within the unincorporated
area of the county as a result of a violation or alleged violation by the owner
or custodian, whether known or unknown, of the provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   The civil hearing will be held (prior to the uniform ordinance summons
criminal proceeding) to determine physical custody of the animal and at the
conclusion of that hearing, the magistrate shall issue an order with its
determination of whether the animal remains with or is returned to the owner or
custodian or whether title to ownership is transferred to the county Animal
Services Department.
   (c)   The civil hearing shall be set not more than ten ( 10) business days
from the date the animal was impounded. The Animal Care Officer or its designee
shall, at least five (5) business days prior to the civil hearing, serve
written notice of the time and place of the civil hearing upon the owner or
custodian if known and residing within the jurisdiction wherein the animal is
found. If the owner or custodian is unknown or cannot be found within the
jurisdiction wherein the animal was found, the Animal Care Officer shall post a
copy of the civil hearing notice at the property where the animal was seized
   (d)   In determining whether the owner or custodian is able to adequately
provide for the animal or is a fit person to own or have custody of the animal,
the magistrate may take into consideration the owner or custodian's convictions
under this chapter and convictions similar thereto, the owner or custodian's
mental and physical condition, and other applicable criteria; and
      (1)   Notwithstanding subsection (2), if the civil hearing is held in
response to a violation or alleged violation of this chapter and the magistrate
orders the animal to remain with or be returned to its owner or custodian, the
animal care facility shall release the animal pursuant to Section
5-17, provided that all other redemption requirements are met; or
      (2)   If the civil hearing is held in response to a violation or alleged
violation of Section
5-7 and the magistrate orders the animal to remain with or be returned to its
owner or custodian, the magistrate is to include in its order that the animal
is not to be released until the magistrate receives from the Animal Care
Officer confirmation the owner or custodian has proper confinement for the
animal as defined in Section
5-7, provided that all other redemption requirements are met.
   (e)   If the owner or custodian does not redeem the animal within seven (7)
business days of the issuance of the magistrate's order, the animal shall
become the property of the county Animal Services Department and may be placed
for adoption or euthanized.
   (f)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as to prohibit the
immediate euthanizing of an animal after seizure or impoundment and without
regard to a civil hearing or the uniform ordinance summons criminal proceeding
when:
      (1)   The animal is determined by the animal care facility superintendent
or its designee, in agreement with a licensed veterinarian, to be a danger to
other animals or persons at the animal care facility, infectious to other
animals, or in pain or near death; or
      (2)   The animal is determined by the animal care facility superintendent
or its designee, in agreement with a licensed veterinarian, to be critically
injured or ill and must be euthanized for humane purposes.
(Ord. 025-24HR, § 1, 7-16-24)
Sec. 5-17. Redemption.
   (a)   The owner or custodian of an animal impounded pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall have the right to redeem such animal prior to
the applicable redemption deadline upon payment of all fees, proof of
vaccination, and an implanted microchip, provided that all other redemption
requirements have been met. The fees set forth shall be doubled for a pet
impounded twice or more within the same 12-month period. An animal attempted to
be redeemed after the redemption deadline may not be released to the owner or
custodian without due cause as determined solely by the Animal Services
Director or its designee.
   (b)   Impounded animals must be spayed or neutered prior to redemption,
unless the owner or custodian of the animal can provide:
      (1)   A statement from a licensed veterinarian that the animal, due to
health reasons, could not withstand sterilization surgery;
      (2)   Proof of participation in a nationally recognized conformation or
performance event occurring within the past twelve (12) months; or
      (3)   Proof the animal is currently being used for hunting purposes and
has properly been registered with a nationally recognized organization which
sanctions hunting tests and/or field trials.
   (c)   Positively identifiable animals.
      (1)   A positively identifiable animal is one which bears or wears a
legible and traceable current permanent number, county license tag or rabies
vaccination tag, tattoo, or microchip pursuant to S.C. Code of Laws Annotated
Section 47-3-510 (1999) or one which is known by the county Animal Services
Department to belong to an owner or custodian positively identifiable by the
county Animal Services Department.
      (2)   With the exception of an animal to be released by a magistrate's
order, the county Animal Services Department shall notify the owner or
custodian of a positively identifiable impounded animal at the last known
address by registered mail that the dog is in its possession. The owner or
custodian has fourteen (14) calendar days from the date of mailing to notify
the county Animal Services Department or the animal care facility that they
will redeem the animal and (14) calendar days from that notification to redeem
the animal from the animal care facility. The animal must be redeemed pursuant
to Section
5-17, provided that all other redemption requirements are met.
      (3)   Animals released pursuant to a magistrate's order must be redeemed
within seven (7) business days after the issuance of the order, provided that
all other redemption requirements are met.
   (d)   Non-positively identifiable animals must be redeemed within five (5)
calendar days of impound.
   (e)   If the owner or custodian of an animal impounded at the animal care
facility fails to redeem the animal within the prescribed time, the animal will
be deemed abandoned, shall become the property of the county Animal Services
Department with title to ownership vested therein, and may be placed for
adoption or euthanized.
   (f)   If the animal has been impounded more than once for a violation of
this chapter, the animal shall be spayed or neutered by the animal care
facility, regardless of whether proof pursuant to subsection (b) is provided,
and the costs of such shall be added to all other required redemption fees.
(Ord. 025-24HR, § 1, 7-16-24)
Sec. 5-18. Adoption.
   (a)   An animal impounded under any provision of this chapter, which is the
property of the county Animal Services Department, may be adopted, provided the
new owner agrees to comply with the provisions contained herein and pays all
applicable fees.
   (b)   Individuals adopting puppies or kittens too young to be neutered,
spayed, or receive rabies vaccinations at the time of adoption will pay the
cost of these procedures at the time of adoption and be given an appointment
for a later date to have these procedures performed. The fees paid for these
procedures will be refunded if the animal is deceased prior to the appointment
date.
(Ord. 025-24HR, § 1, 7-16-24)
Sec. 5-19. Interference with animal care officers.
   It shall be unlawful for a person to interfere with, hinder, or molest an
Animal Care Officer in the performance of their duty or seek to release an
animal in the custody of an Animal Care Officer without such officer's consent.
(Ord. 025-24HR, § 1, 7-16-24)
Sec. 5-20. Complainant’s identification.
   A person reporting a violation of this chapter and/or requesting a summons
be issued must provide identification to the Animal Care Officer. The identity,
or information tending to reveal the identity, of an individual who in good
faith makes a complaint or otherwise discloses information, which alleges a
violation of this chapter, shall remain confidential, unless the complainant
authorizes the release of their identity.
(Ord. 025-24HR, § 1, 7-16-24)
Sec. 5-21. TNR/Community Cat Diversion.
   "Trap, Neuter, and Return” or TNR is the approach to preventing or reducing
cat overpopulation whereby community cats located in the county may be:
humanely trapped by citizens, spayed or neutered, vaccinated, and eartipped by
licensed veterinarians; and returned to the area from which they were trapped.
This approach is also referenced in this chapter as "trap, sterilize, and
return." Richland County recognizes the need to prevent or reduce cat
overpopulation and that citizens voluntarily engage in humane TNR activity to
achieve this goal with cooperation from facilities which may elect to implement
programs to assist citizens with the TNR approach. Facilities, as defined in
this section, means facilities which are not the county's animal care facility,
and are: veterinary hospitals or clinics operated by veterinarians or
facilities operated, owned or maintained by an incorporated humane society or
other nonprofit organization for the purpose of providing for and promoting the
welfare, protection, and humane treatment of animals. Community Cats are exempt
from licensing and related fees.
(Ord. 025-24HR, § 1, 7-16-24)
Sec. 5-22. Penalties.
   (a)   A person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine not
exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment not exceeding thirty
(30) days, or both. Each day's continuing violation shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense.
   (b)   An owner or custodian of an animal convicted of violating Section
5-4(a)(4) of this chapter forfeits ownership, charge, or custody of the animal
and at the discretion of the court, the person convicted of such violation may
be ordered to pay all costs incurred by the county Animal Services Department
prior to the conviction to care for the animal and related expenses.
(Ord. 025-24HR, § 1, 7-16-24)
CHAPTER 6: BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS*
   *Cross reference(s)--Department of public works and utilities, §
2-192 et seq.; planning management, §
2-216 et seq.; airport regulations,
Ch. 3; fire prevention and protection,
Ch. 10; garbage, trash and refuse,
Ch. 12; planning,
Ch. 20; utilities,
Ch. 24; land development regulations,
Ch. 26; landscaping standards, §
26-176; drainage, erosion and sediment control, § 26-202.
   State law reference(s)--Authority to prescribe rules for building
construction, S.C. Code 1976, § 4-25-10 et seq.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 6-1. Scope.
   This chapter is hereby declared to be remedial and shall be construed to
secure the beneficial interests and purposes which are in public safety,
health, and general welfare through structural strength, sanitation, adequate
light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other
hazards incident to the construction, alteration, repair, removal, demolition,
use and occupancy of buildings and structures, or by installation of
electrical, gas, mechanical (HVAC) or plumbing equipment or appurtenances.
(Code 1976, § 7-1001(a); Ord. No. 012-09HR, § I, 3-3-09)
Sec. 6-2. Activities regulated.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the construction, alteration,
repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and
demolition, of every building, structure, installation or any appurtenances
connected or attached to such buildings or structures.
(Code 1976, § 7-1001(b); Ord. No. 012-09HR, § I, 3-3-09)
Sec. 6-3. Area of applicability.
   This chapter shall apply to the unincorporated areas of the county and those
municipalities that make an agreement with the council to be regulated by the
terms of this chapter.
(Code 1976, § 7-1001(c); Ord. No. 012-09HR, § I, 3-3-09)
Sec. 6-4. Conflict of authority.
   No provisions of this chapter shall be held to deprive any federal or state
agency, or any applicable governing body having jurisdiction, of any power or
authority which it had on February 11, 1974, or any remedy then existing for
the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or
corporation of its legal rights as provided by law.
(Code 1976, § 7-1081(a); Ord. No. 012-09HR, § I, 3-3-09)
Sec. 6-5. Conflict with other ordinances.
   Whenever the provisions of this chapter impose more restrictive standards
than are required in or under any other ordinance or regulation, the standards
herein contained shall prevail. Whenever the provisions of any other ordinance
or regulation require more restrictive standards than are required herein, the
requirements of such ordinance or regulation shall prevail.
(Code 1976, § 7-1081(b); Ord. No. 012-09HR, § I, 3-3-09)
Sec. 6-6. Amendment procedures.
   (a)   All proposed amendments to this chapter shall be submitted to the
director of the building codes and inspections department, who shall then refer
the proposals with his/her recommendation to the council.
   (b)   Before enacting an amendment to this chapter, the council shall hold a
public hearing, which shall be advertised to provide fifteen (15) days’ notice
of the time and place of such hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in
the county.
(Code 1976, § 7-1015; Ord. No. 012-09HR, § I, 3-3-09)
Secs. 6-7--6-17. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. ADMINISTRATION
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 6-18. Conflicts of interest.
   No employee of the building codes and inspections department, except one
whose only connection is as a member of the building codes board of appeals,
established by this chapter, shall be financially interested in the furnishing
of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or
maintenance of a building, or in the making of plans or of specifications
therefor unless he/she is the owner of such building. No such employee shall
engage in any work that is inconsistent with his/her duties or with the
interests of the building codes and inspections department.
(Code 1976, § 7-1002(f); Ord. No. 012-09HR, § I, 3-3-09; Ord. No. 0004-12HR, §
I, 2-7-12)
Sec. 6-19. Liability.
   Any officer or employee of the building codes and inspections department, or
member of the building codes board of appeals, charged with the enforcement of
this chapter, acting for the council for the discharge of his/her duties, shall
not thereby render himself/herself liable personally, and he/she is hereby
relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may occur to persons
or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of
his/her duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee because of
such act performed by him/her in the enforcement of any provision of this
chapter shall be defended by the county attorney until the final termination of
the proceedings.
(Code 1976, § 7-1003(f); Ord. No. 012-09HR, § I, 3-3-09; Ord. No. 0004-12HR, §
II, 2-7-12)
Sec. 6-20--6-30. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. BUILDING CODES AND INSPECTIONS DIRECTOR
Sec. 6-31. Powers and duties.
   In addition to the authority given pursuant to Section
2-224 of this Code, the building codes and inspections director, or his/her
duly authorized representative(s) (hereinafter “director” or “building
official”), shall have the following powers and duties:
   (a)   Right of entry. The building official may enter any building,
structure, or premises to perform any duty imposed upon him/her by this
chapter. In single-family and apartment dwellings, entry of occupied areas will
be by permission of the occupant.
   (b)   Stop work orders. Upon notice from the building official that work on
any building, structure or installation is being done contrary to the
provisions of this chapter or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall
be immediately stopped. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to
the owner of the property, or his/her agent, or to the person doing the work,
and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an
emergency exists, no written notice shall be required to be given by the
building official.
   (c)   Revocation of permits. The building official may revoke a permit or
approval, issued under the provisions of this chapter in case there was any
false statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application
or plans on which the permit or approval was based. In all cases no permit fee
shall be refunded.
   (d)   Determination of requirements not covered by chapter. Any requirement
necessary for the safety, strength, or stability of an existing or proposed
building, structure, or installation, or for the safety of the occupants of a
building, or structure, not specifically covered by this chapter, shall be
determined by the building official, subject to appeal to the building codes
board of appeals.r structure, not specifically covered by this chapter, shall
be determined by the building official, subject to appeal to the building codes
board of adjustment.
   (e)   Determination of alternate materials and alternate methods of
construction. The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the
use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by
this chapter, provided any such alternate is approved and its use authorized by
the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternate,
provided he/she finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies
with the intent and purpose of this chapter, and that the material, method, or
work offered, is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that
prescribed in this chapter in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire-
resistance, durability, and safety. The building official shall require that
sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim that may be
made regarding its use. If, in the opinion of the building official, the
evidence and proof are not sufficient to justify approval, the applicant may
refer the entire matter to the building codes board of appeals.
   (f)   Reports. The building official shall submit an annual report and other
reports as requested by his/her immediate supervisor covering the work of his/
her activities. He/she shall incorporate in his/her annual report a summary of
the decisions of the building codes board of appeals during the same period.
   (g)   Records. The building official shall keep, or cause to be kept, a
record of the business of the building codes and inspections department. The
records of the building codes and inspections department shall be open to
public inspection during normal working hours.
(Code 1976, § 7-1003(a)--(e), (g), (h); Ord. No. 1821-88, § I, 12-13-88; Ord.
No. 012-09HR, § I, 3-3-09; Ord. No. 0004- 12HR, § III, 2-7-12; Ord. No. 016-
13HR, § I, II, 4-2-13)
Sec. 6-32. Deputy.
   The building codes and inspections director may designate a deputy, who
shall, during the absence or disability of the director, exercise all the
powers of the director.
(Code 1976, § 7-1002(d); Ord. No. 1821-88, § I, 12-13-88; Ord. No. 012-09HR, §
I, 3-3-09)
Sec. 6-33. Appeals from decisions.
   (a)   General. Whenever the building official shall reject or refuse to
approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials
to be used, or when the holder of the permit claims that the provisions of this
chapter do not apply, or that an equally good or more desirable form of
construction can be employed in any specific case, or when it is claimed that
the true intent and meaning of this chapter or any of the regulations
thereunder were misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the owner of such building
or structure, or his/her duly authorized agent, may appeal the decision of the
building official to the building codes board of appeals. Pending the decision
of the building codes board of appeals, the building official’s decision shall
be considered binding.
   (b)   Time limits.
      (1)   Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within thirty (30)
days after the decision is rendered by the building official.
      (2)   In case a building, structure or installation which, in the opinion
of the building official, is unsafe or dangerous, the building official may on
his/her order limit the time for such appeal to a shorter period.
(Code 1976, § 7-1013; Ord. No. 1821-88, § I, 12-13-88; Ord. No. 012-09HR, § I,
3-3-09; Ord. No. 0004-12HR, § IV, 2-7-12)
Sec. 6-34--6-42. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. PERMITS, INSPECTION AND CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL
   Cross reference(s)--Licenses and miscellaneous business regulations,
Ch. 16.
Sec. 6-43. Permits required; exception.
   (a)   No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve,
remove, convert, or demolish any building or structure, or installation of
electrical, gas or plumbing equipment or other apparatus regulated by this
chapter without first obtaining from the building official a separate permit
for each such building, structure, or installation. One (1) copy of the
required permit shall be forwarded to the county assessor within ten (10) days
after issuance. A building, structure, or installation may contain one or more
units.
   (b)   Nothing contained herein shall require any public utility company to
obtain a permit for work performed in its respective field on property under
the ownership and control of the utility, to include deeded easements. This
provision does not apply to buildings on such properties.
   (c)   Application for a permit required by this division shall be made on
the form provided by the building official. The applicant shall furnish
information as may be required to complete the application.
   (d)   Any entity having a location in Richland County that will employ or
house more than one hundred (100) persons in a facility on a regular basis and
lies within the “Emergency Planning Zone” (EPZ) of the V.C. Summer Nuclear
Plant (which is located in Fairfield County), must submit an evacuation plan
with the Richland County Emergency Services Department. Such evacuation plan
must be approved prior to the issuance of any building permit.
(Code 1976, § 7-1004(a); Ord. No. 1821-88, § I, 12-13-88; Ord. No. 012-09HR, §
I, 3-3-09; Ord. No. 006-11HR, § I, 2-1-11)
Sec. 6-44. Plans and specifications.
   (a)   When required by the building official, two (2) or more copies of the
specifications and drawings shall accompany every application. Such drawings
and specifications shall contain information as to the quality of materials,
where quality is essential to conformity with this chapter.
   (b)   The building official may require details, computations, diagrams, and
other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and basis of
calculations and they shall bear the signature of the person responsible for
the design.
   (c)   All drawings, specifications, and accompanying data shall bear the
name and address of the designer. In case of buildings or structures of Groups
A, E, I, and H occupancy, and all buildings or structures exceeding two (2)
stories in height or five thousand (5,000) square feet in area, except one- and
two-family dwellings, such designer shall be an architect or engineer legally
registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture
or engineering and shall affix his/her official seal to such drawings,
specifications, and accompanying data.
(Code 1976, § 7-1004(c); Ord. No. 1821-88, § I, 12-13-88; Ord. No. 012-09HR, §
I, 3-3-09)
Sec. 6-45. Examination of application; approval or disapproval; appeal from
disapproval.
   (a)   The building official shall examine or cause to be examined each
application for a permit and the drawings and specifications which may be filed
therewith and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction
indicated and described conforms to the requirements of this chapter and other
pertinent laws and ordinances. If such drawings and specifications are in
conformance, the building official shall issue a permit to the applicant.
   (b)   If the application for a permit and the drawings filed therewith
describes work that does not conform to the requirements of this chapter or
other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building official shall not issue a
permit until corrections are made to conform to the requirements of the
building codes. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall
contain the reasons therefor.
   (c)   The applicant may appeal the decision of the building official to the
building codes board of appeals as provided herein.
(Code 1976, § 7-1004(d); Ord. No. 525-79, § 1, 3-7-79; Ord. No. 1821-88, § I,
12-13-88; Ord. No. 012-09HR, § I, 3-3-09; Ord. No. 0004-12HR, § V, 2-7-12)
Sec. 6-46. Conditions of issuance.
   (a)   The building official shall act upon an application for a permit with
plans as filed, or as amended without unreasonable or unnecessary delay.
   (b)   A permit issued shall be construed to be an authorization to proceed
with the work and shall not be construed as authority to violate, cancel,
alter, or set aside any of the provisions of this chapter, nor shall such
issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring
correction of errors in plans or in construction, or of violations of this
chapter.
   (c)   All building permits shall include a completion date in which
construction shall be completed. Any permit issued shall become invalid unless
the work authorized by it was commenced within six (6) months after its
issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned
for a period of one (1) year after the time the work is commenced; provided
that, for cause, one or more extensions of time for periods not exceeding
ninety (90) days each, may be allowed in writing by the building official. Any
structure that has not been completed and has no permitted/approved/inspected
work for a period of one (1) year and has allowed the structure to get in a
state of disrepair due to neglect and abandonment, shall be declared debris and
abated by demolition. A lien shall be placed on the property and possible legal
action taken against the owner for a violation of this article and for any
costs incurred for abatement. Decisions of the building official may be
appealed to the building codes board of appeals.
   (d)   The building official shall not issue any permit until he/she
ascertains that the applicant is in compliance with the state’s licensing
legislation in respect to the permit in question.
(Code 1976, § 7-1007(a); Ord. No. 1821-88, § I, 12-13-88; Ord. No. 012-09HR, §
I, 3-3-09; Ord. No. 0004-12HR, § VI, 2-7-12)
Sec. 6-47. Transfer of permit.
   In case the holder of a permit gives written permission or appears in person
with another contractor and grants permission, the permit shall be transferred
to another qualified person provided the established transfer fee is paid. If
permission is not granted by the original permit holder, the person who
completes the construction or installation shall secure a permit covering the
work he/she does and shall be responsible, in either case, for all the work
done under his/her supervision.
(Code 1976, § 7-1007(b); Ord. No. 012-09HR, § I, 3-3-09)
Sec. 6-48. Notification of quitting required.
   (a)   Should any person to whom a permit was issued quit the construction or
installation for any reason, he/she shall notify the building official and
state the reason. If the construction or installation was partially completed,
the person to whom the permit was issued, upon quitting the installation, shall
notify the building official and request an inspection. Acceptance of, or
violations against the work shall be recorded by the inspector on the permit
record. No refund of the permit fee shall be granted to the person to whom the
permit was issued.
   (b)   If the holder of a permit quits an installation and fails to notify
the building official, the owner or his/her agent may notify the building
official and request inspection. Upon inspection, the holder of the permit
shall be sent a notice of any violation. The owner may then secure another
qualified person to proceed with the work.
   (c)   If no work was done, the holder of the permit shall be entitled to a
refund on his/her permit; provided, however, that a minimum charge shall be
made.
(Code 1976, § 7-1007(c); Ord. No. 1821-88, § I, 12-13-88; Ord. No. 012-09HR, §
I, 3-3-09)
Sec. 6-49. Posting.
   Work requiring a building permit shall not be commenced until the permit
holder or his/her agent shall have posted the building permit card in a
conspicuous place on the front of the premises. The permit shall be protected
from the weather and in such position as to permit the building official to
conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit holder shall
maintain this permit card in such position until the certificate of approval is
issued by the building official.
(Ord. No. Code 1976, § 7-1007(d); Ord. No. 1821-88, § I, 12-13-88; Ord. No.
012-09HR, § I, 3-3-09)
Sec. 6-50. Fees.
   (a)   General. No permit shall be issued until the required fees are paid,
nor shall an amendment to a permit be approved until the additional fee, if
any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building or structure, is
paid. Provided, however, that no fees shall be charged for any Habitat for
Humanity project.
   (b)   Schedule of fees. Fees for permits, appeals, amendments and other
matters pertaining to this chapter shall be determined by the county council
and set forth in the county’s annual budget ordinance for the current fiscal
year.
   (c)   Demolition of building or structure. A fee shall be paid for
demolition of buildings or structures. No fee shall be paid when the demolition
is being done on a noncommercial basis as a gratuity to the property owner,
provided that said demolition is being done pursuant to the county’s unsafe
building regulations, with the county administrator designated to decide when
such demolition was being done as a gratuity. The provisions of this subsection
shall apply to buildings located in the extreme rural areas of the county only
when a complaint is received and/or when the dwelling presents a health or
safety hazard. For the purposes of this subsection, “extreme rural area” is
defined as those areas zoned as RU under the Richland County Zoning Ordinance,
and/or areas of light or sparse population.
   (d)   Moving of building or structures. A fee shall be paid for a moving
permit as prescribed in the fee schedule for any building or structure. Any
person, firm, corporation or agent who is required to pay a fee as one of the
prerequisites for moving a building or structure shall request escort service
from the sheriff’s department, a the current rate of the sheriff’s special duty
charge, while moving the building or structure over public roads in the
unincorporated area of the county. Proof of coordination or request from the
sheriff’s department for escort service must be presented to the building
official before a building or structure moving permit is issued. Any person who
is required by this subsection to pay a fee as a result of moving a building or
structure, and who shall be issued a moving permit upon payment of such fee
shall be required to present the moving permit when requesting escort services
from the sheriff’s department or upon request of any officer of the sheriff’s
department while the building or structure is in transport. Failure to present
the moving permit will result in the denial of escort services or the denial of
further transport of the building or structure until a moving permit is
secured. A building permit for construction shall also be paid and obtained by
a licensed contractor, with a 120-day completion date from the date of
issuance, prior to the issuance of the moving permit. All buildings or
structures shall be parked so as not to obstruct traffic until a moving permit
is secured. Fees collected shall be deposited in the general fund of the
county. Failure to pay this fee shall result in the denial of escort services
until such time as outstanding bills are paid to the county. Further, no
additional building or structure-moving permits shall be issued until such time
as outstanding bills are paid to the county. Before any person, firm,
corporation or agent causes a structure to be placed on a public road or street
in the unincorporated area of the county during the hours of darkness to be
moved from one location to another, flashing lights shall be installed at five-
foot intervals around the perimeter of the structure. Removal of road signs,
overhead lines, or any items private or public shall be the responsibility of
the moving company for removal and replacement. Any regulations or fees
required to move through any municipality, another county, or within the State
of South Carolina is the responsibility of the moving company.
   (e)   If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation of the
building, alteration or structure appears to be underestimated on the
application, the permit shall be denied unless the applicant can show detailed
estimated cost to meet the approval of the building official. Permit valuations
shall include total cost, such as plumbing, mechanical equipment and other
systems.
   (f)   Where any construction requiring a permit begun before a permit is
obtained, the permit fee will be doubled. This includes all construction and
apparatus pertaining thereto.
(Code 1976, § 7-1008; Ord. No. 539-79, § 2, 4-18-79; Ord. No. 839-81, §§ I--IV,
9-19-80; Ord. No. 1006-83, § 1, 1-5-83; Ord. No. 1077-83, §§ 1--3, 10-4-83;
Ord. No. 1657, § 1, 7-28-87; Ord. No. 1821-88, § I, 12-13-88; Ord. No. 1905-89,
§ I, 9-5-89; Ord. No. 052-95HR, § I, 9-5-95; Ord. No. 087-95HR, § I, 11-7-95;
Ord. No. 012-09HR, § I, 3-3-09)
   Cross reference(s)--Building permit fees for water/sewer projects, §
24-15.
Sec. 6-51. Elimination of a permit fee for subcontractor, provided a South
Carolina licensed general or residential contractor has already secured a
single family residential permit and paid the fee.
   (a)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, when a licensed
contractor secures a building permit for the construction of a building or
structure, an appropriate permit fee prescribed by the building permit fee
schedule will be paid by the contractor. Subcontractor(s) performing work for a
licensed contractor will obtain permit(s) for their respective appurtenances,
and pay a fee, except for a single family residence. Trade qualifications,
license and state bond as required shall be provided for all work. The
subcontractor’s application will display the contractor’s name and building
permit number so that all permits relating to the same construction can be
assimilated. Under extenuating circumstances, the building official shall have
the authority to adjust the building permit fee.
   (b)   When a licensed contractor is not involved in the installation,
renovation, alteration, removing or repairing of appurtenances pertaining to a
single family dwelling, building or structure, the individual person or
subcontractor will secure a permit for the work to be performed and pay an
appropriate fee.
   (c)   All approved building code publications providing for the paying of a
separate permit fee for each respective appurtenance other than by the South
Carolina licensed contractor are hereby declared void.
(Code 1976, § 7-1008; Ord. No. 703-80, § 3, 9-17-80; Ord. No. 771-81, § 1, 2-4-
81; Ord. No. 857-81, § 1, 10-21-81; Ord. No. 012-09HR, § I, 3-3-09)
Sec. 6-52. Inspections required.
   (a)   The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at
various intervals all construction, installation and/or work for compliance
with the provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   Not withstanding subsection (a), above, inspections of occupied
structures for the purpose of code compliance for unsafe housing will not be
provided, unless the structure is determined to be unsafe as stated in Sections
108 and 109 of the International Property Maintenance Code.
(Code 1976, § 7-1009(a); Ord. No. 1821-88, § I, 12-13-88; Ord. No. 012-09HR, §
I, 3-3-09; Ord. No. 040-11HR, § I, 9-6-11)
Sec. 6-53. Notifications.
   (a)   Advance notice. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to give
three (3) working days’ advance notice to the building official when work is
ready for inspections or testing.
   (b)   Contractor’s responsibility. It shall be the duty of the permit holder
to ensure that the work will meet the required inspections or tests before
giving the advance notice.
   (c)   Building official’s responsibility. It shall be the duty of the
building official to ensure that, provided the proper advance notice is given,
the first and second inspections are performed within three (3) working days of
the date for which the inspection was requested. The building official must
ensure that the final inspection is performed within five (5) working days of
the date for which the inspection was requested, provided proper advance notice
is given.
   (d)   Re-inspection. If the building official finds that the work will not
pass the inspections or tests, the permit holder shall be required to make
necessary corrections and have the work re-inspected.
(Code 1976, § 7-1009(b); Ord. No. 1821-88, § I, 12-13-88; Ord. No. 012-09HR, §
I, 3-3-09)
Sec. 6-54. Required inspections (as applicable).
   The building official, upon notification from the permit holder or his/her
agent shall make the following inspections of buildings and such other
inspections as may be necessary and shall either approve that portion of the
construction as completed or shall notify the permit holder or his/her agent
wherein the same fails to comply with the law:
   (a)   Foundation and wall inspection.
   (1)   Wall and pier construction. Footings, piers and curtain walls shall be
in place. If curtain wall is not in place, wall ties for brick veneer must be
installed in all outside piers.
   (2)   Concrete slab construction. Plumbing shall be roughed-in booting and
foundation wall if required, shall be in place, and inspected prior to
placement of concrete.
   (3)   First inspection will consist of an inspection of foundation trench
and pier locations prior to placement of concrete unless adequate bearing tests
have been previously submitted.
   (b)   Roughing-in inspection. Finished floor shall not be installed. All
plumbing, heating, and electrical work shall be roughed-in. No interior finish
shall be installed on walls or ceilings. All windows and exterior doors shall
be set. All exterior woodwork shall be primed and roof shingles shall be in
place. The building shall be weather-tight.
   (c)   Final inspections. Property shall be completed in all respects, all
equipment in place and property ready for occupancy. Walks, drives, and all
grading and landscaping shall be completed. Yard work shall be completed in
such a manner as to divert water away from the building and off the lot so as
to avoid excessive erosion. No reinforcing steel or structural framework of any
part of any buildings or structures shall be covered or concealed in any manner
whatsoever without first obtaining the approval of the building official, the
designing architect or engineer. In all buildings where plaster is used for
fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his/her agent shall notify the
building official after all lathing and backing are in place. No plaster shall
be applied until the approval of the building official has been received.
(Code 1976, § 7-1009(c); Ord. No. 1821-88, § I, 12-13-88; Ord. No. 012-09HR, §
I, 3-3-09)
Sec. 6-55. Safety.
   The building official will inspect any construction, installation, or
existing residential structure, which is not required to be inspected, at the
owner’s request provided the inspection fee is paid.
(Code 1976, § 7-1009(d); Ord. No. 529-79, § 3, 4-18-79; Ord. No. 1821-88, § I,
12-13-88; Ord. No. 012-09HR, § I, 3-3-09)
Sec. 6-56. Certificate of approval; certificate of occupancy.
   (a)   General. No new building shall be lawfully occupied and no change in
occupancy of a building or part of a building shall be made until after the
building official has issued a certificate of occupancy to ensure compliance
with the provisions of the building codes.
   (b)   Certificate of occupancy; when required. Upon the issuance of a
certificate of approval, and upon compliance with the provisions of section 12-
23(a)(1) of this Code of Ordinances, and upon application therefor, the
building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy.
(Code 1976, § 7-1010; Ord. No. 1821-88, § I, 12-13-88; Ord. No. 1849-89, § II,
3-21-89; Ord. No. 012-09HR, § I, 3-3-09)
Sec. 6-57--6-63. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. LICENSING AND BONDING OF BUILDERS, CONTRACTORS AND CRAFTSMEN
   Cross reference(s)--Licenses and miscellaneous business regulations,
Ch. 16.
Sec. 6-64. Contractors or builders.
   It shall be the duty of every contractor or builder who shall make contracts
for the erection or construction or repair of buildings for which a permit is
required, and every contractor or builder making such contracts and subletting
the same, or any part thereof, to pay a license tax as provided in the general
license ordinance, and to register his/her name in a book provided for that
purpose, with the building official, giving full name, residence and place of
business, and, in case of removal from one place to another to have made
corresponding change in register accordingly.
(Code 1976, § 7-1005(a); Ord. No. 529-79, § 1, 4-18-79; Ord. No. 648-80, § 1,
1-16-80; Ord. No. 1821-88, § I, 12-13-88; Ord. No. 012-09HR, § I, 3-3-09)
Sec. 6-65. Plumbing, electrical, mechanical (HVAC) or gas installation
business.
   Before any person shall engage in the plumbing, electrical, HVAC or gas
installation business, he/she shall pay a license tax as provided for that
purpose, giving full name, residence and place of business, and in case of
removal from one place to another to have made a corresponding change in such
register accordingly.
(Code 1976, § 7-1005(b); Ord. No. 529-79, § 1, 4-18-79; Ord. No. 648-80, § 1,
1-16-80; Ord. No. 1821-88, § I, 12-13-88; Ord. No. 012-09HR, § I, 3-3-09)
Sec. 6-66. Reserved.
Sec. 6-67. Illegal work; revocation of license.
   Any person engaged in the plumbing, electrical, mechanical (HVAC), or gas
installation business, whose work does not conform to the rules and regulations
set out in this chapter, or whose workmanship or materials are of inferior
quality, shall on notice from the building official make necessary changes or
correction at once so as to conform to this chapter; if work has not been so
changed after ten (10) days’ notice from the building official, the building
official shall then refuse to issue any more permits to that person until such
work has fully complied with the rules and regulations of this chapter. The
building official may appear before the building codes board of appeals and
request that all licenses be revoked because of continued violations. Any
license issued under this chapter, upon recommendation of the building codes
board of appeals, may be revoked by the county council. When the revocation of
any such license is to be considered and voted upon by the council at any
meeting, the person to whom the license has been issued shall have at least
three (3) days’ notice in writing of the time and place of such meeting
together with a statement of the grounds upon which it is proposed to revoke
such license.
(Code 1976, § 7-1005(d); Ord. No. 529-79, § 1, 4-18-79; Ord. No. 648-80, § 1,
1-16-80; Ord. No. 1821-88, § I, 12-13-88; Ord. 012-09HR, § I, 3-3-09; Ord. No.
0004-12HR, § VIII, 2-7-12)
Sec. 6-68. Allowing one’s name or license to be used to obtain permit
fraudulently.
   No person engaged in the business of gas, electrical, mechanical (HVAC), or
plumbing installation, or building erection, construction or repair shall allow
his/her name to be used by any other person, directly or indirectly, to obtain
a permit or for the construction of any work under his/her name or license; nor
shall he/she make any misrepresentations or omissions in his/her return. A
violation of this section shall be considered grounds for the revocation of the
license.
(Code 1976, § 7-1005(f); Ord. No. 529-79, § 1, 4-18-79; Ord. No. 648-80, § 1,
1-16-80; Ord. No. 012-09HR, § I, 3-3-09)
Sec. 6-69--6-74. Reserved.
DIVISION 5. BUILDING CODES BOARD OF APPEALS
Sec. 6-75. Building codes board of appeals.
   (a)   Establishment. The building codes board of appeals is hereby
established and shall consist of seven (7) members. Such board shall consist of
one (1) architect, one (1) engineer, one (1) contractor, one (1) alternate
member from each of the building, electrical, gas and plumbing industries, and
three (3) alternate members from the fire protection industry. All members
shall be residents of the county. All members shall be appointed by the council
and serve without compensation. Based on the nature of the pending appeal(s),
the Building Official shall select four (4) of the alternate members to serve
on the board for any scheduled meeting and shall take into consideration the
expertise offered by said member in making such selections.
   (b)   Term of office. All appointments shall be for three (3) year terms.
Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term in the manner in which original
appointments are required to be made.
   (c)   Quorum. For any scheduled meeting, four (4) members of the board shall
constitute a quorum. In modifying an order of the Building Official or Fire
Official, affirmative votes of the majority present, but not less than three
(3) affirmative votes, shall be required. No board member shall act in a case
in which he or she has a personal interest.
   (d)   Records. The Building Official or Fire Official, or their designee,
shall act as secretary of the board of appeals and shall make a detailed record
of all its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decisions,
the vote of each member participating therein, the absence of a member, and any
failure of a member to vote.
   (e)   Procedures. The board shall establish rules and regulations for its
own procedures not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. The board
shall meet at regular intervals, to be determined by the chairman, or in any
event, the board shall meet within ten (10) days after notice of appeal is
received from the Building Official or Fire Official.
   (f)   Variations and modifications.
   (1)   The board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals of orders,
decisions, or determinations made by the Building Official or Fire Official
relative to the application and interpretation of the various codes adopted in
this Chapter, and after a hearing, may modify or reverse the interpretation of
the said Building Official or Fire Official.
   (2)   A decision of the board of appeals to modify an order of the Building
Official or Fire Official shall specify in what manner such variation or
modification is made, the conditions upon which it is made and the reason
thereof.
   (3)   The board shall have no authority to waive the requirements of any
currently adopted code dealing with existing or proposed structures within
Richland County.
   (g)   Decisions.
   (1)   Every decision of the board of appeals shall be final, subject,
however, to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity.
It shall be in writing and shall indicate the vote on the decision. Every
decision shall be promptly filed in the office of the Building Official or Fire
Official and shall be open to public inspections; a certified copy shall be
sent by registered mail or otherwise delivered to the appellant.
   (2)   The board of appeals shall, in every case, reach a decision without
unreasonable or unnecessary delay.
   (3)   If a decision of the board of appeals reverses or modifies a refusal,
order, or disallowance of the Building Official or Fire Official, the Building
Official or Fire Official shall immediately take action in accordance with such
decision.
(Ord. No. 012-09HR, § I, 3-3-09; Ord. No. 007-11HR, § I, 2-1-11)
Secs. 6-76 - 6-80. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. BUILDING CODES
Sec. 6-81. Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to provide for regulating the construction,
alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupation, location, maintenance,
removal and demolition, of every building or structure or appurtenance
connected or attached to such building or structure.
(Code 1976, § 7-1021(a); Ord. No. 044-01HR, § I,
7-10-01)
Sec. 6-82. Adopted.
   (a)   There is hereby adopted by the county council the 2021 South Carolina
Residential Code, including Chapter 1 (Administration), and all amendments
thereto, as is all published by the International Code Council, Inc. The 2021
South Carolina Residential Code is the published version of the 2021
International Residential Code with South Carolina Modifications and may be
referenced interchangeably. The construction, alteration, repair, or demolition
of every detached one- and two-family dwelling structure, townhomes (not more
than three stories) and accessory structures shall conform to the requirements
of this Code.
   (b)   There is hereby adopted by the county council the 2021 South Carolina
Building Codes, including Chapter 1 (Administration), and all amendments
thereto, as is all published by the International Code Council, Inc. The 2021
South Carolina Building Code is the published version of the 2021 International
Building Code with South Carolina Modifications and may be referenced
interchangeably. The construction, alteration, repair, or demolition of every
building or structure (other than a one- or two-family dwelling structure)
shall conform to the requirements of this Code.
   (c)   There is hereby adopted by the county council the 2021 South Carolina
Existing Building Code, including Chapter 1 (Administration), and all
amendments thereto, as published by the International Code Council, Inc. The
2021 South Carolina Existing Building Code is the published version of the 2021
International Existing Building Code with South Carolina Modifications and may
be referenced interchangeably. The installation, workmanship,construction,
maintenance or repair of existing buildings shall conform to the requirements
of this Code.
(Code 1976, § 7-1021(b); Ord. No. 1397-85, § 2, 12-3-85; Ord. No. 1702-88, § 1,
1-5-88; Ord. No. 1847-89, § I, 3-21-89; Ord. No. 2139-91, § I, 9-17-91; Ord.
No. 079-94, § I, 11-15-94; Ord. No. 017.5-99HR, § I, 5-4-99; Ord. No. 044-
01HR,§ I, 7-10-01; Ord. No. 030-02HR, § I, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 075-04HR, § I, 11-
16-04; Ord. No. 049-05HR, § I, 7-12-05; Ord. No. 038-08HR, § I, 7-15-08; Ord.
No. 044- 09HR, § I, 7-1-09; Ord. No. 050-13HR, § I, 10-1-13; Ord. No. 035-16HR,
§§ I, XIII, 9-13-16; Ord. No. 008-20HR, § I, 5-5-20; Ord. No. 004-24HR, § I, 2-
13-24)
Sec. 6-83. Buildings to be equipped for physically handicapped.
   All government and public buildings and facilities constructed in the
unincorporated areas of Richland County shall adhere to the requirements of
S.C. Code 1976, §§ 10-5-210 through 10-5-320, as amended.
(Ord. No. 044-01HR, § I, 7-10-01)
Sec. 6-84. Boarded-up structures.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote the health, safety
and welfare of the citizens of the county by establishing regulations for
boarded-up structures in order to prevent their detrimental effects in the
county's neighborhoods.
   (b)   Authority. The Housing Official or designee(s) shall be responsible
for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this section.
   (c)   Registration.
      (1)   Any person or owner that intends to board up a commercial structure
or a residential structure shall comply with subsection (d) Covering of any
means of egress and ingress of structures (see below).
      (2)   An application for registration must be made by the owner for the
boarded up commercial or residential structure on a form prescribed by the
building department, and submitted to the division. The completed registration
form shall contain at a minimum the following information:
         a.   The full name and mailing address of the owner;
         b.   The full address and tax parcel number of the commercial or
residential structure to be boarded;
         c.   Telephone number at which the owner may be reached;
         d.   If the owner is a partnership or corporation, the owner shall
designate one of its general partners or officers to act as its agent and
provide the present residence and business addresses and telephone numbers for
the agent;
         e.   The owner's plan for the occupancy, repair or demolition of the
commercial structure or residential structure;
         f.   The owner's plan for regular maintenance during the period the
commercial or residential structure is boarded-up; and
         g.   Such other information as the department shall from time to time
deem necessary.
      (3)   The owner, under this section, shall have a continuing duty to
promptly supplement registration information required by this section in the
event that said information changes in any way from what is stated on the
original registration.
      (4)   Registration of a boarded up commercial or residential structure
does not excuse the owner from compliance with any other applicable ordinance,
regulation, or statute, including, without limitation, Chapter 6. By accepting
an owner's registration, the Building Department has not determined that the
commercial or residential structure being registered is in compliance with any
applicable local or state regulation or law.
   (d)   Covering of any means of egress and ingress of structures.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cover any means of egress or
ingress of a structure so as to secure the structure without first obtaining a
permit to do so from the Building Codes and Inspections Department. The permit
fee shall be charged at the rate on the current Richland County Fee Schedule,
which is on file with the Building Codes and Inspections Department. The permit
shall authorize the owner to board the structure in conformance with the
“National Arson Prevention Initiative” Board-Up Procedures. No later than five
(5) days after boarding the property, the owner shall register the structure
with the Property Maintenance Division.
      (2)   All boarded material shall be painted so as to match either the
dominant color of the exterior of the structure or the color of the trim of the
building, if any.
      (3)   Permits issued pursuant to this section shall be valid for no more
than ten (10) days.
      (4)   Upon issuance of a permit pursuant to this section, the Housing
Official shall list the property on the "Boarded-up Structure Inventory".
      (5)   Notwithstanding any other provision hereunder, it shall be a
violation for any person to cover, for a period in excess of one hundred eighty
(180) days, any means of egress or ingress of any structure that is not in
compliance with the International Property Maintenance Code or other applicable
codes adopted.
      (6)   Notwithstanding any other provision hereunder, it shall be a
violation for any person to cover any means of egress or ingress of any
structure with any material other than materials conforming to the
International Residential Code.
   (e)   Requirements; time limit.
      (1)   An owner who registers a boarded up commercial structure or
residential structure pursuant to subsection (c), above, must comply with the
guidelines for boarding up structures established in subsection (d), above.
      (2)   An owner's registration of a boarded up commercial or residential
structure shall expire one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of
registration with the department. Provided, however, the Housing Official may
grant one extension of up to one hundred eighty (180) days if the request is
made in writing at least thirty (30) days prior to the original expiration date
and if a time line for abatement (either through repair or demolition) is
approved.
   (f)   Inventory of improperly boarded structures; notification of owners.
      (1)   Not less than every sixty (60) days following the adoption of these
Procedures, the Housing Official shall update the "Boarded-up Structure
Inventory", and shall cause notice of these Procedures and the property owner's
obligation to comply with the same, to be mailed by first class certified mail,
return receipt requested, to all property owners whose structure is added to
the inventory.
      (2)   In the event an owner of a structure that appears on the "Boarded-
up Structure Inventory" cannot be located so as to notify the owner of these
Procedures, service of notice by publication in the same manner as prescribed
by the South Carolina Rules of Civil Procedure is authorized.
   (g)   Violations.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of a boarded up commercial or
residential structure to fail to register such structure with the department as
required by subsection (c), above, except as otherwise provided herein.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for an owner who has registered a boarded up
commercial structure or residential structure to leave the structure boarded up
after the expiration of the registration as set forth in subsection (e), above.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for an owner to board up a commercial or
residential structure in a manner that does not comply with this section unless
the owner has obtained the Housing Official's prior written approval for an
alternative method of boarding up a commercial or residential structure.
   (h)   Notification of violation.
      (1)   The Housing Official shall, on the expiration of one hundred eighty
(180) days following the listing of a structure on the "Boarded-up Structure
Inventory", give the owner notice of violation of this Section. Such notice
shall state that the owner must within thirty (30) days of the notice, remove
the non-conforming materials from any means of egress or ingress and replace
the same with conforming materials which conform to the International Building
Code and that the structure is in compliance with the International Property
Maintenance Code.
      (2)   Every day of noncompliance shall constitute a separate violation.
The covering of any means of egress or ingress as provided under the provisions
of this chapter does not stay enforcement of or compliance with, any orders or
notices by the Building Official or designee(s) or relieve any person or owner
from complying with all other applicable local and state laws affecting
structures and premises.
      (3)   Permits shall be obtained by a licensed contractor to abate the
commercial or residential structure either through repair or demolition as
required by Richland County ordinance and South Carolina rules and regulations.
   (i)   Manufactured homes. Manufactured homes shall only be occupied as a
residential structure as set forth by HUD Regulations. All vacant or abandoned
manufactured homes shall be in compliance with HUD regulations, the
International Property Maintenance Code, and this Chapter. Any repairs shall be
made as set forth by HUD Regulations.
(Ord. No. 004-11HR, § I, 1-4-11; Ord. No. 057-13HR, § I, 11-5-13; Ord. No. 026-
15HR, § I, 7-7-15)
Secs. 6-85--6-95. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. ELECTRICAL CODE
   Cross reference(s)--Building codes board of appeals, §
6-75.
Sec. 6-96. Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to provide for regulating the installation,
alteration, and maintenance of all electrical installations that are not
regulated by the 2021 edition of the International Residential Code.
(Code 1976, § 7-1031(a); Ord. No. 529-79, §§ 7, 9, 4-18-79; Ord. No. 044-01HR,
§ II, 7-10-01; Ord. No. 030-02HR, § II, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 049-05HR, § II, 7-12-
05; Ord. No. 028 -11HR, § I, 6-7-11; Ord. No. 035-16HR, § II, 9-13-16; Ord. No.
008-20HR, § X, 5-5-20; Ord. No. 004-24HR, § X, 2-13-24)
Sec. 6-97. Adopted.
   The workmanship, construction, maintenance or repair of all electrical work
shall conform to the requirements set forth in the 2020 edition of the National
Electrical Code (NFPA 70) with South Carolina Modifications, published by the
National Fire Prevention Association.
(Code 1976, § 7-1031(b); Ord. No. 529-79, §§ 7, 9, 4-18-79; Ord. No. 1397-85, §
2, 12-3-85; Ord. No. 1702-88, § 2, 1-5-88; Ord. No. 2139-91, § II, 9-17-91;
Ord. No. 008-94, § I, 1-18-94; Ord. No. 051-96HR, § I, 7-30-96; Ord. No. 067-
00HR, § I, 11-14-00; Ord. No. 044-01HR, § II, 7-10-01; Ord. No. 042-03HR, § I,
6-3-03; Ord. No. 038-08HR, § II, 7-15-08; Ord. No. 028-11HR, § II, 6-7-11; Ord.
050-13HR, § II, 10-1- 13; Ord. No. 035-16HR, § II, 9-13-16; Ord. No. 008-20HR,
§ XI, 5-5-20; Ord. No. 004-24HR, § XI, 2-13-24)
Sec. 6-98. Connection of property by utility company prior to release after
inspection prohibited; exception.
   A permanent release will be issued to the utility company after a final
inspection has been made and determined that the premises comply with all
ordinances of the county. The utility company will not connect the premises to
its electrical system until such release is received. A temporary release may
be issued for completing the building.
(Ord. No. 044-04 HR, § II, 7-10-01)
Secs. 6-99--6-112. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. FIRE PREVENTION CODE
   Cross reference(s)--Fire prevention regulations generally,
Ch. 10.
Sec. 6-113. Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to apply the provisions of the 2021 edition
of the South Carolina Fire Code to all buildings and structures that are not
regulated by the 2021 edition of the South Carolina Residential Code. The 2021
South Carolina Fire Code is the published version of the 2021 International
Fire Code with South Carolina Modifications and may be referenced
interchangeably.
(Ord. No. 017.5-99HR, § II, 5-4-99; Ord. No. 044-01HR, § III, 7-10-01; Ord. No.
030-02HR, § III, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 075-04HR, § II, 11-16-04; Ord. No. 038-08HR,
§ III, 7-15-08; Ord. No. 028-11HR, § III, 6-7-11; Ord. No. 035-16HR, § III, 9-
13-16; Ord. No. 008-20HR, § II, 5-5-20; Ord. No. 004-24HR, § II, 2-13-24)
Sec. 6-114. Adopted; applicability, etc.
   (a)   There is hereby adopted by the county council the 2021 edition of the
South Carolina Fire Code, including Chapter 1 (Administration), and all
amendments thereto, as published by the International Code Council, Inc.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the code adopted by
this section, to permit or maintain such violation, to refuse to obey any
provision thereof, or to fail or refuse to comply with any such provision or
regulation except as variation may be allowed by action of the county fire
marshal in writing. Proof of such unlawful act or failure to act shall be
deemed prima facie evidence that such act is that of the owner. Prosecution or
lack thereof of either the owner or the occupant shall not be deemed to relieve
the other.
   (c)   The provisions of the code adopted by this section shall apply equally
to both public and private property. It shall apply to all new structures and
their occupancies, except as otherwise specified by ordinance, which constitute
a clear and present hazard to life or to property.
   (d)   This section shall be deemed an exercise of the police powers of the
county for the preservation and protection of the public health, peace, safety
and welfare, and all its provisions shall be liberally construed for that
purpose.
(Code 1976, § 7-3032; Ord. No. 434-77, § 2, 9-29-77; Ord. No. 1397-85, § 2, 12-
3-85; Ord. No. 1847-89, § II, 3-21-89; Ord. No. 2139-91, § III, 9-17-91; Ord.
No. 2151-91, § II, 11-5-91; Ord. No. 079-94, § II, 11-15-94; Ord. No. 044-01HR,
§ III, 7-10-01; Ord. No. 075-04HR, § III, 11-16-04; Ord. No. 038-08HR, § III,
7-15-08; Ord. No. 050-13HR, § III, 10-1- 13; Ord. No. 035-16HR, § IV, 9-13-16;
Ord. No. 008-20HR, § III, 5-5-20; Ord. No. 004-24HR, § III, 2-13-24)
Secs. 6-115--6-124. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. GAS CODE
   Cross reference(s)--Building codes board of appeals, §
6-75.
Sec. 6-125. Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to provide for regulating the installation,
alteration, and maintenance of all piping extending from the point of delivery
of gas for use as a fuel and designated to convey or carry the same gas
appliances, and regulating the installation and maintenance of appliances
designated to use such gas as a fuel, in all buildings and structures that are
not regulated by the 2021 edition of the South Carolina Residential Code.
(Code 1976, § 7-1041(a); Ord. No. 318-76, § 1, 4-21-76; Ord. No. 529-79, § 7,
4-18-79; Ord. No. 044-01HR, § IV, 7-10-01; Ord. No. 030-02HR, § IV, 7-9-02;
Ord. No. 049-05HR, § III, 7-12-05; Ord. No. 028-11HR, § IV, 6-7-11; Ord. No.
050-13HR, § IV, 10-1-13; Ord. No. 035-16HR, § V, 9-13-16; Ord. No. 008-20HR, §
IV, 5-5-20; Ord. No. 004-24HR, § IV, 2-13-24)
Sec. 6-126. Adopted.
   There is hereby adopted by the county council the 2021 edition of the South
Carolina Fuel/Gas Code, and all amendments thereto, as published by the
International Code Council, Inc. The 2021 South Carolina Fuel/Gas Code is the
published version of the 2021 International Fuel/Gas Code with South Carolina
Modifications and may be referenced interchangeably. The installation,
workmanship, construction, maintenance, or repair of all gas work shall conform
to the requirements of this Code.
(Code 1976, § 7-1041(b); Ord. No. 318-76, § 1, 4-21-76; Ord. No. 529-79, § 7,
4-18-79; Ord. No. 1702-88, § 3, 1-5-88; Ord. No.1847-89, § III, 3-21-89; Ord.
No. 2139-91, § IV, 9-17-91; Ord. No. 079-94, § III, 11-15-94; Ord. No. 017.5-
99HR, § III, 5-4-99; Ord. No. 044-01HR, § IV, 7-10-01; Ord. No. 049-05HR, § IV,
7-12-05; Ord. No. 038-08HR, § IV, 7-15-08; Ord. No. 050-13HR, § IV, 10-1- 13;
Ord. No. 035-16HR, § VI, 9-13-16; Ord. No. 008-20HR, § V, 5-5-20; Ord. No. 004-
24HR, § V, 2-13-24)
Secs. 6-127--6-138. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. MECHANICAL CODE
Sec. 6-139. Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to provide for regulating the installation,
alteration, and maintenance of all mechanical systems and other related
appurtenances that are not regulated by the 2021 edition of the South Carolina
Residential Code.
(Code 1976, § 7-1071(a); Ord. No. 529-79, §§ 7, 8, 4-18-79; Ord. No. 044-01HR,
§ V, 7-10-01; Ord. No. 030-02HR, § V, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 049-05HR, § V, 7-12-05;
Ord. No. 028 -11HR, § V, 6-7-11; Ord. No. 050-13HR, § V, 10-1-13; Ord. No. 035-
16HR, § VII, 9-13-16; Ord. No. 008-20HR, § VI, 5- 5-20; Ord. No. 004-24HR, §
VI, 2-13-24)
Sec. 6-140. Adopted.
   There is hereby adopted by the county council the 2021 South Carolina
Mechanical Code, including Chapter 1 (Administration), and all amendments
thereto, as published by the International Code Council, Inc. The 2021 South
Carolina Mechanical Code is the published version of the 2021 International
Mechanical Code with South Carolina Modifications and may be referenced
interchangeably. The installation of mechanical systems, including alterations,
repair, replacements, equipment, appliances, fixtures, and/or appurtenances
shall conform to these Code requirements.
(Code 1976, § 7-1071(b); Ord. No. 529-79, §§ 7, 8, 4-18-79; Ord. No. 1397-85, §
2, 12-3-85; Ord. No. 1702-88, § 4, 1-5-88; Ord. No. 1847-89, § IV, 3-21-89;
Ord. No. 2139, § V, 9-17-91; Ord. No. 017.5-99HR, § IV, 5-4-99; Ord. No. 044-
01HR, § V, 7-10-01; Ord. No. 075-04HR, § IV, 11-16-04; Ord. No. 038-08HR, § V,
7-15-08; Ord. No. 050- 13HR, § VI, 10-1-13; Ord. No. 035-16HR, § VIII, 9-13-16;
Ord. No. 008-20HR, § VII, 5-5-20; Ord. No. 004-24HR, § VII, 2-13-24)
Secs. 6-141--6-152. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. PLUMBING CODE
   Cross reference(s)--Building codes board of appeals, §
6-75 et seq.
Sec. 6-153. Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to provide for regulating the installation,
alteration, and maintenance of all plumbing and other related appurtenances
that are not regulated by the 2021 edition of the South Carolina Residential
Code.
(Code 1976, § 7-1051(a); Ord. No. 416-77, § 1, 7-6-77; Ord. No. 529-79, § 7, 4-
18-79; Ord. No. 044-01HR, § VI, 7-10-01; Ord. No. 030-02HR, § VI, 7-9-02; Ord.
No. 049-05HR, § VI, 7-12-05; Ord. No. 028-11HR, § VI, 6-7-11; Ord. No. 050-
13HR, § VII, 10-1-13; Ord. No. 035-16HR, § IX, 9-13-16; Ord. No. 008-20HR, §
VIII, 5-5-20; Ord. No. 004-24HR, § VIII, 2-13-24)
Sec. 6-154. Adopted.
   There is hereby adopted by the county council the 2021 South Carolina
Plumbing Code, including Chapter 1 (Administration), and all amendments
thereto, as published by the International Code Council, Inc. The 2021 South
Carolina Plumbing Code is the published version of the 2021 International
Plumbing Code with South Carolina Modifications and may be referenced
interchangeably. The installation, workmanship, construction, maintenance or
repair of all plumbing work shall conform to the requirements of this Code.
(Code 1976, § 7-1051(b); Ord. No. 416-77, § 1, 7-6-77; Ord. No. 529-79, § 7, 4-
18-79; Ord. No. 1397-85, § 2, 12-3-85; Ord. No. 1702-88, § 5, 1-5-88; Ord. No.
1847-89, § V, 3-21-89; Ord. No. 2139-91, § VI, 9-17-91; Ord. No. 017.5-99HR, §
V, 5-4-99; Ord. No. 044-01HR, § VI, 7-10-01; Ord. No. 075-04HR, § V, 11-16-04;
Ord. No. 038-08HR, § VI, 7-15-08; Ord. No. 050-13HR, § VIII, 10-1- 13; Ord. No.
035-16HR, § X, 9-13-16; Ord. No. 008-20HR, § IX, 5-5-20; Ord. No. 004-24HR, §
IX, 2-13-14)
Sec. 6-155. Permit.
   In addition to the provisions of the plumbing code adopted by this article,
a permit must be obtained from the appropriate county permitting department
before making any sewer tap or plumbing connection to any sewer system in the
county.
(Code 1976, § 7-1051(c); Ord. No. 416-77, § 1, 7-6-77; Ord. No. 529-79, § 7, 4-
18-79; Ord. No. 1821-88, § I, 12-13-88; Ord. No. 044-01HR, § VI, 7-10-01)
Secs. 6-156--6-166. Reserved.
ARTICLE IX. SWIMMING POOL CODE
Sec. 6-167. Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to provide for regulating the installation
and alteration of swimming pools, public or private.
(Code 1976, § 7-1061(1); Ord. 529-79, § 7, 4-18-79; Ord. No. 733-80, § 1, 10-
15-80)
Sec. 6-168. Adoption and requirements.
   (a)   There is hereby adopted by the county council the 2021 International
Swimming Pool and Spa (ISPSC) Code with Modifications, including Chapter 1
(Administration), and all amendments thereto, as published by the International
Code Council, Inc. The installation, workmanship, construction, maintenance or
repair of all work shall conform to the requirements of this Code.
   (b)   In addition to the requirements imposed by the 2021 edition of the
International Swimming Pool and Spa (ISPSC) Code with Modifications, the
following administrative requirements are hereby enacted:
      (1)   A licensed swimming pool contractor shall be responsible for
securing a permit from the county building official for the installation of any
in-ground swimming pool or spa.
      (2)   In the event an approved wall, fence, or other substantial
structure to completely enclose the proposed pool is not in existence at the
time an application is made for the permit to install a pool, it shall be the
responsibility of the property owner to have the enclosure installed prior to
the final inspection and, further, to ensure that said structure remains in
place as long as the swimming pool exists.
(Code 1976, § 7-1061(3); Ord. No. 529-79, § 7, 4-18-79; Ord. No. 733-80, § 1,
10-15-80; Ord. No. 921-82, § 1, 5-19-82; Ord. No. 1296-85, § 1, 5-7-85; Ord.
No. 1811-88, § II, 11-1-88; Ord. No. 1941-89, § I, 12-5-89; Ord. No. 044-01HR,
§ VII, 7-10-01; Ord. No. 030-02HR, § VIII, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 075-04HR, § VI, 11-
16-04; Ord. No. 049-05HR, § VIII, 7-12-05; Ord. No. 038-08HR, § VII, 7-15-08;
Ord. No. 068-13HR, § I, 12-3-13; Ord. No. 035-16HR, § XI, 9-13-16; Ord. No.
008-20HR, § XII, 5-5- 20; Ord. No. 004-24HR, § XII, 2-13-24)
Sec. 6-169--6-181. Reserved.
ARTICLE X. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
   Editor's note--Nonamendatory Ord. No. 2342-93, §§ I--VI, has been treated by
the editor as superseding the provisions of former Art. X, §§ 6-182, 6-183.
Former Art. X pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of
1976, §§ 7-1106, 7-1107; Ord. No. 701-80, §§ 1, 2, 9-17-80; Ord. No. 1847-89, §
VI, 3-21-89; Ord. No. 1974-90, §§ I, II, 5-15-90.
Sec. 6-182 Adoption.
   The 2021 edition of the International Property Maintenance Code and all
amendments thereto, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is
hereby adopted verbatim and incorporated by reference.
(Ord. No. 004-97HR, § I, 1-7-97; Ord. No. 044-01HR, § VIII, 7-10-01; Ord. No.
042-03HR, § II, 6-3-03; Ord. No. 049-05HR, § IX, 7-12-05; Ord. No. 038-08HR, §
VIII, 7-15-08; Ord. No. 050-13HR, § IX, 10-1- 13; Ord. No. 035-16HR, § XII, 9-
13-16; Ord. No. 008-20HR, § XIII, 5-5-20; Ord. No. 004-24HR, § XIII, 2-13-24)
Secs. 6-183--6-190. Reserved.
ARTICLE XI. ENERGY CONSERVATION
Sec. 6-191. Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to regulate the design of building envelopes
for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage, and the design and
selection of mechanical, electrical, service water- heating, and illumination
systems and equipment which will enable effective use of energy in new building
construction.
(Ord. No. 075-04HR, § VII, 11-16-04)
Sec. 6-192. Adopted.
   There is hereby adopted by the county council the 2009 International Energy
Conservation Code, including Chapter 1 (Administration and Enforcement), and
all amendments thereto, as published by the International Code Council, Inc.
The construction, alteration, repair, or maintenance of every building or
structure shall conform to the requirements of this Code.
(Ord. No. 075-04HR, § VII, 11-16-04; Ord. No. 028-11HR, § VII, 6-7-11; Ord. No.
011-13HR, § I, 3-5-13)
Secs. 6-193—6-199. Reserved.
ARTICLE XII. MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS
Sec. 6-200. Purpose and scope.
   (a)   The provisions of this article shall apply to the construction, use,
maintenance, and occupancy of mobile/manufactured homes, permanent buildings,
accessory buildings or structures, and building components located, within
mobile/manufactured home parks and mobile/manufactured home sites, in all parts
of the unincorporated areas of Richland County.
   (b)   These provisions shall also apply to the use, maintenance, and
occupancy of manufactured homes, mobile homes, and multifamily manufactured
homes, and the installations for supplying fuel gas, water,
electricity, and the disposal of sewage from accessory buildings or structures,
building components, manufactured homes, multifamily manufactured homes and
mobile homes located within mobile/manufactured home parks and mobile/
manufactured home sites, in all parts of the unincorporated areas of Richland
County.
   (c)   Existing construction, connections, and installations of units,
accessory buildings and structures, building components, plumbing, electrical,
fuel gas, fire protection, earthquake resistant bracing, and permanent
buildings completed before February 10, 2015 may continue in use so long as
they were in compliance with requirements in effect at the date of their
installation and are not found to be substandard or in violation of Section 79-
43 of the South Carolina Code of Regulations.
(Ord. No. 002-15HR, § I, 2-10-15)
Sec. 6-201. Definitions.
   In addition to the definitions contained in this section, which shall apply
in the interpretation and enforcement of these regulations, the definitions
contained Section 79-1 of the South Carolina Code of Regulations, are also
applicable to this article.
   Applicable code. The code language of the county, state, or national code or
standard, whichever is more stringent.
   Approved. Acceptable to the South Carolina Department of Health and
Environmental Control.
   Accessory building or structure. A structure or use that is clearly
incidental to and customarily found in connection with a principal building or
use, is subordinate to and serves that principal building or use, and is
subordinate in area, extent and purpose to the principal building or principal
use served. An accessory structure must be on the lot on which the principal
use is located.
   Carport. An accessory structure for vehicle parking, used for shade or
weather protection, supported by one or more posts or columns and partially
supported by an accessory structure installed, erected, or used on a lot; or
supported entirely by columns or posts and, other than flashing, not attached
to or supported by a home or other accessory structure.
   Family property mobile/manufactured home installation. Mobile homes occupied
by family members on property owned by a member of the same family and not
offered for rent or lease to the public Such installations are exempt from this
article.
   Health authority. An authorized representative of the South Carolina
Department of Health and Environmental Control.
   Lot. A space within a mobile/manufactured home park or within a mobile/
manufactured home site for the placement of a mobile/manufactured home,
   Mobile/manufactured home. A factory assembled structure equipped with the
necessary service connections and made so as to be readily movable as a unit on
its own running gear and designed to be used as a dwelling. This definition
shall include any structural addition to a mobile/manufactured home. The term
“home” is included within this definition.
   Mobile/manufactured home park. A parcel of land containing five (5) or more
mobile/manufactured home lots which are available for rent or lease. The term
“park” is included within this definition.
   Mobile/manufactured home site. A parcel of land containing four (4) or less
mobile/manufactured home lots which are available for rent or lease. The term
“site” is included within this definition.
   Permanent building. A structure that has its structural supports mounted
into the ground and is not expected to change in status, condition, or place;
and which is not on a lot and is expressly used in the operation of the park,
such as for the park office, a community center, or park storage facilities,
and is under the control and ownership of the park/site owner or operator.
   Permit. A written permit issued to a person who owns the mobile/manufactured
home park by the health authority authorizing the mobile/manufactured home park
to operate under this regulation; or a written permit issued by the Richland
County Building and Inspections Department for any construction or demolitions.
   Person. Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association
or other entity.
   Registered Owner. A person registered by the appropriate department as the
owner of the mobile/manufactured home.
   Sewer connection. All pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the drain
outlet of the mobile/manufactured home to the inlet of the corresponding sewer
riser.
   Sewer riser pipe. That portion of the sewer lateral which extends vertically
to or above the ground elevation and terminates at each mobile/manufactured
home site. It contains a suitable connector which can be capped when not in
use.
   Storage Building. An accessory building located on a lot, and designed and
used solely for the storage of personal equipment and possessions of the
mobile/manufactured home’s occupants.
   Working Days. All days except Saturdays, Sundays, and applicable local,
state and federal holidays.
(Ord. No. 002-15HR, § I, 2-10-15)
Sec. 6-202. Permits.
   (a)   No person shall operate a mobile/manufactured home park or site, or a
portion of a park or site, or rent, lease, sublease, hire out, or let out for
occupancy, any new or existing lot or mobile/manufactured home within a park or
site in the unincorporated areas of Richland County without a current permit to
operate issued by the health authority and evidence of compliance with all
Richland County Zoning, Building, Mobile/Manufactured Home, and Business
License regulations.
   (b)   No person shall erect, construct, reconstruct, install, replace,
relocate, or alter any building, structure, accessory building or structure, or
building component; any electrical mechanical, or plumbing equipment; or any
fuel gas equipment and installations; or fire protection equipment within a
mobile/manufactured home park or site without first obtaining a permit from the
Richland County Building Department.
(Ord. No. 002-15HR, § I, 2-10-15)
Sec. 6-203. Copies of permits.
   A copy of the “Permit to Operate” issued by the health authority shall be
provided to the Property Maintenance Division for each mobile/manufactured home
park or site.
(Ord. No. 002-15HR, § I, 2-10-15)
Sec. 6-204. Layout plans.
   (a)   All mobile/manufactured home park development plans must be approved
by the health authority. Detailed plans must be submitted to the Property
Maintenance Division, which identify mobile homes and/or manufactured homes
located in each approved space.
   (b)   All mobile home and manufactured home parks and sites shall meet the
requirements of the Richland County Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 26, Land Development; Article V, Zoning Districts and District
Standards; Section
26-92, MH Manufactured Home Residential District; and Article VI, Supplemental
Use Standards; Section
26-151, Subsection (c), Standards; Paragraph (45), Manufactured Home Parks.
(Ord. No. 002-15HR, § I, 2-10-15)
Sec. 6-205. Applicant documents.
   (a)   The owner, operator, or designated representative shall complete and
submit a Mobile/Manufactured Home Park Registration Form for the park or site
to the Property Maintenance Division.
   (b)   The owner, operator, or designated representative shall also submit
completed Mobile/Manufactured Home Registration Forms for every mobile/
manufactured home within the park or site to the Property Maintenance Division.
(Ord. No. 002-15HR, § I, 2-10-15)
Sec. 6-206. Emergency information.
   (a)   The owner, operator, or designated representative of a mobile
manufactured home park or site shall adopt an emergency preparedness plan and
notify park or site residents how to obtain a copy of this plan. It shall be
posted at the Manager’s office or on-site at a central location.
   (b)   At a minimum, the following items should be included in a park or
site’s emergency preparedness plan:
   (1)   Maps showing evacuation routes out of the park including all exits and
alternate routes and exits.
   (2)   The elevation of the park property if the park is in a floodplain.
   (3)   Contact information for emergency government agencies, local fire and
police department and community assistance organizations and other emergency
agencies contact information.
   (4)   Information on how residents may obtain additional materials for
establishing an individual household emergency plan, emergency supply kits, and
individual home safety recommendations.
(Ord. No. 002-15HR, § I, 2-10-15)
Sec. 6-207. Reporting change in park status.
   Mobile homes and manufactured homes cannot be moved in or out of a park or
site without proper approval from Richland County Zoning, Permits, and
Assessor’s Office (i.e. Mobile Home Division). An operator of the park or site
shall submit any change or information related to the park or site to these
divisions within Richland County government Changes in information shall
include, but not be limited to:
   (a)   Change of mobile/manufactured home park or site name, mailing address,
telephone number, management, or ownership;
   (b)   Change in the number of lots resulting from the sale, lease, removal,
construction or alterations of existing lots or facilities; and
   (c)   Change in the number of mobile or manufactured homes resulting from
demolition and/or removal or additional mobile or manufactured homes moved into
the park or site.
(Ord. No. 002-15HR, § I, 2-10-15)
Sec. 6-208. Swimming pools.
   Pool and barrier standards for public and private swimming pools constructed
or erected within a park or site shall comply with the currently adopted
International Building Code and with the currently adopted International
Property Maintenance Code.
(Ord. No. 002-15HR, § I, 2-10-15)
Sec. 6-209. Inspections.
   (a)   An inspection of a mobile/manufactured home park or site shall be
performed annually or as often as the Richland County Property Maintenance
Division deems necessary for the enforcement of mis article.
   (b)   The permit holder, to whom a construction work related permit is
issued by the Richland County Building and Inspections Department, shall
request inspections of all work allowed under such permit.
(Ord. No. 002-15HR, § I, 2-10-15)
Sec. 6-210. Stop work order.
   Whenever any work is performed in violation of the provisions of this
chapter, Chapter 79 of the South Carolina Code of Regulations, or any other
applicable provisions of law, the Property Maintenance Division shall post an
order to stop work on the site and provide a written notice to the person
responsible for the work being performed and the park owner. The work shall
immediately stop until authorized to proceed by the Property Maintenance
Division.
(Ord. No. 002-15HR, § I, 2-10-15)
Sec. 6-211. General park and site requirements.
   (a)   Purpose and Scope.
   (1)   The provision of this section shall apply to the construction, use,
maintenance, and occupancy of mobile/manufactured homes within parks and sites
in all parts of the unincorporated areas of Richland County.
   (2)   Existing construction and installations made before February 10, 2014
may continue in use so long as they were in compliance with requirements in
effect at the date of their installation and are not found to be substandard or
in violation of Section 79-43 of the South Carolina Code of Regulations.
   (3)   Records of mobile/manufactured homes, owners and tenants shall be kept
by the mobile/manufactured home park or site owner, operator, or designee.
   (4)   The park or site shall be maintained in accordance with the most
recently adopted International Property Maintenance Cede.
   (b)   Responsibility.
   (1)   The owner, operator, or designated agent for the park or site shall be
responsible for the safe operation and maintenance of all lots within the park
or site, common areas, electrical, gas, and plumbing equipment and their
installations, and all permanent buildings or structures, within the park or
site. When not owned by the serving utility, the park or site is responsible
for lot services, including the gas riser, water riser, lot drain inlet, and me
electrical pedestal. The mobile/manufactured home owner is responsible for
ensuring the connection of all required utilities.
   (2)   The owner of a mobile/manufactured borne, its appurtenances, an
accessory building or structure, or building component shall be responsible for
the use and maintenance of the home, its appurtenances, accessory building or
structure, or building component and utility connections up to the lot, all of
which shall be in compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   (3)   Any person obtaining a building permit shall be responsible for the
construction or installation in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter.
   (4)   The person to whom a permit for a mobile/manufactured home park or
site is issued shall at all times operate the park or site in compliance with
this Article and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park or
site and its facilities and equipment in safe repair and in a clean and
sanitary condition. If the permit holder resides outside the boundaries of the
state of South Carolina, s/he shall assign a person who resides in the county
where the park or site is located to supervise and assume responsibility for
compliance with these regulations. The assignment shall be made in writing to
the Richland County Property Maintenance Division and immediately upon change
of supervisor.
   (c)   The mobile/manufactured home park or site shall comply with the
Richland County Code of Ordinances, Section
26-183(c), Addressing. In addition, all lots shall be identified by letters,
numbers, or street address numbers. The lot identification shall be in a
conspicuous location facing the roadway. If the lot identification number is to
be installed on a wall surface of the home, the wall surface facing the roadway
shall be used, The letters and/or numbers shall also meet the requirements of
Section
26-183(c), Addressing.
   (d)   Roadways.
   (1)   All mobile home and manufactured home park or site roadways shall have
a clear and unobstructed access to the public thoroughfare, except that a
roadway may have security gates, if such security gates are not in violation of
any law or regulation of Richland County.
   (2)   Paved roads shall be maintained free of potholes, sinkholes, or
erosion.
   (3)   If a park or site owner or operator proposes reducing the width, or
changing the layout or configuration, of the park or site roadways from the way
they were previously approved or constructed, approval shall be obtained from
Richland County Development Services.
   (e)   In every mobile/manufactured home park or site, lighting shall be
installed in accordance with Section
26-177 of the Richland County Code of Ordinances.
   (f)   The mobile/manufactured home park or site owner and all residents of
the park/site shall comply with Richland County’s animal regulations, found in
Chapter 5 of the Richland County Code of Ordinances.
   (g)   Refuse shall be stored, collected and disposed of as required by the
International Property Maintenance Code and by
Chapter 12 of the Richland County Code of Ordinances, and in such a manner as
not to create a nuisance, vector attractant, breeding or harborage problem.
(Ord. No. 002-15HR, § I, 2-10-15)
Sec. 6-212. Electrical, plumbing, mechanical, gas, and building requirements.
   (a)   The requirements of the National Electrical, International Plumbing,
International Mechanical, International Gas, and International Building Codes
shall apply to all mobile/manufactured home parks and sites, and all accessory
buildings or structures, for construction and repair. The International
Residential Code shall apply to all mobile/manufactured homes and/or structures
for construction, installation, alteration, and repair.
   (b)   Existing construction, connections, and installations made before
February 10,2015 may continue in use so long as they were in compliance with
all county and state laws in effect on the date of their installation and are
not found to be substandard or in violation of the National Electrical Code,
International Mechanical Code, International Gas Code, International Building
Code, International Residential Code, and/or Section 79-43 of the South
Carolina Code of Regulations.
   (c)   All plumbing shall comply with DHEC Chapter 61-40, Sections III and
IV, the International Residential Code, and the International Plumbing Code.
   (d)   Fuel storage tanks or cylinders shall comply with DHEC Chapter 61-40,
Section VII, and the International Fuel Gas Codes.
(Ord. No. 002-15HR, § I, 2-10-15)
Sec. 6-213. Sewage disposal.
   (a)   Every mobile/manufactured home parks drainage system shall comply with
DHEC Chapter 61-40, Section IV.
   (b)   Onsite wastewater systems (septic tanks) shall comply with DHEC
Chapter 61-56, Onsite Wastewater System.
(Ord. No. 002-15HR, § I, 2-10-15)
Sec. 6-214. Fire protection requirements for parks and sites.
   (a)   Fire protection equipment meeting the requirements of the
International Fire Code shall be installed and maintained in every park and
site.
   (b)   All systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire, actuate an alarm,
or suppress or control a fire or any combination thereof shall be maintained in
an operable condition at all times in accordance with the International Fire
Code.
   (c)   In areas where fire department services are not available, the park or
site owner/operator shall be responsible for the instruction of park/site staff
in the use of private fire protection equipment and their specific duties in
the event of fire.
   (d)   No person shall construct, reconstruct, modify, or alter any
installations relating to fire protection equipment within a park or site
unless a written permit has been obtained from the Richland County Building
Department and/or the City of Columbia Fire Department, with written evidence
of approval from the fire department responsible for fire suppression.
(Ord. No. 002-15HR, § I, 2-10-15)
Sec. 6-215. Accessory buildings and structures.
   (a)   The requirements of this section shall apply to the construction, use,
maintenance, and occupancy of accessory buildings or structures and building
components constructed or installed adjacent to homes within mobile home parks
or sites.
   (b)   An accessory building or structure or building component that is moved
to a different location and any alterations or additions shall meet the
requirements of Chapters 6 and 26 of the Richland County Code of Ordinances.
   (c)   No accessory structure may be attached to or be supported by a mobile/
manufactured home if the manufacturer’s installation instructions prohibit
attachment or transmission of loads to the home or require freestanding
structures.
   (d)   Playgrounds shall be kept clean and in safe conditions.
Sec. 6-216. Complaint investigations.
   When a complaint is received, the Property Maintenance Division shall:
   (a)   Perform an inspection on allegations of violations representing an
unreasonable risk to life, health, or safety within three (3) business days;
unless imminent danger is apparent, and in that case, an inspection will occur
sooner.
   (b)   Inform the complainant that an inspection was performed and, if
violations were found, that a notice will be sent to the property owner
regarding any valid code violations.
   (c)   If violations were found, issue a written order to correct violations,
which shall be mailed to the property owner in accordance with the
International Property Maintenance Code.
(Ord. No. 002-15HR, § I, 2-10-15)
Sec. 6-217. Violations; Abatement.
   (a)   The substandard conditions and abatement requirements contained in
this section shall apply to mobile home/manufactured home parks and sites,
permanent buildings or structures in parks or sites, accessory buildings or
structures, and building components located within the park or site in all
unincorporated areas of Richland County,
   (b)   Existing construction, connections, and installations made before
February 10, 2015 may continue in use so long as they were in compliance with
requirements in effect at the date of their installation and are not found to
be substandard or in violation of Section 79-43 of the South Carolina code of
Regulations.
   (c)   Any permanent building, structure, or portion thereof, or the premises
on which it is located, shall be deemed substandard and/or a nuisance when any
of the following conditions exist that endanger the life, limb, health,
property, safety, or welfare of the occupants or the public; or is in violation
of the International Property Maintenance Code.
   (1)   Health hazards or inadequate sanitation that includes, but is not
limited to, the following:
      a.   Where required, the lack of, inoperable, or defective water closet,
lavatory, bathtub or shower.
      b.   Where required, the lack of, inoperable, or defective kitchen sink.
      c.   Lack of or inadequate hot and cold running water to plumbing
fixtures.
      d.   Dampness of habitable rooms.
      e.   Infestation of insects, vermin or rodents.
      f.   General dilapidation or improper maintenance.
      g.   Lack of or defective connection of plumbing fixtures to a sewage
disposal system.
      h.   Lack of adequate garbage and rubbish storage and removal facilities.
      i.   Lack of minimum amounts of required natural light and ventilation.
   (2)   Structural hazards that include, but are not be limited to, the
following:
      a.   Deteriorated or inadequate foundations.
      b.   Defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports.
      c.   Flooring or floor supports of insufficient size to carry imposed
loads with safety.
      d.   Members of walls, partitions, or other vertical supports that split,
lean, fist, or buckle due to defective material or deterioration.
      e.   Members of walls, partitions, or other vertical supports that are of
insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety.
      f.   Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other
horizontal members which sag, split, or buckle due to defective material or
deterioration.
      g.   Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports, or other
horizontal members that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with
safety.
      h.   Fireplaces or chimneys which list, bulge, or settle, due to
defective material or deterioration.
      i.   Fireplaces or chimneys which are of insufficient size or strength to
carry imposed loads with safety.
   (3)   Electrical hazards that include, but are not limited to, the
following:
      a.   All electrical wiring that did not conform to all applicable laws
and regulations in effect at the time of its installation, has not been
maintained in good and safe condition, or is not being used in a safe manner.
      b.   Lack of, inoperable, or defective required electrical lighting.
   (4)   Plumbing that did not conform to all applicable laws and regulations
in effect at the time of its installation, has not been maintained in good or
safe condition, or has cross-connections and leakage between fixtures.
   (5)   Mechanical equipment, including heating equipment and its vents, that
did not conform with all applicable laws and regulations in effect at the time
of its installation or which has not been maintained in good and safe
condition, or is not being used in a safe manner, and inoperable or defective
heating facilities, and inoperable or defective ventilating equipment.
   (6)   Faulty weather protection shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
      a.   Deteriorated roofs.
      b.   Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roof,
foundations, or floors, including broken windows or doors.
      c.   Defective or lack of weather protection for exterior wall coverings.
      d.   Broken, rotted, split, or buckled exterior wall coverings or roof
coverings.
   (7)   Any building, structure, or portion thereof, device, apparatus,
equipment, combustible waste, or vegetation which is in such a condition as to
cause a fire or explosion or
      provide a ready fuel to augment the spread and intensity of fire or
explosion arising from any cause.
   (8)   Materials or construction not allowed or approved by this chapter or
which have not been adequately maintained in good and safe condition.
   (9)   Those premises on which’ an accumulation of weeds, vegetation,
rubbish, dead organic matter, debris, garbage, offal, rat harborages, stagnant
water, combustible materials, and similar materials or conditions constitute
fire, health, or safety hazards.
   (10)   All buildings or portions thereof not provided with adequate exit
facilities, except those buildings or portions thereof whose exit facilities
conformed with all applicable laws and regulations at the time of their
construction.
   (11)   All buildings, structures, or portions thereof which are not provided
with the fire-resistive construction or fire-extinguishing systems or equipment
required by this chapter, except those buildings, structures, or portions
thereof which conformed to all applicable laws and regulations at the time of
their construction.
   (12)   All buildings, structures, or portions thereof occupied for living
sleeping, cooking, or dining purposes which are not designed or intended to be
used for these occupancies.
   (d)   Any mobile or manufactured home shall be deemed substandard and a
nuisance when any of the following conditions exist that endangers the life,
limb, health, property, safety, or welfare of the occupants or the public:
   (1)   Health hazards or inadequate sanitation that includes, but is not
limited to, the following:
      a.   Lack of, inoperable, or defective water closet, lavatory, bathtub or
shower.
      b.   Lack of, inoperable, or defective kitchen sink,
      c.   Lack of or inadequate hot and cold running water to plumbing
fixtures.
      d.   Dampness of habitable rooms.
      e.   Infestation of insects, vermin, or rodents.
      f.   General dilapidation or improper maintenance.
      g.   Lack of or defective connection of plumbing fixtures to a sewage
disposal system.
   (2)   Structural hazards include, but are not limited to, the following:
      a.   Deteriorated or inadequate foundation or stabilizing devices.
      b.   Defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports.
      c.   Members of walls, partitions, or other vertical supports that split,
lean, list, or buckle due to defective material or deterioration.
      d.   Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other
horizontal members which sag, split, or buckle due to defective material or
deterioration.
      e.   Lack of adequate or defective ventilation.
      f.   Lack of adequate room and space dimensions.
   (3)   Electrical hazards include, but are not limited to, the following:
      a.   All electrical wiring that did not conform to ail applicable laws
and
         regulations in effect at the time of its installation, has not been
maintained in good and safe condition, or is not being used in a safe manner.
      b.   Electrical conductors which are not protected by overcurrent
protective devices designed to open the circuit when the current exceeds the
ampacity of the conductor.
      c.   Electrical conductors which do not have amp capacity at least equal
to the rating of outlet devices or equipment supplied.
      d.   Electrical conductors which are not protected from physical damage.
      e.   Metallic boxes, fittings, or equipment in an electrical wiring
system which are not grounded to prevent shock.
      f.   Lack of operable, or defective, electrical lighting.
   (4)   Plumbing hazards include, but are not limited to, the following:
      a.   Plumbing that did not conform with all applicable laws and
regulations in effect at the time of its installation, has not been maintained
in good or safe condition, or has cross-connections and leakage between
fixtures.
      b.   Lack of effective traps providing a water seal for each plumbing
fixture.
      c.   Lack of effective venting of plumbing drain piping.
      d.   Broken, unsanitary or leaking plumbing pipe or fixtures.
      e.   Any fixture, fitting, device or connection installed in such a
manner as to permit contamination of the potable water supply.
   (5)   Hazardous mechanical equipment shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:
      a.   Mechanical equipment, including all heating equipment and its vent,
that did not conform with all applicable laws and regulations in effect at the-
time of its installation or which has not been maintained in good and safe
condition, or is not being used in a safe manner.
      b.   Unvented fuel burning heating appliances unless their use is
permitted by all applicable laws and regulations.
      c.   Hearing or fuel burning equipment, including its vent, without
adequate clearance from combustible material.
      d.   Unsupported, loose, or leaking fuel supply piping.
      e.   Lack of, inoperable, or defective heating.
   (6)   Faulty weather protection shall include, but not be limited to,
deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roof, or floors,
including broken windows or doors.
   (7)   Any mobile or manufactured home or portion thereof, device, apparatus,
equipment, or combustible material which is in such a condition as to cause a
fire or explosion or provide a ready fuel to augment the spread and intensity
of fire or explosion arising from any cause.
   (8)   Materials or construction not allowed or approved by this chapter or
which have not been adequately maintained in good and safe condition.
   (9)   Those premises on which an accumulation of weeds, vegetation, rubbish,
dead organic matter, debris, garbage, offal, rat harborages, stagnant water,
combustible materials, and similar materials or conditions constitute fire,
health, or safety hazards.
   (10)   All mobile or manufactured homes or portions thereof not provided
with adequate exit facilities as required by this chapter except those mobile
or manufactured homes or portions thereof whose exit facilities conformed with
all applicable laws at the time of their construction, and those facilities
which have not been adequately maintained.
   (11)   Any mobile or manufactured home containing fossil-fuel burning
appliances or an attached garage that is not supplied with an operational
carbon monoxide alarm.
   (e)   Any accessory structure or building, or building component or portion
thereof, or the premises on which the same is located, shall be deemed
substandard and a nuisance when any of the following conditions exist that
endanger the life, limb, health, property, safety, or welfare of the occupants
or the public:
   (1)   Health hazards or inadequate sanitation include, but are not limited
to, the following:
      a.   When installed, inoperable or defective water closet, lavatory,
bathtub or shower.
      b.   When installed, inoperable or defective kitchen sink.
      c.   When installed, inadequate hot and cold running water to plumbing
fixtures.
      d.   Dampness of habitable rooms.
      e.   Infestation of insects, vermin or rodents.
      f.   General dilapidation or improper maintenance.
      g.   When installed, defective connection of plumbing fixtures to a
sewage disposal system.
      h.   Lack of minimum amounts of required natural light and ventilation.
   (2)   Structural hazards, which include, but are not limited to, the
following:
      a.   Deteriorated or inadequate foundations or stabilizing devices.
      b.   Defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports.
      c.   Flooring or floor supports of insufficient size to carry imposed
loads with safety.
      d.   Members of walls, partitions, or other vertical supports that split,
lean, list, or buckle due to defective material or deterioration.
      e.   Members of walls, partitions, or other vertical supports that are of
insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety.
      f.   Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports, or other
horizontal members which sag, split, or buckle due to defective material or
deterioration.
      g.   Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports, or other
horizontal members that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with
safety.
      h.   Fireplaces or chimneys which list, bulge, or settle, due to
defective material or deterioration.
      i.   Fireplaces or chimneys which are of insufficient size or strength to
carry imposed loads with safety.
      j.   Lack of, inoperable, or defective required ventilating equipment.
   (3)   Electrical hazards include, but are not limited to, the following:
      a.   All electrical wiring that did not conform to all applicable laws
and regulations in effect at the time of its installation, has not been
maintained in good and safe condition, or is not being used in a safe manner.
      b.   Lack of, inoperable, or defective required electrical lighting,
   (4)   Plumbing that did not conform to all applicable laws and regulations
in effect at the time of its installation, has not been maintained in good or
safe condition, or has cross-connections and leakage between fixtures.
   (5)   Mechanical equipment, including heating equipment and its vents, that
did not conform with all applicable laws and regulations in effect at the time
of its installation or which has not been maintained in good and safe
condition, or is not being used in a safe manner, or is inoperable or
defective.
   (6)   Faulty weather protection, which includes, but is not limited to, the
following:
      a.   Deteriorated roofs.
      b.   Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roof,
foundations, or floors, including broken windows or doors.
      c.   Defective or lack of weather protection for exterior wall coverings.
      d.   Broken, rotted, split, or buckled exterior wall coverings or roof
coverings.
   (7)   Any accessory structure or building or building component or portion
thereof, device, apparatus, equipment, combustible waste, or vegetation which
is in such a condition as to cause a fire or explosion or provide a ready fuel
to augment the spread and intensity of fire or explosion arising from any
cause.
   (8)   Materials or construction not allowed or approved by this chapter or
which have not been adequately maintained in good and safe condition.
   (9)   Those premises on which an accumulation of weeds, vegetation, rubbish,
dead organic matter, debris, garbage, offal, rat harborages, stagnant water,-
combustible materials, and similar materials or conditions constitute fire,
health or safety hazards.
   (10)   All accessory building or structures or building components or
portions thereof not provided with adequate exit facilities as required by this
chapter except those buildings or portions thereof whose exit facilities
conformed with all applicable laws and regulations in effect at the time of
their construction and which have been adequately maintained and increased in
relation to any increase in occupant load, alteration or addition, or any
change in occupancy.
   (11)   All buildings, structures, or portions thereof which are not provided
with the fire-resistive construction or fire-extinguishing systems or equipment
required by this chapter, except those buildings, structures, or portions
thereof which conformed with all applicable laws at the time of their
construction and whose fire-resistive integrity and fire-extinguishing system
or equipment have been adequately maintained and improved in relation to any
increase in occupant load, alteration or addition, or any change in occupancy.
   (12)   All accessory buildings or structures or building components or
portions thereof occupied for living, sleeping, cooking, or dining purposes
which were not designed or intended to be used for such occupancies.
   (f)   Abatement.
   (1)   The registered owner of a mobile/ manufactured home, accessory
building or structure, or building component that is constructed, altered,
converted, used, or maintained in a manner that constitutes a violation is
required to abate the violation.
   (2)   The legal owner of the property, or park/site owner or operator for
properties or permanent buildings under their ownership or control, that is
constructed, altered, converted, used, or maintained in a manner that
constitutes a violation, is required to abate the violation
   (g)   Notice of violation, complaints, and order to correct.
   (1)   Whenever the Property Maintenance Division finds a condition that
constitutes a violation of this chapter, the International Property Maintenance
Code, or any other applicable provision of law, the Property Maintenance
Division, in accordance with the International Property Maintenance Code shall
provide a written notice to the person or entity responsible for correction of
the violation.
   (2)   The written notice shall state the conditions which constitute the
violation, including a reference to the law or regulation being violated, and
shall order its abatement or correction within thirty (30) days after the date
of notice or a longer period of time as allowed by the code official.
   (3)   If a mobile/manufactured home is in such condition that identification
numbers are not available to determine ownership, the notice shall be given to
the owner or operator of the park.
   (4)   Whenever the Property Maintenance Division determines a mobile/
manufactured home, habitable accessory building or structure, or permanent
building constitutes an imminent danger representing an immediate risk to the
life, health, or the safety of an occupant, the Property Maintenance Division
shall post a notice on the structure, declaring it uninhabitable. The home,
habitable accessory building or structure, or permanent building shall not be
occupied until deemed safe by the code official. At the time of the posting,
the code official shall issue a notice as described in this section to the
registered owner. A copy of the notice shall be issued to the occupant of the
home, or accessory building or structure, or permanent building, if the
occupant is not the registered owner.
   (h)   Final notice requirements and appeals.
   (1)   If the initial notice from the Property Maintenance Division has not
been complied with on or before the date specified in the notice, the code
official may institute proceedings against the cited person or entity.
   (2)   The code official shall issue to the cited person, the last registered
owner of a cited mobile/manufactured home, and the park owner or operator, or
the legal owner of the property where the cited home, structure, or property is
located, a final notice of violation or notice to abate the violation in
accordance with the International Property Maintenance Code that shall contain
at a minimum the following:
      a.   The date the notice is prepared;
      b.   The name or names of the responsible person or entity;
      c.   A list of the uncorrected violation(s) cited;
      d.   A final compliance date;
      e.   Notice of the right to request an informal conference, if one has
not
         been requested previously with regard to the identified violations;
      f.   The right to request a hearing with the Building Codes Board of
Appeals, but only after the denial or after the conclusion of the informal
conference;
      g.   A statement that any willful violation is a misdemeanor.
   (3)   The final notice shall be mailed, by registered or certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the cited person, to the legal owner of the
property as indicated on the permit to operate application and to the last
known address of the last registered or legal owner of record of the cited
mobile/manufactured home, unless the home is in such condition that
identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. The final
notice may also be served in accordance with state requirements.
   (4)   If, after the re-inspection of an order to correct a violation, the
code official determines that the cited person has made reasonable progress to
abate the violation, or that circumstances beyond the control of the cited
person have interfered with compliance or slowed compliance, the code official,
in his/her sole discretion, may extend the period for compliance.
   (i)   Consequences of failure to abate.
   (1)   It is unlawful for the person ordered to abate a violation to fail or
refuse to remove and abate that violation within the time period allowed in the
order after the date of posting of an order on the cited mobile/manufactured
home, structure, or property or receipt of an order. After the expiration of
the time period allowed for an order related to a violation, the code official
has the authority to initiate prosecution of violation in accordance with the
International Property Maintenance Code, including, but not limited to, seeking
a court order for abatement.
   (2)   Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (1), above, if a violation
poses an imminent danger representing an immediate risk to life, health, and
safety and requires immediate correction, the code official has the authority
to initiate any appropriate action or proceeding to abate a violation if
abatement is not complete within the time period allowed by the notice of
violation and order.
   (j)   Responsibility for Costs.
   (1)   The registered owner of the mobile/manufactured home or any other
cited person or entity that fails to correct a violation or abate a nuisance
within the time allotted in the original correction order, or any extension
thereto, shall be held responsible for the costs of abatement of the violation.
Costs of abatement, for purposes of this section, may include the Property
Maintenance Division’s investigative and case preparation costs, court costs
and attorney fees, the cost associated with any physical actions taken to abate
the violation, and any technical service or other fees due to the Property
Maintenance Division related to the abatement activity.
   (2)   If the mobile/manufactured mobile home is in such condition that
identification numbers are not available to determine ownership, or the
Property Maintenance Division is unable to locate the owner after making a
reasonable effort to do so, the owner of the property on which the home is
located shall be liable for such costs.
   (k)   Removal.
   (1)   A mobile/manufactured mobile home, permanent building, accessory
building or structure or building component which has been ordered to be
removed due to the existence of violations or a nuisance shall be removed in a
manner consistent with local, state, and federal law.
   (2)   The owner or responsible person of a mobile home or manufactured home
that has been ordered to remove or abate the home shall have the title, license
plates, decal, and the federal labels, if available, forwarded to the
appropriate authority to have the home removed from their records.
(Ord. No. 002-15HR, § I, 2-10-15)
Sec. 6-218. Informal conference, hearings, and appeals.
   (a)   Purpose and scope.
   (1)   The provisions of this section apply to the procedures available to a
cited person who has received a notice of a violation ordering abatement or
correction of a violation of this chapter, the International Property
Maintenance Code or any other applicable provision of law, issued by the
Property Maintenance Division.
   (2)   A request for an informal conference or hearing will not extend the
time for correction of immediate risks to life, health, or safety.
   (3)   None of the procedures for the appeal and subsequent hearing process
extends the time allowed for the correction of violations noted in the original
notice of violation or notice of abatement noted in subsequent notices of
violation issued to the same person or about the same situation unless:
      a.   An extension of time allowed for the correction of violations is
contained in the written determination provided by the code official after an
informal conference [see subsection (b), below]; or
      b.   An extension of the time allowed for the correction of violations is
contained in the final decision issued by the Building Codes of Appeals
pursuant to section
6-75 of the Richland County Code of Ordinances.
   (b)   Informal conference.
   (1)   An informal conference related to a violation shall occur at the time
and place scheduled and shall provide the person requesting the conference with
the opportunity to explain to the representatives of the Property Maintenance
Division each issue disputed and the facts and circumstances of each dispute.
   (2)   Within ten (10) working days of the completion of the informal
conference, the code official shall provide a written notification of its
determination, to the person who requested the conference.
   (3)   The written determination shall sustain, overrule, or modify the
original notice of violation that contained each issue disputed at the informal
conference. Modification may include:
      a.   Changes to the original violation cited.
      b.   Where necessary to provide a reasonable time for compliance, an
extension of the time within which the modified required corrective action
shall be completed. The extension of time shall not exceed thirty (30) calendar
days, or such longer period of time allowed by the code official, from the date
of the code official’s written determination or greater period of time as
determined by the Property Maintenance Division.
   (4)   The written request for an informal conference shall be considered
withdrawn if the person who submitted the request:
      a.   Does not appear at the mutually-agreed upon time and place scheduled
for the informal conference, and
      b.   Does not notify the Property Maintenance Division, within five (5)
calendar days prior to the date on which the informal conference was scheduled,
with written confirmation of the good-cause reason for not appearing at the
informal conference.
   (5)   If the code official determines that good cause exists for a
postponement, the code official shall postpone an informal conference for a
period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) working days and shall notify the
person in writing of the time and date of the postponed conference. Otherwise,
the code official shall confirm the automatic withdrawal and, if applicable,
the denial of the request due to a lack of a good-cause reason, as determined
by the code official.
   (c)   Request for hearing: appeal of decision rendered in informal
conference.
   (1)   Any park/site owner or operator, cited person, or any registered owner
of a mobile/manufactured home, who has received a notice of violation ordering
abatement or correction of a violation of this chapter, the International
Property Maintenance Code, Chapter 79 of the South Carolina Code of
Regulations, or any other applicable provision of law from the Property
Maintenance Division has the right to request a hearing on the matter before
the Building Codes Board of Appeals after a decision is rendered in an informal
conference or the code official has denied the request for an informal
conference.
   (2)   If a request for a hearing is not received within thirty (30) working
days from the date of personal service or acknowledgment of receipt by mail of
the notice, the Property Maintenance Division shall have the discretion to
continue abatement proceedings.
   (3)   If a hearing is requested, the appellant shall submit an application
and pay the associated fee to the Property Maintenance Division within thirty
(30) working days of the date of the denial of a request for an informal
conference, or within thirty (30) working days of the date of the code
official’s written determination, following an informal conference, if the
issues contained in the notice of violation and the request for hearing were
disputed at the informal conference,
   (4)   The written application for a hearing shall include:
      a.   The name, address, and phone number of the appellant;
      b.   The appellant’s reasons for how the true intent of the International
Property Maintenance Code, or Chapter 79 of the South Carolina Code of
Regulations, or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly
interpreted, or why the provisions of the International Property Maintenance
Code, or Chapter 79 of the South Carolina Code of Regulations, do not fully
apply, or how the requirements of the International Property Maintenance Code,
or Chapter 79 of the South Carolina Code of Regulations, are adequately
satisfied by other means;
      c.   A summary of each issue to be disputed at the hearing; and
      d.   The remedy the appellant is seeking,
   (5)   Upon receipt of a request for a hearing, the Property Maintenance
Division shall set a time and place for the hearing before the Building Codes
Board of Appeals and shall provide the appellant with a written notice of the
scheduled time and place of the hearing.
   (6)   The appellant shall have the right to apply to the code official for
the postponement of the date of the hearing for a reasonable amount of time.
The appellant shall provide a good cause for the request.
   (7)   The code official shall grant a request for postponement if he/she
determines that the appellant has a good cause for the postponement. The
appellant shall only be allowed one postponement.
   (8)   In the event that a cited violation constitutes an imminent danger
representing an immediate risk to life, health and safety of persons or
property which requires immediate correction, a request for a hearing shall not
extend the time for the correction of the violation.
   (9)   Upon receipt of the request for a hearing, the Property Maintenance
Division shall not initiate any judicial or administrative action related to
the defect or defects appealed until after the hearing. However, if the defect
or defects cited become an imminent danger representing an immediate risk to
life, health, and safety of persons or property which require immediate
correction, the code official may demand immediate abatement or correction, and
initiate any appropriate judicial or administrative action related to the
defect or defects.
   (d)   Any cited person, owner, or other aggrieved person having any
objections as to any proceedings or actions undertaken by the Building Codes
Board of Appeals, shall have the right to apply to the appropriate court for a
writ of certiorari to correct errors of law. After receipt of the final order
or decision of the Building Codes Board of Appeals, an appeal from such
decision may be taken to the circuit court by filing with the clerk of the
court a petition in writing setting forth plainly, fully, and distinctly why
the decision is contrary to law. The appeal must be filed within thirty (30)
days after the decision of the Building Codes Board of Appeals is mailed. For
the purposes of this section, “aggrieved person” or entity is any person that
claims to have been injured by actions of the Property Maintenance Division
that would permit the person to file a lawsuit in court.
(Ord. No. 002-15HR, § I, 2-10-15)
Sec. 6-219 - 6-222. Reserved.
ARTICLE XIII. PENALTIES
Sec. 6-223. Penalties.
   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine not exceeding
five hundred ($500) dollars or to imprisonment not exceeding thirty (30) days.
Each day during which such violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ord. No. 002-HR15, § II, 2-10-15)
CHAPTER 7: COURTS*
   *Cross reference(s)--General penalty for code violations, §
1-8; county attorney, §
2-136 et seq.; department of judicial services, §
2-247 et seq.; clerk of court, §
2-268 et seq.; county coroner, §
2-277 et seq.; register of mesne conveyances,
2-238.1; offenses generally,
Ch. 18.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 7-1--7-10. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. RESERVED
   Editor's note--Ord. No. 1872, § I, effective June 6, 1989, repealed former
Art. II, §§ 7-11--7-13, relative to magistrates, which derived from Code 1976,
§§ 3-4081--3-4083; Ord. No. 408-77, § 1, 6-29-77; and Ord. No. 531-99, § 5, 7-
1-79.
CHAPTER 8: VECTOR CONTROL
Sec. 8-1. Intent and application.
   The intent of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and
welfare by preventing or controlling the spread of vector-borne disease through
the use of regulations, intervention, enforcement, education, advice and
assistance. Where practicable and not likely to cause injury to the public
health, in the sole opinion of the Director of Vector Control, the Vector
Control Department shall first attempt to use education, intervention, and
assistance to encourage voluntary compliance with the provisions of the
chapter.
   This chapter shall be applicable to all premises in unincorporated Richland
County regardless of the use or zoning classification. In instances where a
specific property use is regulated by the laws and regulations of the State of
South Carolina, the Vector Control Department shall work in conjunction with
the proper regulatory authority to remediate any violations of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 040-15HR, § I, 9-15-15)
Sec. 8-2. Definitions.
   Harborage. Any area, interior or exterior, which is maintained in a manner
such that vectors will tend to live, nest, breed or seek shelter.
   Insect. Any of the numerous small invertebrate animals generally having the
body more or less obviously segmented, for the most part belonging to the Class
Insecta, comprising six-legged, usually winged forms, as for example, flies and
mosquitoes, and to other allied classes of arthropods whose members are
wingless and usually have more than six legs, as for example, spiders, and
ticks.
   Person. An individual, partnership, co-partnership, cooperative,
association, firm, company, public or private corporation, trust, estate, joint
structure company or any other legal entity or its legal representative, agent
or assigns.
   Premises. A parcel of real property, including all buildings and structures
located thereon. This term is used interchangeably with “Property.”
   Structure. All parts of a building, whether vacant or occupied, in all
stages of construction.
   Vector. An organism that has the ability to transmit disease, including, but
not limited to, mosquitoes, ticks, fleas, rats, etc.
   Waste. Garbage, household trash, debris, commercial waste, yard waste,
sewage, white goods, rubbish, paper, junk, building materials, glass or plastic
bottles, other glass, cans and any other discarded or abandoned material,
including solid, liquid, or semisolid matter.
(Ord. No. 040-15HR, § I, 9-15-15)
Sec. 8-3. Minimum requirements.
   The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum requirements
required to keep premises in a clean and sanitary condition so as not to
adversely affect the public health or safety.
(Ord. No. 040-15HR, § I, 9-15-15)
Sec. 8-4. Sanitation.
   All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe, and
sanitary condition to the extent necessary to prevent vector breeding and
harborage.
(Ord. No. 040-15HR, § I, 9-15-15)
Sec. 8-5. Accumulation of waste.
   No person shall allow the accumulation or discharge of waste on any premises
to the extent and in such manner as to create a harborage or breeding ground
for rodents or other vectors.
(Ord. No. 040-15HR, § I, 9-15-15)
Sec. 8-6. Insect and rodent harborage.
   (a)   All premises, structures, and exterior property shall be kept free
from insect and rodent harborage and infestation. All structures in which
insects or rodents are found shall be promptly exterminated in such manner as
will not be injurious to human health After pest and rodent elimination, proper
precautions shall be taken by (he occupant to prevent re-infestation.
   (b)   The accumulation of water in which mosquito larvae may breed is
prohibited.
   (c)   All premises shall be kept free from the excessive growth of weeds and
rank vegetation where mosquitoes harbor.
   (d)   The maintenance of any barn, stable, chicken yard, manure pile,
garbage receptacle, etc., in such manner that flies are in excess of reasonable
acceptable levels, as defined in the Vector Control Fly Protocol, as may from
time to time be amended, is prohibited.
   (e)   No dead animals or parts thereof shall be left on any exterior
premises for more than forty-eight (48) hours or thrown upon any street, road,
or public place.
(Ord. No. 040-15HR, § I, 9-15-15)
Sec. 8-7. Swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs.
   Privately owned swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs shall be maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition to the extent and in such manner so as to prevent
vector breeding and harborage.
(Ord. No. 040-15HR, § I, 9-15-15)
Sec. 8-8. Duty to abate.
   It shall be the duty of any owner, lessee, occupant, agent, or
representative of the owner of any property to comply with the requirements of
this chapter and take whatever action as may be necessary as often as may be
necessary to prevent the breeding and harborage of vectors.
(Ord. No. 040-15HR, § I, 9-15-15)
Sec. 8-9. Enforcement; Abatement; penalties.
   (a)   The Vector Control Director, or his/her authorized representative,
shall have the authority to investigate threats or potential threats to the
public health relating to vectors and potential vector transmitted diseases on
any premises in unincorporated Richland County and to require abatement of
conditions which violate the provisions of this chapter. As such, the Vector
Control Director, or his/her authorized representative, shall, with proper
consent, have the right of entry upon any premises where entry is necessary to
carry out the provisions of this chapter. If consent for entry is not given or
obtained by an authorized person, a search warrant shall be obtained by the
Vector Control Director from a court of competent jurisdiction before entry
onto the premises made.
   (b)   Whenever and wherever a condition shall exist which is determined by
the Vector Control Director, or his/her authorized representative, to be a
violation of this chapter, notice shall be given to the owner, lessee,
occupant, or agent or representative of the owner setting forth the violation,
and advising that the violation(s) must be corrected, the time allowed for such
correction, and the necessary methods or means to be employed in the
correction. It shall be sufficient notification to deliver the notice to the
person to whom it is addressed or to deposit a copy of such in the United
States mail, properly stamped, certified, and directed to the person to whom
the notice is addressed, or to post a copy of the notice upon such premises.
   (c)   Whenever and wherever a repeat violation of this chapter shall occur,
where more than one Uniform Ordinance Summons has been issued on the same
premises and/or on the same person, which, in the opinion of the Vector Control
Director, or his/her authorized representative, constitutes a public health
nuisance, it shall be his/her duty to notify in writing the person or persons,
firm or corporation, responsible for its continuance, of the character of the
public health nuisance and give the person, persons, firm, or corporation a
reasonable length of time to abate it. However, whenever and wherever a
nuisance is of a character as to require, in the interest of the public health,
immediate abatement or discontinuance, the Vector Control Director may bring a
proceeding for immediate action in the magistrate’s court for the abatement of
such nuisance and the court may upon hearing and for good cause enjoin the
continuance of the condition creating the nuisance, irrespective of all other
remedies at law.
   (d)   Any person who fails to abate the violation or public health nuisance
after notice shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, issued a Uniform
Ordinance Summons, and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine not
exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment not exceeding thirty
(30) days, or both. Each day’s continuing violation shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense.
(Ord. No. 040-15HR, § I, 9-15-15)
CHAPTER 9: ELECTIONS*
   *Cross reference(s)--Administration generally,
Ch. 2; elected and special officers, §
2-262 et seq.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 9-1. Registration of electors.
   The books of registration shall be open from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday
through Friday at the office of the board of registration except during those
portions of the year in which such books are required to be closed.
(Code 1976, § 2-5001)
   State law reference(s)--Books to be kept open during hours other county
offices are normally open, S.C. Code 1976, § 7-5-130.
Sec. 9-2. Electoral districts.
   (A)   The county shall be divided into 11 new districts for the purpose of
electing members to the Council. Each new district shall be entitled to elect
one member of Council in accordance with S.C. Code 1976, § 4-9-90, as amended.
The new districts are as defined and delineated on the schedule of precincts
and voting districts, and as shown on the series of 11 maps, all of which are
herein adopted by reference.
   (B)   The County Attorney is hereby directed and authorized to submit the
plan for the new districts to the Attorney General of the United States for
preclearance pursuant to Section 5 of the U.S. Voting Rights Act of 1965, as
amended. The County Attorney is further directed to request expedited
preclearance in accordance with the regulations promulgated hereunder by the
Attorney General of the United States.
(Ord. No. 087-01HR, §§ II, III, 12-18-01; Ord. No. 003-02HR, §§ II, III, 1-29-
02)
Secs. 9-3--9-12. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. ELECTION COMMISSION
   Cross reference(s)--Boards, commissions and committees generally, § 2-326 et
seq.
Sec. 9-13. Employees and equipment--Limitation on outside work.
   Employees of the election commission are declared to be under the direction
of the county administrator and subject to the provisions of the personnel
ordinance. Election commission personnel may not perform any election-related
services, for pay or otherwise, for any town, city, party, union, or other
organization except pursuant to an agreement between the commission and such
organization for such services. No election commission personnel may accept any
money whatsoever from any political party, club, or organization. All
equipment, names, lists, data, and other materials belonging to the election
commission must remain in the commission office unless removed for a legitimate
purpose outlined in the directions or policies of the election commission.
(Code 1976, § 2-5002)
Sec. 9-14. Same--Overtime.
   If election commission or related personnel are required to work beyond
their normal work schedule for any election, they will be paid by the county at
their regular base rate for each hour of overtime.
   Unless such work is performed for a school or in a general or county special
election, the organization, city, town or party to which the services are
rendered must reimburse the county for all overtime and other extraordinary
expenses associated with such services.
(Code 1976, § 2-5003)
Sec. 9-15. Same--Outside use of voting machines.
   (a)   In the interests of voter education, colleges and schools will be
allowed to use voting machines in school elections or in displays at no charge.
A written request for the use of machines must be made two (2) weeks in advance
to the Richland County Election Commission, P.O. Box 4069, Columbia, South
Carolina 29240. This request must list all offices to be filled and all
candidates.
   (b)   Labor unions, fraternal organizations and other groups wishing to use
voting machines will be charged five dollars ($5.00) for each machine used. A
written request listing all offices and candidates will be required two (2)
weeks in advance.
   (c)   Any city (except the City of Columbia), town, or political party using
the machines for a municipal or primary election will be charged one dollar
($1.00) for each machine used (plus an optional five dollars ($5.00) per
machine charge for independent certification). The renter is responsible for
all costs of the programs, transportation, and for providing printed ballot
strips for the machine. Notice of all offices and candidates will be required
two (2) days after the filing deadline for the particular election.
(Code 1976, § 2-5004; Ord. No. 469-77, § 1, 12-7-77)
Sec. 9-16. Same--Damage to machines.
   If any machine is damaged while in the custody of any city, town, party,
school, or other organization using the machines, the cost of repairs will be
charged to that organization. If repairs can be made by the voting machine
custodian, the organization will be charged at the custodian's base pay rate
for each hour spent in repairing the machine, plus the actual cost of repair
parts.
(Code 1976, § 2-5005)
Sec. 9-17. Same--Election services.
   The election commission will contract with any city, town, or political
party in the county to provide services related to the holding of elections.
Upon the request of such city, town, or party, election commission personnel
will formulate an estimate of charges for the entire package of requested
services, based upon the actual unit costs of personnel, supplies, printing,
etc. Such charges may include the charge for providing voting machines as
specified above. After the election, the commission will render to the city,
town, or party a statement of charges which may vary from the estimated charge
only in the case of specific expenses or personnel time actually incurred
because of unanticipated events.
(Code 1976, § 2-5006)
Sec. 9-18. Same--Method of charging.
   All charges specified above will be remitted by check made payable to and
sent directly to the Richland County Finance Department, P.O. Box 4069,
Columbia, South Carolina 29240. All money remitted to the commission under
these provisions will be deposited with the finance department to the credit of
the general fund of Richland County.
(Code 1976, § 2-5007)
Sec. 9-19. Same--Priorities.
   If all requests for voting machines or election services cannot be filled
because of limited time or equipment, the following priorities will be
observed:
      (1)   General and county special elections;
      (2)   Municipal and primary elections;
      (3)   School and college elections; and
      (4)   Elections of unions, fraternal organizations, and other groups.
(Code 1976, § 2-5008)
CHAPTER 9.5: RESERVED*
   *Editor's note--Ord. No. 1909-89, adopted Sept. 5, 1989, provided for the
deletion of former Ch. 9.5, §§ 9.5-1--9.5-12, relative to emergency
preparedness, which derived from Ord. No. 1076-83, §§ 1--11, adopted Oct. 4,
1983. Said Ord. No. 1909-89 enacted similar provisions regarding the office of
emergency preparedness, codified in Ch. 2, Art. VI, Div. 4, Subdiv. B, as § 2-
286 et seq.
CHAPTER 10: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION*
   *Editor’s note--By § I of Ord. No. 1164-84, the county entered into an
inter-governmental contract for fire protection with the City of Columbia.
Section IV prescribed for enforcement after the date of the contract between
the city and county, with implementation after Jan. 1, 1985.
   Cross reference(s)--Fire prevention code, §
6-113 et seq.
Sec. 10-1. Compliance with chapter provisions.
   No person shall kindle or maintain any open burning or authorize any such
fire to be kindled or maintained within the unincorporated areas of the county,
except as stated in this article.
(Ord. No. 001-09, § I, 1-6-09)
Sec. 10-2. Open burning on the premises of private residences.
   Open burning of leaves, tree branches and yard trimmings originating on the
premises of private residences and burned on those premises shall be permitted
within “rural” zoning districts, as defined under the Richland County Land
Development Code, provided that any fire must be located not less than 75 feet
from any structure, road, or property line and adequate provision has been made
to prevent the fire from spreading to within 75 feet of any such structure,
road or property line. Open burning of leaves, tree branches, and yard
trimmings shall be prohibited on the premises of private residences within any
“residential” zoning district, as defined under the Richland County Land
Development Code.
(Ord. No. 001-09, § I, 1-6-09)
Sec. 10-3. Open burning on the premises of undeveloped properties for the
purpose of land clearing or right-of-way maintenance.
   Open burning on the premises of undeveloped properties upon which no private
residence is situated, including undeveloped properties within “residential”
zoning districts, as defined under the Richland County Land Development Code,
for the purpose of land-clearing or right-of-way maintenance shall be
permitted, provided that such burning is conducted in accordance with the SC
Department of Health and Environmental Control (DHEC) Air Quality Regulations
61-62.2 and 61-62.4 and S.C. Code 1976, § 48-35-10 et seq. Open burning for the
purpose of land clearing and right-of-way maintenance shall be prohibited
during the ozone season (April 1 through October 30).
(Ord. No. 001-09, § I, 1-6-09)
Sec. 10-4. Attendant and fire extinguishing equipment required; notice to state
forester; adherence to state law.
   The burning must be constantly attended by a competent person until such
fire is extinguished. Such person shall have a garden hose connected to a water
supply, or other fire extinguishing equipment readily available for use. Proper
notification shall be given to the state forester or his duly authorized
representative or other persons designated by the state forester. The notice
shall contain all information required by the state forester or his
representative. The burning must be conducted in accordance with related state
laws and regulations including, but not limited to, DHEC Air Quality
Regulations 61-62.2 and 61-62.4 and S.C. Code 1976, § 48-35-10 et seq.
(Ord. No. 001-09, § I, 1-6-09)
Sec. 10-5. Fires shall be prohibited as follows.
         a.   The county Fire Marshal may prohibit open burning when
atmospheric conditions, local circumstances or other conditions exist that
would make such fires hazardous.
         b.   The following materials shall not be burned in an open fire:
asphalt and asphaltic materials, paint, plastics, metals, treated wood, paper,
petroleum products, demolition debris, dead animals, construction debris,
household chemicals, household garbage, tires, trade waste and cardboard.
(Ord. No. 001-09, § I, 1-6-09)
Sec. 10-6. Criteria for determining hazards.
   Reasonable criteria shall be established by the county council to assist in
determining when outdoor fires may be hazardous. These criteria may include air
quality standards as well as various fire danger indexes.
(Ord. No. 001-09, § I, 1-6-09)
Sec. 10-7. Prohibited on county roads, drainage rights-of-way and adjacent
areas.
   Open burning shall be prohibited on all county roads and drainage rights-of-
way, or within an area that may cause damage to such areas.
(Ord. No. 001-09, § I, 1-6-09)
Sec. 10-8. Exemptions.
         a.   This article does not apply to vegetative debris burning related
to forestry, wildlife and agricultural burns, as authorized by the state
forestry commission.
         b.   This article is not meant to restrict open burning in the
connection with the preparation of food for immediate consumption, or campfires
and fires used solely for recreational purposes, ceremonial occasions or human
warmth that are done in a safe manner.
(Ord. No. 001-09, § I, 1-6-09)
Sec. 10-9. Restrictions; exceptions.
   Smoke production must be ended and no combustible material may be added to
the fire between official sunset of one day and official sunrise of the
following day with the exception of fires in the connection with the
preparation of food for immediate consumption, or campfires and fires used
solely for recreational purposes, ceremonial occasions, or human warmth and
fires where time parameters are already regulated by the Department of
Environmental Control Regulation 61-62.2.
(Ord. No. 001-09, § I, 1-6-09)
Sec. 10-10. Hazardous or toxic materials.
   Hazardous or toxic materials shall not be burned.
(Ord. No. 001-09, § I, 1-6-09)
Sec. 10-11. Permit for organized public fireworks displays--Fee.
   A charge of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be made for the issuance of
the public fireworks display permit required by the fire prevention code
adopted in Article V of
Chapter 6, to cover administrative costs.
(Ord. No. 001-09, § I, 1-6-09)
Sec. 10-12. Same--Disposition of fee.
   All fees required by section
10-2 shall be deposited in the county general fund, in accordance with the
receipts and deposits policies established by county council.
(Ord. No. 001-09, § I, 1-6-09)
Sec. 10-13. Same--Penalties.
   Any person holding a fireworks display in the county without obtaining a
permit as provided in the fire prevention code adopted in Article V of
Chapter 6, shall be deemed in violation of S.C. Code 1976, § 23-35-60, as
amended, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished according to law.
(Ord. No. 001-09, § I, 1-6-09)
Sec. 10-14. Burning of structures for fire-fighting training.
   A vacant, dilapidated and unsafe structure may be burned by personnel of a
legally constituted fire department for fire-fighting training purposes. Before
such training is commenced, the appropriate fire department official will
present proof to the county building official that approval for burning the
structure has been obtained, if so required, from the state department of
health and environmental control and the owner of the structure. Upon
presentation of the required proof, the building official will issue a permit
for the burning of the structure. When the burning/training is completed, the
fire department which conducted the training will remove or cause to be removed
debris, burned or unburned, lying within ten feet of the perimeter wall of the
structure. Necessary and appropriate seeding will be accomplished to establish
vegetation to prevent transporting of soil to other people’s property by way of
erosion. On completion of the removal of debris and necessary seeding, the fire
department official will notify the building official, so that an inspection
will be made for compliance with this section and the closing out of the
permit.
(Ord. No. 001-09, § I, 1-6-09)
Sec. 10-15. Civil and criminal liability.
   The authorization to conduct an open burn does not relieve the individual
responsible from civil or criminal liabilities resulting from the burning.
(Ord. No. 001-09, § I, 1-6-09)
Sec. 10-16. Conflicts of article with state law.
   The provision of this chapter shall prevail and be controlling over
provisions of state law if such is allowed by state law. Otherwise, if any
conflict arises between the provisions of this chapter and any state law, the
provisions of state law shall prevail and be controlling.
(Ord. No. 001-09, § I, 1-6-09)
CHAPTER 11: FRANCHISING REGULATIONS*
   *Cross reference(s)--Utilities,
Ch. 24.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 11-1--11-10. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. CABLE TELEVISION
   State law reference(s)--Authority to grant franchises, S.C. Code 1976, § 4-
9-30(11).
Sec. 11-11. Purpose.
   In order to better protect the public interest, welfare, and convenience,
the following article is hereby enacted, setting forth the conditions,
requirements, and limitations under which a person may construct, operate, and
maintain a cable antenna television system in this county. It is the express
intent of the county council that this article shall govern all cable antenna
television system franchises granted after November 3, 1992.
(Ord. No. 773-81, § I, 2-4-81; Ord. No. 2264.1-92HR, § I, 10-20-92)
Sec. 11-12. Definitions.
   For the purpose of this article, the following terms, words, phrases, and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
   Cable system, cable television system, or CATV system means a facility,
consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal
generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable
service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple
subscribers within a community, but such terms do not include: (1) A facility
that services only to retransmit the television signals of one or more
television broadcast stations; (2) A facility that serves only subscribers in
one or more multiple unit dwellings under common ownership, control, or
management, unless such facility or facilities uses any public right-of-way;
(3) A facility or common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the
provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, except
that such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes
of Section 621 (c) of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984) to the
extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly
to subscribers; or (4) Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for
operating its electric utility systems.
   CATV shall mean Cable television.
   Council shall mean the County Council of the County of Richland.
   County shall mean the County of Richland, South Carolina.
   Department shall mean that department or agency of Richland County
designated by the County Administrator to supervise, monitor and implement a
cable television system franchise granted hereunder, including the enforcement
of its terms and provisions.
   Franchise shall mean and include the authorization, right or privilege to
construct, erect, operate and maintain in, upon, along or across public places
in the county, now laid out or dedicated, and all extensions thereof and
additions thereto, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and
other conductors and fixtures necessary to maintain and operate a CATV system
in the county; provided, however, that such authorization in whatever terms
granted, shall not include any non-discriminatory license or permit as may be
required by the County of Richland for the privilege of operating a business
within the county. As used in this article, the term "franchise" shall not mean
the grant of an exclusive right to operate a cable television system in any
part of the county, unless so indicated.
   Franchise area shall mean the unincorporated area within the county.
   Franchisee shall mean the person to whom or to which a cable television
franchise is granted by the county.
   Franchise ordinance shall mean an ordinance granted by council to the
franchisee, granting the franchisee the right and privilege to construct and
operate a cable television system in the franchise area. If approved by
council, the franchise ordinance shall constitute proof of the grant of a
franchise.
   Gross revenue shall mean any and all revenues for periodic services, for
installations, relocations of outlets, and all compensation and other
consideration received from subscribers within the county, and revenues derived
from advertising sales based on the ration determined by dividing the number of
subscribers within the unincorporated county, by the total number of
subscribers served by the cable system; provided, however, that this shall not
include any taxes on grantee's services imposed directly upon any subscriber or
user by any governmental unit and collected by the grantee on behalf of said
governmental unit.
   Pay television shall mean the practice of transmitting any special program
or event for which a distinct charge is made to the subscriber in the manner
commonly known and referred to as "pay television," or to directly or
indirectly install, maintain, or operate on any television set a coin box or
any other device or means for collection of money for individual programs.
"Home Box Office," "Showtime," and like services are excluded from this
definition.
   Person shall mean any person, firm partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
   Property of the franchisee shall mean all property owned, leased, installed,
or used by the franchisee in the conduct of a cable television system.
   Rate shall mean all revenues for subscriber services whether received
directly or indirectly from a subscriber. It shall include all installation and
removal fees or charges.
   Street shall mean the surface of and space above and below any publicly
owned or maintained property or right-of-way, street, road, highway, freeway,
lane, path, alley, court, sidewalk, easement, parkway, or drive, now or
hereafter existing as such within the county.
   Subscriber shall mean any person or entity receiving for any purpose the
cable television service of the franchisee.
(Ord. No. 773-81, § II, 2-4-81; Ord. No. 2264.1-92HR, § I, 10-20-92)
   Cross reference(s)--Rules of construction and definitions generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 11-13. Compliance with applicable laws, ordinances, regulations, and
rules.
   In addition to the provisions of this article and the general police power
of the county and State of South Carolina, every franchise granted hereunder
shall be subject to the provisions of 47 United States Code Sections 521 et
seq., Sections 58-12-10 et seq. South Carolina Code of Laws, 1976, as amended,
and all federal and state regulations promulgated thereunder, and the county
may amend any franchise ordinance granted hereunder to incorporate the
provisions of amended statutes or regulations, including regulation to provide
consumer protection, protect consumer privacy and assure customer service, as
the county may adopt pursuant to the provisions of 47 U.S.C. Section 552 as
adopted heretofore or may be amended, upon terms mutually agreeable between the
county and the franchisee.
(Ord. No. 773-81, § III, 2-4-81; Ord. No. 2264.1-92HR, § I, 10-20-92)
Sec. 11-14. Territorial area involved.
   A franchise granted under the provisions of this article shall extend to the
whole of the franchise area unless otherwise provided for by the franchise
ordinance.
(Ord. No. 773-81, § IV, 2-4-81; Ord. No. 2264.1-92HR, § I, 10-20-92)
Sec. 11-15. Operation of franchise without a franchise ordinance prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a cable television system in
the franchise area without a franchise ordinance.
(Ord. No. 773-81, § V, 2-4-81; Ord. No. 1779-88, § 17-28-88; Ord. No. 2264.1-
92HR, § I, 10-20-92)
Sec. 11-16. Limits upon business interests.
   (a)   A franchisee under this article, its officers, agents, and/or
employees shall not directly or indirectly engage in the conduct of any
service, rental, leasing or retail business, including but not limited to,
television receivers, radio receivers, or related parts and accessories, or any
other business which may conflict with or detract from delivery of service
through its cable television system, nor shall any franchisee, its officers,
agents, and/or employees require or attempt to direct its subscribers, either
directly or indirectly, to deal with any firm or person in regard to sale,
service, rental, or leasing of television receivers, radio receivers, or
related parts and accessories. All restrictions upon additional business
interests of cable television franchisees contained in 47 United States Code
Section 521 et seq., statutes of the State of South Carolina, and/or
regulations promulgated thereunder shall be incorporated in all franchises
granted hereunder and/or by amendment to existing franchises, upon terms
mutually agreeable to the county and the franchisee.
   (b)   The franchise ordinance, unless it provides otherwise, only authorizes
the operation of a cable television franchise.
(Ord. No. 773-81, § VI, 2-4-81; Ord. No. 2264.1-92HR, § I, 10-20-92)
Sec. 11-17. Franchise application procedure.
   (a)   Any person may apply to the council for the grant of a franchise.
   (b)   Such application shall be made on a form supplied by the county. In
the absence of any prescribed form, the applicant may apply by filing a neat,
legible, typewritten letter of application with the council.
   (c)   The applicant shall furnish such further information as shall be
requested by the council as to ownership, affiliations, finances, proposed
operating information, rate structure, and such other relevant information as
the council shall request.
   (d)   The applicant shall forward with its application a nonrefundable
application fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
   (e)   During the period in which an application is pending before the
council, the applicant shall immediately inform council of any change in the
information previously furnished.
   (f)   In considering the application for a franchise, the council, in its
deliberations, shall take into consideration, among other factors it deems
appropriate, the following factors:
      (1)   Need for service;
      (2)   Ability of the applicant to provide service in an effective and
satisfactory manner;
      (3)   Public health, welfare, and safety of residents of the area to be
served;
      (4)   Economic impact on the area and the county as a whole;
      (5)   The most feasible means of providing service; and
      (6)   The general background and record of the applicant.
   (g)   The application shall be approved or rejected by the council after a
review of the application, consideration of the above factors, and any other
information deemed relevant, following three (3) readings and a public hearing.
   (h)   The county shall have the right to make a public invitation for bids
on a franchise within the franchise area.
   (i)   Nothing in this article shall prohibit the county from issuing and
granting different franchises with the same technical and performance standards
to different parties within the franchise area, where such differentiation is
in the best interests of the citizens of the county.
   (j)   The council shall process promptly and render a determination within
six (6) months of the filing of such application.
(Ord. No. 773-81, § VII, 2-4-81; Ord. No. 2264.1-92HR, § I, 10-20-92))
Sec. 11-18. Grant of franchise.
   (a)   Generally. The grant of a franchise shall entitle the franchisee to
the right and privilege to construct, erect, operate, and maintain, in, upon,
along, across, above, over, and under the streets, alleys, public ways, and
public places not laid out or dedicated, and all extensions thereof, and
additions thereto, in the county, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits,
manholes, and other television conductors and fixtures necessary for the
maintenance and operation in the county of a CATV system for the interception,
sale, and distribution of television and radio signals.
   (b)   Term. The term of franchises granted hereunder shall be as prescribed
by franchising ordinance, but in no case shall the term of any franchise exceed
a period of fifteen (15) years from and after the date of approval by the
county council.
   (c)   Liability and indemnification.
      (1)   Liability of the county shall in every case be governed by the
South Carolina Tort Claims Act, Sections 15-78-10 et seq. South Carolina Code
of Laws (1976, as amended). In every case, the franchisee shall indemnify the
county for any and all damages and penalties the county may legally be required
to pay as a result of the franchisee's actions. These damages or penalties
shall include, but shall not be limited to, damages arising out of copyright
infringements and all other damages arising out of the installation, operation,
or maintenance of the cable television system authorized by the franchise
ordinance whether tort, contract, or products liability, and whether or not any
act or omission complained of is authorized or allowed, or prohibited by the
franchise ordinance.
      (2)   Nothing in this article shall be construed or interpreted as an
extension of any immunity enjoyed or owned by the county to the franchisee.
      (3)   The franchisee shall maintain, and by its acceptance of a
franchise, specifically agrees that it will maintain throughout the terms of
its franchise adequate liability insurance insuring the county and the
franchisee with regard to all damages as prescribed by the South Carolina Tort
Claims Act, Section 15-78-120 South Carolina Code of Laws, (1976, as amended).
      (4)   The franchisee shall maintain, and by its acceptance of a franchise
shall specifically agree, that it will maintain throughout the first two (2)
years of its franchise a faithful performance bond running to the county, with
at least two (2) good and sufficient sureties approved by the county, in the
sum which council shall deem reasonable that the franchisee shall well and
truly observe, fulfill, and perform each term and condition of its franchise
and that in case of any breach of condition of the bond, the amount thereof
shall be recoverable from the principal and sureties thereof by the county for
all damages proximately resulting from the failure of the franchisee to well
and faithfully observe and perform any provision of its franchise; provided,
however, that, the franchisee shall only be required to provide one surety if
that surety is a commercial bonding company. This provision does not apply to
renewal franchises.
(Ord. No. 773-81, § VIII, 2-4-81; Ord. No. 2264.1-92HR, § I, 10-20-92)
Sec. 11-19. Service to be commenced promptly; deadlines.
   (a)   Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of its franchise
agreement ordinance, a franchisee under this article shall proceed with all due
diligence to obtain all necessary permits and authorizations which are required
in the conduct of its business, including but not limited to, any utility joint
use attachment agreements, licenses, and authorizations required by duly
constituted regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the operation of cable
television systems and service, including the obtaining of a certificate of
compliance from the Federal Communications Commission.
   (b)   Within ninety (90) days after obtaining all necessary permits, pole
permits, easements, licenses, and authorizations, including the certificate of
compliance issued by the Federal Communications Commission, the franchisee
shall commence construction and installation of the cable television system.
   (c)   Within two hundred seventy (270) days after the commencement of the
construction and installation of the cable television system, the franchisee
shall begin to render service to its customers.
   (d)   A franchisee's failure to commence and diligently pursue each of the
requirements set forth in paragraphs (a) through (c) of this section shall
constitute grounds for revocation of its franchise agreement; provided,
however, the council may extend the time for the commencement and completion of
construction and installation of service for additional service for additional
periods in the event the franchisee, acting in good faith, experiences delays
by reason of circumstances beyond its control.
(Ord. No. 773-81, § IX, 2-4-81; Ord. No. 2264.1-92HR, § I, 10-20-92)
Sec. 11-20. System construction and extension.
   (a)   Whenever the franchisee receives requests for service from at least
sixty (60) subscribers within one mile of its aerial trunk cable, or from at
least one hundred (100) subscribers within one mile of its underground trunk
cable, it shall extend its system to such subscribers solely for the usual
connection and service fees for all subscribers, provided that such extension
is technically feasible. The one mile shall be measured in extension length of
company's cable required for service located within the public way or easement
and shall not include length of necessary service drop to the subscriber's home
or premises.
   (b)   No person in the franchisee's service area shall be arbitrarily
refused service; but in recognition of the capital costs involved in unusual
circumstances, including, without limitation, when the distance from
distribution cable to connection of service to subscribers is more than one
hundred fifty (150) feet, or when a subscriber density exists less than the
density specified hereinabove, or where a customer requests special service,
service may be made available on the basis of costs of materials, labor, and
easements, in order to prevent inequitable burdens on potential cable
subscribers in more densely populated areas.
   (c)   For all residential structures hereinafter erected which are to be
served by underground utilities, the developer of the subdivision or
development may acquire CATV service for his development under the following
conditions; but otherwise the franchisee shall not be obligated to construct a
CATV system in such new development. Such developer shall perform all trenching
and backfilling necessary for the provision of cable television service,
including furnishing of any imported backfill material required, and will
furnish and install for the franchisee any necessary distribution conduit and
substructures, including pedestals, required in accordance with the
franchisee's plans and specifications. In addition to providing plans and
specifications to the developer, the franchisee shall inspect the facilities
required hereunder, and certify to the county prior to final approval of the
subdivision or development that the facilities required herein are properly
installed. The county shall have the right to review and require its approval
of the maps and specifications provided by the franchisee. The cost of that
portion of an extension to a subdivision or development from the franchisee's
existing facilities in excess of two hundred (200) feet outside of the
boundaries of the subdivision or development shall be borne by the developer.
(Ord. No. 773-81, § X, 2-4-81; Ord. No. 2264.1-92HR, § I, 10-20-92)
Sec. 11-21. Franchise fee.
   (a)   In consideration of the rights and privileges granted by its
franchise, each franchisee shall pay to the county a franchise fee of at least
five (5) per cent of its gross revenues annually or such franchise fee as may
be permitted under the provisions of 47 United States Code Section 521 et seq.,
regulations promulgated thereunder or as amended.
   (b)   The fee shall be payable annually on June thirtieth, for the preceding
year.
   (c)   The franchisee shall pay the county interest at the legal rate
permissible upon judgment per month for any balance of the franchise fee
payment left unpaid after June thirtieth of any given year. Failure of a
franchisee to pay the fee in full within ninety (90) days after June thirtieth
shall be deemed a default of a material obligation of the franchise. The
franchisee shall pay to the county all costs of collection with respect to fees
in arrears, including but not limited to court costs and reasonable attorney
fees.
(Ord. No. 773-81, § XI, 2-4-81; Ord. No. 1658, § 1, 7-28-87; Ord. No. 2264.1-
92HR, § I, 10-20-92)
Sec. 11-22. Conditions of street occupancy.
   (a)   The poles, towers, and other structures and appurtenances used by a
franchisee under this article, its successors and assigns, for the erection,
installation, construction, operation and maintenance of its cable television
system shall be so located and constructed as not to interfere with the traffic
over the streets and alleys, and the location of poles, towers, and all other
structures and installations shall be subject to the prior written approval and
under the supervision of the county, whenever the county shall so direct, as to
such locations, giving consideration to the reasonable operation of the same;
provided, further, that such location initially approved and used shall not be
considered a vested interest or privilege, and such structures, poles, and
other installations shall be removed and relocated by the franchisee whenever
the same shall restrict or obstruct the reasonable use of such streets, alleys,
and public places.
   (b)   A franchisee is also authorized to attach or otherwise affix cables or
wires to the facilities of any public utility even though the same may cross
over the streets, sidewalks, public lands and highways of the county; provided
that, the franchisee first secures the permission and consent of the
aforementioned public utility to affix the same cables, wires, or other
apparatus to the facilities of such public utility.
   (c)   All streets, sidewalks, alleys, and public highways disturbed or
damaged in the construction, operation, repair, relocation, or maintenance of a
cable television system shall be promptly repaired by the franchisee at its own
expense and to the complete satisfaction of the county.
   (d)   The franchisee shall, on the request of any person holding a building
moving permit issued by the county, temporarily raise or lower its wires to
permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal or
raising or lowering wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and
the franchisee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The
franchisee shall be given a reasonable advanced notice to arrange for such
temporary wire changes.
   (e)   The franchisee shall have the responsibility and authority to trim
trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks, and public ways and
places of the county so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in
contact with the wires and cables of the franchisee.
   (f)   In all sections of the county where the cables, wires, or other like
facilities of public utilities are placed underground, the franchisee shall
place its cables, wires, or other like facilities underground to the maximum
extent that existing technology reasonably permits the franchisee to do so;
provided, however, that the franchisee shall not install underground cables,
wires, or other equipment on private property without the written consent of
the owner.
   (g)   No franchisee shall obtain any exclusive right to the use of any
utility pole, equipment, or facilities used by the franchisee in its
operations.
(Ord. No. 773-81, § XII, 2-4-81; Ord. No. 2264.1-92HR, § I, 10-20-92)
Sec. 11-23. Preferential or discriminatory practices prohibited.
   (a)   A franchisee under this article shall not discriminate as to rates,
charges, services, service facilities, rules, regulations, or in any other
respect make or grant any undue preference or advantage to any person.
   (b)   All franchisees shall sign and file with the clerk of council an equal
employment opportunity statement and shall so advertise as an equal employment
employer.
(Ord. No. 773-81, § XIII, 2-4-81; Ord. No. 2264.1-92HR, § I, 10-20-92)
Sec. 11-24. Repealed.
Sec. 11-25. Standards of service.
   (a)   Generally. During the existence of its franchise, a franchisee under
this article shall furnish reasonable, adequate, and efficient cable television
reception service to its subscribers connected to its system within the county
and shall maintain its system in reasonable repair and working order at all
times.
   (b)   Number of channels required.
      (1)   Unless otherwise provided in the franchise ordinance or by law, the
franchisee shall establish a cable television system capable of providing the
maximum number of channels required or recommended by the provisions of 47
United States Code Sections 521 et seq. and regulations promulgated thereunder.
      (2)   The franchisee may include a selection of FM radio stations and
shall include services such as weather, time, and news.
   (c)   Color television.
      (1)   The facilities used by the franchisee shall be capable of
distributing color television signals.
      (2)   When the franchisee receives signals in color, they shall be
distributed in color where technically feasible as determined by the prevailing
standards of the industry.
   (d)   Signal quality requirements. The franchisee shall, under all
circumstances within its control:
      (1)   Produce a picture, whether in black and white or in color, that is
undistorted, free from ghost images, and accompanied with proper sound on
typical standard production TV sets in good repair, and as good as the state of
the art allows;
      (2)   Transmit signals of adequate strength to produce good pictures with
good sound at all outlets without causing cross-modulation in the cables or
interfering with other electrical or electronic systems;
      (3)   Demonstrate both by instruments and visually to subscribers that a
signal of adequate strength and quality is being delivered;
      (4)   Comply with the applicable standards of all federal and state
regulations, including, but not limited to, all such standards established by
the Federal Communications Commission.
   (e)   Operation and maintenance of system.
      (1)   A franchisee under this article shall render efficient service,
make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the
shortest time possible.
      (2)   A franchisee under this article shall at all times keep and
maintain in the county a proper, sufficient and adequate inventory of
maintenance and repair parts for the cable television system as will assure the
continuity of the service of the system to subscribers in the county on a
prompt and efficient basis and without being subjected to delays by having to
obtain necessary parts and equipment from distant points; and a franchisee
shall keep available in the county at all times maintenance and repair crews in
sufficient number and capability as may be necessary and sufficient to give
prompt, reasonable, and capable maintenance and repair service to the cable
television system in accordance with good engineering practices. A franchisee
shall provide such adjustments and repairs as are necessary to provide a
quality signal to the subscriber within two (2) days of the time the report of
trouble is made, and repairmen shall be available for such purpose during
normal business hours and on an emergency basis, and must respond to a call
within twenty-four (24) hours after such call is received. A franchisee shall
place a higher priority on servicing existing customers with a quality signal
than hooking up new customers.
   (f)   Program alteration. All programs of broadcasting stations carried by
the franchisee shall be carried in their entirety as received, without
announcements and advertisements and without additions.
   (g)   Service to public buildings, schools, and teaching stations.
      (1)   The franchisee shall provide, without charge, one outlet to each
public building and fire station, within one hundred fifty (150) feet of its
existing trunk line, upon the request of the county or its designee.
      (2)   A franchisee under this article shall also provide, without charge,
one outlet to each public school and teaching station, within one hundred fifty
(150) feet of its existing trunk line, for educational purposes upon request by
the county and at no cost to the public school system.
      (3)   Should any such building be more than one hundred fifty (150) feet
from existing trunk lines and request service, free outlets shall be provided
where payment is made to franchisee for extra costs involved for connection and
a reasonable period of time allowed for service to be commenced.
      (4)   The distribution of the cable facility inside such buildings and
the extension thereof shall be at the option, duty, and expense of the building
owner.
   (h)   Removal of facilities upon request. Upon termination of service to any
subscriber, upon request, the franchisee shall promptly remove all of its
facilities and equipment from the property of such subscriber.
   (i)   Public access channel. At the request of council, a franchisee shall
provide at least one full-time composite access channel for educational,
governmental, and public uses. This channel shall be made available during the
hours from 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and during the hours
from 5:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m., Saturday and Sunday. No facilities or equipment
shall be required.
   (j)   Emergency service. In the event of an emergency or disaster, the
franchisee, upon the request of council, shall make available its facilities to
the county for emergency use during the emergency or disaster period.
(Ord. No. 773-81, § XV, 2-4-81; Ord. No. 2264.1-92HR, § I, 10-20-92)
Sec. 11-26. Safety regulations.
   (a)   A franchisee under this article shall at all times employ ordinary
care and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and
devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause
damages, injuries, or nuisances to the public.
   (b)   The franchisee shall install and maintain its wires, cables, fixtures,
and other equipment in accordance with the requirements of the National
Electrical Code of the National Board of Fire Underwriters, and in such manner
that they will not interfere with an installation of the county or of a public
utility serving the county.
   (c)   All structures and all lines, equipment, and connections in, over,
under and upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys, and public ways or places of the
county, wherever situated or located, shall at all times be kept and maintained
in a safe, suitable, substantial condition, and in good order and repair.
   (d)   A franchisee under this article shall maintain a force of one or more
resident agents or employees at all times and shall have sufficient employees
to provide safe, adequate, and prompt service for its facilities.
(Ord. No. 773-81, § XVI, 2-4-81; Ord. No. 2264.1-92HR, § I, 10-20-92)
Sec. 11-27. Transfer of franchise.
   A franchisee under this article shall not transfer its franchise without
prior approval of the council.
(Ord. No. 773-81, § XVII, 2-4-81; Ord. No. 2264.1-92HR, § I, 10-20-92)
Sec. 11-28. Change of control of franchisee.
   Prior approval of the council shall be required where ownership or control
of more than five (5) per cent of the right of control of a franchisee is
acquired by a person or group of persons acting in concert, none of whom
already own or control five (5) per cent or more or such right of control,
singularly or collectively. By its acceptance of a franchise, a franchisee
shall specifically grant and agree that any such acquisition occurring without
prior approval of the council shall constitute a violation of the franchise by
the franchisee.
(Ord. No. 773-81, § XVIII, 2-4-81; Ord. No. 2264.1-92HR, § I, 10-20-92)
Sec. 11-29. Filings and communications with regulatory agencies.
   Upon written request of the council, copies of all petitions, applications,
and communications submitted by a franchisee to the Federal Communications
Commission, Securities and Exchange Commission, or any other federal or state
regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction in respect to any matters
affecting CATV operations authorized pursuant to the franchise, shall also be
submitted simultaneously to the council.
(Ord. No. 773-81, § XIX, 2-4-81; Ord. No. 2264.1-92HR, § I, 10-20-92)
Sec. 11-30. Records and reports.
   (a)   The county shall have access at all reasonable hours to all of a
company's plans, contracts, and engineering, accounting, financial,
statistical, customer and service records relating to the property and the
operation of such franchisee and to all other records required to be kept by
the franchise agreement ordinance, or state or federal regulation.
   (b)   When requested by council, a franchisee shall file with the clerk of
council true and accurate maps or plats of all existing and proposed
installations.
   (c)   When requested by council, a franchisee shall forward to the clerk of
council a copy of its report to its stockholders (if it prepares such a
report), an income statement applicable to its operations during the preceding
twelve (12) month period, a balance sheet, and a statement of its properties
devoted to CATV operations, by categories, giving its investment in such
properties on the basis of original cost, less applicable depreciation, or such
other information as may be requested.
   (d)   Not later than sixty (60) days thereafter, a franchisee shall, upon
request of council, file a written report with the council and shall,
thereafter, if and upon request by the council, appear before council and
discuss that written report and answer such questions as may be prompted by
that report. The report will relate to operations of the company during the
preceding calendar year and shall include, but not necessarily be limited to,
the following:
      (1)   Construction activities of the franchisee.
      (2)   Operating and service maintenance activities of the franchisee.
      (3)   Progress made by the franchisee in extending its service throughout
the county.
      (4)   The number of service maintenance calls made by the franchisee's
personnel, the average response time, the nature of any major cable reception
problems, and the approximate length of time required to service those major
cable reception problems.
      (5)   Activities of the franchisee designed to improve the quality of
maintenance and service.
      (6)   Future plans of the franchisee for the extension of its service to
new areas within the county limits.
      (7)   Plans of the franchisee for the future expansion and improvements
of the quality of service and maintenance to subscribers.
      (8)   Such other information as the council may direct the franchisee to
include in the report, or that the franchisee believes to be appropriate for
inclusion in the report.
(Ord. No. 773-81, § XX, 2-4-81; Ord. No. 2264.1-92HR, § I, 10-20-92)
Sec. 11-31. Rates.
   The county shall adopt such regulations and terms with respect to charges
and rates for cable television service as may be proper and permissible under
the provisions of 47 United States Code Section 543 as adopted heretofore or as
may be amended.
(Ord. No. 773-81, § XXI, 2-4-81; Ord. No. 2264.1-92HR, § I, 10-20-92)
Sec. 11-32. Effect of franchisee's bankruptcy or insolvency.
   In the event a franchisee under this article shall be adjudicated bankrupt
or placed in receivership or make an assignment for the benefit of its
creditors, or any foreclosure or any mortgage or deed of trust upon its
properties shall be commenced, or any other insolvency proceedings either
voluntarily or involuntarily on the part of the franchisee shall be commenced,
the county may declare the franchise grant immediately terminated and in that
event all of the rights, privileges, and authority of the franchisee shall
immediately cease and terminate. In no event shall such franchise grant be
considered an asset of the bankrupt estate or receivership.
(Ord. No. 773-81, § XXII, 2-4-81; Ord. No. 2264.1-92HR, § I, 10-20-92)
Sec. 11-33. Office in county required.
   (a)   A franchisee under this article shall maintain an office in the county
to which all notices, correspondence, complaints, and other communications from
the county shall be sent.
   (b)   The franchisee shall provide the county with official notification of
the location of the office.
(Ord. No. 773-81, § XXIII, 2-4-81; Ord. No. 2264.1-92HR, § I, 10-20-92)
Sec. 11-34. Personnel, services, and equipment required at local office.
   (a)   A franchisee under this article shall maintain through its local
office:
      (1)   A representative who shall be fully authorized and shall make
prompt investigations and resolutions of all complaints regarding the quality
of service, equipment malfunction, the handling of held orders for service, and
all other matters relating to or affecting the quality of service being
rendered and to be rendered by the franchisee in the operation of a cable
television system in the county.
      (2)   At least one standby local technician shall be available to respond
to any outages and other problems which occur at times other than the normal
working days.
   (b)   The franchisee shall maintain in its local office a listed telephone
which shall be operated, at which complaints and requests for repairs or
adjustments may be made at the franchisee's local office.
   (c)   A franchisee under this article shall maintain an answering service to
accept calls after normal business hours.
(Ord. No. 773-81, § XXIV, 2-4-81; Ord. No. 2264.1-92HR, § I, 10-20-92)
Sec. 11-35. Response to requests for service.
   (a)   A franchisee under this article shall respond to all service calls
within a reasonable period of time. A reasonable period shall normally be
defined as twenty-four (24) hours for an initial response.
   (b)   In any event, the franchisee shall correct all malfunctions within a
reasonable period after the receipt of a request for service or complaint. For
the purposes of this paragraph (b), a reasonable period shall normally be
defined as seventy-two (72) hours.
   (c)   Normally, all installation requests shall be fulfilled within one week
of receipt where cable television is available, unless delayed by conditions
beyond the control of the franchisee or an unusual volume of requests, in which
case installation shall be completed as soon as reasonably possible.
(Ord. No. 773-81, § XXV, 2-4-81; Ord. No. 2264.1-92HR, § I, 10-20-92)
Sec. 11-36. Complaints.
   (a)   All complaints received from the public shall be kept on file with the
clerk of council. The clerk of council shall forward to the franchisee a copy
of all complaints about the franchisee received by the clerk's office.
   (b)   All complaints received by the clerk of council shall be kept on file
for the life of the franchise agreement. Such complaints shall constitute a
public record and be open for inspection and copying by members of the public.
   (c)   There is hereby established a citizens oversight committee to consist
of seven (7) members, including not more than three (3) members nominated by
cable television franchisees, appointed on a staggered basis by the county
council for two (2) year terms, except that three (3) original members shall
serve one (1) year terms so that appointments and re-appointments shall be made
every year thereafter, alternating between three (3) and four (4) seats to be
filled each year. The functions of the committee shall be:
      (1)   To monitor consumer service standards;
      (2)   To advise the grantee on matters of subscriber service;
      (3)   To oversee cable television performance;
      (4)   To advise county council on consumer problems and suggestions.
(Ord. No. 773-81, § XXVI, 2-4-81; Ord. No. 2264.1-92HR, § I, 10-20-92)
Sec. 11-37. Grounds for termination of a franchise.
   The county council may terminate a franchise and all rights and privileges
pertaining to it prior to its normal expiration on any or all of the following
grounds:
      (1)   The franchisee has made a material, false statement in the
application for the franchise, knowing it to be false;
      (2)   The franchisee, contrary to the best interest of public convenience
and welfare, is failing to provide subscribers with regular, adequate,
reasonable and proper service, as defined by generally accepted industry
standards;
      (3)   The franchisee has failed to comply with any material provision of
this article, or has defaulted in any of its material obligations hereunder,
except for causes beyond its control;
      (4)   The franchisee has failed within sixty (60) days after written
notice, or within such extended period as may be allowed by the county to
complete the correction of any default and remedy any noncompliance with the
provisions of this article or the franchise ordinance;
      (5)   The franchisee has violated any provisions of any relevant federal,
state or local law;
      (6)   The franchisee has failed to provide adequate cable service as
determined by the existing industry standards or becomes insolvent or is
adjudged bankrupt;
      (7)   The franchisee has consistently failed to respond to bona fide
complaints;
      (8)   Upon application of the franchisee and approval of council after a
public hearing.
(Ord. No. 773-81, § XXVII, 2-4-81; Ord. No. 2264.1-92HR, § I, 10-20-92)
Sec. 11-38. When a hearing shall be held.
   A public hearing shall be held on motion of council, or whenever the county
administrator has reason to believe that a franchisee under this article has
violated federal, state, or local law or has failed to provide adequate
service, or otherwise has failed to comply with the terms of this article or
its franchise ordinance.
(Ord. No. 773-81, § XXVIII, 2-4-81; Ord. No. 2264.1-92HR, § I, 10-20-92)
Sec. 11-39. Procedure for termination of a franchise.
   (a)   A franchise shall only be terminated after a public hearing and upon
approval of the county.
   (b)   A franchisee under this article shall have the following rights:
      (1)   Right to sixty (60) days' written notice setting forth the reasons
that a termination hearing is being held;
      (2)   Right to examine, and make copies at franchisee's expense of all
evidence which the county has, whether favorable or adverse to the franchisee;
      (3)   Right to be represented by counsel;
      (4)   Right to cross-examine witnesses;
      (5)   Right to present witnesses;
      (6)   Right to present evidence in its own behalf;
      (7)   A written decision setting forth council's decision.
   (c)   If council finds by a preponderance of the evidence that any of the
provisions of this article or state, local, or federal law, or the franchisee's
franchise ordinance has been violated, it may revoke the franchise agreement,
place on probation for a stated period of time, impose a civil penalty of not
more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) where circumstances are blatant, or
take such lawful action as it shall deem appropriate.
(Ord. No. 773-81, § XXIX, 2-4-81; Ord. No. 2264.1-92HR, § I, 10-20-92)
Sec. 11-40. Hearing officer.
   Prior to any public hearing required or prescribed by any section of this
article, the county council may, in conjunction with the affected franchisee or
franchisees, appoint a mutually acceptable hearing officer who shall make
findings and recommendations, which findings and recommendations shall not be
binding upon the council; provided, however, that, if the county and the
affected franchisee(s) are unable to agree upon a mutually acceptable hearing
officer within twenty (20) days of the county's decision to appoint same, the
county and the affected franchisee shall each name one impartial hearing
officer and these persons shall agree upon a third hearing officer, within
twenty (20) days of their appointment, failing which, they shall discharge the
duties of the hearing officer; provided, further, that, the record presented
before the hearing officer(s) shall form the basis for the council's
consideration of the matter before it, and all parties will be bound by the
record, including testimony and exhibits.
(Ord. No. 773-81, § XXX, 2-4-81; Ord. No. 2264.1-92HR, § I, 10-20-92)
Sec. 11-41. Removal of discontinued facilities.
   In the event that the use of any part of a cable television system is
discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of twelve (12) months, or
the franchise grant has been terminated, cancelled, revoked or has expired, the
franchisee shall promptly remove from the streets and public places and from
underground facilities under public streets and public places all such property
and poles, wires, conduits, vaults, and other parts of the system, other than
those which the county may permit to be abandoned in place, and, shall either
restore the street and the underground area or pay the county for restoring the
street or other area from which such property has been removed, to a condition
for public use acceptable to the county. Any property remaining in place for a
period of one hundred eighty (180) days after the termination or expiration of
a franchise ordinance shall be considered permanently abandoned, and may be
appropriated by the county or removed by the county at the expense of the
franchisee and the surety on its performance bond.
(Ord. No. 773-81, § XXXI, 2-4-81; Ord. No. 2264.1-92HR, § I, 10-20-92)
Sec. 11-42. Subscriber refunds on termination of service.
   If any subscriber because of a franchisee's failure to render service to
such subscriber of a type and quality provided for by law, or if service to a
subscriber of less than three (3) years is terminated by franchisee without
good cause or because the franchisee ceases to operate the CATV business
authorized by this article and franchise ordinance for any reason, except
expiration of its franchise, the franchisee shall refund to each such
subscriber an amount equal to the initial tap-in and connection charges paid by
him divided by thirty-six (36) and multiplied by a number equal to thirty-six
(36) minus the number of months the subscriber has been on the system.
(Ord. No. 773-81, § XXXII, 2-4-81; Ord. No. 2264.1-92HR, § I, 10-20-92)
Sec. 11-43. Publication costs.
   A franchisee under this article shall assume the cost of publication of his
franchise as such publication is required by law and such is payable upon the
franchisee's filing of acceptance of his franchise.
(Ord. No. 773-81, § XXIII, 2-4-81; Ord. No. 2264.1-92HR, § I, 10-20-92)
Sec. 11-44. Penalty for unlawful interference.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install, or maintain
within any public street or roadway in the county, or within any other public
property of the county, or within any privately owned area within the county
which has not yet become a public street on any tentative subdivision which may
be approved by the county, any equipment or facilities for distributing any
television signals or radio signals through a CATV system, unless a franchise
authorizing such use of such street or property or area has first been
obtained, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make unauthorized connection,
whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively, or otherwise, with
any part of a franchise CATV system within this county for the purpose of
enabling anyone to receive any television signal, radio signal, picture, sound,
or other transmission, without payment to the company.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner,
to wilfully tamper with, remove, or injure any cables, wires or equipment used
for distribution of television signals, radio signals, pictures, sound, or
other transmission.
(Ord. No. 773-81, § XXIV, 2-4-81; Ord. No. 2264.1-92HR, § I, 10-20-92)
Sec. 11-45. No waiver of right of eminent domain.
   Nothing in this article shall be construed as a waiver of the county's right
to exercise eminent domain.
(Ord. No. 773-81, § XXVI, 2-4-81; Ord. No. 2264.1-92HR, § I, 10-20-92)
Sec. 11-46. Effect on conflicting ordinances.
   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of
this article are hereby repealed, with the exception of the cablevision
franchise ordinances which became effective prior to October 20, 1992.
(Ord. No. 773-81, § XXXVIII, 2-4-81; Ord. No. 2264.1-92HR, § I, 10-20-92)
CHAPTER 12: SOLID WASTE, RECYCLING, AND PUBLIC SANITATION
ARTICLE I. ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 12-1. In general.
   Richland County shall manage the solid waste stream on behalf of its
citizens in order to preserve and protect public health and welfare and to
promote a suitable quality of life for residents and visitors. It shall perform
these missions with appropriate staff, equipment, programs, and facilities and
in accordance with applicable federal and state laws and regulations. The task
of solid waste management shall be discharged by the Director of Public Works.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-2. Definitions.
   Any definitions contained herein shall apply unless specifically stated
otherwise. In addition to the definitions contained in this chapter, the
articles of this chapter shall adopt by reference the definition of terms (to
the extent they are not inconsistent with definitions specifically contained
herein) defined in the South Carolina Solid Waste Policy and Management Act of
1991, South Carolina Code Section 44-96-10, et seq. and in any regulations
promulgated pursuant thereto. Any term not specifically defined will be
construed pursuant to its plain and ordinary meaning. When not inconsistent
with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words
used in the plural include the singular, and words used in the singular include
the plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely discretionary.
   Agricultural operation: Raising, harvesting, or storing crops or feed,
breeding or managing livestock, including the preparation of the products
raised thereon for human use and disposed of by marketing or other means. It
includes, but is not limited to, agriculture, grazing, horticulture, forestry,
and dairy farming.
   Apartment: Any building containing more than four (4) contiguous dwelling
units or any group of buildings or mobile homes located on a single parcel that
contains a total of six (6) or more dwelling units regardless of ownership of
the dwelling units.
   Bulk Waste ("Bulk Items"): Large appliances, air conditioners, furniture,
mattresses, box springs, yard furniture, large toys, grills, push mowers,
bicycles, and playground equipment. The following items are not considered bulk
waste: Gym/exercise equipment, pianos, organs, pool tables, electronics, riding
mowers, automotive equipment, fencing, decks, swimming pools (any size except
small form plastic pools), animal shelters, demolition debris, building debris
and any other item of such weight that two adults cannot easily lift.
   Bulk Waste Container (a.k.a. - “Roll Off container”): A manufactured
container suitable for emptying by mechanical equipment.
   Class Three Waste: Non-hazardous commercial and industrial wastes that are
permitted by SCDHEC to be disposed of in a Class Three landfill. See also:
Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) and Garbage.
   Class Two Waste: The waste streams listed in Appendix I, Acceptable Waste
for Class Two Landfills, of SC Regulation 61-107.19, and Solid Waste
Management: Solid Waste Landfills and Structural Fill. The list will be posted
at each County disposal facility. See also: Construction and Demolition (C&D)
Waste.
   Code: The Richland County, South Carolina Code of Ordinances.
   Collection Area: A quasi-official subdivided area of the County for the
purpose of solid waste management program administration.
   Commercial Establishment: Any hotel, apartment, rooming house, business,
industrial, public or semi-public establishment of any nature. See also:
Apartment.
   Commercial Waste: Trash and garbage generated by apartments, operation of
stores, offices, restaurants and other places of business and industrial
establishments (excluding industrial waste as defined herein).
   Construction and Demolition (C&D) debris: Any discarded solid wastes
resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, and demolition of structures,
and road construction. The wastes include, but are not limited to, bricks,
concrete, other masonry materials, lumber, road spoils, and paving materials,
but do not include solid waste from agricultural operations or Garbage.
   Contaminant/Contamination: Generally applied in the context of recycling.
Items, to include plastic bags, garbage, or items not approved for the County's
Recycling Program, intermingled with items intended for pickup. The presence of
this contamination may preclude pickup, causing an interruption of efficient
collection operations. See also: "Non-compliant Pile/Roll Cart", "Mixed Pile",
and "Mixed Waste."
   County: Richland County, South Carolina.
   County Administrator: The Richland County Administrator.
   County Council: The governing body of Richland County, South Carolina.
   Curbside: The area within the right-of-way or easement immediately adjacent
to a public road, highway, street, etc. For purposes of this ordinance chapter,
curbside will be considered as the area within six (6) feet of the edge of the
public road, highway, and street, etc., unless deemed otherwise by the
Director. Curbside shall not extend past the road right-of-way or easement
except in those cases where the road right-of-way or easement ends at the edge
of the traveled way of the road.
   Curbside Collector: (a.k.a. - Collections Contractor) the person that has
entered into a contract with the County to provide specified solid waste
curbside collection services. The solid wastes eligible for curbside service
from dwelling units and small businesses are: garbage, household waste, yard
waste, recyclables, bulk items, and white goods as defined herein.
   Debris: Includes, but is not limited to, miscellaneous equipment, yard toys,
furniture, packaging items, shipping containers, waste tires, construction and
demolition (C&D) waste, bricks, blocks, concrete, asphalt, metals, lumber,
trees, tree limbs, tree stumps, brush or parts thereof, or stumps, and/or
building materials or solid waste of any description that are deemed by the
Director or designee to be a nuisance, potentially deleterious to public
health, public sanitation and/or public safety.
   Department: The Richland County Department of Public Works.
   DHEC: The South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control.
   Director: The Richland County Director of Public Works.
   Disposal: The discharge, deposition, injection, dumping, spilling, or
placing of any solid waste into or on any land or water, whether intentional or
unintentional, so that the substance or any constituent thereof may enter the
environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including
groundwater.
   Disposal Facility: All contiguous land, structures, other appurtenances and
improvements on the land used for treating, storing, or disposing of solid
waste pursuant to a solid waste disposal permit issued by DHEC. A facility may
consist of several treatment, storage, or disposal operational units,
including, but not limited to, one or more landfills, surface impoundments, or
combination thereof.
   Domicile: A residential dwelling to include single and multi-family
configurations.
   Dumpster: A type of movable waste container designed to be brought and taken
away by a special collection vehicle, or to a bin that a specially designed
garbage truck lifts, empties into its hopper, and lowers, on the spot. The word
is a generic trademark of Dumpster, an American brand name for a specific
design.
   Dwelling unit: One or more habitable rooms which are intended to be occupied
by one (1) family with facilities for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating and
from which the County would collect solid waste; excludes commercial,
industrial and manufacturing establishments.
   Garbage: All accumulations of animal, fruit or vegetable matter that attend
the preparation, use, cooking and dealing in, or storage of meats, fish, fowl,
fruit, vegetables and any other matter of any nature whatsoever which is
subject to decay, putrefaction and the generation of noxious and offensive
smells or odors, or which during and after decay may serve as breeding or
feeding material for flies and/or germ-carrying insects or vermin; bottles.
cans or food containers which due to their ability to retain water can serve as
a breeding place for mosquitoes and other water-breeding insects.
   Hazardous waste: Those wastes that are defined as hazardous in Section 44-
56-20 of the South Carolina Hazardous Waste Management Act.
   Household: One or more people who occupy a dwelling unit as their usual
place of residence.
   Household Hazardous Waste: Any commonly used household hazardous material
that is not regulated as hazardous waste when disposed of. This includes, but
is not limited to, insecticides, pesticides, petroleum-based paints,
lubricants, fertilizers, cleaning agents and polishing compounds. For purposes
of this definition, household hazardous waste does not include gasoline or
motor oil.
   Household Quantities: Quantities of solid waste reasonably generated in the
course of typical daily domestic activities from a dwelling unit. Household
quantities typically would fit into the assigned roll cart.
   Illegal Dump: A solid waste or debris pile of any size that was placed in an
unauthorized location for an unauthorized purpose.
   Illegal Pile: A non-compliant pile of solid waste that has not been made
compliant for collection over a 15-day period of time and is, therefore, in
violation of this ordinance and subject to enforcement action.
   Industrial waste: Solid waste generated from industrial or manufacturing
processes including, but not limited to, factories and treatment plants.
   Intergovernmental Agreement (IGA): An agreement for services between the
County and another governmental entity (often contained herein) whether
federal, state, or local and any department, division, unit or subdivision
thereof.
   Legal residence: A residential dwelling unit that is occupied by the owner
of the dwelling unit, thus designated their legal residence by the county Tax
Assessor. Owners may designate only one legal residence in the state.
   Litter: Waste products that have been discarded, intentionally or
unintentionally, without consent, at an unsuitable location. Includes items
blown or thrown from a vehicle or property.
   Materials Recovery Facility (MRF): A specialized facility that receives,
separates and prepares recyclable materials for marketing to end-user
manufacturers.
   Mixed Pile: A solid waste pile, placed at curbside by the homeowner for the
purpose of collection as part of the Residential/Small Business Curbside
Collection Program, but which intermingles incompatible waste types and,
therefore, cannot be efficiently collected for transportation and disposal. See
also "Non-compliant Pile."
   Mixed Waste: The intermingling of incompatible waste types (such as yard
waste and garbage).
   Municipal Solid Waste (MSW): Everyday items that are used and then throw
away, such as product packaging, grass clippings, furniture, clothing, bottles,
food scraps, newspapers, appliances, paint, and batteries. See also "Garbage."
   Municipal Solid Waste Management (MSWM): A broad term that describes various
policies, procedures, programs, and services that are directly or indirectly
related to the safe and efficient management of the Solid Waste Stream on
behalf of a Community.
   Non-compliant Pile/Roll Cart: A solid waste pile or roll cart, placed at
curbside by the homeowner for the purpose of collection as part of the
Residential/Small Business Curbside Collection Program, but which does not
comply with applicable standards contained herein.
   Recovered Material: Those solid wastes which have known use, reuse, or
recycling potential; can be feasibly used, reused, or recycled; and have been
diverted or removed from the solid waste stream.
   Recyclable Material (Recyclables): Those wastes which are capable of being
recycled and which would otherwise be processed or disposed of as solid waste.
For purposes of this ordinance chapter, only those recyclables specifically
listed by the county will be collected for recycling.
   Residential/Small Business Curbside Collection Program: An MSWM Program,
administered by the County, by which various types of solid waste (garbage,
yard waste, recycling, bulk items, and white goods) are picked up by Curbside
Collection contractors from single family residences and some small businesses
for transportation to an appropriate disposal facility.
   Residential Property: Property which contains residential dwelling units
other than those defined m this section as apartments.
   Roll Cart: A container, mounted on wheels, which is issued to citizens by
the County for the storage of garbage or recyclables between pick up by
Collection Contractors.
   Roll Cart Fee: An individual fee charged for the delivery of a roll cart
(garbage or recycling) for a new, or newly re-activated, service in the
Residential/Small Business Curbside Collection Program. The fee is for the
delivery, handling, and management of the roll cart; not for its purchase.
   Sanitary landfill: The method of disposing of solid waste in an SCDHEC
Permitted Disposal Facility by the placement of an earth cover thereon which
meets the regulations promulgated by that Agency.
   Scavenging: Rummaging through, taking or gathering items from County owned
or privately owned solid waste management facilities or solid waste containers,
including, but not limited to, bags, roll carts, bins, or roll-offs, or
dumpsters of solid waste (which also includes recyclables).
   Small Business: Any business entity registered with the South Carolina
Secretary of State that produces no more garbage and household type waste
during any county-defined solid waste collection cycle than will fill two (2)
90-gallon roll carts and has only one location inside the County. A small
business becomes an "eligible small business" when a request for curbside
collection service has been made and the initial Solid Waste Service Initiation
Fee and Roll Cart Fee have both been paid.
   Solid Waste: Garbage, household waste, debris, commercial waste, industrial
waste, yard waste, white goods, ashes, rubbish, paper, junk, building
materials, glass or plastic bottles, other glass, cans and any other discarded
or abandoned material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
matter.
   Solid Waste Service Fee (a.k.a. - Residential/Small Business Curbside
Collection Program Fee): The annual charge established by County Council for
all single family households and eligible small businesses to fund the
Residential/Small Business Curbside Collection Program in the Unincorporated
Area of the County.
   Solid Waste Service Initiation Fee: The initial curbside collection service
fee established by County Council for new households or small businesses or to
re-establish service for existing single family households and small businesses
where service was discontinued and Roll Carts have been removed in the
Unincorporated Area of the County. Computed on a per diem, pro rata basis and
payable before service is commenced.
   Solid Waste Stream: The entire life cycle flow of the garbage produced -
from putting out the garbage and recycling for pickup to landfilling, energy
production, and the reuse of recycled materials.
   Special Waste: Items of solid waste permitted in the solid waste stream for
disposal, but not collected as part of the Residential/Small Business Curbside
Collection Program such as carpet or C&D Debris.
   Storm Debris: A variety of debris types that may include, but not limited
to: trees and large limbs, Construction and Demolition (C&D) Debris,
appliances, furniture, and other solid waste types caused by a significant
storm or disaster with a resulting area emergency declaration by local, State,
or Federal officials.
   (Tree) Storm Debris: Any organic debris fallen from trees as a result of
high winds, heavy rains, or accumulation of ice. This may include limbs and
large parts of trees damaged by these conditions.
   Vehicle: Any device capable of being moved upon a public highway or road and
in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn
upon a public highway or road.
   White Goods: Large appliances, usually electrical or natural gas powered,
that are used domestically such as refrigerators and washing machines (often
white in color).
   Yard waste: Any and all accumulations of grass, leaves, pine straw, small
trees, branches, limbs, brush, shrubs, vines and other similar items generated
by the typical maintenance of lawns, shrubs, gardens, and trees from
residential properties or eligible small business properties. Includes
branches, sticks, and limbs less than four (4) inches in diameter and less than
four (4) feet in length.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-3. Applicability.
   Provisions of this chapter shall apply to all unincorporated areas within
the County as well as Municipalities that subscribe to County Solid Waste
Management Programs through Intergovernmental Agreement (IGA).
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Secs. 12-4--12-7. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. FINANCE
Sec. 12-8. In general.
   Richland County shall assess such taxes and fees necessary to manage,
administer, and enforce in an equitable and effective manner, a Municipal Solid
Waste Management (MSWM) Program as described herein.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-9. Solid Waste Fund.
   Richland County shall maintain a Solid Waste Fund for the purpose of paying
for a Municipal Solid Waste Management (MSWM) Program, and associated support
activities. The Fund shall be maintained through the collection of various
fees, taxes, and other revenues such as grants. A fund balance equal to half of
the average annual operating costs of the Solid Waste & Recycling Division over
the past three-year period shall be the financial goal. Bond revenue for solid
waste related Capital projects shall be otherwise accounted for and not
considered as part of the Solid Waste Fund. Current and future Host County Fee
payments for the siting of solid waste facilities within the County shall be
directed to the Solid Waste Fund.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-10. Millage.
   (a)   Richland County shall levy a countywide millage, to include all
municipalities therein, for the purpose of raising revenue to generally cover
the cost of:
      (1)   Countywide-generated residential Municipal Solid Waste (MSW)
disposal in Class Three Landfill;
      (2)   Administration of a Countywide Solid Waste Management Program;
      (3)   Countywide-generated residential disposal of C&D Debris and yard
waste in an appropriate, SCDHEC permitted Landfill (this does NOT include
contractor- generated waste from residential construction, or tree removal/
pruning/trimming);
      (4)   Operation of County Drop-Off and Recycling Centers; and
      (5)   Processing of recyclable materials generated by the County
Residential/Small Business Curbside Collection Program and Special Recycling
Events.
   (b)   This charge shall appear on County Real and Personal Property Tax
Notices.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-11. Fees.
   (a)   A schedule of solid waste related fees charged by Richland County
shall be maintained by the Solid Waste Division. These fees must be reviewed
and establish on an annual basis in order to cover the cost of associated solid
waste services. These fees shall generally cover the cost of the:
      (1)   Residential/Small Business Curbside Collection Program;
      (2)   Disposal of C&D debris and yard waste in a county operated landfill
generated by nonresidential customers and businesses and governmental entities;
and
      (3)   Processing of other specialized recycling material such as
electronic waste, tires, or mattresses.
   (b)   The fee for the Residential/Small Business Curbside Collection Program
shall appear on County Real Property Tax Notices. All other fees will be
collected or invoiced at the point of sale.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-12. Grants.
   The Director of Public Works shall participate in applicable grant programs,
either recurring or individual, administered by SCDHEC, or other entities, for
the purpose of mitigating local costs and projects associated with MSW
Management and solid waste reduction and recycling on behalf of Richland
County.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-13. Partial year assessments for the residential/small business
curbside collection program.
   (a)   All new service Residential/Small Business Curbside Collection Program
customers (new residence or newly activated service) shall be charged a Partial
Year Fee for the initial, partial year of curbside collection service received
at the designated service level.
   (b)   Partial year service fees for new residences shall be computed on a
pro rata basis and paid along with the Roll Cart Fee following the issuance of
the Certificate of Occupancy (CO).
   (c)   Thereafter, annual fees will be charged on the Real Property Tax
Notice. It shall be the duty of the Auditor to include the assessment with the
annual property tax notices.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-14. Annual schedule of fees and assessments.
   The Director of Public Works shall, on an annual basis and concurrent with
the Budget Process, review and update a Master Schedule of all solid waste fees
for the purpose of ensuring adequate revenue for associated, fee-based solid
waste management programs established herein. This schedule shall be reviewed
and approved by County Council annually.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-15. Determination of assessments; inclusion in tax notice.
   (a)   The Director of Public Works shall maintain and reconcile, on at least
an annual basis, a complete list of all Residential/Small Business Curbside
Collection Program customers and their designated program level of service.
This list shall serve as the basis for monthly contractor payment and annual
tax notice issuance by the Auditor. The levels of service and their associated
multipliers follow:
      (1)   Standard (S) - Curbside placement/collection of MSW and Recycling
(1.0 multiplier);
      (2)   Enhanced (E) - Backyard (B) placement/collection of MSW and
Recycling (1.8 multiplier);
      (3)   Disability (D) - Backyard placement/collection of MSW and Recycling
(1.0 multiplier);
      (4)   Small Business (SB) - Curbside placement/collection of MSW and
Recycling (2.0 multiplier).
   (b)   These levels of service and their associated multipliers of the
uniform fee shall be applied by the Auditor to Annual Real Property Tax
Notices.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-16--12-17. Reserved.
Sec. 12-16--12-17. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. RESIDENTIAL/SMALL BUSINESS CURBSIDE
COLLECTION PROGRAM
Sec. 12-18. In general.
   The County shall provide a program of regular collection of Municipal Solid
Waste (MSW) from single family residences as well as from eligible small
businesses and local entities such as churches and neighborhood facilities
within the unincorporated County. This service may be extended to like
customers within small municipalities based on Intergovernmental Agreement
(IGA) and assessment of program fees. No solid waste of any kind, or roll cart,
shall be placed in or near a storm water drainage course so as to impede the
flow thereof. All Roll Carts, piles, and bulk items placed at curbside with the
intention of pickup as part of the Residential/Small Business Curbside
Collection Program are subject to inspection by County Solid Waste Staff or
their agents for compliance with standards contained herein.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-19. Conditions for residential/small business curbside collection
program.
   Solid Waste collection service shall be provided under the following
conditions:
   (1)   Unincorporated areas of the County;
   (2)   Small Municipalities covered by an IGA for solid waste services, and
Residential, Single family homes;
   (3)   Residential, Duplexes, Triplexes, or Quadraplexes;
   (4)   Small/home-based businesses located within residential areas;
   (5)   Ancillary facilities located within residential areas such as
recreation centers;
   (6)   Churches that generate small volumes of solid waste; or
   (7)   Other facilities located within residential areas that generate small
volumes of solid waste and, in the judgment of the Director of Public Works,
would practically benefit from participation in this program.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-20. Garbage.
   (a)   Garbage shall only be collected from residential and small businesses
in residential areas by Collection Contractors who are employed by the County.
   (b)   Garbage shall be collected in the unincorporated portion of the County
by roll cart service under the following conditions:
      (1)   One (1) Roll Cart shall be issued to each single family residential
household/small business in the unincorporated area of the County. These roll
carts shall remain the property of the County for use by the household to which
they are issued. Residents who damage roll carts issued to them shall pay for
repairing or replacement of the carts. Carts that are damaged as a result of
mishandling by collection contractors will be repaired at County's expense.
   (c)   Eligible Small Business entities participating in this program may
request up to two (2) roll carts and fees will apply.
   (d)   Roll Carts shall be placed at curbside of the nearest public road, no
later than 7:00 a.m. on the day of collection. Roll Carts shall be removed from
the curbside by the residents once collection is complete or no later than 7:30
p.m. on the designated day of collection.
   (e)   For residential collection, occasional small quantities of garbage in
excess of the capacity of the roll cart will be collected if neatly placed in
tied plastic bags and placed at curbside along with the roll cart.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-21. Yard waste.
   (a)   Yard waste shall only be collected from residential and small
businesses in residential areas by collection contractors employed by the
County.
   (b)   Yard Waste shall be collected in the unincorporated portion of the
County under the following conditions:
      (1)   Yard waste (Sticks, hedge clippings, and small brush) shall be
neatly stacked and placed in order to facilitate efficient pick up. A volume
roughly equivalent to two (2) roll carts (192 gallons or a pile measuring
approximately six feet (6') in length, three feet (3') in width, and two feet
(2') in height, or six 30-gallon yard waste bags) shall be placed within six
(6) feet of curbside of the nearest public road and shall be collected on a
designated day. Yard waste shall not be placed within the traveled way of the
road. Bagging, boxing, or bundling of yard waste is encouraged.
      (2)   Larger tree branches and heavy brush which do not exceed four (4)
inches in diameter shall be cut in lengths not exceeding four (4) feet and
stacked in a neat, compact pile in front of the residence adjacent to the curb,
but such piles shall not extend into the streets.
      (3)   Exclusions: Tree trunks, branches and limbs having a length greater
than four (4) feet and diameter greater than four (4) inches are not deemed
yard waste, thus are not eligible for curbside collection. Waste generated from
either a tree removal (including-the stump) or de-limbing of a tree greater
than four (4) inches in diameter at the tree base at ground level is not
considered yard waste, thus is not eligible for curbside collection. Re-sizing
waste from a tree removal, from a stump removal or from de-limbing an
ineligible tree to make it meet the above dimensions does not make it eligible
for curbside collection. Waste generated from clearing a lot is not considered
yard waste, thus is not eligible for curbside collection.
   (c)   Dirt, sand, and mulch, other than those small residual quantities
incidental to yard waste collection, shall not be accepted for curbside
collection.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-22. Recycling.
   (a)   Recycling shall only be collected from residential and small
businesses in residential areas by Collection Contractors who are employed by
the County.
   (b)   Recycling shall be collected in the entire unincorporated portion of
the County by roll cart service under the following conditions:
      (1)   One (1) Roll Cart shall be issued to each single family residential
household/small business in the unincorporated area of the County. These roll
carts shall remain the property of the County for use by the household to which
they are issued. Residents who damage roll carts issued to them shall pay for
repairing or replacement of the carts. Carts that are damaged as a result of
mishandling by collection contractors will be repaired at County's expense.
   (c)   Roll carts shall be placed at curbside of the nearest public road, no
later than 7:00 a.m. on the day of collection. Roll Carts shall be removed from
the curbside by the residents once collection is complete or no later than 7:30
p.m. on the designated day of collection.
   (d)   Authorized recyclable materials previously containing food or
beverages shall be properly prepared by the resident prior to placement in the
recycling roll cart. Aerosol cans shall be excluded from single stream
recycling. Cardboard shall be broken down/flattened for efficient handling and
collection. Recycling shall not be mixed with garbage or other contaminants.
Recyclable materials shall not be placed in bags.
   (e)   Collection Contractors may refuse to collect curbside recycling if the
material is found to be contaminated by non-recyclables. Collectors may attach
information to the Roll Cart explaining why the material was not collected. The
resident shall remove the non-recyclable material identified as contamination
before the next scheduled recycling collection day in order to be serviced.
   (f)   The Director of Public Works shall, on an annual basis, review the
official list of commodities eligible for recycling based on market conditions
and recommend additions or deletions to the County Administrator. The Director
of Public Information shall lead and manage the public information campaign
necessary to this program.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-23. Bulk items (a.k.a. "brown goods").
   Residential/Small Business curbside collection customers may request, at no
extra charge, the pickup and disposal of Bulk Items such as indoor and outdoor
furniture, large yard toys, mattresses, etc. by requesting an appointment for
pickup. Bulk Items shall only be placed at curbside following a confirmed,
scheduled appointment for pickup and shall not remain at curbside indefinitely.
Limit of four items per appointment request.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-24. White goods.
   White Goods shall be collected and managed in the same manner as Bulk Items.
All large appliances, such as refrigerators, shall have doors removed prior to
placement at curbside.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-25. Enhanced ("backyard") service.
   (a)   An enhanced level of service (a.k.a. - "Backyard Service") shall be
made available to neighborhoods that request it and have established
Homeowners' Association (HOA) covenants supporting same as well as to
individual homes in which the occupants cannot physically place their garbage
or recycling roll carts at curbside for standard pickup.
   (b)   Neighborhoods desiring a higher level of service may request backyard
pick-up pursuant to the following conditions:
      (1)   The subdivision must have a duly organized, active Homeowners
Association (HOA) and such request shall be made by said association. At the
time that the HOA requests the higher level of service, said association shall
provide either a certified true copy of the results of a certified ballot
mailed to each homeowner and tallied by a certified public accountant (CPA), or
a certified true copy of the minutes of the meeting where the decision was made
by majority vote to request said higher level of service. Said minutes shall be
signed and attested by the President and Secretary of the HOA; the association
must also certify that all homeowners were notified of the meeting at least ten
(10) days in advance and must furnish a copy of the notice.
      (2)   At the time that the HOA makes the request, said association shall
clearly define the geographic boundaries of the area encompassed in the
request, including tax map sheet references.
      (3)   AH requests for an enhanced level of service (backyard pick-up)
shall be made to the Director of Public Works and approved by the County
Administrator.
      (4)   Under no circumstances shall the county provide the higher level of
roll cart service (backyard pick-up) to any subdivision which does not have
deed restrictions which prohibit curbside pick-up.
   (c)   Disabled citizens may receive enhanced ("backyard") service for roll
cart (garbage and recycling) service collection at no extra charge. This
special exception may be granted when the General Manager of Solid Waste &
Recycling determines that there is no able-bodied individual over the age of 18
who resides at the address to place and remove roll carts on the curb.
Application for this consideration must be completed by an attending physician
and needs to be updated annually.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-26. Uniform fee structure.
   The Fee Structure used to generate revenue for the Residential/Small
Business Curbside Collection Program shall be normalized and uniform throughout
all areas served (Unincorporated County and Small Municipalities through IGAs)
such that variations in collection area locations, collection contractor bids,
or development density or do not cause undue financial burden to individual
customers. The Director of Public Works shall, on an annual basis, update the
calculation of the fee in advance of annual distribution of real property tax
notices. A multiplier to the uniform fee for basic service shall be applied for
neighborhood Enhanced ("Backyard") Service.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-27. Small business (quasi-residential) service.
   (a)   Though the intent of the Residential/Small Business Curbside
Collection Program is to primarily serve single family residential customers,
there are others for whom providing this service is appropriate, convenient,
and efficient. Such quasi-residential customers are generally referred to as
"eligible small businesses" (even though they might not technically be a "small
business", per se) and may include:
      (1)   Duplex through Quadraplex residential customers;
      (2)   Other residential customers besides Apartments;
      (3)   Neighborhood pavilions or recreation centers;
      (4)   Small, home-based businesses;
      (5)   Small local government facilities such as fire/EMS stations; and
      (6)   Churches.
   (b)   Additionally, in order to participate in this program, such facilities
must:
      (1)   Be physically located along an established residential collection
route;
      (2)   Generate quantities and types of solid waste consistent with
typical single-family residences;
      (3)   Pay all associated solid waste fees and taxes;
      (4)   Be approved by the Director of Public Works for participation in
the program.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-28. Roll carts.
   Roll Carts of approximately 96-gallon capacity shall be used in the
collection of solid waste when deemed efficient and effective. Roll Carts shall
be purchased, owned, delivered, and collected by the County or its designated
agent. Fees may be charged for initial Roll Cart delivery or replacement. A fee
for repair, replacement and delivery may be charged to the home owner in the
event of damage or destruction due to negligence or theft. Roll Carts shall be
kept clean and free of accumulated waste and shall be treated with an effective
insecticide by the user thereof, if necessary, to prevent nuisance.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-29. Items ineligible for residential/small business curbside collection
service.
   (a)   Dead animals. Dead animals shall not be collected. Dead household pets
shall be collected by the County Department of Animal Care if placed in plastic
bags at curbside and if that Department is notified. Proper disposal of all
other dead animals shall be the responsibility of property owners.
   (b)   Building materials. The County shall not be responsible for collecting
or hauling discarded building material, dirt, rock, or industrial and hazardous
waste.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sections 12-30 – 12-32. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. DROP-OFF CENTERS, SPECIAL COLLECTION EVENTS,
AND STORM DEBRIS
Sec. 12-33. In General.
   The Director of Public Works may maintain additional solid waste facilities
and conduct such special events for the purpose of augmenting the efficient
collection of various types of Solid Waste and recyclable materials from County
residential customers. These facilities may collect materials that are
permitted in the waste stream for disposal or recycling, but not included for
collection at curbside. These facilities shall not receive garbage. These
facilities shall not receive any waste generated outside of the County. Only
County residents are authorized to use County Operated Drop-Off Centers.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-34. Construction & demolition (C&D) debris.
   Drop-Off Centers may accept for disposal or recycling Construction &
Demolition (C&D) Debris generated by County Residents, performing home
improvement projects on their Residential Property. The Director of Public
Works may prescribe quantity limitations based on efficiency and facility
limitations.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-35. Yard waste and landscaping debris.
   Drop-Off Centers may accept for disposal, Yard Waste and Landscaping Debris
generated by County Residents, performing yard maintenance at their Residential
Property. The Director of Public Works may prescribe quantity limitations based
on efficiency and facility limitations.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-36. Recycling.
   Drop-Off Centers may accept for recycling, various items, generated by
County Residents at their domiciles. The Director of Public Works may prescribe
commodity and quantity limitations based on efficiency and facility
limitations.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-37. Bulk items.
   Drop-Off Centers may accept for disposal, Bulk Items generated by County
Residents at their domiciles. The Director of Public Works may prescribe
quantity limitations based on efficiency and facility limitations.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-38. White goods.
   Drop-Off Centers may accept for disposal, White Goods generated by County
Residents at their Residential Property. The Director of Public Works may
prescribe quantity limitations based on efficiency and facility limitations.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-39. Special collection events.
   The Director of Public Works may conduct on occasion, either on an
individual basis or in partnership with municipalities or neighboring counties,
Special Collection Events to promote the proper collection and disposal or
recycling of items such as paint, household hazardous waste, sensitive
documents for shredding, tires, electronic waste (eWaste), and scrap metal/
white goods. The Director of Public Works may prescribe commodity and quantity
limitations based on efficiency and facility limitations.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-40. Community "clean sweep" events.
   The Director of Public Works may conduct a program to support citizen
volunteer efforts at the neighborhood level to clean up and beautify their
communities.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-41. Storm events.
   Storm events vary in size, scope, intensity, and affected area and, thereby,
resulting debris types. Similarly, County response to such events will vary to
appropriately address the magnitude of the event and the impact of Storm Debris
or (Tree) Storm Debris on the health, safety, and efficiency of the County. In
general terms, Storm Debris and/or (Tree) Storm Debris must be placed at
curbside and segregated by waste type. The Director of Public Works shall
coordinate the Storm Event Debris Management mission and assign a Storm Event
Debris Manager.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
ARTICLE V. RECYCLING
Sec. 12-42. In General.
   (a)   The County shall, consistent with State Law, conduct a program of
residential recycling in order to:
      (1)   Conserve Natural Resources and Landfill Space;
      (2)   Promote economic development and security;
      (3)   Protect the environment; and
      (4)   Conserve energy.
   (b)   The County shall also promote and encourage commercial and business
recycling. Participation in recycling programs is encouraged and voluntary.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-43. Residential recycling.
   Residential recycling will primarily be promoted through the Residential/
Small Business Curbside Collection Program and may be supplemented through
collections at Special Collection Events and Drop off Centers.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-44. Commercial and business recycling.
   Commercial and Business Recycling will primarily be promoted through
education and voluntary reporting.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-45. Commodities.
   The Director of Public Works shall, on an annual basis, and in consultation
with the General Manager of Solid Waste & Recycling, recommend to the County
Administrator, a list of commodities to be included in the Residential /Small
Business Curbside Collection Program. This recommendation shall be based on
forecasts of recycling commodities' market conditions. The County Director of
Public Information shall promote and publicize current information regarding
commodities for recycling.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-46. Recovered materials.
   Materials collected through all County Recycling Programs are County
property. The County shall ensure the services of a Materials Recovery Facility
(MRF) in order to process recovered materials for recycling. Any revenue
generated from the sale of recovered materials shall be deposited into the
Solid Waste Fund.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-47. Reporting.
   The County shall account for and report recycling activity in a form and
manner consistent with State and Federal law.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sections 12-48 – 12-49. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. TRANSPORTATION AND DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE
Sec. 12-50. In general.
   The transportation and disposal of solid waste shall be conducted by
authorized personnel and in accordance with all applicable State and Federal
Laws.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-51. Transportation of solid waste.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to haul, convey or cause to be
conveyed any refuse upon or along the public streets and roadways except when
the material transported is adequately secured in such a manner as to prevent
it from falling, leaking, or being blown from transporting vehicles. The owner
or driver of the offending vehicle shall be personally responsible for any
violation of this section.
   (b)   It shall be a violation of this article for any person not authorized
by the County to collect and haul any refuse other than that arising from his
or her own accumulation within any area of the County in which solid waste
collection service is provided by the County.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-52. Use of county operated solid waste management facilities.
   Only County residents or specifically authorized agents of the County (i.e.
- Curbside Collection Contractors) are authorized to use County operated solid
waste management facilities, including landfills, as determined by the Director
of Public Works. Such solid waste management facilities shall, under non-
emergent conditions, only accept solid waste that is generated within the
County. Fees may be charged in a consistent, uniform, and equitable manner.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-53. Garbage.
   Garbage shall only be disposed of in an appropriate Class Three Landfill
permitted by the South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control
(SCDHEC).
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-54. Construction & demolition (C&D) Debris.
   C&D Debris shall only be disposed of in an appropriate Class Two Landfill
permitted by the South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control
(SCDHEC).
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-55. Other common waste types.
   Other commonly generated waste types, such as Electronic Waste (e-waste),
Tires, Mattresses, or"Household Quantities" of Hazardous Waste shall be
accepted and disposed of (or recycled) by the County in appropriate manners at
permitted facilities.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sections 12-56 – 12-57. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 12-58. In general.
   The Director of Public Works shall maintain a Refuse Control Section
composed of duly appointed Codes Enforcement Officers who shall enforce the
provisions of this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-59. Littering.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge litter, in any quantity,
from their person, vehicle, property, or any other conveyance.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-60. Illegal dumping.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, allow another person to
dump, or cause to be dumped any garbage, debris, household trash, litter, junk,
appliances, equipment, cans, bottles, paper. trees, tree limbs, tree stumps,
brush or parts thereof, or any other solid waste, anywhere in the
unincorporated area of the county, except at an SCDHEC approved landfill.
Failure of the owner to sufficiently limit access to the property where dumping
is occurring shall be considered to be allowing another person to dump, thus
would be unlawful.
   (b)   The above provisions shall not apply to the dumping on private
property, with the owner's written permission of sand, dirt, and stone for use
as a fill to raise the elevation of land; provided, the same is not maintained
in an unsightly condition and, further provided, the owner of the property on
which such material is dumped agrees to level such dumped material with
appropriate grading equipment to ensure compliance with best management
practices for storm water management.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-61. Covering vehicle loads.
   It shall be unlawful for vehicles of any kind, transporting solid waste in
any quantity, to fail in ensuring that said waste is contained therein by
maintaining an adequate cover and containment throughout transit.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-62. Debris on lots.
   (a)   Declaration of nuisance. Debris allowed to accumulate and remain on
any lot or parcel of land in a developed residential area within the county may
be deemed and declared a nuisance in the judgement of the County Director of
Public Works. For the purpose of this action, "residential area" is defined as
property zoned for a residential use, platted for residential use with a plat
having been begun, installation of utilities having been begun and construction
of residential units being commenced.
   (b)   Duty of owner, etc., to remove. It shall be the duty of any owner,
lessee, occupant, agent, or representative of the owner of any lot or parcel of
land in a developed residential area within the county to remove such debris as
often as may be necessary to prevent the accumulation of such debris.
   (c)   Notice to owner, etc., to remove. Whenever the Director of Public
Works shall find that debris has been allowed to accumulate and remain upon any
lot or parcel of land in a developed residential area within the county in such
a manner as to constitute a nuisance, he may serve written notice upon the
owner, or the occupant of the premises, or upon the agent or representative of
the owner of such land having control thereof to comply with the provisions of
this section. It shall be sufficient notification to deliver the notice to the
person to whom it is addressed or to deposit a copy of such in the United
States mail, properly stamped, certified, and directed to the person to whom
the notice is addressed, or to post a copy of the notice upon such premises.
   (d)   Failure to comply with notice. If the person to whom the notice is
directed, under the provisions of the preceding subsection fails, or neglects
to cause such debris to be removed from any such premises within ten (10) days
after such notice has been served or deposited in the United States mail, or
posted upon premises, such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and
subject to the penalty provisions of this chapter.
   (e)   Removal by County. In the event any property is determined to be a
nuisance, and twenty (20) days has elapsed after such notice has been served,
deposited in the United States mail, or posted upon the premises, then the
Department of Public Works or its duly authorized agent or representative may
enter upon any such lands and abate such nuisance by removing the debris, and
the cost of doing so may become a charge to the property owner, or may be
recovered by the county through judgment proceedings initiated in a court of
competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-63. Scavenging.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to rummage through, take or gather items
from County-owned or privately owned solid waste management facilities or any
County-owned or privately owned solid waste management containers, including,
but not limited to, bags, roll carts for garbage or recycling, bins, roll-off
containers, or dumpsters.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-64. Evictions.
   The placement of household goods and contents from a lawful eviction
process, may, if necessary, be addressed in the same manner of the provision of
Debris on a Lot (Sec.
12-62. above). Debris resulting from the lawful eviction process is assumed to
be a mixed pile and therefore ineligible for collection under the Residential/
Small Business Curbside Collection Program.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-65. Collected solid waste is county property.
   Once picked up for collection from the Residential/Business Curbside
Collection Program, or disposed of in any County Solid Waste Management
Facility, all Solid Waste is County Property whose disposition is the
responsibility of the County.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
Sec. 12-66. Penalties.
   (a)   If any of the matter or material dumped in violation of this Chapter
can be identified as having last belonged to, been in the possession of, sent
to, or received by, or to have been the property of any person, firm, or
corporation prior to its being dumped as prohibited herein, such identification
shall be presumed to be prima facie evidence that such owner dumped or caused
to be dumped such matter or material in violation of this Chapter.
   (b)   Appointed Refuse Control Officers shall have the authority to enforce
all the provisions of this chapter and shall issue summons to violators of any
provision to appear in the Magistrate's Court of the County to answer to the
charge of violation of the appropriate section of this chapter.
   (c)   Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter with less than
15 pounds of material shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, shall be required to complete 8 hours of litter-gathering community
service and must be fined not less than twenty-five ($25.00) dollars and not
more than one hundred ($100.00) dollars.
   (d)   Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter with 15 pounds
or more of material shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, shall be required to complete 16 hours of litter-gathering
community service and must be fined not less than two hundred ($200.00) dollars
nor more than five hundred ($500.00) dollars.
   (e)   Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter for a second or
more distinct offense and within 365 days of the prior offense, shall be
required to complete 24 hours of litter-gathering community service and must be
fined not less than two hundred ($200.00) dollars nor more than five hundred
($500.00) dollars.
   (f)   Any business identified to have participated or provided materials for
improper disposal is subject to flagging of the business license for renewal
consideration, for
12-66(d) or (e) is subject to revocation of the business license.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22; Ord. No. 014-24HR, § I, 6- 4-24)
Sec. 12-67. Miscellaneous enforcement provisions.
   (a)   Appointed Solid Waste & Recycling Code Enforcement Officers
(hereinafter "Refuse Control Officers") shall have the authority to enforce all
the provisions of this chapter and may issue warning letters, warning tickets,
and citations for violations of those provisions. The violator may either
appear in the designated magistrate's court of the County on a date determined
by the court to answer to the charged violation(s) of the appropriate article
and section of this chapter or may pay the fine and associated court costs at
the magistrate court office prior to the court hearing.
   (b)   If any solid waste improperly or illegally disposed of in violation of
this chapter can be identified as having last belonged to, been in the
possession of, sent to, or received by, or to have been the property of any
person prior to its being disposed of as prohibited herein, such identification
shall be presumed to be prima facie evidence that such person disposed of or
caused to be disposed of such solid waste in violation of this chapter.
   (c)   Solid waste placed at curbside for collection shall be considered
property of Richland County unless reclaimed by the generator of the waste.
Solid waste delivered to any county owned solid waste management facility shall
be considered property of Richland County. It shall be unlawful for anyone to
take solid waste belonging to Richland County without prior written
authorization of Richland County.
   (d)   Proof of means used for proper disposal of solid wastes at businesses
and commercial enterprises shall be presented to a County Refuse Control
Officer when requested. This includes, but is not limited to, businesses
engaged in lawn maintenance, landscaping, tree trimming/removal, and
transporting of any solid waste in Richland County.
   (e)   Refuse Control Officers shall use Form S-438 when issuing citations
unless approved otherwise in writing by the County Administrator. These
Officers may, when they deem appropriate, issue a warning letter or a warning
tickets for violations of this chapter. The warning ticket shall be of a design
and content approved by the County Administrator.
   (f)   If a non-compliant solid waste pile or roll cart, placed at curbside
as part of the Residential/Small Business Curbside Collection Program, is not,
in whole, brought into compliance for collection within a 15-day period
following notification of non-compliance by the County, it shall be deemed to
be an Illegal Pile and considered Illegal Dumping.
   (g)   Preparation and storage of residential and/or small business solid
waste for collection. It shall be the duty of the occupant or owner of any
residential premises, or the owner or operator of any small business, to store
all garbage properly, pending collection and disposal. Residential excess
garbage beyond that which can be placed in the roll cart shall be neatly placed
in sealed plastic bags alongside carts on designated collection days.
   (h)   All garbage receptacles except single-use paper or plastic bags and
cardboard boxes shall be kept clean and free of accumulated waste and shall be
treated with an effective insecticide, if necessary, to prevent nuisance.
   (i)   Each property owner shall prevent the continued, excessive and
unsightly accumulation of refuse upon the property occupied by him (or her) or
on a public thoroughfare adjoining his or her property.
   (j)   It shall be a violation of this article to place or cause to be placed
in any dumpster, solid waste receptacle, or bulk container for collection any
acid, explosive material, flammable liquids or dangerous or corrosive material
of any kind, or any other hazardous waste.
   (k)   No person other than the owner thereof, his or her agents or
employees, or employees of contractors of the county for the collection of
solid waste shall tamper or meddle with any garbage container or the contents
thereof, or remove the contents of the container from the location where the
same shall have been placed by the owner thereof or his agents.
   (l)   Property owners shall be prohibited from receiving for deposit in
their refuse containers any type refuse that originates outside their
designated collection area.
   (m)   Property owners shall be responsible for policing any strewn refuse
resulting from broken bags, garbage not properly prepared for collection or
from any other cause other than contractor mishandling.
   (n)   It shall be unlawful for a Resident/Small Business Owner to repeatedly
leave Roll Carts at curbside in residential areas beyond the prescribed daily
period for collection.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
ARTICLE VIII. CONSTRUCTION, MODIFICATION, EXPANSION, AND/OR OPERATION
OF SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITIES, BENEFICIAL LANDFILLS,
AND COMPOSTING FACILITIES
Sec. 12-68. In general.
   All solid waste management facilities, beneficial landfills, and composting
facilities shall adhere to all Federal and State rules and regulations, and all
local zoning land use and other applicable local ordinances.
(Ord. No. 008-22HR, § I, 4-5-22)
CHAPTER 13: HAZARDOUS MATERIALS*
   *Cross reference(s)--Director of hazardous waste division of department of
public safety, §
2-227(c); fire prevention code, §
6-113 et seq.; fire prevention and protection generally,
Ch. 10; health,
Ch. 14.
Sec. 13-1. Purpose.
   (a)   It is the intent of this chapter to develop a database of information
concerning the location and disposal of hazardous materials in the county. This
database will be used to protect all emergency personnel from injury or death
occurring from an explosion or fire because of unknown dangerous materials
present.
   (b)   It is further intended to use this database to protect the natural
environment through the monitoring of use and disposal of hazardous materials
within the county.
   (c)   It is further intended to locate and identify those businesses that
should report extremely hazardous substances under SARA Title III, in order to
form site plans and assure compliance.
(Ord. 002-95HR, § I, 1-3-95)
Sec. 13-2. Scope.
   (a)   This chapter shall apply to all materials which are highly flammable,
or which may react to cause fires or explosions, or which by their presence
create or augment a fire or explosion hazard, or which because of the toxicity,
flammability, or liability of explosion render fire fighting, rescue or public
safety operations abnormally dangerous or difficult, or create a threat to
public health, safety or the environment.
   This chapter shall also apply to flammable or combustible liquids which are
chemically unstable and which may spontaneously form explosive compounds, or
undergo evolution of heat to be a fire hazard. Hazardous materials shall
include such materials as flammable solids, corrosive liquids, radioactive
materials, oxidizing materials, potentially explosive materials, poisonous
gases, and hazardous materials known or suspected of chronic toxicity, as
defined in this chapter. However, this chapter shall not include heating fuels,
lubricating oils, hydraulic oils, lubricating greases or compressed gases for
residential use.
   (b)   The storing, handling, and dispensing of materials covered by this
chapter shall be conducted pursuant to the requirements of any and all
applicable state and federal codes, and the most current edition of the various
standard codes that have been adopted by the county council relating to
building, fire prevention, gas, mechanical and plumbing.
   (c)   A current material safety data sheet for all hazardous materials
inventory stored, handled, or used on a premises shall be made available to
emergency personnel and a copy shall be located near the entrance to the
premise and immediately available.
   (d)   This chapter recognizes that transporters of hazardous materials must
comply with all United States Department of Transportation regulations, such
hazardous materials regulations governing both interstate and intrastate
activities.
(Ord. 002-95HR, § I, 1-3-95; Ord. 039-02HR, § I, 7-23-02)
Sec. 13-3. Jurisdiction.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all lands within the
jurisdiction of the county and within the jurisdiction of those municipalities
which, by written agreement executed, contract to have these provisions
administered within their corporate limits.
(Ord. 002-95HR, § I, 1-3-95)
Sec. 13-4. Definitions.
   (a)   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions as
identified by the United Nations' classification system shall apply:
Class 1   Explosives.
Division 1.1   Explosives with a mass explosion hazard.
Division 1.2   Explosives with a projection hazard.
Division 1.3   Explosives with predominantly a fire hazard.
Division 1.4   Explosives with no significant blast hazard.
Division 1.5   Very insensitive explosives.
Class 2   Gases.
Division 2.1   Flammable gases (can be ignited very easily).
Division 2.2   Nonflammable gases.
Division 2.3   Poison gases (Any gas of such nature that a small amount of the
gas, when mixed with air, is dangerous to life).
Class 3   Flammable liquids.
Division 3.1   Flashpoint below minus 18oC (0oF).
Division 3.2   Flashpoint minus 18oC and above but less than 23oC (73oF).
Division 3.3   Flashpoint of 23oC and up 61oC (141oF).
Class 4   Flammable solids; spontaneously combustible materials; and, materials
dangerous when wet.
Division 4.1   Flammable solids (A solid substance, other than one classified
as an explosive, which is liable to cause fires through friction, through
absorption of moisture, through spontaneous chemical changes, or as a result of
retained heat from manufacturing or processing.).
Division 4.2   Spontaneously combustible materials.
Division 4.3   Materials that are dangerous when wet.
Class 5   Oxidizers and organic peroxides.
Division 5.1   Oxidizers (evolve oxygen either spontaneously or with mild
heating).
Division 5.2   Organic peroxides.
Class 6   Poisonous and etiologic (infectious) materials.
Division 6.1   Poison A: A liquid so toxic that an extremely small amount of
the vapor formed by the liquid is dangerous to life.
      Poison B: Less toxic liquids and solids that are hazardous either by
contact with the body (skin absorption) or by ingestion.
      Poison C: Liquids or solids that evolve toxic or strongly irritating
fumes when heated or when exposed to air.
Division 6.2   Etiological (infectious) materials.
Class 7   Radioactive materials.
      Any material or combination of materials that spontaneously emits
ionizing radiation.
Class 8   Corrosives.
      Any acids, alkaline caustic liquids, and other corrosive liquids which
when in contact with living tissue, will cause severe damage of such tissue by
chemical action; in case of leakage will materially damage or destroy other
containers of other hazardous commodities by chemical action and cause the
release of their contents; or are liable to cause fire when in contact with
organic matter or with certain materials.
   (b)   Extremely hazardous substances are those substances designated as such
by the Administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
   (c)   For the purpose of registration, the following Registration Categories
are hereby established and defined:
   Category A: Includes any facility which uses, produces or stores any amount
of extremely hazardous substance(s) as defined by Section 304 of the Emergency
Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act of 1986 (SARA TITLE III); and meets or
exceeds the Reportable Quantities under the Extremely Hazardous Substances
list, or under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and
Liability Act (CERCLA) of 1980 list.
    Category B: Includes any facility which produces hazardous chemical(s) and/
or stores hazardous chemical(s) for wholesale and/or any facility which uses
hazardous chemicals as defined in Sec. 13-4(a) of this chapter and meets or
exceeds quantities listed in Sec. 13-4(e) of this chapter.
   Category C: Includes any facility which handles or stores any hazardous
chemical(s) as defined in Sec. 13-4(a) of this chapter and meets or exceeds
quantities listed in Sec. 13-4(e) of this chapter for retail sale to the
general public.
   (d)   For the purpose of registration, the term "hazardous chemicals" does
not include:
            1.   Any food, food additive, color additive, drug or cosmetic
regulated by the Food and Drug Administration.
            2.   Any substance to the extent it is used for personal, family or
household purposes.
            3.   This chapter shall not apply to farmers, provided, their
storing, handling, and use of hazardous materials is for farming purposes only.
            4.   Any substance to the extent it is used by a food service
facility in the preparation of such food for human consumption.
            5.   Any substance to the extent it is stored and used by the
facility for janitorial and housekeeping purposes only.
            6.   Any substance to the extent it is used in a medical research
laboratory or a hospital or other medical facility under the direct supervision
of a technically qualified individual.
            7.   Any substance which meets the definition of Other Regulated
Material-Domestic (ORM-D) due to its form, quantity, or packaging, while
maintained in that form, quantity or packaging.
   (e)   A registration shall be required for the use, handling, production,
and/or storage of any quantity of hazardous chemicals as defined under Sec. 13-
4(a) of this chapter, which meets or exceeds the below-listed amounts.
NOTE: A registration shall also be required for these facilities which adhere
to Sec. 13-4(a) of this chapter:
   Division      Amount
   Class 1   1.1   Any
      1.2   Any
      1.3   Any
      1.4   Any
      1.5   Any
   Class 2   2.1   200 lbs
      2.2   None
      2.3   Any
   Class 3   3.1   55 gals
      3.2   110 gals
      3.3   110 gals
   Class 4   4.1   10 lbs
      4.2   10 lbs
      4.3   10 lbs
   Class 5   5.1   200 lbs
      5.2   10 lbs
   Class 6   6.1   Any
      6.2   Any
   Class 7      Any
   Class 8      55 gals
(Ord. 002-95HR, § I, 1-3-95)
Sec. 13-5. Registration and fees required.
   (a)   A fee shall be paid for initial registration pursuant to this
ordinance. An annual renewal fee shall be paid by January 1st of each year.
Only one registration is required per facility per year. Fee schedule is as
follows:
   Initial Registration      Renewal Registration
   Category A - $300.00      $250.00
   Category B - $200.00      $150.00
   Category C - $100.00      $ 75.00
   (b)   No registration shall be valid after the last day of the year in which
it was issued.
   (c)   Government agencies are not exempted from the fees nor from
compliance.
   (d)   Registrations are nontransferable.
   (e)   Facilities registering under Category A, as defined in Sec. 13-4(c) of
this ordinance may report inventories under the requirements and provisions of
the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act (SARA TITLE III).
   (f)   Facilities registering Class 7, Radioactive Materials, as defined in
Sec. 13-4 of this ordinance, may submit a copy of the most recent Department of
Health and Environmental Control (DHEC), Bureau of Radiological Health
inventory file.
   (g)   Any person, firm, or corporation applying for a permit to store,
handle, and/or use hazardous chemicals as required by Sec. 13-4 shall make
application to the Business Service Center of Richland County on such forms as
the deputy director of hazardous materials shall supply. Each applicant shall
be required to furnish information concerning his business, including but not
limited to the following: A Hazardous Materials Inventory Statement and a
Hazardous Materials Management Plan as defined in either Appendix C, Standard
Fire Prevention Code/1991 and/or Tier II, Hazardous Chemical Inventory Facility
information as required by the State of South Carolina.
(Ord. 002-95HR, § I, 1-3-95; Ord. No. 088-05HR, § II, 12-6-05)
Sec. 13-6. Official's right of entry.
   (a)   The appropriate official designated by the county or a duly authorized
fire official may at all reasonable times request access to any building
whether completed or under construction, or to any property for the purpose of
making an inspection or investigation to enforce any of the provisions of this
ordinance, or to establish a pre-fire plan and, if denied, and a belief exists
as to probable cause that hazardous materials are present, then such official
shall obtain a search warrant to allow inspection of the premises.
   (b)   If an emergency appears to exist, the county may petition for a court
order enjoining the owner or occupant of the premises from conducting business
or storing product in question.
   (c)   No person, owner, or occupant of any building or premise shall fail,
after proper credentials are displayed, to permit entry into any building or
onto any property by the appropriate official designated by the county, or a
duly authorized agent, for the purpose of inspections or pre-fire planning
pursuant to this ordinance. Any person violating this section shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, sentenced a two hundred dollar ($200.00)
fine and/or thirty (30) days in jail for each offense.
(Ord. 002-95HR, § I, 1-3-95)
Sec. 13-7. Sampling permitted.
   The appropriate official may verify the contents or labeling of any chemical
container by taking a sample for analysis if the holder or owner of a chemical
container is unable to identify or substantiate the contents through the
production of trade-accepted manifests and/or acceptable documentation.
(Ord. 002-95HR, § I, 1-3-95)
Sec. 13-8. Vehicle inspection.
   No materials shall be transported in any vehicle which has physical,
mechanical or electrical defects which could cause or contribute to fire,
explosion, spillage or release or which is improperly placarded, as provided in
the United States Department of Transportation Regulation. The appropriate
official designated by the county or any county law enforcement officer shall
have the authority to inspect a vehicle transporting materials for such defects
or violations and shall prohibit a defective vehicle or improperly placarded
vehicle from transporting materials on roads and highways within the county.
(Ord. 002-95HR, § I, 1-3-95)
Sec. 13-9. Disposal.
   Disposal of materials shall be by methods meeting all requirements of local,
state and federal law. Upon registration of hazardous materials, a list of
materials for disposal, method of disposal, and location of disposal shall be
supplied. Chemicals or chemical waste which are not produced within the county
shall not be disposed of within the county.
(Ord. 002-95HR, § I, 1-3-95)
Sec. 13-10. Reimbursement.
   In the event of a spill or release of any hazardous materials, as defined by
this ordinance, which would require Richland County to commit its resources,
the party or parties responsible for such spill or release shall pay all costs
incurred by Richland County or supporting agencies including all legal fees, in
its efforts to mitigate any risks to life, property and/or the environment
caused by such a spill or release. The Richland County director of emergency
services or his designee or an authorized fire official shall have the sole
authority to commit Richland County's hazardous materials resources.
(Ord. 002-95HR, § I, 1-3-95)
Sec. 13-11. Enforcement and administration.
   All fees collected shall be turned in to the county treasurer and credited
to the county's general fund.
(Ord. 002-95HR, § I, 1-3-95)
Sec. 13-12. Notices and orders.
   Whenever the Richland County fire marshal or a duly authorized agent or
authorized fire official finds in any building or upon any premises dangerous
or hazardous conditions or materials, there shall be issued such notice or
orders to remove or remedy the conditions as may be necessary for the
protection of life and property from fire and smoke or explosion.
(Ord. 002-95HR, § I, 1-3-95)
Sec. 13-13. Violations and penalties.
   (a)   Any person operating or maintaining any occupancy, premise or vehicle
subject to this chapter, who violates any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (b)   Any person failing to register material(s) or pay registration/renewal
fee covered by this ordinance is in violation of the ordinance and is subject
to the penalties and fees as previously outlined in Section
13-13(a).
   (c)   Appointed hazardous materials investigators shall have the authority
to enforce all the provisions of this ordinance and shall issue summons to
violators of any provisions to appear in the magistrate's court of the county
to answer to the charge of violation of the appropriate section of this
ordinance.
   (d)   Appointed hazardous materials investigators may use Form S-438 when
issuing citations.
(Ord. 002-95HR, § I, 1-3-95; Ord. 039-02HR, § II, 7-23-02)
Sec. 13-14. Revisions.
   This ordinance intends to provide regulations consistent with nationally
recognized practices for the reasonable protection of life and property from
the hazards of fire and explosion due to storage, use or handling of hazardous
materials, substances and devices, and to minimize hazards to life and property
due to fire and panic. The director of emergency services will be responsible
for providing council with recommendations for changes and/or revisions to this
ordinance every three years or as recognized practices change.
(Ord. 002-95HR, § I, 1-3-95)
Sec. 13-15. Fire risk analysis and planning.
   Facilities subject to the requirements of this ordinance shall assist local
fire departments in preplanning objectives. Upon request, the owner or operator
of the facility shall provide information to the local fire department for the
development and implementation of emergency plans. The local fire chief may at
reasonable and mutually acceptable times request access to any building, or to
any property for the purpose of fire risk analysis and planning and, if denied,
then shall make a written request the Richland County fire marshal.
(Ord. 002-95HR, § I, 1-3-95)
CHAPTER 14: HEALTH*
   *Cross reference(s)--Department of public safety, §§
2-227 et seq.; department of health, social and institutional services, §§
2-235 et seq.; county coroner, §§
2-277 et seq.; plumbing code, §§
6-153 et seq.; code for elimination or repair of unsafe buildings, §§
6-182 et seq.; swimming pool code, §§
6-167 et seq.; garbage, trash and refuse,
Ch. 12; hazardous chemicals,
Ch. 13; sewers and sewage disposal, §§
24-61 et seq; weeds and rank vegetation, §
18-4
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 14-1--14-10. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. BOARD OF HEALTH
Sec. 14-11. Appointive powers of council.
   Pursuant to section 4-9-170 of the Code of Laws of South Carolina, 1976, and
Section 3 of Act 283, of 1975 (the Home Rule Act), the county council hereby
assumes all appointive powers in regard to the county board of health.
(Code 1976, § 2-7085; Ord. No. 634-79, § 1, 1-1-80)
Sec. 14-12. Composition; terms.
   (a)   The county board of health shall be composed of five (5) residents of
the county appointed by a majority of the county council, two (2) of whom shall
be appointed by the council after requesting the recommendations of the medical
community of the county. Said recommendations shall be advisory only.
   (b)   The regular terms of office of the members of the board shall be for a
period of four (4) years and until their successors have been appointed and
qualify.
   (c)   In case of a vacancy occurring for any cause, it shall be filled by
appointment as provided for the regular term.
(Code 1976, § 2-7086; Ord. No. 634-79, § 2, 1-1-80; Ord. No. 1928-89, § I, 11-
7-89)
Sec. 14-13. Rights, powers, duties and responsibilities.
   The county board of health shall have all rights, powers, duties,
privileges, and responsibilities that are now imposed by law upon local boards
of health in incorporated cities, towns, and villages, and shall have such
other powers and duties as provided in this article; provided that, in carrying
out all powers, duties, privileges, and responsibilities the board shall
control and direct the activities of the county health department through the
director of the county health department, as provided for in this article.
(Code 1976, § 2-7087; Ord. No. 634-79, § 3, 1-1-80)
Sec. 14-14. Rules and regulations of board--Penalty for violation.
   The county board of health may make reasonable rules and regulations for the
promotion of health within the county outside the City of Columbia and it shall
be specifically empowered to promulgate rules and regulations for the promotion
of safe and sanitary housing which shall include provisions requiring adequate
water supply and indoor toilet facilities, if the board deems it necessary, the
sanitary disposal of sewage, garbage, and solid wastes, and the control of
pests such as flies, mosquitoes, and rodents. Such rules shall become effective
upon being filed with the secretary of state and the county clerk of court. Any
person violating any rule or regulation of the board, after he shall have been
notified thereof in writing by the board or any of its authorized agents, shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, shall be subject to
the penalty provided in section
1-8 of this Code. Each day that any such regulation is not obeyed, after one
(1) notice of the violation thereof, shall constitute a separate offense.
Notice by registered mail shall be sufficient notice.
(Code 1976, § 2-7088; Ord. No. 634-79, § 4, 1-1-80)
Sec. 14-15. Same--Term of effect.
   All rules and regulations of the present county board of health shall remain
in full force and effect until such times as they may be changed by the board.
(Code 1976, § 2-7089; Ord. No. 634-79, § 5, 1-1-80)
Secs. 14-16--14-40. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. MEDICAL INDIGENT CARE PROGRAM
   Editor's note--Ord. No. 1104-83, effective Dec. 6, 1983, did not expressly
amend the Code; therefore, codification of §§ 1--8 as Art. III hereof has been
at the discretion of the editor. The criteria for the program have not been
codified; they are on file in the office of the clerk.
   Cross reference(s)--Unused indigent care funds, §
2-552.
Sec. 14-41. Need established.
   The county council, by agreement, provides for reimbursement of the cost of
outpatient medical care for qualified medical indigents by the county to the
Richland Memorial Hospital, Providence Hospital, and the Baptist Medical Center
in compliance with criteria and requirements established by the county council.
The county finds a need to provide for reimbursement of the cost of medicines
prescribed by the physicians of the Columbia Free Clinic in compliance with
criteria and requirements established by the county council. The county council
finds that it is necessary to expand the scope of the medical indigent care
office in order to examine and administer the program including the payment of
claims submitted to the county for medical care to indigent persons by approved
hospitals, and for the cost of medicines prescribed by the physicians of the
Columbia Free Clinic, within certain defined limits. Such activities shall be
subject to the criteria and other requirements as set forth in this article and
in the medical indigent care criteria, which are made a part hereof.
(Ord. No. 1104-83, § 1, 12-6-83; Ord. No. 1660-87, § 1, 7-28-87)
Sec. 14-42. Medical indigent care office--Creation.
   There is hereby created and established the county medical indigent care
office, which shall fulfill the purposes, objectives, functions, duties and
responsibilities established by this article.
(Ord. No. 1104-83, § 2, 12-6-83)
Sec. 14-43. Same--Purpose, objectives, functions.
   The purpose, objectives, functions, duties and responsibilities of the
county medical indigent care office shall be:
      (1)   To receive applications and to conduct investigations of applicants
for medical care, where deemed necessary, to be funded in whole or in part by
the county at approved county hospitals and for the cost of medicines
prescribed by the physicians of the Columbia Free Clinic;
      (2)   To receive, examine, approve and certify for payment in whole or in
part or to disapprove claims and bills for payment submitted by approved
hospitals located within the county, for medical services or the cost of
medicines prescribed by physicians of the Columbia Free Clinic rendered to
residents of the county who qualify for such payment as indigent persons, as
defined in this article and/or in regulations promulgated by the county
pursuant thereto;
      (3)   To implement and administer the programs and policies of the county
with respect to the payment by the county of claims and bills for medical
services rendered by approved county hospitals or for the cost of medicines
prescribed by physicians of the Columbia Free Clinic for eligible and certified
indigent persons;
      (4)   To establish checks and safeguards for the proper expenditure of
the county medical indigent care fund for eligible and certified indigent
persons at approved county hospitals or for the cost of medicines prescribed by
physicians of the Columbia Free Clinic;
      (5)   To provide an effective and efficient mechanism for the payment by
the county of valid and approved claims and bills submitted by approved county
hospitals for medical services or for the cost of medicines prescribed by
physicians of the Columbia Free Clinic provided to eligible and certified
indigent persons;
      (6)   To ensure the prompt and proper processing of applications and
claims for payment for medical care rendered by approved county hospitals or
for the cost of medicines prescribed by physicians of the Columbia Free Clinic
to eligible indigent persons as defined from time to time by the county
council;
      (7)   To perform such other duties and functions as may be necessary or
appropriate for the proper administration of county programs to provide medical
care or the cost of medicines prescribed by physicians of the Columbia Free
Clinic to indigent persons.
(Ord. No. 1104-83, § 3, 12-6-83; Ord. No. 1660-87, § 2, 7-28-87)
Sec. 14-44. Same--Personnel.
   The county medical indigent care office shall have such personnel and staff,
consistent with the availability of funds, as may be necessary or appropriate
to administer county programs for medical services for indigent persons, or to
implement and carry out the purposes and objectives of this article and the
policies and regulations promulgated by the county council with respect
thereto. Personnel shall be appointed by and be responsible to the county
administrator. All employees of the county medical indigent care office shall
be employees of the county and shall be subject to and governed by the statutes
of the state and the ordinances of the county and all rules and regulations
promulgated pursuant thereto.
(Ord. No. 1104-83, § 8, 12-6-83)
Sec. 14-45. Determination of indigency.
   For purposes of this article and of the operation of the county medical
indigent care office, and the administration of programs thereunder, an
indigent person who is entitled to have any portion of the costs of medical
care rendered to such person by an approved county hospital, or the cost of
medicines prescribed by physicians of the Columbia Free Clinic, paid in whole
or in part by the county is a person who, at a minimum:
      (1)   Is determined by the county to be indigent; and
      (2)   Does not have the financial ability to pay his hospital bill for
medical services or his bill for medicines prescribed by the physicians of the
Columbia Free Clinic; and
      (3)   Meets the county residency criteria for indigents; and
      (4)   Incurs reasonable necessary medical expenses at an approved county
hospital or incurs necessary expenses for the cost of medicines prescribed by
physicians of the Columbia Free Clinic; and
      (5)   Has been determined by the county medical indigent care office to
meet all eligibility criteria established from time to time by the county
council; and
      (6)   Has not exceeded twelve (12) days of in-patient care in any twelve-
month period unless the physician in charge of such patient certifies the bill
in writing to the county indigent care administration for appropriate review
and approval. Such certification shall state that it was medically necessary
for the patient to have an additional number of days of care beyond the basic
period; and
      (7)   Has met the definition and/or criteria set forth in paragraphs (1)
through (6), above, of this section and other relevant provisions approved by
county council.
(Ord. No. 1104-83, § 4, 12-6-83; Ord. No. 1660-87, § 3, 7-28-87)
Sec. 14-46. Emergency care; primary care.
   (a)   County indigent funds may be used to defray the cost of medical care
that is certified by a licensed physician to be a life- and limb-threatening
medical emergency. Medical emergencies shall include, but not be limited to,
cardiovascular and cerebral vascular accidents, loss of consciousness or
respiration, convulsions, or other acute conditions determined to be medical
emergencies by the county medical indigent care office.
   (b)   For the purposes of this article and the administration of programs
hereunder, primary medical care received at the emergency room of any approved
county hospital shall not qualify for payment under the county medical indigent
care fund.
(Ord. No. 1104-83, § 4, 12-6-83)
Sec. 14-47. Separate application; certification.
   A separate application and certification shall be required for each
admission to an approved county hospital or for each request for reimbursement
for the cost of medicines prescribed by physicians of the Columbia Free Clinic.
(Ord. No. 1104-83, § 4, 12-6-83; Ord. No. 1660-87, § 4, 7-28-87)
Sec. 14-48. Establishment of other eligibility criteria.
   The county council may adopt, amend or rescind eligibility criteria utilized
by the county medical indigent care office in the administration of programs by
the county to provide medical care to indigent persons.
(Ord. No. 1104-83, § 5, 12-6-83)
Sec. 14-49. Payer of last resort.
   It shall be the policy of the county to be the payer of last resort for such
services otherwise paid by Medicare, Medicaid or some other government program,
or by some outside source, such as insurance, an employee benefit plan, or some
other person required by law to provide medical care for such person.
(Ord. No. 1104-83, § 4, 12-6-83)
Sec. 14-50. Administration and implementation of programs.
   The county council shall have the sole authority to promulgate, amend, or
rescind rules and regulations for the administration and implementation of
county programs to provide medical care or medicines as prescribed by the
physicians of the Columbia Free Clinic to indigent persons. Such information
shall be made available to participating hospitals and to the physicians of the
Columbia Free Clinic at least thirty (30) days before implementation.
(Ord. No. 1104-83, § 6, 12-6-83; Ord. No. 1660-87, § 5, 7-28-87)
Sec. 14-51. Failure to cooperate; submission of false, fraudulent or incomplete
applications.
   Any person who shall withhold or fail to disclose requested information, or
who shall submit a false, fraudulent and/or misleading application or claims
for payment for medical expenses of medical care to the county shall be
disqualified from participation in county programs to provide medical care to
the indigent; and claims submitted by or on behalf of any such person shall be
denied.
(Ord. No. 1104-83, § 7, 12-6-83)
Secs. 14-52--14-60. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. AIR POLLUTION CONTROL
   Cross reference(s)--Burning within rights-of-way prohibited, § 10-1;
hazardous chemicals, Ch. 13.
Sec. 14-61. Air pollution control board created; appointment of members.
   There is hereby created a Richland County Air Pollution Control Board,
consisting of five (5) members, each of whom shall be residents of Richland
County, and who shall be appointed in the following manner:
   (a)   Three (3) members shall be appointed by the governing body of Richland
County for four-year terms, provided, however, that of the first three (3)
appointments made after the effective date of this article [Ordinance Number
1803-88, effective November 1, 1988], one (1) shall be appointed for a three-
year term, one (1) shall be appointed for a two-year term, and one (1) shall be
appointed for a one-year term. After these initial appointments, each
appointment made shall be for a four-year term.
   (b)   Two (2) members shall be appointed by the Board of the East Midlands
Health District for four-year terms, provided, however, that of the first two
(2) appointments made after the effective date of this article, one (1) shall
be appointed for a three-year term, and one (1) shall be appointed for a two-
year term. After these initial appointments, each appointment made shall be for
a four-year term.
(Ord. No. 1803-88, § I, 11-1-88; Ord. No. 051-02HR, § I, 9-17-02)
Sec. 14-62. Powers and duties of the board.
   (a)    The Richland County Air Pollution Control Board is hereby empowered
to request and receive from the South Carolina Department of Health and
Environmental Control copies of applications for the following types of
permits: Permits to operate incinerators within Richland County, and permits to
change the status of any incinerator already operating in Richland County. The
board is further empowered to review said applications for possible zoning
violations.
   (b)   The board shall report any possible zoning violations to the Richland
County Planning Commission and the Richland County Department of Building,
Planning and Zoning.
(Ord. No. 1803-88, § I, 11-1-88; Ord. No. 051-02HR, § I, 9-17-02)
Sec. 14-63. Persons subject to the jurisdiction of the board.
   Any person, whether one or more individuals, a partnership, a corporation,
an association, or a governmental agency or body, who is required by the
statutes of the State of South Carolina or the regulations promulgated
thereunder to obtain a permit from the South Carolina Department of Health and
Environmental Control in order to operate an incinerator is required to inform
in writing the Richland County Air Pollution Control Board before operating an
incinerator within Richland County.
(Ord. No. 1803-88, § I, 11-1-88; Ord. No. 051-02HR, § I, 9-17-02)
ARTICLE V. AIR POLLUTION CONTROL
   Cross reference(s)--Burning within rights-of-way prohibited, § 10-1;
hazardous chemicals,
Ch. 13.
Sec. 14-71. Air pollution control board created; appointment of members.
   There is hereby created a Richland County Air Pollution Control Board,
consisting of five (5) members, each of whom shall be residents of Richland
County, and who shall be appointed in the following manner:
   (a)   Three (3) members shall be appointed by the governing body of Richland
County for four-year terms, provided, however, that of the first three (3)
appointments made after the effective date of this article [Ordinance Number
1803-88, effective November 1, 1988], one (1) shall be appointed for a three-
year term, one (1) shall be appointed for a two-year term, and one (1) shall be
appointed for a one-year term. After these initial appointments, each
appointment made shall be for a four-year term.
   (b)   Two (2) members shall be appointed by the Board of the East Midlands
Health District for four-year terms, provided, however, that of the first two
(2) appointments made after the effective date of this article, one (1) shall
be appointed for a three-year term, and one (1) shall be appointed for a two-
year term. After these initial appointments, each appointment made shall be for
a four-year term.
(Ord. No. 1803-88, § I, 11-1-88)
Sec. 14-72. Powers and duties of the board.
   (a)   The Richland County Air Pollution Control Board is hereby empowered to
request and receive from the South Carolina Department of Health and
Environmental Control copies of applications for the following types of
permits: Permits to operate incinerators within Richland County, and permits to
change the status of any incinerator already operating in Richland County. The
board is further empowered to review said applications for possible zoning
violations.
   (b)   The board shall report any possible zoning violations to the Richland
County Planning Commission and the Richland County Department of Building,
Planning and Zoning.
(Ord. No. 1803-88, § I, 11-1-88)
   Cross reference(s)--Zoning,
Chapter 26
Sec. 14-73. Persons subject to the jurisdiction of the board.
   Any person, whether one or more individuals, a partnership, a corporation,
an association, or a governmental agency or body, who is required by the
statutes of the State of South Carolina or the regulations promulgated
thereunder to obtain a permit from the South Carolina Department of Health and
Environmental Control in order to operate an incinerator is required to inform
in writing the Richland County Air Pollution Control Board before operating an
incinerator within Richland County.
(Ord. No. 1803-88, § I, 11-1-88)
CHAPTER 15: LIBRARIES*
   *Cross reference(s)--Administration generally,
Ch. 2.
Sec. 15-1. Established; organization.
   Pursuant to the provisions of South Carolina Code of Laws 1976, sections 4-
9-35 through 4-9-39, there is hereby established the Richland County Public
Library System. The county public library system shall be controlled and
managed by a board of trustees consisting of ten (10) members appointed by the
county council for terms of four (4) years, after the initial terms, and until
successors are appointed and qualify. Service on a county library board prior
to July 1, 1979, shall not limit service on the board. Vacancies shall be
filled in the manner of the original appointment for the unexpired term. To the
extent feasible, members shall be appointed from all geographical areas of the
county. The board shall annually elect a chairman, vice-chairman, secretary,
treasurer and such other officers as it deems necessary. The board shall meet
not less than four (4) times each year and at other times as called by the
chairman or upon the written request by a majority of the members.
(Code 1976, § 3-5001; Ord. No. 554-79, § 1, 7-1-79)
   Cross reference(s)--County boards, commissions and committees generally, §
2-326 et seq.
Sec. 15-2. Powers and duties of board.
   (a)   The county library board, as provided for in section
15-1, shall be authorized to exercise powers as to the policies of the county
library which shall not be inconsistent with the general policies established
by the council, and pursuant to that authority shall be empowered to:
      (1)   Employ chief librarian. Employ a chief librarian whose
qualifications and credentials shall meet the certification requirements of the
state library board, and who shall be responsible to the county library board
for the administration of the program and the selection of library staff
members required to carry out the functions of the library system;
      (2)   Purchase, lease, etc., property in name of county. Purchase, lease,
hold and dispose of real and personal property in the name of the county for
the exclusive use of the county public library system. Provided, however, any
such conveyance, lease or purchase of real property shall be by the county
council;
      (3)   Acquire books. Acquire books and other library materials and
provide for use thereof throughout the county;
      (4)   Accept donations. Accept donations of real property, services,
books and other items suitable for use in the library system;
      (5)   Designate facilities and commemorate donations. Designate or mark
equipment, rooms and buildings, and other library facilities to commemorate and
identify gifts and donations made to the library system;
      (6)   Enter into certain contracts with public and private agencies.
Cooperate or enter into contracts or agreements with any public or private
agency which results in improved services or the receipt of financial aid in
carrying out the functions of the library system. Provided, however, such
contracts and agreements shall be subject to approval by the county council;
      (7)   Enter into certain contracts with other counties. Enter into
contracts or agreements with other counties to operate regional or joint
libraries and related facilities. Provided, however, such contracts and
agreements shall be subject to approval by the county council;
      (8)   Receive grants for expansion. Receive and expend grants,
appropriations, gifts and donations from any private or public source for the
operation, expansion or improvement of the library system;
      (9)   Take necessary action to maintain effective system. Take any
actions deemed necessary and proper by the board to establish, equip, operate
and maintain an effective library system within the limits of approved
appropriations of the county council.
   (b)   In addition to the powers and duties prescribed in paragraph (a) of
this section, the board shall:
      (1)   Make books and materials available. Provide and make available to
the residents of the county, books and library materials and in the fulfillment
of this function, shall establish a headquarters library and may establish
branches and subdivisions thereof in appropriate geographical areas of the
county within the limits of available funds. The board may operate one (1) or
more bookmobiles over routes determined by the board;
      (2)   Adopt necessary regulations. Adopt regulations necessary to ensure
effective operation, maintenance and security of the property of the library
system; provided, however, such regulations shall not be in conflict with
policy or regulations established by the county council;
      (3)   Submit annual budget. Annually, at a time designated by the county
council, submit to the council a budget for the ensuing fiscal year adequate to
fund the operation and programs of the library system. Such budget shall list
all funds which the board anticipates will be available for the operation of
the library system. All funds appropriated, earned, granted or donated to the
library system or any of its parts shall be used exclusively for library
purposes. All financial procedures relating to the library system including
audits shall conform to the procedures established by the county council;
      (4)   File annual report. Annually file a detailed report of its
operations and expenditures for the previous fiscal year with the county
council;
      (5)   Submit recommendations for appointment to the Richland County First
Steps Partnership Board. Submit the name of an employee of the library system
to serve as a member of the Richland County First Steps Partnership Board to
the county council. If the council rejects the candidate, the board shall
submit another recommendation.
(Code 1976, § 3-5002; Ord. No. 554-79, §§ 2, 3, 7-1-79; Ord. No. 040-23, § I,
9-19-23)
Sec. 15-3. Applicability of state laws.
   All state laws and regulations relating to county public library systems
shall apply to the library systems created pursuant to section
15-1. All employees of a county public library system shall be subject to the
provisions of section 4-9-30(7) of the Code of Laws of South Carolina, 1976.
(Code 1976, § 3-5003; Ord. No. 554-79, § 4, 7-1-79)
Sec. 15-4. Funding.
   The county public library system shall be funded by annual appropriations by
the county council, including millage, if any, levied specifically for the
county public library system, plus aid provided by the state and federal
governments and other sources. If the county council levies a tax specifically
for the support of the county public library system, such tax shall apply to
all persons and corporations subject to school taxes.
(Code 1976, § 3-5004; Ord. No. 554-79, § 5, 7-1-79)
Sec. 15-5. Transfer of assets and property owned by county library prior to
this chapter.
   All assets and property, both real and personal, owned by any county library
prior to the creation of a library system under this chapter shall be
transferred to the county by the persons or entities owning title thereto;
provided, however, that all such assets and property shall be used exclusively
for library purposes.
(Code 1976, § 3-5005; Ord. No. 554-79, § 6, 7-1-79)
CHAPTER 16: LICENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS*
   *Cross reference(s)--Department of inspection and licenses, §
2-205 et seq.; building permits, inspection and certificate of approval, §
6-43 et seq.; licensing and bonding of builders, contractors and craftsmen, §
6-64 et seq.; permit for organized public fireworks displays, §
10-2 et seq.; permit required for storage or handling of certain hazardous
materials, §
13-3; permit required for excavations in streets, §
21-36; vehicles for hire, Ch. 25; sexually oriented businesses, §
26-151(c)(53).
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
   Editor’s note--The editor has included nonamendatory Ord. No. 1626-87,
effective July 1, 1987, as Art. I, §§
16-1--
16-19. See also the editor’s footnote to Art. II.
Sec. 16-1. License Required.
   Every person engaged or intending to engage in any calling, business,
occupation or profession, whether or not it is listed in the rate
classification index portion of the Business License Fee Schedule, in whole or
in part, within the unincorporated areas of the county is required to submit a
completed application for a business license accompanied by the appropriate
fees for the privilege of doing business in the county and to obtain a business
license as herein provided, except those as noted in Section
16-7.
(Ord. No. 069-07HR, § I, 7-24-07; Ord. No. 044-08HR, § I, 7-15-08; Ord. No.
052-21HR, § I, 11-16-21)
Sec. 16-2. Definitions.
   The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article shall
have the meaning ascribed herein, except where the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
   (1)   Business means a calling, occupation, profession or activity engaged
in with the object of gain, benefit of advantage, either directly or
indirectly. A charitable organization shall be deemed a business unless the
entire proceeds of its operation are devoted to charitable purposes. For the
purposes of this article, business does not include a wholesaler who does not
maintain a warehouse or distribution establishment within the County.
   (2)   Charitable organization means a person:
      (a)   determined by the Internal Revenue Service to be a tax exempt
organization pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code; or
      (b)   that is or holds itself out to be established for any benevolent,
social welfare, scientific, educational, environmental, philanthropic, humane,
patriotic, public health, civic, or other eleemosynary purpose, or for the
benefit of law enforcement personnel, firefighters, or other persons who
protect the public safety; or
      (c)   that employs a charitable appeal as the basis of solicitation or an
appeal that suggests that there is a charitable purpose to solicitation, or
that solicits or obtains contributions solicited from the public for a
charitable purpose.
   (3)   Charitable purpose means a purpose described in Section 501(c)(3) of
the Internal Revenue Code or a benevolent, social welfare, scientific,
educational, environmental, philanthropic, humane, patriotic, public health,
civic or other eleemosynary objective, including an objective of an
organization of law enforcement personnel, firefighters, or other persons who
protected the public safety if a stated purpose of the solicitations includes a
benefit to a person outside the actual service membership of the organization.
   (4)   Classification means a division of businesses by major groups subject
to the same license rate as determined by a calculated index of ability to pay
based on national averages, benefits, equalization of tax burden, relationships
of services, or other basis deemed appropriate by County Council.
   (5)   Construction Manager means any self-employed individual, firm,
partnership, corporation, or group which supervises or coordinates construction
of any building, highway, sewer, grading, improvement, re-improvement,
structure, or part thereof. Notwithstanding payment of fixed price, commission,
fee, or wage, said construction manager shall be classified in the category of
construction contractors for purposes of this article and shall pay a license
fee based upon the total cost of the undertaking supervised or coordinated,
except as otherwise exempted.
   (6)   Contractor means any self-employed individual (not reporting income
taxes on the IRS Form W2), firm, partnership, corporation, or group performing
a service or providing a product subsequent to a contract signed by that party
and another party.
   (7)   County means the County of Richland.
   (8)   Domicile means a principal place from which the trade or business of a
license is conducted, directed, or managed. A license may have more than one
domicile.
   (9)   Drinking Place means any business which obtains the majority, not
necessarily at least 50.1 % of its gross income from the sale or provision of
alcohol for onsite consumption.
   (10)   (a)   (i)   Gross income means the gross receipts or gross revenue of
a business, received or accrued, for one calendar or fiscal year collected or
to be collected from a business done within Richland County. For a licensee who
has a domicile in the County, business done within the County shall include all
gross receipts or revenue received or accrued by such person or business,
excepting income earned outside of the County on which a license tax is paid by
the person or business to some other county or municipality and fully reported
to the County. For a licensee who does not have a domicile in the County,
business done within the County shall include only gross receipts or revenue
received or accrued within the County. In all cases, if the licensee pays a
business license fee to another county or municipality, the taxpayer's gross
income for the purpose of computing the tax within the County must be reduced
by the amount of gross income taxed in the other county or municipality.
         (ii)   Gross income for agents means gross commissions received or
retained. If commissions are divided with other brokers or agents, then only
the amount retained by the broker or agent is considered gross income.
         (iii)   Gross income for insurance companies means gross premiums
written.
         (iv)   Gross income for manufacturers of goods or materials is the
lesser of gross income collected from business done at the location within the
County, the amount of income allocated an apportioned to that location by the
business for purposes of the business's state income tax return, or the amount
of expenses attributable to the location as a cost center of the business.
Manufacturers include those licensees reporting a manufacturing principal
business activity code on their federal income tax returns.
         (v)   Gross income for telecommunications providers is subject to the
provisions of Article 20, Chapter 9, Title 58.
      (b)   Gross income for business license tax purposes may not include
taxes collected for a governmental entity, escrow funds, or funds that are the
property of a third party. The value of bartered goods or trade in merchandise
may be included in gross income.
      (c)   The gross receipts of gross revenues for business license purposes
may be verified by inspection of returns and reports filed with the Internal
Revenue Service, the South Carolina Department of Revenue, the South Carolina
Department of Insurance, or other governmental agencies.
   (11)   Gross receipts means the value proceeding or accruing from the sale
of tangible personal property, including merchandise and commodities of any
kind and character and all receipts, by the reason of any business engaged in,
including interest, dividends, discounts, rentals of real estate or royalties,
without any deduction on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of
the materials used, labor or service cost, interest paid, or any other expenses
whatsoever, and without any deductions on account of losses.
   (12)   Insurance company refers to a business which meets the definition
established in South Carolina Code of Laws, § 38-1-20, Definitions; an insurer
defined as "any corporation,... or aggregation of individuals engaging or
proposing or attempting to engage as principals in any kind of insurance
[defined as a "contract whereby one undertakes to indemnify another or pay a
specified amount upon determinable contingencies"] or surety business,
including the exchanging of reciprocal or inter-insurance contracts between
individuals, partnerships, and corporations", and does not meet the criteria
for a health maintenance organization as covered by South Carolina Code of
Laws, § 38-33-140(D).
   (13)   Licensee means the business or the person applying on for a license
on behalf of a business, an agent or legal representative or a business, a
person who receives any part of the net profit of the business, or a person who
owns or exercises control of the business.
   (14)   License official means a county employee who is designated to
administer this article, and/or his/her designee.
   (15)   Person means any individual, firm, partnership, LLP, LLC,
cooperative, nonprofit membership, corporation, join venture, professional
association, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, holding
company, or other group or combination acting as a unit, in the singular or
plural, and the agent or employee having charge or control of a business in the
absence of the principals.
   (16)   Sexually Oriented Business means a sexually oriented business defined
within Section
26-22 of the Richland County Code of Ordinances.
   (17)   Wholesaler means a business that specializes in the sale of goods to
an individual who will resell the goods. The sale includes the delivery of
goods to the reselling individual. A wholesaler does not sell goods to a user
or a final consumer.
(Ord. No. 069-07HR, § I, 7-24-07; Ord. No. 044-08, § I, 7-15-08; Ord. No. 052-
21HR, § I, 11-16-21)
Sec. 16-3. Purpose and Duration.
   (1)   The requirement of a business license is for the purpose of assuring
that a business conducted within unincorporated Richland County complies with
all applicable State and County regulations and requirements in order to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the County.
Additionally, the requirement of a business license fee levied by this article
serves to establish an excise tax for the privilege of doing business within
unincorporated Richland County.
   (2)   The license of a licensee who has applied for and received a business
license through December 31, 2021 shall continue until April 30, 2022. Each
license issued thereafter shall be issued for the twelve-month period beginning
May 1 and ending April 30.
   (3)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (2), the county may issue
a business license to a contractor with respect to a specific construction
project which may, at the request of the licensee, expire at the completion of
the construction project.
   (4)   The provisions of this article and the rates set out in this article
shall remain in effect from year to year as amended by the County Council.
(Ord. No. 069-07HR, § I, 7-24-07; Ord. No. 044-08, § I, 7-15-08; Ord. No. 052-
21HR, § I, 11-16-21)
Sec. 16-4. License Fee.
   (1)   The required license fee shall be paid for each business subject to
this article according to the applicable rate classification on or before May 1
of each year and the county may impose a penalty on a licensee who has not paid
by this date. However, an admitted insurance company may pay before June 1
without penalty.
   (2)   A separate license shall be required for each place of business and
for each classification of business conducted at one place. If gross income
cannot be separated for classifications at one location, the license fee shall
be computed on the combined gross income for the classification requiring the
highest rate.
   (3)   A license fee based on gross income shall be computed on the gross
income for the preceding calendar or fiscal year, and on a 12-month projected
income based on the monthly average for a business in operation for less than
one year. The fee for a new business shall be computed on the estimated or
probable gross income stated in the license application for the balance of the
calendar year, or if the estimated or probable gross income is unknown, shall
be computed on the average actual first-year income of all similar businesses,
identified by NAICS codes, and updated prior to renewing for the following
year.
   (4)   Unless otherwise specifically provided, all minimum fees and rates
shall be multiplied by 200 percent for nonresidents and for itinerants having
no fixed principal place of business within the county.
(Ord. No. 069-07HR, § I, 7-24-07; Ord. No. 052-21HR, § I, 11-16-21)
Sec. 16-5. Classification and Rates.
   (1)   The County Council shall, by ordinance, establish and approve a
Business License Fee Schedule upon the adoption of the latest Standardized
Business License Class Schedule as recommended by the Municipal Association of
South Carolina and adopted by the Director of the Revenue and Fiscal Affairs
office by December 31 of every odd year.
   (2)   The sectors of businesses included in each Rate Class are listed with
the United States North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) codes.
The alphabetical index in the Business License Fee Schedule is a tool for
classification, not a limitation on businesses subject to a license tax. The
License Official shall determine the proper class for a business according to
the applicable NAICS manual or website, whether or not the business is listed
in the alphabetical index. The County may, upon a finding of a rational basis
as explained in its ordinance and by a positive majority vote of the County
Council, provide for additional reasonable subclassifications described by a
NAICS sector, subsector, or industry, based upon particularized considerations
as needed for economic stimulus or the enhanced or disproportionate demands by
a specific business subclassification on the County's services or
infrastructure.
   (3)   (a)   One decal shall be required for each vehicle used by contractor
companies for going to and from job sites to identify their business as being
properly licensed. Decals shall cost no more and no less than the cost to
produce the decal, rounded up to the nearest quarter value.
      (b)   Taxis, limos, and shuttles shall post one taxi or shuttle decal on
each vehicle. Vehicles registered in Richland County shall be charged $115.84
per decal; vehicles not registered in Richland County shall be charged $173.76
per decal.
   (4)   (a)   All rates, including the cost of decals and stickers, shall be
automatically adjusted every three years by July l, to be effective the
following January 1, to account for changes in the Consumer Price Index (CPI).
The adjustment shall be made in the following manner: the CPI, using the CPI
calculation used by the County in other contexts, for the previous three years
shall be determined and averaged together. The rates described in the Business
License Fee Schedule shall be increased by the sum of the three-year average
CPI for each of the last three years. (Rates shall be rounded up to the nearest
nickel value; fees for decals and stickers shall be rounded up to the nearest
quarter value.)
      (b)   If County Council increases the rates independent of the automatic
CPI increases, the next CPI increase shall not be calculated until the third
year, by July 1, following the County Council increase.
   (5)   Until the adoption of an updated Business License Class Schedule
pursuant to subsection (1) of this section, the following applies:
   2023 BUSINESS LICENSE CLASS SCHEDULE BY NAICS CODE
NAICS            Industry Sector Class
Sector/Subsector
NAICS            Industry Sector                                          Class
Sector/Subsector
11               Agriculture, forestry, hunting and fishing               1.00
21               Mining                                                   2.00
31               Manufacturing                                            3.00
32               Manufacturing                                            3.00
33               Manufacturing                                            3.00
42               Wholesale Trade                                          1.00
44               Retail Trade                                             1.00
45               Retail Trade                                             1.00
48               Transportation and Warehousing                           1.00
49               Transportation and Warehousing                           1.00
51               Information                                              4.00
52               Finance and Insurance                                    7.00
53               Real Estate and Rental and Leasing                       7.00
54               Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services         5.00
55               Management of Companies                                  7.00
56               Administrative and Support and Waste Management and      3.00
                 Remediation Services
61               Educational Services                                     3.00
62               Health Care and Social Assistance                        4.00
71               Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation                      3.00
721              Accommodation                                            1.00
722              Food Services and Drinking Places                        2.00
81               Other Services                                           4.00
Class 8 Mandatory or Recommended Subclasses
23               Construction                                             8.10
482              Rail Transportation                                      8.20
517311           Wired Telecommunications Carriers                        8.30
517312           Wireless Telecommunications Carriers (except Satellite)  8.30
5241             Insurance Carriers                                       8.40
5242             Insurance Brokers for non-admitted Insurance Carriers    8.40
713120           Amusement Parks and Arcades                              8.51
713290           Nonpayout Amusement Machines                             8.52
713990           All Other Amusement and Recreational Industries (Pool    8.60
                 Tables)
Class 9 Optional Subclasses
423930           Recyclable Material Merchant Wholesalers (Junk)          9.10
522298           Pawnshops                                                9.20
4411             Automobile Dealers                                       9.30
4412             Other Motor Vehicle Dealers                              9.30
454390           Other Direct Selling Establishments (Regular Peddlers)   9.41
454390           Other Direct Selling Establishments (Seasonal Peddlers)  9.42
713290           Bingo Halls                                              9.50
711190           Other Performing Arts Companies (Carnivals and Circuses) 9.60
722410           Drinking Places (Alcoholic Beverages)                    9.70
 
Note: Class Schedule is based on 2017 IRS Data.
   Richland County Business Service Center Business License Tax Schedule Rates
Rate Class Income $0-2,000 All Income Over $2,000
                           (Rate per $1,000 or fraction thereof)
Rate Class Income $0-2,000         All Income Over $2,000
                                   (Rate per $1,000 or fraction thereof)
1          $20.00                  $1.00
2          $22.00                  $1.10
3          $24.00                  $1.20
4          $26.00                  $1.30
5          $28.00                  $1.40
6          $30.00                  $1.50
7          $32.00                  $1.60
8          See Class 8 Rates Below See Class 8 Rates Below
 
   Non-Resident Rates
   Unless otherwise specially provided, all minimum taxes and rates shall be
doubled for nonresidents and itinerants having no fixed principal place of
business within the county.
   Declining Rates
Declining rates apply in all cases for gross income over $1,000,000.00
Gross Income  Percent of Class Rate for each additional $1,000
(In Millions)
0.00-1.00     100%
1.01-2.00     95%
2.01-3.00     90%
3.01-4.00     85%
4.01-5.00     80%
5.01-6.00     75%
6.01-7.00     70%
7.01-8.00     65%
8.01-9.00     60%
9.01-10.00    55%
Over 10.00    50%
 
   Decals
   Coin Operated Machines - All coin operated amusement, skill, and music
machines must have a decal posted upon it. The cost per decal is $12.50.
   Passenger Transportation - All taxies, limos, shuttles, and any other type
of vehicle, motorized or non-motorized, whose primary purpose is to move people
from one place to another shall post one decal on each vehicles. Vehicles shall
be charged according to the table below.
 
Place of Registration   Cost per Decal
In Richland County      $115.84
Outside Richland County $173.76
 
   Business Vehicles - A personal or company vehicle which has anywhere upon it
visible markings including, but not limited to, magnets, stickers, or decals,
to identify the vehicle as associated with a business and is used by the
business to go to or from locations in the County to conduct business shall
post one decal on the rear of each vehicle to identify the business as being
properly licensed. Decals shall cost the total cost to product the decal
rounded up to the nearest quarter value.
   Class 8 Rates
 
Rate Class NAICS # Business Type
8.20       482     Railroad Companies, Exempt from County, SC Code Section 4-9-
                   30
8.30       517311  Wired Telecommunications Carriers, Exempt from County, SC
                   Code Section 4-9-30
8.30       517312  Wireless Telecommunications Carriers (except Satellite),
                   Exempt from County, SC Code Section 4-9-30
8.40       5241    Insurance Carriers, Exempt from County, SC Code Section 4-9-
                   30
8.40       5242    Insurance Brokers for non-admitted Insurance Carriers,
                   Exempt from County, SC Code Section 4-9-30
 
 
Rate NAICS # Business Type                         Base Rate Incremental Rate
8.10 23      Contractors, Construction (All Types) $40.00    $1.00
 
   1.   All out-of-county income, for which a business license has been paid,
must be reported as part of the gross income. (This income will then be
deducted, as described in Section
16-7 of the Business License Ordinance.)
   2.   A trailer at the construction site is not a permanent place of business
under this ordinance.
   3.   The total business license fee for the full amount of the contract
shall be paid prior to the issuing of a building permit or the commencement of
work and shall entitle the contractor to complete the job without regard to the
normal license expiration date. Before any County Certificate of Occupancy is
issued, any change orders resulting in a higher contract value to the
contractor must be reported and the business license tax increased as necessary
(except as provided in Section
16-7(4)). An amended report shall be filed for each new job and the appropriate
additional license fee per $1,000 of the contract amount shall be paid prior to
commencement of new work. Only one base fee shall be paid in a calendar year.
   4.   Before any electrical or plumbing contractor shall be issued a business
license, a master's license must be obtained in his or her respective field and
post bond as provided by the plumbing and electrical ordinances of the county.
Subcontractors furnishing labor for and/or supervision over construction or
providing any type of contractual service shall be held liable for payment of
the business license fees set forth in the section on the same basis as are
prime contractors.
   5.   No contractor shall be issued a business license until all State and
County qualification examinations and trade license requirements have been met.
Each contractor shall post a sign in plain view on each job identifying the
contractor with the job and shall furnished the License Inspector with a list
of all sub-contractors for the same job. Each and every vehicle at the job site
shall display a contractor decal, as provided in Section
16-5(4)(a).
   6.   Sub-Contractors shall be licensed on the same basis as general or prime
contractors for the same job, and no deductions shall be made by a general or
prime contractor for value of work performed by a subcontractor. Genera or
prime contractors will be responsible and will pay for the business license of
any sub-contractor doing work on the project if the sub-contractor is found
without a county business license.
   7.   All contractors located in the unincorporated areas of Richland County
must report all income received in the prior year to the business license
office during the renewal period. Each contractor shall itemize and deduct all
update fees paid to Richland County, or any other jurisdiction, as part of the
business license application.
 
Rate NAICS # Business Type                        Base Rate Incremental Rate
8.51 713120  Amusement Parks and Arcades          $40.00    $1.00
8.52 713290  Nonpayout Amusement Machines         $40.00    $1.00
8.60 713990  All Other Amusement and Recreational $40.00    $1.00
             Industries (pool tables)
 
   Class 9 Optional Sub-Classes
Rate NAICS # Business Type Base Rate Incremental Rate
Rate NAICS # Business Type                         Base Rate Incremental Rate
9.10 423930  Recyclable Material Merchant          $40.00    $1.35
             Wholesalers (Junk)
9.20 522298  Pawnshops                             $40.00    $1.35
9.30 4411    Automobile Dealers                    $40.00    $1.30
9.30 4412    Other Motor Vehicle Dealers           $40.00    $1.30
9.41 454390  Other Direct Selling Establishments   $50.00    $2.00
             (Regular Peddlers)
9.42 454390  Other Direct Selling Establishments   $15.00    $1.25
             (Seasonal Peddlers)
9.50 713290  Bingo Halls                           $40.00    $1.20
9.60 711190  Other Performing Arts Companies       $40.00    $1.25
             (Carnivals and Circuses)
9.70 722410  Drinking Places (Alcoholic Beverages) $40.00    $1.25
9.91 454210  Vending Machine Operators             $35.00    $1.20
9.92 562212  Solid Waste Landfill                  $40.00    $1.25
9.93 713990  All Other Amusement and Recreation    $40.00    $1.25
             Industries
9.94 722330  Mobile Food Services                  $40.00    $3.00
 
(Ord. No. 069-07HR, § I, 7-24-07; Ord. No. 025-08, § I, 5-20-08; Ord. No. 009-
09, § I, 2-17-09; Ord. No. 052-21HR, § I, 11- 16-21; Ord. No. 007-22HR, § I, 4-
5-22; Ord. No. 035-23HR, § I, 9-12-23)
Sec. 16-6. Registration Required.
   (1)   The owner, agent, or legal representative of each business subject to
this article, whether listed in the classification index or not, shall register
the business and make application for a business license on or before the due
date of each year. A new business license shall be required to have a business
license prior to operation within any unincorporated area of the county.
   (2)   Application shall be on a form provided by the License Official which
shall contain the social security number and/or the federal employer's
identification number, the South Carolina Retail License Number (if
applicable), the business name as reported on the South Carolina income tax
return, the business name as it appears to the public at the physical location,
and all information about the applicant and the business deemed appropriate to
carry out the purpose of this article by the License Official. Applicants may
be required to submit copies of portions of state and federal income tax
returns reflecting gross income figures.
   (3)   The applicant shall certify that the information given in the
application is true, that the gross income is accurately reported, or estimated
for a new business, without any unauthorized deductions, that all funds due to
the county have been paid, and that all other licenses and permits required by
the county or state to do business in the county have been obtained.
   (4)   No business license shall be issued until the applicant has obtained
all other licenses and/or permits required by the County or State to do
business in the County, and paid in full any associated license and permit fees
or business-related fees and taxes, including any late fees or penalties.
   (5)   As prerequisite to submittal of a business license application, the
premises and real property to be used as a business must be in compliance with
all applicable state and local health, fire, zoning and building codes and
regulations. As part of the Business License application, the applicant must
submit to the License Official documentation that shows that the premises is
currently in compliance with the Richland County Zoning Ordinance, Building
Code, Electrical Code, Mechanical Code, Plumbing Code, Roofing Code and other
applicable regulatory Codes as adopted by the County Council.
   (6)   Insurance agents and brokers shall report the name of each insurance
company for which a policy was issued and the total premiums collected for each
company for each type of insurance coverage on a form approved by the License
Official. An insurance agent not employed by an insurance company or employed
by more than one insurance company shall be licensed as a broker.
   (7)   Fireworks sales: Any establishment desiring to sell fireworks must
first acquire the Annual State Board of Pyrotechnic Safety License and must
meet all regulations pursuant to the provisions of Regulation 19-405, S.C. Code
of Laws for 1976. Prior approval of the Richland County Sheriff's Department is
required as governed by regulations of the State Fire Marshal pursuant to the
1976 Code, Chapter 9 of Title 23, and Chapter 43 of Title 39, governing the
transportation and use of pyrotechnics.
   (8)   Miscellaneous sales (antique malls, flea markets or leases space
sales): Any person leasing space for the sale of merchandise from an
established business shall be required to have a business license, whether or
not the sales are made through a central cash register. Furthermore, it shall
be the responsibility of the lessor of the spaces to advise the business
license office of persons leasing space.
(Ord. No. 069-07HR, § I, 7-24-07; Ord. No. 044-08HR, § II, 7-15-08; Ord. No.
052-21HR, § I, 11-16-21)
Sec. 16-7. Deductions, Exemptions, Charitable Organizations, and Determination
of Classification.
   (1)   No deductions from gross income shall be made except as follows:
      (a)   Income from business done wholly outside of the county jurisdiction
on which a license tax is paid to another county or to any municipality, taxes
collected for a governmental entity, or income which cannot be taxed pursuant
to state or federal law. The applicant shall have the burden to establish the
right to deduction by satisfactory records and proof by including with the
business license application, either new or renewing, a separate itemized list
showing all deductions claimed, or no deductions will be allowed. Deductions
will be approved as authorized by this section.
      (b)   Income from sales generated by interstate commerce, i.e. sales of
goods or products across state lines. Provided, however, such deducted income
shall be included in the business' reported gross income.
   (2)   Exemptions.
      (a)   No person shall be exempt from the requirements of this article by
reason of the lack of an established place of business within the County,
unless exempted by state or federal law.
      (b)   The following businesses, occupations or professions are exempt
from the requirements of this article:
         1.   Teachers;
         2.   Ministers, pastors, preachers, rabbis and other leaders of
commonly recognized religious faiths;
         3.   Telephone, telegraph, gas and electric and other utilities or
providers regulated by the South Carolina Public Service Commission;
         4.   Insurance companies; and
         5.   An entity which is exempt from license tax under any state law
other than South Carolina Code of Laws, § 4-9-30(12), or a subsidiary or
affiliate of any such exempt entity.
      (c)   No person shall be exempt from this article by reason of the
payment of any other tax or fee, unless exempted by State law, and no person
shall be relieved of the liability for the payment of any other tax or fee by
reason of the application of this article.
   (3)   In lieu of the license required by Section
16-1, a participant in a single annual event of not more than ten consecutive
calendar days in length may be issued a permit at the rate of $10.53 on gross
income on the first $2,000.00 and $1.26 on each additional $1,000.00 of gross
income or fraction thereof. This permit will be valid only for the time period
specified thereon and can be obtained for no more than one event annually.
Organizers of such events may pay for and obtain a business license on behalf
on all its vendors at a rate of $10 per vendor or on the previous year's income
generated by the event based upon the rate above, whichever is greater.
   Inspections prior to the issuance of a permit may be waived. Inspections may
be conducted during the event. For purposes of this subsection, an event is
defined as participation by a group of exhibitors or others where displays are
established in individual booths or stalls for the purpose of presenting to the
audience goods, wares, merchandise or services offered for sale, rent or
promotional purposes or for the general good will of the exhibitors. An event
may be a trade show, an antique show, a craft show, or any other type of show
fitting this definition.
   (4)   Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, businesses and
individuals defined as contractor herein shall be exempt from the provisions of
this article in the following manner:
   The business license tax shall be reduced by excluding that portion of the
business' gross income generated from work done for which a Richland County
building permit was obtained and a building permit fee paid (by either the
general contractor or subcontractor responsible for that work), pursuant to the
provisions of Section 6-51 of the Richland County Code of Ordinances.
   Income generated from work done for which a Richland County building permit
is not required, such as general repairs, shall be subject to a business
license tax on that income.
   (5)   Charitable organizations which have exemptions from state and federal
income taxes and/or are 50l(c)(3) organizations according to the IRS Tax Code
and where all proceeds are devoted to charitable purposes are exempt from a
business license tax. Documentation of the claim to this exemption must be
provided.
   (6)   The provisions of this article shall not extend to persons who grow
their own agricultural produce or products, and use the Columbia State Farmers'
Market, or other farmers' markets officially recognized by the County, to sell
their produce directly to consumers.
   (7)   The License Official shall determine the appropriate classification
for each business.
(Ord. No. 069-07HR, § I, 7-24-07; Ord. No. 044-08HR, § II, 7-15-08; Ord. No.
018-09HR, § II, 1-1-10; Ord. No. 013- 12HR, § I, 3-6-12; Ord. No. 052-21HR, §
I, 11-16-21; Ord. No. 007-22HR, § II, 5-1-23)
Sec. 16-8. False Application Unlawful.
   It shall be unlawful for any person subject to the provisions of this
article to make a false application for a business license, or to give or file,
or direct the giving or filing of any false information with respect to the
license or fee required by this article.
(Ord. No. 069-07HR, § I, 7-24-07; Ord. No. 052-21HR, § I, 11-16-21)
Sec. 16-9. Display and Transfer.
   (1)   All persons shall display the license, with the business name as it
appears at the physical location, issued to them on the original form provided
by the License Official in a conspicuous place in the business establishment at
the physical location shown on the license. A transient or non-resident shall
carry the license upon his or her person or in a vehicle used in the business
readily available for inspection by an authorized agent of the County.
Authenticated copies shall be available at an additional cost per copy,
established by the License Official.
   (2)   A change of address must be reported to the License Official within
ten (10) business days after removal of the business to a new location and the
license will be valid at the new address upon written notification of the
License Official and compliance with zoning and building codes. Failure to
obtain the approval of the License Official for a change of address shall
invalidate the license and subject the licensee to prosecution for doing
business without a license. A business license shall not be transferable, and a
transfer of controlling interest shall be considered a termination of the old
business and the establishment of a new business requiring a new business
license, based on the prior business' income.
(Ord. No. 069-07HR, § I, 7-24-07; Ord. No. 052-21HR, § I, 11-16-21)
Sec. 16-10. Administration, Enforcement.
   (1)   The License Official shall administer the provisions of this article,
collect license fees, issue licenses, make or initiate investigations and
audits to ensure compliance, initiate denial or revocation procedures, report
violations to the appropriate department, and assist in prosecution of
violators, produce forms, make reasonable regulations relating to the
administration of this article, and perform such other duties as may be
assigned by the County Administrator.
   (2)   The Planning and Development Services Department, Building Codes and
Inspections Department, Fire Marshal's Office, and Sheriff's Department, in
addition to the License Official, are hereby empowered to make or initiate
investigations to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article and to
initiate prosecution of violations.
(Ord. No. 069-07HR, § I, 7-24-07; Ord. No. 044-08HR, § III, 7-15-08; Ord. No.
052-21HR, § I, 11-16-21)
Sec. 16-11. Inspection and Audits.
   (1)   For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, the
License Official or other authorized agent of the county is empowered to enter
upon the premises of any person subject to this article to make inspections and
to examine and audit books and records. It shall be unlawful for any such
person to fail or refuse to make available the necessary books and records. In
the event an audit shall be added to the correct license fee and late penalties
in addition to other penalties provided herein. Each day of failure to pay the
proper amount of license fee shall constitute a separate offense.
   (2)   The License Official shall make systematic and random inspections and
audits of all businesses within the county to ensure compliance with this
article. Records of inspections and audits shall not be deemed public records,
and the License Official shall not release the amount of license fees paid or
the reported gross income of any person by name without written permission of
the licensee, provided that statistics compiled by classifications may be made
public.
   (3)   The License Official, upon approval of the County Administrator, may
disclose gross income of licensees to the Internal Revenue Service, State
Department of Revenue, Richland County Auditor, Richland County Business
Service Center Appeals Board, and other State, County, and municipal business
license offices for the purpose of assisting tax assessments, tax collections,
and enforcement. Such disclosures shall be for internal, confidential, and
official use of these governmental agencies and shall not be deemed public
records.
(Ord. No. 069-07HR, § I, 7-24-07; Ord. No. 052-21HR, § I, 11-16-21)
Sec. 16-12. Assessments.
   (1)   When a person fails to obtain a business license or to furnish the
information required by this article or by the License Official, the License
Official shall proceed to examine such records of the business or any other
available records as may be appropriate and to conduct such investigations and
statistical surveys as the License Official may deem appropriate to assess a
license fee and penalties as provide herein.
   (2)   A notice of assessment shall be served by certified mail. An
application for adjustment of the assessment may be made to the License
Official within five (5) business days after the notice is mailed or the
assessment will become final. The License Official shall establish by
regulation the procedure for hearing an application for adjustment or
assessment and issuing a notice of final assessment.
   (3)   A final assessment may be appealed to the Business Service Center
Appeals Board, as described in Section
16-18.
(Ord. No. 069-07HR, § I, 7-24-07; Ord. No. 052-21HR, § I, 11-16-21)
Sec. 16-13. Delinquent License Fees, Partial Payment.
   (1)   A license fee shall be considered delinquent if all or any part of
such fee has not been paid on or before April 30 of each calendar year.
Businesses providing business license payments by the deadline but which have:
a) indebtedness to the County, orb) have not yet obtained other necessary
permits or licenses, of c) have not met other requirements necessary to obtain
a business license, as specified in Section
16-6, shall accrue penalties until the indebtedness is cleared, the permits or
licenses obtained, or met the other requirements necessary to obtain a business
license, at which time the business license application processing may
continue.
   (2)   Partial payment may be accepted by the License Official to toll
imposition of penalties as authorized in Section
16-22 on the portion paid; provided, however, no business license shall be
issued or renewed until the full amount of the balance due, with penalties, has
been paid.
(Ord. No. 069-07HR, § I, 7-24-07; Ord. No. 044-08, § IV, 7-15-08; Ord. No. 052-
21HR, § I, 11-16-21)
Sec. 16-14. Notices.
   The License Official may, but shall not be required to, mail written notices
that license fees are due. If notices are not mailed, there shall be published
a notice of the due date in a newspaper of general circulation within the
county three (3) times prior to the due date in each year. Failure to receive
notice shall not constitute a defense to prosecution for failure to pay the fee
due or grounds for a waiver of penalties.
(Ord. No. 069-07HR, § I, 7-24-07; Ord. No. 052-21HR, § I, 11-16-21)
Sec. 16-15. Denial of License.
   (1)   The License Official shall deny a license to an applicant if:
      (a)   the application is incomplete;
      (b)   the application contains a misrepresentation, false or misleading
statement, evasion or suppression of a material fact;
      (c)   the applicant has given a bad check or tendered illegal
consideration for any license fee;
      (d)   within five years from the date of application, an applicant has
been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere any crime(s) or offense(s)
under South Carolina Code of Laws, Title 16, Crimes and Offenses, Chapter 13,
Forgery, Larceny, Embezzlement, False Pretenses and Cheats; Chapter 14, the
Financial Transaction Card Crime Act; or South Carolina Code of Laws, § 39-15-
1190, Sale of Goods or
         Services with a Counterfeit Mark; or the same crime or offense in
another jurisdiction;
      (e)   the premises and parcel of real property to be used for the
business activity for which a license is sought is not in compliance with
applicable state and/or local health, fire, zoning, and building codes and
regulations;
      (f)   the business activity for which a license is sought is unlawful; or
      (g)   the business constitutes a public nuisance as determined by a court
of law.
   A decision of the License Official shall be subject to appeal to the
Business Service Center Appeals Board as herein provided. Denial shall be
written with reasons stated.
(Ord. No. 069-07HR, § I, 7-24-07; Ord. No. 044-08HR, § V, 7-15-08; Ord. No.
052-21HR, § I, 11-16-21)
Sec. 16-16. Drinking Places.
   (1)   No license to operate a drinking place shall be issued to, or in the
name of, a corporation, association, or trade name as such. Any application for
a corporation, association, or trade name shall be made by the officers for its
use, and such officers shall identify in the application the name by which the
business will be operated. In addition, such officers in making an application
shall be held to assume all responsibility there under as individuals, and
shall be subject to all the provisions and penalties set forth herein or in any
other article of the Richland County Code of Ordinances.
   (2)   In addition to the reasons for denial of a license set forth in
Section
16-5 of this article, the License Official shall deny a business license to an
applicant for a Drinking Place if the applicant or an agent of such applicant
who has or will have actual authority to control and manage the business
proposed to be operated:
      (a)   is a minor;
      (b)   has had an alcohol liquor license issued in the name of the
applicant or other officer pursuant to South Carolina Code of Laws, § 61-6-10
et seq. suspended, revoked, or not renewed within a two-year period immediately
preceding the filing of the application; or
      (c)   has had a business license revoked or denied under the provisions
of this article within a three-year period immediately preceding the filing of
the application.
(Ord. No. 069-07HR, § I, 7-24-07; Ord. No. 044-08HR, § V, 7-15-08; Ord. No.
052-21HR, § I, 11-16-21)
Sec. 16-17. Sexually Oriented Businesses.
   (1)   The purpose of this section is to regulate sexually oriented
businesses in order to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the
citizens of Richland County, and to establish reasonable and uniform
regulations to prevent or reduce to any extent the deleterious secondary
effects of sexually oriented businesses within the County. The provisions of
this section have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or
restriction on the content of or reasonable access to any communicative
materials or expression. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this
ordinance to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials
or expression protected by the First amendment of the United States
Constitution, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually
oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent or
effect of this ordinance to condone or legitimize the distribution of
exhibition of obscenity.
   (2)   Based on evidence of the adverse secondary effects of sexually
oriented businesses presented in hearings and reports made available to the
Richland County Council, and on the findings, interpretations, and narrowing
constructions incorporated in the cases of City of Littleton v. Z.J. Gifts D-4,
LLC, 124 S. Ct. 2219 (2003); City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc., 535
U.S. 425 (2002); Pap's A.M. v. City of Erie, 529 U.S. 277 (2000); City of
Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini
Theatres, All U.S. 50 (1976); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560
(1991); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); Chesapeake B&M, Inc. v.
Harford County, 58 F.3d 1005 (4th Cir. 1995); Giovani Carandola, Ltd. V. Fox,
470 F.3d 1074 (4th Cir. 2006); Centaur v. Richland County, 392 S.E.2d 165 (S.C.
1990); U.S. v. Pendergrass, Petition to Enter a Plea of Guilty and Plea
Agreement on the Charge of Tax Evasion (3:06-00147, M.D. Term. 2007); and other
cases; and on reports of secondary effects occurring in and around sexually
oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, Phoenix, Arizona (1979);
Minneapolis, Minnesota (1980); Houston, Texas (1987); Indianapolis, Indiana
(1984); Amarillo, Texas (1977); Garden Grove, California (1991); Los Angeles,
California (1977); Whittier, California (1978); Austin, Texas (1986); Seattle,
Washington (1989); Oklahoma City, Oklahoma (1986); El Paso, Texas (1986); New
York City, New York (1994); Dallas, Texas (1997); Newport News, Virginia
(1996); New York Times Square Study (1994); Phoenix, Arizona (1995-1998);
Greensboro, North Carolina (2003); and also from the reports of Sexually
Oriented Businesses: An Insider's View, by David Sherman, presented to the
Michigan House Committee on Ethics and Constitutional Law, January 12, 2000;
Survey of Appraisers Fort Worth & Dallas, Effects of Land Use on Surrounding
Property Values, by Duncan Associates, September 2004; and the Report of the
Attorney General's Working Group on the Regulations of Sexually Oriented
Businesses (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), the Richland County Council
finds:
      (a)   Sexually oriented businesses, as a category of commercial uses, are
associated with a wide variety of adverse secondary effects including, but not
limited to, prostitution, potential spread of disease, lewdness, public
indecency, illicit sexual activity, and sexual assault and exploitation.
      (b)   Each of the foregoing negative secondary effects constitutes a harm
which the County has a substantial government interest in preventing and/or
abating in the future. This substantial government interest in prevent
secondary effects, which is the County's rationale for this ordinance, exists
independent of any comparative analysis between sexually oriented and non-
sexually oriented businesses in the future as well as sexually oriented
businesses that may locate in the County in the future. The County finds that
the cases and secondary effects documentation relied on in this ordinance are
reasonably believed to be relevant to said secondary effects.
   (3)   No license to operate a sexually oriented business shall be issued to,
or in the name of, a corporation, association, or a trade name as such. Any
application for a corporation, association, or trade name shall be made the
officers for its use, and such officers shall identify in the application the
name by which the business will be operated. In addition, such officers in
making an application shall be held to assume all responsibility there under as
individuals, and shall be subject to all the provisions and penalties set forth
herein or in any other article of the Richland County Code of Ordinances.
   (4)   Notwithstanding the pre-application process wherein an applicant must
obtain documentation of compliance with all applicable state and local health,
fire, zoning, and building codes or regulations pursuant to Section
16-6(5) of this ordinance, upon application for a business license by an
applicant identifying the business as a sexually oriented business, the License
Official must circulate a form on which compliance shall be certified by the
officials administering the applicable zoning, fire, building and health
regulations. The applicable and aforementioned officials shall determine
compliance with their respective codes or regulations and inform the License
Official of their determination within thirty days from the earliest date of
receipt of the compliance form by any one of the aforementioned officials. If
the License Official does not receive a particular determination of compliance
from an official administering the aforementioned codes and regulations before
the thirty-day time period expires, that compliance determination not received
by the License Official shall be deemed approved. All other compliance
determination received before the thirty-day time period expires shall be
unaffected by any other compliance determination that fails to meet the thirty-
day time period.
   (5)   During the time in which an application for a pre-existing Sexually
Oriented Business is pending, the applicant may continue its business activity
and shall not be subject to citations for violations of any provision of this
article, nor any enforcement proceedings pursuant to this article or Section
1-8 of this Code of Ordinances.
   (6)   The License Official shall approve or deny an application for a
license for a Sexually Oriented Business within thirty calendar days (30) from
the date of receipt of the application. If the License Official fails to either
approve or deny the application within thirty calendar days, then the
application shall be deemed approved and business activity may begin or
continue immediately, notwithstanding the fact that no license has been issued.
   (7)   In addition to the reasons for denial of a license set forth in
Section 16-15 of this article, the License Official shall deny a business
license to an applicant for a Sexually Oriented Business if the applicant or an
agent of such applicant who has or will have actual authority to control and
manage the business proposed to be operated:
      (a)   is under the age of eighteen;
      (b)   within five years of the date of application, has been convicted or
pled guilty or nolo contendere to any of the following crimes: South Carolina
Code of Laws, § 16-15-90, § 16-15-100, § 16-15-305, § 16-15-325, § 16-15-335, §
16-15-342, § 16-15-345, § 16-15-355, § 16-15-365, § 16-15-385, § 16-15-387, §
16-15-395, § 16-15-405, § 16-15-410, § 16-15-415, or § 16-15-425, or of the
same crime in any other jurisdiction.
   (8)   Applicants for a sexually oriented business herein described, in
addition to the license application(s) required under Section 16-1 of this
article, shall complete a sworn, notarized statement on a form prepared by the
License Official for the purpose of establishing his/her qualifications to
operate a business identified in this section.
   (9)   Owners of sexually oriented businesses are responsible for maintaining
a list of their current contractors' names and a copy of a photo ID for each
contractor on file.
(Ord. No. 044-08HR, § V, 7-15-08; Ord. No. 052-21HR, § I, 11-16-21)
Sec. 16-18. Revocation of License.
   When the License Official determines that:
   (a)   a license has been mistakenly or improperly issued or issued contrary
to law; or
   (b)   a licensee has breached any condition upon which the license was
issued or has failed to comply with any provision of this article; or
   (c)   a licensee has obtained a license through a fraud, misrepresentation,
or false or misleading statement, evasion or suppression of a material fact in
the license application;
   (d)   has given a bad check or tendered illegal consideration for any
license fee; or
   (e)   the business activity for which a license was obtained has proven to
be a public nuisance as determined by a court of law; or
   (f)   the business has proven to be a public nuisance as determined by a
court of law; the License Official shall give written notice of intent to
revoke to the licensee or the person in control of the business within the
County by personal service or certified mail stating the License Official's
basis for revocation and setting forth a date and time for a hearing before the
Business Service Center Appeals Board for the purpose of determining whether
the license should be revoked. The hearing shall be held within thirty (30)
days from the date of service of the notice. A licensee who received proper
notice yet fails to appear or defend at the revocation hearing waives his or
her right to contest the revocation.
(Ord. No. 069-07HR, § I, 7-24-07; Ord. No. 044-08HR, § V, 7-15-08; Ord. No.
013-19HR, § II, 4-16-19; Ord. No. 052- 21HR, § I, 11-16-21)
Section 16-19. Appeals.
   (1)   Any person aggrieved by the following actions or decisions made by the
License Official may bring an appeal to the Business Service Center Appeals
Board:
      (a)   A final assessment pursuant to Section
16-12;
      (b)   Charge backs or other adjustment to the business license fee as
determined by an audit conducted pursuant to Section
16-11;
      (c)   A revocation or a denial of a business license pursuant to Section
16-15 or Section
16-18;
      (d)   Imposition of a business license penalty; or
      (e)   A decision or determination made by the License Official concerning
the proper classification of a business or the proper calculation of business
license fees. This ground for appeal shall not be construed to authorize
appeals based on objections to the business license fee structure established
by Richland County Council.
   (2)   Those wishing to appeal must first file a written appeal with License
Official for decision by the Business Service Center Appeals Board. The
Business Service Center Appeals Board, or its designee, is authorized to reject
an appeal for failure to comply with the requirements of this subsection. The
following requirements for submission of an appeal must be strictly complied
with:
      (a)   The appeal must be in writing and state the reasons for the appeal.
      (b)   The appeal shall be filed with the License Official within fifteen
(15) business days after the payment of all applicable fees and penalties,
including assessments or chargebacks of an audit, and within twenty (20)
business days after receipt of the License Official's written and certified
mail notification of an assessment, charge backs of an audit, or notice of
denial or revocation.
      (c)   The written notice of appeal must be accompanied by an
administrative fee (which shall be determined by the License Official) that
will be used to partially defray the costs incurred in connection with the
administration of appeals. Payment under protest of all applicable fees and
penalties, and assessment, or audit charge backs shall be a condition precedent
to appeal. The fee will be refunded in the event of final resolution of the
appeal in favor of the appellant.
   (3)   An appeal or a hearing on revocation shall be held by the Appeals
Board within thirty (30) calendar days, or as soon as reasonably possible,
after receipt of a request for appeal or service of notice of suspension or
intent to revoke. The applicant or licensee shall be given written notice as to
the date and time of the meeting. At the meeting, all parties have the right to
be represented by counsel and to present testimony and evidence. The
proceedings shall be recorded and transcribed at the expense of the party so
requesting. The rules of evidence and procedure prescribed by the Board shall
govern the hearing.
   (4)   In the event of an appeal of business license penalties paid, the
Appeals Board may waive a business license penalty paid only if any of the
following circumstances of reasonable cause are proven by the applicant:
      (a)   An unexpected and unavoidable absence of the appellant from South
Carolina, such as being called to active military duty. In the case of a
corporation or other business entity, the absence must have been an individual
having primary authority to pay the business license fee.
      (b)   A delay caused by death or serious, incapacitating illness of the
appellant, the appellant's immediate family, or the appellant's accountant or
other third party professional charged with determining the business fee owed.
In the case of a corporation or other business entity, the death or serious,
incapacitating illness must have been an individual having primary authority to
pay the business license fee.
      (c)   The business license fee was documented as paid on time, but
inadvertently paid to another taxing entity.
      (d)   The delinquency was caused by the unavailability of necessary
records directly related to calculation of business fees, over which the
appellant had no control, which made timely payment impossible. For example,
the required records may have been destroyed by fire, flood, federally-declared
natural disaster, or actions of war or terrorism. Unavailability of records
caused by time or business pressures, employee turnover, or negligence are not
reasonable cause for waiver of business license penalties.
      (e)   The delinquency was the result of clear error on the part of the
License Official or Business Service Center staff in processing or posting
receipt of appellant's payment.
      (f)   Delay or failure caused by good faith reliance on erroneous
guidance provided by the License Official or other staff, so long as complete
and accurate information was given to the Business License Service Center, no
change in the law occurred, and the appellant produces written documentation.
   (5)   The Board shall, by majority vote of members present, render a written
decision based upon findings of fact and the application of the standards
herein which shall be served upon all parties or their representatives within
fifteen (15) calendar days, or as soon as reasonably possible, after the
hearing. The decision of the Board shall be final unless appealed to County
Council within ten (10) calendar days after service of the Board's decision.
County Council shall review the record and without further hearing affirm,
modify, or deny the appeal in the event of an error of fact by the Board. The
decision of Council shall be final unless appealed to a court of competent
jurisdiction within ten (10) calendar days after service of County Council's
decision.
(Ord. No. 069-07HR, § I, 7-24-07; Ord. No. 044-08HR, § V, 7-15-08; Ord. No.
018-09HR, § III, 4-21-09; Ord. No. 052- 21HR, § I, 11-16-21)
Section 16-20. Consent, Franchise or Business License Fee Required.
   The annual fee for use of streets or public places authorized by a consent
agreement or franchise agreement shall be set pursuant to the agreement, and
shall be consistent with limits set by State law. Existing franchise agreements
shall continue in effect until expiration dates in the agreements. Franchise
and consent fees shall not be in lieu of or be credited against business
license fees unless specifically provided by the franchise or consent
agreement.
(Ord. No. 069-07HR, § I, 7-24-07; Ord. No. 044-08HR, § V, 7-15-08; Ord. No.
052-21HR, § I, 11-16-21)
Section 16-21. Confidentiality.
   Except in accordance with proper judicial order, pursuant to an appeal, or
as otherwise provided by law, it shall be unlawful for any official or employee
to divulge or make known in any manner the amount of income or any particulars
set forth or disclosed in any report or return required under this article.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the publication of
statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports
or returns.
(Ord. No. 069-07HR, § I, 7-24-07; Ord. No. 044-08HR, § V, 7-15-08; Ord. No.
052-21HR, § I, 11-16-21)
Section 16-22. Criminal and Civil Penalties, Injunctive Relief.
   (a)   Criminal Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this article
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to
punishment under the general penalty provisions of Section 1-8 of this Code of
Ordinances: that is, shall be subject to a fine of up to $500.00 or
imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days or both. Each day It of
violation shall be considered a separate offense. Punishment for violation
shall not relieve the offender of liability for delinquent fees, penalties, and
costs provided for herein.
   (b)   Civil penalty. For non-payment of all or any part of the business
license fee, the License Official shall levy and collect a penalty of five (5%)
percent of the unpaid fee for each month or portion thereof after the due date
until paid. Penalties shall not be waived exception in accordance with
circumstances of reasonable cause set forth in Section 16-19 of this article as
determined by the Business Service Center Appeals Board.
   (c)   Injunctive Relief. The County may seek injunctive relief in a court of
competent jurisdiction as a means of enforcing the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 069-07HR, § I, 7-24-07; Ord. No. 044-08HR, § VI, 7-15-08; Ord. 018-
09HR, § IV, 4-21-09; Ord. No. 052- 21HR, § I, 11-16-21)
Sec. 16-23. Health massage, bodywork therapists, and massage establishments.
   (1)   Authority. This section is adopted pursuant to S.C. Code of Laws
Annotated Section 4-9-25 which confers upon counties the authority to "enact
regulations, resolutions, and ordinances, not inconsistent with the
Constitution and general law of this State, including the exercise of these
powers in relation to health and order in counties or respecting any subject as
appears to them necessary and proper for the security, general welfare, and
convenience of counties or for preserving health, peace, order, and good
government in them." Such "powers of a county must be liberally construed in
favor of the county and the specific mention of particular powers may not be
construed as limiting in any manner the general powers of counties." This
section further is adopted pursuant to S.C. Code of Laws Annotated Section 4-9-
30 which authorizes counties acting through their governing bodies "(14) to
enact ordinances for the implementation and enforcement of the powers granted
in this section and provide penalties for violations thereof not to exceed the
penalty jurisdiction of magistrates' courts."
   (2)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate health massage,
bodywork therapists and massage establishments in order to promote the health,
safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Richland County. In adopting
this ordinance, Richland County hereby establishes reasonable and uniform
regulations to prevent or reduce to any extent the deleterious secondary
effects of health massage, bodywork therapists and massage establishments
within the County. The provisions of this section have neither the purpose nor
the intent nor effect of restricting or denying access to health massage,
bodywork therapists and massage establishments. Among the deleterious secondary
effects of imminent and growing concern associated with the unlawful operation
of some establishments subject hereto that obtain business licenses under the
guise of legitimate health massage, body therapy or massage establishments are
a) their use as commercial sex operations, 2) prostitution, 3) the potential to
spread disease, 4) lewdness, 5) public indecency, 6) illicit sexual activity,
7) sexual assault and exploitation, and 8) human trafficking. The negative
secondary effects of businesses associated with commercial sexual exploitation
are manifest. See, e.g., City of Littleton v. Z.J Gifts D-4, LLC, 124 S. Ct.
2219 (2003); City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc., 535 U.S. 425 (2002);
Pap's A.M v. City of Erie, 529 U.S. 277 (2000); City of Renton v. Playtime
Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theatres, All U.S.
50 (1976); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); California v.
LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); Chesapeake B&M, Inc. v. Harford County, 58 F.3d
1005 (4th Cir. 1995); Giovani Carandola, Ltd. v. Fox, 470 F.3d 1074 (4th Cir.
2006); Centaur v. Richland County, 392 S.E.2d 165 (S.C. 1990); US. v.
Pendergrass, Petition to Enter a Plea of Guilty and Plea Agreement on the
Charge of Tax Evasion (3:06-00147, M.D. Term. 2007); and other cases; and on
reports of secondary effects occurring in and around such businesses,
including, but not limited to, Phoenix, Arizona (1979); Minneapolis, Minnesota
(1980); Houston, Texas (1987); Indianapolis, Indiana (1984); Amarillo, Texas
(1977); Garden Grove, California (1991); Los Angeles, California (1977);
Whittier, California (1978); Austin, Texas (1986); Seattle, Washington (1989);
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma (1986); El Paso, Texas (1986); New York City, New York
(1994); Dallas, Texas (1997); Newport News, Virginia (1996); New York Times
Square Study (1994); Phoenix, Arizona (1995-1998); Greensboro, North Carolina
(2003); Toledo, Ohio (2002); Centralia, Washington 2004; Greensboro, North
Carolina (2003); and also from the reports of "Human Trafficking in illicit
Massage Businesses," by Polaris (January 2018), which reports that in 2017,
"The United Nations estimates that more than 40 million people in the world
today are living in some form of modem slavery," and that "Illicit massage
businesses (IMBs) that front for commercial sex operations have been ubiquitous
in the American landscape for decades, with an estimate of more than 9,000
operating today."
   (3)   Findings. Based on this breadth of case law, research and data
regarding negative secondary effects of commercial sex and related operations,
the Richland County Council finds:
      (a)   Illicit massage establishments, as a category of commercial uses,
are associated with a wide variety of adverse secondary effects including, but
not limited to their use as commercial sex operations, for prostitution, to
spread disease, lewdness, public indecency, illicit sexual activity, sexual
assault and exploitation, and human trafficking.
      (b)   Each of the foregoing negative secondary effects constitutes a harm
which the County has a substantial government interest in preventing or
abating. Additionally, the County's interest in regulating illicit massage
businesses extends to future secondary effects that could occur in the County
related to such establishments as well as future such businesses that may
locate in the County. The County finds that the cases and secondary effects
documentation relied on in this ordinance are reasonably believed to be
relevant to said secondary effects.
   (4)   Exemptions. This section shall not apply to physicians, surgeons,
chiropractors, osteopaths, physical therapists or podiatrists duly licensed to
practice in the State of South Carolina, registered or licensed nurses,
athletic directors or trainers who are affiliated with an approved educational
institution or professional sports team and whose work is limited to athletic
team members, licensed personal trainers, licensed cosmetologists, barbers or
beauticians who do not give or hold themselves out to give massage treatments
other than those customarily given in such establishments.
   (5)   Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them herein, unless the context of their usage clearly
indicates a different meaning:
      (a)   "Bodywork establishment" means any building, structure, room,
place, or any establishment whose business includes advertising or offering a
massage or other massage services upon the human body for compensation by any
person whether with or without the use of mechanical, therapeutic or bathing
devices, and shall include bathhouses. This term shall not include beauty
salons or barbershops duly licensed by the State of South Carolina, or licensed
hospitals, medical clinics, or licensed physical therapy facilities or
establishments wherein registered physical therapists treat only patients
recommended and referred by a licensed physician and operate only under such
physician's direction. "Bodywork establishment" includes any business or
establishment wherein bodywork therapy is performed by a bodywork therapist.
      (b)   "Bodywork therapy" means the application of a system of structured
touch of the superficial tissues of the human body with the hand, foot, arm, or
elbow whether or not the structured touch is aided by hydrotherapy, thermal
therapy, a massage device, human hands, or the application to the human body of
an herbal preparation. Bodywork therapy includes the manual manipulation of
soft body tissues (muscle, connective tissue, tendons and ligaments) to enhance
a person's health and well-being. Bodywork therapy also includes the
application of pressure with the hands, feet, arms, or elbows for therapeutic
or relaxation purposes to the superficial or deep tissues (muscles, tendons,
ligaments, connective tissue, skin) of the body. Soft tissue health massage and
bodywork practices are designed to promote general relaxation, improve
flexibility and pliability of the soft tissues or relieve stress and muscle
hypertension, and to enhance a general sense of well-being in the person
receiving the massage or bodywork. Bodywork therapy also includes any process
consisting in kneading, rubbing or otherwise manipulating the skin of the body
of an individual, either with the hand, or by means of electrical instruments,
devices, or apparatus, but shall not include massage by duly licensed
physicians and chiropractors, registered physical therapists who treat only
patients recommended by a licensed physician and who operate only under such
physicians' direction, or massage of the face practiced by duly licensed
personnel of beauty salons or barbershops. The term "therapy" does not include
the diagnosis or treatment of illness or disease, medical procedures, or
treatment for which a license to practice medicine, chiropractic, physical
therapy, acupuncture or podiatry is required by law.
      (c)   "Bodywork therapist" means a person who performs or administers
massage or bodywork therapy, whether licensed as required by the South Carolina
Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation, or not. Bodywork therapist
includes a person who practices massage therapy or administers massages or
other massage services to a person. The term includes a licensed or an
unlicensed massage therapist, therapeutic massage practitioner, massage
technician, masseur, masseuse, body massager, body rubber, health massager, or
any derivation of those titles or similar designations.
      (d)   "Health massage establishment" or any derivative or similar
designation has the same meaning as "Bodywork establishment."
      (e)   "Health massage therapist" or any derivative or similar designation
has the same meaning as "Bodywork therapist."
      (f)   "Health massage therapy" or any derivative or similar designation
has the same meaning as "Bodywork therapy."
      (g)   "Hydrotherapy" means the use of water, vapor, or ice for treatment
of superficial tissues.
      (h)   "Illicit Massage Establishment" means any business, establishment,
undertaking or enterprise that operates in violation of the provisions of this
section.
      (i)   "Massage device" means a mechanical device that mimics or enhances
bodywork therapy by means of vibration or other artificial action.
      (j)   "Massage establishment" or any derivative or similar designation
has the same meaning as "Bodywork establishment."
      (k)   "Massage therapy" or any derivative or similar designation has the
same meaning as "Bodywork therapy."
      (l)   "Massage therapist" or any derivative or similar designation has
the same meaning as “Bodywork therapist.”
      (m)   "Thermal therapy" means the use of ice or a heat lamp or moist heat
on superficial tissues.
   (6)   Use of only licensed therapists; posting of license. No person or
business or establishment shall permit anyone to perform bodywork, health
massage or massage work upon the premises operated by that person or business
or establishment unless the individual performing the bodywork, health massage
or massage work has been issued a license as required by this article. Every
bodywork therapist, health massage therapist and massage therapist shall post
the license required by this article in the therapist's work area at all time.
A bodywork, health massage or massage establishment or a place of business that
advertises bodywork, health massage or massage therapy or offers such work,
therapy or other massage services must be licensed by the South Carolina
Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation in accordance with Title 40,
Professions and Occupations, Chapter 30, the "Massage/Bodywork Practice Act,"
and must display the establishment's license along with any Richland County
business license needed for the establishment to operate in a prominent
location available for inspection by the public and by law enforcement and code
enforcement officers and inspectors.
   (7)   Maintenance of premises and equipment. It shall be the duty of every
person conducting or operating a bodywork, health massage or massage
establishment to keep the establishment in a clean and sanitary condition at
all times. All instruments and mechanical, therapeutic and bathing devices or
parts thereof that come into contact with the human body shall be sterilized on
a regular basis and shall be rendered free from harmful organisms in a manner
consistent with state laws and local ordinances and regulations. Towels and
linens furnished for use of one patron shall not be furnished for use of
another until thoroughly laundered.
   (8)   Operation in connection with living or sleeping quarters prohibited. A
bodywork, health massage and massage establishment shall not contain rooms used
wholly or in part for residential or sleeping purposes unless such
establishment is located within and properly zoned as a residence, in which
case the establishment shall maintain separation from rooms used wholly or in
part for residential or sleeping purposes by a solid wall or by a wall with a
solid door which shall be inaccessible other than for emergency purposes during
business hours; provided, however, this provision shall not apply to a hotel
which houses an on-premises spa, massage, or bodywork establishment.
   (9)   Hours of operation. No bodywork, health massage or massage
establishment shall be kept open for any purpose between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 5:00 a.m. on any day.
   (10)   Management to keep list of employees. The owner, manager, operator or
person in charge of a bodywork, health massage or massage establishment shall
maintain on the premises a list of the names and addresses of all employees
therein, whether such employees are on duty or off duty, and such list shall be
made available for inspection upon the request of any law enforcement or code
enforcement officer. Failure to comply with this provision shall be an offense.
   (11)   Employment of persons found guilty of criminal sexual offenses. It
shall be unlawful for any person operating a bodywork, health massage or
massage establishment to knowingly employ, in any capacity, any person who has
a prior conviction for an offense involving sexual misconduct with a child,
including sexual abuse, sexual assault, sexual conduct, sexual molestation or
sexual exploitation.
   Hygiene. All massage therapists and operators at a massage establishment
shall wash their hands thoroughly before administering massage manipulations to
any patron, and shall at all times observe proper cleanliness and hygiene
practices.
   (12)   Access; right of entry. Any officer appointed or employed by any law
enforcement agency of this State, or any Richland County code enforcement
officer commissioned pursuant to S.C. Code of Laws Annotated Section 4-9-145,
may enter the premises of a bodywork, health massage or massage establishment
for purposes of inspection or investigation to ensure compliance with this
article; provided, however, no officer may enter any room where bodywork
therapy is in progress without the express consent of the person receiving the
service, or a warrant. If entry and access to the premises of the bodywork,
health massage or massage establishment is denied, entry may be made under the
authority of a warrant or other lawful process.
   (13)   Penalties. Failure to comply with any of the requirements of this
section shall constitute a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding five
hundred dollars ($500.00) and imprisonment not exceeding thirty (30) days. Each
day any violation of this section continues shall constitute a separate
offense. Nothing in this section prevents the County or any interested party
from seeking an injunction, issuing a stop work order or otherwise attempting
to enforce the provisions of this section or to obtain relief or any remedy
provided for by law.
   (14)   Cumulative effect. The provisions of this section are cumulative to
and not in lieu of laws and other ordinances, such as sexually oriented
business and nuisance laws and ordinances, applicable to the businesses
described in this section.
   (15)   Educational institutions. Nothing in this section may be construed so
as to prevent the teaching of bodywork, health massage or massage in the County
at a duly licensed or authorized bodywork, health massage or massage school.
(Ord. No. 019-19HR, § I, 5-7-19)
Sec. 16-24. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. RESERVED
   Editor’s note--Ord. No. 1701-87, § 3, effective Dec. 15, 1987, repealed Art.
II, §§
16-11--
16-16, concerning peddlers, hawkers, and transient merchants, which derived
from Ord. No. 804-81, effective April 15, 1981.
Secs. 16-25--16-27. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS
   Editor’s note--Ord. No. 031-02HR, § III, effective July 9, 2002, repealed
former Art. III, §§
16-28--
16-33, concerning solicitors, which derived from the 1976 Code, §§ 11-5001--11-
5005; Ord. No. 341-76, effective Sept. 15, 1976; and Ord. No. 788-81, effective
April 1, 1981.
Sec. 16-28. Definitions.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   Charitable organization means a person:
      (1)   Determined by the Internal Revenue Service to be a tax exempt
organization pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code; or
      (2)   That is or holds itself out to be established for any benevolent,
social welfare, scientific, educational, environmental, philanthropic, humane,
patriotic, public health, civic, or other eleemosynary purpose, or for the
benefit of law enforcement personnel, firefighters, or other persons who
protect the public safety; or
      (3)   That employs a charitable appeal as the basis of solicitation or an
appeal that suggests that there is a charitable purpose to a solicitation, or
that solicits or obtains contributions solicited from the public for a
charitable purpose.
   Charitable purpose means a purpose described in Section 501(c)(3) of the
Internal Revenue Code or a benevolent, social welfare, scientific, educational,
environmental, philanthropic, humane, patriotic, public health, civic, or other
eleemosynary objective, including an objective of an organization of law
enforcement personnel, firefighters, or other persons who protect the public
safety if a stated purpose of the solicitations includes a benefit to a person
outside the actual service membership of the organization.
   Panhandle or panhandling means to go door- to-door or on the streets asking
for monetary contributions for the personal benefit of the individual asking.
   Peddle means to offer goods for sale from door-to-door, or on the streets by
outcry, or by attracting the attention of persons by exposing goods in a public
place, or by placards, labels, or signals.
   Person means an individual, an organization, a trust, a foundation, a group,
an association, a partnership, a corporation, a society, or a combination of
them.
   Solicit and solicitation means to request and the request for money, credit,
property, financial assistance, or other thing of value, or a portion of it, to
be used for a charitable purpose or to benefit a charitable organization. A
solicitation takes place whether or not the person making the request receives
a contribution.
(Ord. 031-02HR, § I, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 011-08HR, § I, 3-4-08)
Sec. 16-29. Administration.
   No person shall solicit or peddle, anywhere in the unincorporated areas of
the county unless they have met the requirements of this article.
(Ord. 031-02HR, § I, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 011-08HR, § I, 3-4-08)
Sec. 16-30. Peddler’s license required for non-charitable purposes.
   (a)    License required. Any person desiring to peddle goods, wares, and/or
merchandise for non-charitable purposes, anywhere in the unincorporated area of
the county, shall first acquire the state peddlers license and meet all
regulations pursuant to the provisions of S.C. Code §§ 40-41-10, et seq., as
amended; and shall also meet all local and state laws and regulations.
   (b)    Application for license. An applicant for a peddlers license shall be
required to furnish information concerning his/her business, including, but not
limited to the following: gross receipts, as reflected on federal tax returns,
for the previous calendar year; type of merchandise sold; address of considered
place of business; and companies, firms, or corporations with which the
applicant is affiliated or for which s/he 282is a representative. Falsification
of any information on a permit application shall be grounds for the revocation
of any permit issued.
   (c)    Fees. The fee for a peddlers license shall be fifty dollars ($50.00).
(Ord. 031-02HR, § I, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 011-08HR, § I, 3-4-08)
Sec. 16-31. Solicitation of charitable funds.
   Any charitable organization desiring to solicit contributions within the
unincorporated area of the county shall comply with the requirements of S.C.
Code §§ 33-56-10, et seq., as amended.
(Ord. 031-02HR, § I, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 011-08HR, § I, 3-4-08)
Sec. 16-32. Permit required prior to soliciting funds from motorists.
   (a)   Only rescue squads, volunteer fire departments, and charitable
organizations in this State may solicit funds from motorists on highways and
streets located within the unincorporated area of the county.
   (b)   Prior to soliciting such funds, the organization shall apply for and
acquire a permit from the County Council. All provisions of Section 5-27-910 of
the S.C. Code of Laws, as amended, shall be followed.
   (c)   The organization shall complete the permit application form, including
the specific date(s), time(s), and location(s) of the desired solicitation.
   (d)   No more than two (2) permits shall be issued to an organization in any
one calendar year, and each permit shall be valid for no longer than seven (7)
consecutive days.
(Ord. 031-02HR, § I, 7-9-02; Ord. 014-04HR, § I, 4-6-04; Ord. No. 011-08HR, §
I, 3-4-08)
Sec. 16-33. Panhandling prohibited.
   No person shall engage in panhandling activities in the unincorporated areas
of Richland County.
(Ord. 031-02HR, § I, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 011-08HR, § I, 3-4-08)
Sec. 16-34. Solicitation and/or peddling goods on county property.
   In addition to the requirements of this article, any person who wishes to
solicit funds and/or peddle goods in county-owned buildings or on county-owned
property, shall comply with the following:
   (a)   County employees shall first obtain approval from their department
directors.
   (b)   All other persons shall first obtain approval from the County
Administrator or the County Administrator’s designee.
(Ord. 031-02HR, § I, 7-9-02)
Sec. 16-35. Enforcement.
   The County Administrator or other authorized agent of the County may make
systematic inspections of people or businesses governed by this Article within
the County to ensure compliance with this Article. Records of inspections shall
not be deemed public records.
(Ord. No. 011-08HR, § I, 3-4-08)
Sec. 16-36. Violations.
   Any person violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to punishment under the
general penalty provisions of Section
1-8 of this Code of Ordinances: that is, shall be subject to a fine of up to
$500.00 or imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days or both. Each day of
violation shall be considered a separate offense. Punishment for violation
shall not relieve the offender of liability for delinquent fees, penalties, and
costs provided for herein.
(Ord. No. 011-08HR, § I, 3-4-08)
Secs. 16-37--16-40. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. ALARM BUSINESSES, USERS AND SYSTEMS
   Editor’s note--Ord. No. 1315-85, §§ 1--8, effective July 1, 1985, being
nonamendatory of the Code, has been included in
Ch. 16 as Art. IV, §§
16-41--
16-48, at the discretion of the editor.
Sec. 16-41. Short title.
   This article shall hereby be known as the “Burglar Alarm Control Ordinance.”
(Ord. No. 1315-85, § 1, 7-1-85)
Sec. 16-42. Purpose and scope.
   (a)    Purpose. The purpose of this article is to protect the sheriff’s
department emergency services of this county from misuse.
   (b)    Scope. This article governs and regulates alarm systems, alarm users,
and alarm businesses, and establishes fees, provides for revocation of permits,
and provides for the punishment of violations within this article.
(Ord. No. 1315-85, § 2, 7-1-85)
Sec. 16-43. Definitions.
   (a)    Alarm business means the business by any individual, partnership,
corporation, or other entity selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing,
repairing, altering, replacing, moving, or installing any alarm system or
causing to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced,
moved or installed any alarm system in or on any building, structure, or
facility.
   (b)    Alarm system means any assembly of equipment, mechanical or
electrical, installed by an alarm business, arranged to signal the occurrence
of an illegal entry or other activity requiring urgent attention and to which
sheriff’s department personnel may be expected to respond. Excluded are user-
installed internal alarms which do not signal the sheriff’s department or
activate a loud bell or horn outside the premises.
   (c)    Alarm user means a person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind in control of any building,
structure or facility where an alarm system is maintained.
   (d)    Automatic dialing device means a device which is interconnected to a
telephone line and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and
transmit by a voice message an emergency message indicating the need for an
emergency response.
   (e)    Central station means an office to which remote alarm and supervisory
signaling devices are connected, where operators supervise circuits and where
guards are maintained continuously to investigate signals.
   (f)    Direct connect means an alarm system which has the capability of
transmitting system signals to and receiving them at the county sheriff’s
department communication center.
   (g)    False alarm means the activation of an alarm system through
mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence of
the owner or lessee of an alarm system or of his employees or agents. Such
terminology does not include, for example, alarms caused by hurricanes,
tornadoes, earthquakes or other similarly violent conditions, or alarms caused
by illegal entry or attempted entry into a protected premises or illegal
tampering with a protected premises or alarm system.
   (h)    Interconnect means to connect an alarm system including an automatic
dialing device to a telephone line, either directly or through a mechanical
device that utilizes the telephone, for the purpose of using the telephone line
to transmit a message upon the activation of the alarm system.
   (i)    Alarm permit division means the division of the city authorized to
issue permits and licenses and collect the fees for same as provided herein.
   (j)    Local alarms means those alarms which activate an audible signal
within the proximity of the premises only.
   (k)    Permit year means a twelve-month period beginning with the first of
July and ending on the last day of June of each year.
   (l)    Primary trunkline means a telephone line leading directly into the
county sheriff’s department which is for the purpose of handling emergency
calls on a person-to-person basis, and which is identified by a specific number
in the telephone directory.
(Ord. No. 1315-85, § 3, 7-1-85; Ord. No. 014-99HR, § I, 5-4-99)
Sec. 16-44. Alarm business permit.
   (a)    Any individual, partnership, corporation or other entity engaging in
an alarm business within the unincorporated area of Richland County shall apply
to the alarm permit division of the city for a permit to operate. Said
application shall be on a form to be furnished by said division and signed by
the individual proprietor of such business, or by a partner, or by the proper
corporate official as is appropriate for the form of the business seeking the
permit, and shall include:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the alarm business and
the type of business entity it is (individual, partnership, or corporate). The
name, address, and telephone number of the individual proprietor, partners, or
directors and principal officers, depending on the nature of the entity
applying.
      (2)   A description of the alarm systems and devices offered for sale or
lease to the public and a description of any services related to alarm devices
offered to the public.
      (3)   A list of all felony and misdemeanor convictions of individual
proprietors, partners, directors, principal employees and officers of the
applicant business. The date and location of each conviction shall also be
included.
      (4)   A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been denied a
license or permit in any jurisdiction to engage in the alarm business or has
had such license or permit revoked.
      (5)   A statement as to the length of time the applicant has been engaged
in the alarm business and where engaged.
      (6)   A statement that the applicant agrees to update the above
information upon application for renewal of alarm permit at least every two (2)
years as provided below.
   (b)    Permit applications shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of
one hundred dollars ($100.00) to cover the costs to Richland County of
processing the applications as described herein.
   (c)    Alarm businesses already engaged in providing services and/or alarm
system equipment in the unincorporated area of Richland County on the effective
date of this article shall submit an application for a permit no later than
July 1, 1985. Said applicants may continue to do business while their permit
applications are being processed. An applicant not previously engaged in
providing services as an alarm business in the unincorporated area of Richland
County on the effective date of this article shall not commence doing business
until his application is approved.
   (d)    The alarm permit division shall review each application for a permit
and may conduct an investigation to determine whether the facts set forth in
the application are true. The division shall within sixty (60) days after
receipt of an application for such permit, either approve or deny issuance of
same and, accordingly, forward written notification to the applicant of said
decision. A written notification of denial shall include the basis for said
finding and if the grounds for denial are subject to correction, applicant
shall be given ten (10) days after receipt of such notice within which to make
the required connection.
   (e)    The alarm permit division may deny the application for an original or
renewed alarm business permit if the division finds that the applicant or the
individual having the authority and the responsibility for the management and
operation of the applicant’s alarm business within the unincorporated area of
Richland County or any of the applicants, owners, partners, or principal
corporate officers have:
      (1)   Committed any act which, if committed by a permittee, would be
grounds for revocation of a permit under the provisions of this article; or
      (2)   While unpermitted, knowingly and willfully committed or aided and
abetted in the commission of any act for which a permit is required by this
article; or
      (3)   Been convicted in any jurisdiction of a felony or misdemeanor or
the police alarm administrator finds that such conviction reflects unfavorably
on the fitness of the applicant to engage in the alarm business.
   (f)    Application for renewal of an alarm business permit shall be made at
least every two (2) years within thirty (30) days immediately preceding July 1
of every other year, and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of fifty
dollars ($50.00). Applicants for renewal may continue to do business while
their renewal application is being processed.
   (g)    No permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be
assigned or transferred either by operation of law or otherwise.
(Ord. No. 1315-85, § 4, 7-1-85; Ord. No. 014-99HR, § II, 5-4-99)
Sec. 16-45. Control of false alarms.
   (a)    Whenever sheriff’s department personnel respond to an activated alarm
system, the responding officer(s) shall make every reasonable effort to seek
the cause of the alarm system’s activation. If no sign or evidence of illegal
entry, attempted illegal entry, tampering or other criminal action is found,
the officer(s) may determine that the alarm is a false alarm.
   (b)   When the responding officer(s) return to service, the sheriff’s
department dispatcher shall be notified whether an alarm activation was
determined to be founded or unfounded, and in the case of unfounded alarms,
whether the activation appears to be the result of human, mechanical, or other
causes. The dispatcher shall record these findings on an alarm response log,
noting the date, time, location, and cause of each alarm response.
   (c)    The sheriff’s department personnel shall review the alarm response
logs on a frequent basis in order to monitor the accumulation of significant
numbers of false alarms at particular locations. Personnel shall notify by
certified mail any alarm user which has registered five (5) false alarms on the
alarm response log within a permit year, citing the location and date of each
said false alarm. Said notice shall recommend that appropriate action be taken
on the part of the alarm user to alleviate the causes of such false alarms, and
shall include a statement that an accumulation of eight (8) false alarms within
a permit year shall be cause for further enforcement action on the part of the
county.
   (d)    The accumulation of eight (8) false alarms at one (1) location within
a permit year constitutes a violation of this section, and enforcement shall
take place via the procedure set out in section
16-48. No alarm user shall be charged with accumulating more than two (2) false
alarms in any twenty-four-hour period, unless such false alarms shall be caused
by alarm user error. All false alarms caused by alarm user error shall count
against the alarm user’s total accumulation during the permit year.
(Ord. No. 1315-85, § 5, 7-1-85; Ord. No. 014-99HR, 5-4-99)
Sec. 16-46. Specific alarm provisions.
   (a)    Automatic telephone dialing devices:
      (1)   No automatic dialing device shall be interconnected to a primary
trunkline after the effective date of this article.
      (2)   Those persons who owned or leased automatic dialing systems prior
to the effective date of this article should not be required to disconnect the
same from the primary trunkline. The owner or lessee of such devices, however,
otherwise shall be subject to the provisions of this article.
      (3)   The owner or lessee of an automatic dialing device which becomes
unserviceable shall not be allowed to replace that system with another
automatic dialing system.
   (b)    Audible signals--Standards and procedures:
      (1)   All alarm systems installed after July 1, 1985, which use an
audible horn or bell shall be equipped with a device that will shut off such
horn or bell within twenty (20) minutes after activation of the alarm system.
Prior to January 1, 1986, all alarm systems in operation in the county must be
modified with the addition of a device that will shut off the horn or bell
within twenty (20) minutes after activation of the alarm.
      (2)   Any alarm system emitting a continuous and uninterrupted signal for
more than thirty (30) minutes which cannot be shut off or otherwise curtailed
due to the absence or unavailability of the alarm user and which disturbs the
peace, comfort or repose of a community, a neighborhood or a considerable
number of inhabitants of the area where the alarm system is located, shall
constitute a public nuisance.
      (3)   Upon receiving complaints regarding such a continuous and
uninterrupted signal, the sheriff’s department shall endeavor to contact the
alarm user, or members of the alarm user’s family, or other such persons as may
be made known to sheriff’s department personnel in an effort to abate the
nuisance. The sheriff’s department shall cause to be recorded the names and
addresses of all complainants and the time each complaint was made.
      (4)   In the event that the sheriff’s department is unable to contact the
alarm user, or members of the alarm user’s family, or other persons able to
deactivate the alarm or if the aforesaid persons cannot or will not curtail the
audible signal being emitted by the alarm system, and if the sheriff’s
department is otherwise unable to abate the nuisance, it may direct a deputy or
a firefighter or a qualified alarm technician to take whatever action may be
reasonable and necessary to abate the nuisance.
      (5)   The sounding of an audible horn or bell for more than twenty (20)
minutes shall constitute a violation of this section, and enforcement shall
take place via the procedure set out in section
16-48.
   (c)    Every alarm business selling, leasing, or furnishing to any user an
alarm system which is installed on premises located in the unincorporated areas
of Richland County shall furnish the user with instructions that provide
information to enable the user to operate the alarm system properly and to
obtain service for the alarm system at any time.
(Ord. No. 1315-85, § 6, 7-1-85; Ord. No. 1398-85, § 1, 12-3-85)
Sec. 16-47. Interpretation.
   This article shall be liberally construed to effect the purpose of the
sections included herein and to achieve uniform interpretation and application
of the respective sections.
(Ord. No. 1315-85, § 7, 7-1-85)
Sec. 16-48. Enforcement and penalties.
   (a)   Enforcement of the provisions of this article shall be accomplished
through magistrate's court.
   (b)   Notice of each false alarm response will be posted at the alarm
location, except that on the fourth false alarm response notice will be given
via posting and certified mail. After the alarm location has accumulated a
total of eight (8) false alarms within a permit year, each subsequent false
alarm response by the sheriff’s department will result in the issuance of a
citation fine of one hundred ($100.00) dollars.
   (c)   At the appointed date and time, the deputy issuing the citation will
present the necessary evidence to prove that a violation of this article has
occurred.
   (d)   Upon a finding by the magistrate that a violation of this article has
occurred, the alarm user shall be required to pay the one hundred ($100.00)
dollar fine, which will be returned to the county general fund.
   (e)   An alarm user which is a governmental unit or entity shall be subject
to the provisions of this article, except that it shall not be required to pay
any fine. Such unit or entity shall, however, be required to appear in
magistrate's court if summoned and explain the cause of the false alarms and
what remedy is proposed.
(Ord. No. 1315-85, § 8, 7-1-85; Ord. No. 014-99HR, § IV, 5-4-99)
Secs. 16-49--16-60. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. MARRIAGE LICENSES
Sec. 16-61. Fee for license.
   There is established a fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for a marriage
license issued by the office of the probate court in Richland County. All
revenue derived from this fee shall be deposited in the general fund of the
county.
(Ord. No. 071-94, § I, 10-4-94)
Secs. 16-62--16-64. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. EQUAL ENJOYMENT AND PRIVILEGES TO PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS
Sec. 16-65. Title.
   This article shall be known and may be cited as the Richland County “Public
Accommodations Ordinance.”
(Ord. No. 030-11HR, § II, 6-7-11)
Sec. 16-66. Policy; purpose of law.
   It is the policy of Richland County that no person shall be discriminated
against in the full and equal enjoyment of the goods, services, facilities,
privileges, advantages and accommodations of any place of public accommodation
on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, age, national origin, familial
status, disability or sexual orientation.
   The general purpose of this article is to safeguard all individuals within
the unincorporated areas of Richland County from discrimination in the equal
enjoyment and privileges to public accommodations because of race, color,
religion, national origin, sex, familial status, disability, or sexual
orientation; thereby to protect their interest in personal dignity and freedom
from humiliation; to secure Richland County against domestic strife and unrest
which would menace its democratic institutions; to preserve the public health
and general welfare; and to further the interests, rights, and privileges of
individuals within the Richland County.
(Ord. No. 030-11HR, § II, 6-7-11)
Sec. 16-67. Definitions.
   Except where the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following terms as
used in this article shall have the following meanings:
   Disability means a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits
one or more of the major life activities of the individual, a record of such
impairment or being regarded as having such impairment.
   Discrimination means any direct or indirect act or practice of exclusion,
distinction, restriction, segregation, limitation, refusal, denial, or any
other act or practice of differentiation or preference in the treatment of a
person or persons because of race, color, religion, national origin, age, sex,
familial status, disability or sexual orientation in the aiding, abetting,
inciting, coercing or compelling thereof.
   Place of public accommodation means any place which serves the public and
requires a license or permit issued by the State of South Carolina, its
agencies, or Richland County to operate, including, but not limited to:
   (1)   Any inn, hotel, motel, or other establishment which provides lodging
to transient guests, other than an establishment located within a building
which contains not more than five rooms for rent or hire and which is actually
occupied by the proprietor of such establishment as his residence;
   (2)   Any restaurant, cafeteria, lunchroom, lunch counter, soda fountain, or
other facility principally engaged in selling food for consumption on the
premises, including, but not limited to, any such facility located on the
premises of any retail establishment, or any gasoline station;
   (3)   Any hospital, clinic, or other medical facility which provides
overnight accommodations;
   (4)   Any retail or wholesale establishment;
   (5)   Any motion picture house, theater, concert hall, billiard parlor,
saloon, barroom, golf course, sports arena, stadium, or other place of
amusement, exhibition, recreation, or entertainment; and,
   (6)   Any establishment which is physically located within the premises of
any establishment otherwise covered by this article, and which holds itself out
as serving patrons of such covered establishment.
   Sexual orientation means a person's real or perceived heterosexuality,
homosexuality or bisexuality, or gender identity or expression.
(Ord. No. 030-11HR, § II, 6-7-11)
Sec. 16-68. Prohibition of discrimination in a place of public accommodation.
   No person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a place of
public accommodation, or any employee thereof, shall discriminate against any
person in the full and equal enjoyment of the goods, services, facilities,
privileges, advantages and accommodations of such place on the basis of that
person's race, color, religion, sex, age, national origin, familial status,
disability, or sexual orientation.
(Ord. No. 030-11HR, § II, 6-7-11)
Sec. 16-69. Exemption from public accommodations provisions.
   The provisions of this article do not apply to a private club or other
establishment not in fact open to the general public.
(Ord. No. 030-11HR, § II, 6-7-11)
Sec. 16-70. Enforcement and penalties.
   In addition to appropriate civil and/or equitable remedies for enforcement
of this article, a person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a
place of public accommodation, or is an employee thereof, and who fails to
comply with the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an
infraction. An infraction is punishable by a fine of five hundred dollars
($500). Each day on which a violation of this Article occurs shall be
considered a separate and distinct infraction.
(Ord. No. 030-11HR, § II, 6-7-11)
ARTICLE VII. RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY REGISTRATION AND REGULATIONS
Sec. 16-71. Purpose.
   The general purpose of this article is to safeguard all neighborhoods within
the unincorporated areas of Richland County from blight and unsafe living
conditions by requiring the owners, tenants, property management companies, and
property managers to share equally in the burden and liability of the
compliance with all county property and building related ordinances and
regulations.
(Ord. No. 001-23HR, § I, 2-7-23)
Sec. 16-72. Registration; business license.
   (a)   The owner of any non-owner occupied and habitable residential property
or unit shall register such property or unit with the county's online database
within thirty (30) days of such property or unit becoming non-owner occupied
and habitable. For the purpose of this article only, habitable shall mean
capable of being lived in as evidenced by a certificate of occupancy and/or a
legal electric supply and running water. Registration shall include:
      (1)   Property address;
      (2)   Owner's mailing address;
      (3)   Owner's phone number;
      (4)   Owner's email address, if any;
      (5)   If the owner shall not reside within fifty (50) miles of the
registered address or within Richland County, then all of the above information
is also required of an authorized agent residing within the fifty (50) mile
radius or Richland County.
   (b)   Any person or entity owning more than one (1) non-owner occupied
residential property or unit within unincorporated Richland County that is
leased or offered for lease for thirty (30) days or longer must obtain a
business license; provided, however, that those persons or entities contracting
with a properly licensed property manager or property management company for
management of such properties or units shall be exempt from such requirement.
If at any time such property manager or company shall fail to properly obtain
or maintain a business license within Richland County, it shall be the
responsibility of the owner to obtain such license on its own behalf.
(Ord. No. 001-23HR, § I, 2-7-23)
Sec. 16-73. Enforcement and penalties.
   (a)   It shall be the responsibility of the owner, property manager,
property management company, and tenant, each individually and collectively, to
comply with all Richland County ordinances related to property maintenance,
weeds and rank vegetation, zoning, building regulations, and building safety,
and each person or entity may be cited for a violation of such county
ordinance; provided, however, a tenant may only be cited for a violation of
zoning or building regulations if there is affirmative evidence that the tenant
actively constructed any structure or created a use in violation of such
ordinances.
   (b)   In addition to appropriate civil and/or equitable remedies for
enforcement of this article, any person convicted of violating this section
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in accordance with the
provisions of section
1-8 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 001-23HR, § I, 2-7-23)
Secs. 16-74--16-79. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. SHORT-TERM RENTALS
Sec. 16-80. Applicability.
   Unless otherwise specified, the requirements and provisions of this article
shall apply to owner-occupied and non-owner-occupied short-term rentals
(collectively called “short-term rentals”) made available to occupants for
periods of less than thirty (30) consecutive days in the unincorporated area of
Richland County. This article does not apply to rentals rented for a period of
more than thirty (30) days or hotels, motels, bed and breakfast establishments,
or inns that are subject to and compliant with the county's business license
and other applicable Code requirements.
(Ord. No. 007-24HR, § I, 4-9-24)
Sec. 16-81. Definitions.
   Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purposes of this article, mean:
   Citation. A charge or formal written accusation of violation of a county,
state or federal law, regulation or ordinance.
   Guest. Any person who occupies a short-term rental.
   Non-owner occupied. A property that is not classified as owner-occupied by
the Richland County Assessor’s Office and is primarily used for rent for
transient occupancy by guests.
   Overnight occupancy. The occupancy of a premises between the hours of 12:00
a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
   Owner-occupied. A property that is lawfully classified as owner-occupied by
the Richland County Assessor’s Office and is receiving the four-percent (4%)
special assessment ratio.
   Responsible local representative. A person having his or her place of
residence or business office within forty- five (45) miles of the short-term
rental property and designated by the property owner as the agent responsible
for operating such property or portion of property in compliance with the
county’s ordinances and having been authorized by appointment to accept service
of process on behalf of the owner pursuant to Rule 4(d)(1) of the South
Carolina Rules of Civil Procedure.
   Short-term rental. Leasing of a short-term rental property or permitting the
occupancy of a short-term rental property or other property by a lease or any
other form of agreement. Hotels, motels, bed and breakfast establishments, and
inns are excluded from this definition.
   Short-term rental property. Any residential property, either owner-occupied
or non-owner occupied, in the unincorporated area of Richland County that, in
whole or in part, is offered for lease or occupancy under a lease or any other
form of agreement for periods of less than thirty (30) days.
   Transient occupancy. The lease or occupancy of a guest for a period of not
more than thirty (30) consecutive days.
(Ord. No. 007-24HR, § I, 4-9-24)
Sec. 16-82. Short-term rental regulations.
   The following regulations apply to all properties being used as a short-term
rental in the unincorporated area of Richland County:
   (a)   Any advertisement for a short-term rental by the owner or responsible
local representative is deemed sufficient to determine that a property or
portion of a property is being offered as a short-term rental.
   (b)   The owner or responsible local representative offering a property or
portion of a property as a short-term rental shall obtain a business license
and comply with all business license and revenue collection laws of the
Richland County and State of South Carolina.
   (c)   The owner or responsible local representative of a permitted short-
term rental shall ensure the short-term rental property complies with all
county ordinances at all times.
   (d)   A safety inspection to ensure compliance with the provisions of this
article may be performed by the county or its designated third-party as deemed
necessary by the county. The county must provide the owner or responsible local
representative with twenty-four (24) hours’ notice unless a serious violation
of a county, state or federal law, regulation or ordinance exists and immediate
remediation is necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the
immediate area.
   (e)   The property owner or responsible local representative shall maintain
the following which shall be made available to the county upon request:
      (1)   For a period of two (2) years, records demonstrating compliance
with these provisions, including but not limited to, information demonstrating
residency, if required, and the number of days per calendar year the
residential unit has been rented as a short-term rental; and
      (2)   The name and phone number of each short-term guest that booked the
short-term rental for the previous two (2) years.
   (f)   The property owner or responsible local representative must be willing
to take phone calls at all times to address issues with the short-term rental.
The responsible local representative must be authorized to accept service of
process on behalf of the owner.
   (g)   The guest making the booking or reservation for a short-term rental
shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age.
   (h)   The short-term rental shall not be available for occupancy for a
period of less than one (1) night.
   (i)   At a minimum, the following shall be made available in written form to
each short-term guest:
      (1)   Emergency contact numbers;
      (2)   The name and contact information for the owner or responsible local
representative;
      (3)   Instructions or a diagram of the designated parking spaces; and
      (4)   All short-term rental property rules imposed on guests by the
owner.
   (j)   Two (2) parking spaces per short-term rental property must be made
available and designated. Guests must be notified of the parking plan and the
maximum number of vehicles allowed.
   (k)   The maximum overnight occupancy of a short-term rental shall not
exceed two (2) persons, excluding minor children, per bedroom, as defined in
the International Building Code, plus two (2) additional people per dwelling
unit.
   (l)   The owner or responsible local representative shall be responsible for
determining that any guest occupying the short-term rental is listed in the
booking or reservation for the short-term rental.
(Ord. No. 007-24HR, § I, 4-9-24)
Sec. 16-83. Violations.
   (a)   It is a violation of this article to:
      (1)   Lease or advertise a property or portion of a property as a short-
term rental without first complying with the requirements of this article; or
      (2)   Otherwise fail to comply with a requirement of this article.
   (b)   In addition to appropriate civil and equitable remedies for the
enforcement of this article, an owner or responsible local representative who
violates the provisions of this article is deemed guilty of an infraction. An
infraction is subject to punishment under the general penalty provisions of
Section
1-8 of this Code of Ordinances. Each day of violation is considered a separate
offense.
(Ord. No. 007-24HR, § I, 4-9-24)
CHAPTER 17: MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC*
   *Cross reference(s)--General penalty for code violations, §
1-8; planning,
Ch. 20; roads, highways and bridges,
Ch. 21; vehicles for hire,
Ch. 25.
   State law reference(s)--Powers of local authorities, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-
710.
ARTICLE I. REGULATIONS REGARDING COUNTY OWNED OR LEASED PROPERTY
Sec. 17-1. Traffic on county office property.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle on the
grounds of the land of any county office:
      (1)   To drive such vehicle on any traffic lane designated as one-way in
a direction opposite to the indicated flow of traffic; or
      (2)   To drive such vehicle so as to enter, exit, turn or fail to stop,
contrary to any posted traffic control sign; or
      (3)   To drive such vehicle recklessly or in excess of 15 miles per hour.
   (b)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be fined ten
dollars.
(Code 1976, § 10-2001; Ord. No. 449-77, § 2, 10-26-77; Ord. No. 061-01HR, § I,
9-4-01)
Sec. 17-2. Parking on county office property.
   (a)   There are hereby established the following regulations to govern use
of parking facilities on the grounds of county owned or leased properties:
      (1)   All parking spaces shall be designated by the county
administrator's office for use by employees of the county or for the use of
county vehicles or for use by the public. The administrator may impose a
reasonable fee for the use of such spaces.
      (2)   Each vehicle authorized to occupy an assigned employee parking
space shall display an official identification decal.
      (3)   No vehicle without the appropriate decal shall occupy any assigned
employee parking space.
      (4)   No employee shall park a vehicle in any numbered assigned parking
space except that assigned to such person and for which a valid decal or
temporary permit is displayed as provided herein.
      (5)   All assignments and decals for employee parking will be issued by
the county finance department. No other office, department head, or person
shall grant parking assignments.
      (6)   The first decal will be issued at no charge. This decal shall be
placed on the left rear bumper (and left front bumper if two (2) decals are
issued). If a decal is desired by an individual for a second or alternative
vehicle, the cost per decal will be an amount set by the county finance
department, based on the current cost to obtain parking decals. This fee will
be paid to the county finance department.
      (7)   Each department head will submit a list containing the names of
those employees who are to be issued decals. This list will include at a
minimum: tag number, make of car, color, and office location of the employee.
      (8)   Each department will notify the finance department when a space is
no longer needed or a change in assignment is desired.
      (9)   Any county employee who resigns or is otherwise terminated from
employment shall on the last day of employment return his or her parking card
to the county finance department. Failure to do so shall result in the
withholding of that employee's last paycheck until such card is returned.
      (10)   Reserved parking spaces will be provided at the county
administration building for use by the county council, department directors,
and other personnel. When these spaces are reserved, they will be marked for
such use and will become a tow-away zone.
      (11)   Reserved parking at the county judicial center and in nearby
designated areas shall be assigned in priority order as follows:
         a.   Permanent judges and judicial officers (location on a seniority
basis);
         b.   Visiting judges and judicial officers;
         c.   Sheriffs department official vehicles;
         d.   Other department heads; and
         e.   Other personnel designated by department heads (available spaces
allocated on a percentage basis, based on the number of employees in the
department compared to the number of total full and part-time employees working
at the courthouse).
      (12)   Non-county vehicles shall not be left on county premises for more
than 48 hours without notice to a county security officer.
      (13)   No vehicle shall park in an unauthorized parking space.
      (14)   No vehicle shall park in a marked fire lane, a bus or taxi zone, a
loading zone, a service or maintenance vehicle zone, or a space reserved for
sheriff's vehicles unless properly authorized.
      (15)   No vehicle shall block the ingress or egress of another vehicle,
or park in a no parking area or on a sidewalk.
      (16)   No vehicle shall park in a public or employee handicapped space
without displaying proper identification/ authorization.
      (17)   Repeated violations of parking regulations may result in the
suspension of an individual's parking privileges.
      (18)   Repeated failure to comply with instructions of a county security
officer may result in the loss of an individual's parking privileges.
      (19)   Any vehicle found violating the provisions of this subsection may
be towed at the owner's expense or, alternatively, shall be fined ten dollars.
Provided, however, any vehicle found in violation of subsection (16) above
(parking in a handicapped space), shall be towed at the owner's expense or,
alternatively, shall be fined $200.
   (b)   There are hereby established the following regulations to govern use
of parking on the grounds of the county administration building:
      (1)   The county administrator shall provide parking spaces next to the
county administration building for public parking.
      (2)   No person shall park a vehicle in a public space longer than two
(2) hours, or cause, allow, or suffer any such vehicle to be so parked.
      (3)   No person shall park a vehicle on or beyond the lines denoting the
limits of any parking space, or cause, allow, or suffer any such vehicle to be
so parked.
      (4)   No employee shall park in a public parking space on the grounds of
the county administration building.
      (5)   No non-disabled employee shall park a vehicle in a designated
reserved employee handicapped space.
      (6)   Any vehicle found violating the provisions of this subsection may
be towed at the owner’s expense or, alternatively, shall be fined five dollars.
   (c)   Other provisions herein notwithstanding, the county administrator may
assign county parking spaces to agencies not under the budgetary and
administrative control of the county; provided, however, that:
      (1)   The county administrator may impose a reasonable fee for the use of
such parking spaces;
      (2)   The county administrator shall have the authority to designate
which parking spaces will be made available to such agencies; and
      (3)   All county parking regulations shall apply to such spaces.
   (d)   The county administrator's office shall have the responsibility and
authority for the administration of the provisions of this section.
   (e)   The sheriff of the county shall be charged with the responsibility of
enforcing the provisions of this section and shall have the responsibility of
issuing parking tickets and/or engaging a towing service for any vehicle parked
in violation of these regulations; provided that the cost of towing service
shall be charged to the registered owner of any vehicle so removed. The parking
ticket shall be on a form designated by the county administrator and shall be
used by all law enforcement officers for violations of this article.
(Ord. No. 061-01HR, § I, 9-4-01; Ord. No. 070-07HR, § I, 9-11-07; Ord. No. 022-
13HR, § I, 6-18-13)
Sec. 17-3. Sheriff’s deputies assigned as security officers to issue tickets.
   (a)   Upon detecting any violation of any provision of this chapter, and if
a parking ticket is to be issued, a security officer shall report at a minimum:
      (1)   The location at which the violation occurred;
      (2)   The nature of the violation;
      (3)   The date of the violation;
      (4)   The name of the registered owner;
      (5)   The license tag number, make, model, VIN, and color of the vehicle
involved;
      (6)   Instructions to report to the Richland County Central Court,
including trial date, time, and location;
      (7)   The amount of the fine; and
      (8)   Any other facts, a knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending such violation.
   (b)   The security officer shall leave the parking ticket with the operator
or on the vehicle.
(Code 1976, § 10-3001; Ord. No. 449-77, § 3, 10-26-77; Ord. No. 061-01HR, § I,
9-4-01; Ord. No. 022-13HR, § II, 6-18-13)
Sec. 17-4. Richland County Central Court to collect fines.
   It shall be the responsibility of the Richland County Central Court:
      (1)   To receive all fines paid pursuant to this chapter; and
      (2)   To hold such hearings as may be requested by persons appearing for
trial who are cited for a violation of this chapter.
(Code 1976, § 10-3002; Ord. No. 449-77, § 3, 10-26-77; Ord. No. 061-01HR, § I,
9-4-01)
Sec. 17-5. Additional penalties.
   If not paid to the Richland County Central Court on or before the trial
date, the fines provided in this chapter shall be increased as follows:
      (1)   Five dollar ($5) fine increased to fifteen dollars ($15);
      (2)   Ten dollar ($10) fine increased to thirty dollars ($30);
(Code 1976, § 10-3003; Ord. No. 449-77, § 3, 10-26-77; Ord. No. 1826-89, §§ I,
II, 1-17-89; Ord. No. 061-01HR, § I, 9-4-01)
Sec. 17-6. Disposition of fines.
   All fines collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited with the
county finance department to the credit of an enterprise fund. The Richland
County Central Court shall itemize the fines received, indicating the ticket
number and the amount received.
(Code 1976, § 10-3004; Ord. No. 449-77, § 3, 10-26-77; Ord. No. 061-96HR, § I,
9-17-96; Ord. No. 061-01HR, § I, 9-4-01)
Sec. 17-7. Registered owner shall be responsible for payment of unpaid fines.
   If a parking ticket fine has not been paid on or before the trial date, and
a continuance has not been granted by the Court, the Richland County Central
Court shall send a certified letter to the registered owner of the vehicle that
was ticketed. The letter shall be addressed to the owner at his or her address
of record and shall state that the fine, increased pursuant to section
17-5 above, must be paid within 30 days of the date the letter was mailed or
the owner may be subject to arrest. If the parking ticket fine remains unpaid
after 30 days from the date the certified letter was mailed, the magistrate may
thereafter issue a bench warrant for the arrest of the registered owner.
(Ord. No. 061-01HR, § I, 9-4-01)
Sec. 17-8. Defacing, etc, traffic control devices and street name signs.
   (a)   No person shall willfully, without lawful authority, attempt to or in
fact alter, deface, injure, knock down, or remove any county traffic-control
device or sign, or any street name signs or any portion thereof, along county
streets and roads.
   (b)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined an amount not to
exceed $500 or shall be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 30 days, or both.
(Ord. No. 778-81, §§ I, II, 3-4-81; Ord. No. 061-01HR, § I, 9-4-01)
ARTICLE II. GENERAL TRAFFIC AND PARKING REGULATIONS
Sec. 17-9. Through truck traffic prohibited.
   (a)   All through truck traffic is prohibited on the following roads in
Richland County, South Carolina:
      (1)   Sparkleberry Lane;
      (2)   Congress Road between Leesburg Road and Gamers Ferry Road;
      (3)   Bynum Road;
      (4)   Summit Parkway;
      (5)   Valhalla Drive;
      (6)   Olympia Avenue between Heyward Street and Bluff Road;
      (7)   Bakersfield Road between Dutch Square Boulevard and Mominghill
Drive;
      (8)   N. Donar Drive;
      (9)   Prima Drive;
      (10)   Longreen Parkway;
      (11)   Hobart Road;
      (12)   Clearwater Road;
      (13)   Crestbrook Road;
      (14)   Edgewater Drive;
      (15)   Risdon Way; and
      (16)   Sparkleberry Lane Extension.
   (b)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply:
      (1)   Truck means: a) every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for
drawing other vehicles, and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a
part of the weight of the vehicle and the load so drawn; b) every vehicle
having more than two (2) axles, with or without motive power, other than a pole
trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its
load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle; and/or c) every vehicle
having more than two (2) axles, with or without motive power, other than a pole
trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle, and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the
towing vehicle.
      (2)   Through truck traffic means truck traffic moving from the beginning
point of the road to the ending point of the road without stopping.
(Ord. No. 016-96HR, §I, 1-2-96; Ord. No. 061-01HR, § I, 9-4-01; Ord. No. 002-
02HR, § I, 1-8-02; Ord. No. 001-06HR, § I, 1-3-06; Ord. No. 031-07HR, §I, 4-3-
07; Ord. No. 058-10HR, §I, 9-21-10; Ord. No. 058-14HR, § I, 11-18-14; Ord. No.
040-18HR, § I, 9-11-18; Ord. No. 013-24HR, § I, 6-4-24)
Sec. 17-10. Parking in residential and commercial zones of the county.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply:
      (1)   Motor Vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled, except
mopeds or scooters, by any source of artificial power (i.e., not propelled by
human effort), excluding trains.
      (2)   Semi-trailer means every vehicle, with or without motive power,
designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor
vehicle, and constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load
rests upon or is carried by another vehicle; and exceeds a gross weight of
10,000 pounds, or a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of 10,000
pounds.
      (3)   Trailer (other than semi-trailer) means every vehicle, with or
without motive power, designed for carrying persons or property and for being
drawn by a motor vehicle; and which does not exceed a gross weight of 10,000
pounds, or a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of 10,000
pounds. This definition excludes camping trailers, boat trailers, travel
trailers, and utility trailers, as such are regulated in the Richland County
Land Development Code.
      (4)   Truck tractor means every motor vehicle designed and used primarily
for drawing other vehicles; and not so constructed as to carry a load other
than a part of the weight of the vehicle and the load drawn.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for a truck tractor, a semi-trailer, or a trailer
to be parked on any public street, road, right-of-way or as otherwise
prohibited by the Richland County Code of Ordinances in the unincorporated
portions of the county which are or hereafter shall be designated as Rural
Residential, Single-Family Residential, Manufactured Home, or General
Residential under the Richland County Zoning Ordinance and the "Zoning Map of
Unincorporated Richland County," as amended.
   (c)   Except as is provided in subsection (d), below, it shall be unlawful
for any truck tractor, semi-trailer or trailer to be parked, stored or located
on a lot in any residential zoning district in the unincorporated areas of the
county [except for those parcels that are three (3) acres or greater in the
(RU) Rural zoning district] unless the entire portion of such truck tractor,
semi-trailer or trailer is parked, stored or located in an enclosed garage or
in a carport at the vehicle owner's or operator's residence.
   (d)   Notwithstanding subsections (b) and (c), above, truck tractors,
semitrailers or trailers that are in active use in the provision of a service
or delivery or removal of property or material at or from a residence in a
residential zoning district may park on the public street, road, right-of-way
or lot at which the service is being provided or the delivery or removal is
being made, for only the duration of the service provision or delivery or
removal as provided for herein. For purposes of this section, "active loading
or unloading" shall include, but not be limited to, the delivery or removal of
furniture, yard trash or debris, household or building materials, tangible
personal property and the like, evidenced by the active involvement (e.g., the
loading, unloading, service provision or supervision thereof) of the owner,
operator, delivery personnel, service provider, or other person responsible for
parking or causing to be parked the truck tractor, semi-trailer or trailer
while the truck tractor, semi-trailer or trailer is parked on the public
street, road, right-of way or lot subject to this section. For purposes of this
section, "active loading and unloading" does not include parking or "staging" a
truck tractor, semi-trailer or trailer, leaving the same unattended and then
engaging in loading, unloading, removal or service provision at a subsequent
point beyond twenty-four (24) hours.
   (e)   It shall be unlawful for a motor vehicle, or wheeled conveyance of any
kind required by law to be licensed that is unlicensed, or is displaying an
expired or invalid license to be parked on any public street or road, right-of-
way or as otherwise prohibited by the Richland County Code of Ordinances in the
unincorporated portions of the county which are or hereafter shall be
designated as Rural Residential, Single-Family Residential, Manufactured Home,
or Multi-Family Residential under the Richland County Zoning Ordinance and the
"Zoning Map of Unincorporated Richland County", as amended.
   (f)   All motor vehicles or trailers without a valid state-issued license
plate permitting operation on public roads and highways, which are stored,
parked, or located on a lot in any zoning district in the unincorporated areas
of the county, except for those parcels that are three (3) acres or greater in
the (RU) Rural zoning district, are required to be kept in a garage or carport
located at the owner's or the operator's residence. Licensed automobile
dealerships, body or mechanical repair shops, towing services, persons licensed
to conduct businesses involving storage and sale of junk and scrap, trailers
utilized as temporary structures in conjunction with construction activities,
and vehicles used in agricultural operations and which are not operated on the
public roads and highways are exempt.
   (g)   Any motor vehicle or trailer that is not capable of operating in
accordance with South Carolina law or, in the case of a motor vehicle, not
capable of moving under its own power (even if it has a valid state-issued
license plate permitting operation on public roads and highways) shall not be
stored, parked, or located on a lot in any residential or commercial zoning
district in the unincorporated areas of the county (except for those parcels
that are three (3) acres or greater in the (RU) Rural zoning district) for more
than thirty (30) consecutive days unless it is kept in an enclosed garage or in
a carport. Licensed automobile dealerships, body or mechanical repair shops,
towing services, persons licensed to conduct businesses involving storage and
sale of junk and scrap, trailers utilized as temporary structures in
conjunction with construction activities, and vehicles used in agricultural
operations and which are not operated on the public roads and highways are
exempt from the provisions of this subsection.
   (h)   Penalties: Anyone violating the provisions of this section shall have
an opportunity to cure the violation within thirty (30) days of having been
issued a written notice of violation. If the offender, resident, owner of the
vehicle, motor vehicle, truck tractor, semi-trailer, or trailer or owner of the
real property on which the violation occurred fails to take proper corrective
action within the period prescribed herein, such person shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not more than five
hundred ($500.00) dollars or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days, or
both. Each day such violation continues after due notice shall be considered a
separate offense. Any owner or operator of a vehicle, motor vehicle, truck
tractor, semi-trailer, or trailer which is in violation of this section (or if
the offender is unable to be located, any owner of land on which the violation
occurred), and any person who commits, participates in, assists in, or
maintains that violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and
suffer the penalties set forth herein. In the event that an offender has been
previously cited for or given notice of a violation of any offense prescribed
in ef this section, enforcement action may commence without an additional
notice to cure as set forth above.
   (i)   Administration and enforcement: The Sheriff of Richland County, and
Deputy Sheriff of Richland County, and any Richland County Code Enforcement
Officer commissioned pursuant to S.C. Code Ann. Section 4-9-145 shall be
authorized to enforce the provisions of this section and to engage a towing
service to remove any vehicle parked in violation of these regulations,
provided the cost of towing services shall be charged to the registered owner
of any vehicle so removed.
(Ord. No. 061-01HR, § I, 9-4-01; Ord. No. 054-02HR, § II, 10-1-02; Ord. No.
040-03HR, § I, 6-3-03; Ord. No. 053- 06HR, § I, 6-6-06; Ord. No. 009-10HR, § I,
2-16-10; Ord. No. 001-15HR, § I, 2-10-15; Ord. No. 012-19HR, § I, 4-2-19)
Sec. 17-11. Careless driving.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle without
care and caution, without full regard for the safety or persons or property, or
when the vehicle or its appliances are not in proper or safe condition.
   (b)   Any person who violates this section shall upon conviction thereof, be
fined not less than $25 and not more than $200.
   (c)   This offense shall in no way whatsoever be used as an alternative or
lesser charge for driving under the influence of intoxicants, driving under
suspension of driver's license, passing a stopped school bus, or reckless
driving, or to contravene any state statutes which impose criminal liability.
(Ord. No. 054-06HR, § I, 6-6-06)
Sec. 17-12. Driving across public or private property in order to evade traffic
control device.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle to use
public or private property, not recognized as a roadway or thoroughfare, with
the intention or purpose of avoiding a traffic signal or sign.
   (b)   Any person who violates this section shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined not more than $500 or be
imprisoned for not more than 30 days.
(Ord. No. 054-06HR, § I, 6-6-06)
Secs. 17-13--17-17. Reserved.
CHAPTER 18: OFFENSES*
   *Cross reference(s)--General penalty for code violations, §
1-8; department of judicial services, §
2-247 et seq.; courts,
Ch. 7; motor vehicles and traffic,
Ch. 17.
Sec. 18-1. Discharge of firearms in certain areas unlawful.
   (a)   Within two hundred yards of the property boundaries of any school.  It
shall be unlawful for any person in the unincorporated area of the county to
discharge any rifle, gun, pistol, revolver, or other similar instrument from or
by means of which any bullet, shot, or other missile of any kind may be
projected within two hundred (200) yards of the property boundaries of any
school. This subsection shall not apply to the lawful defense of life or
property.
   (b)   Within three hundred yards of the property boundaries of any dwelling,
business, or subdivision. It shall be unlawful for any person in the
unincorporated area of the county to discharge any rifle, gun, pistol,
revolver, or other similar instrument from or by means of which any bullet,
shot, or other missile of any kind may be projected within three hundred (300)
yards of any building used as a dwelling or business, or within the boundaries
of any subdivision or within three hundred (300) yards of any subdivision, as
that term is defined in Sec.
26-22 of this Code. This subsection shall not apply to a peace officer or
member of the armed forces of the United States or any authorized gun club, or
in the lawful defense of life or property. This subsection also shall not apply
to other lawful use of firearms by persons while upon their own property, nor
shall this subsection apply to existing firearms ranges, lawful events or
persons otherwise lawfully discharging firearms on another person’s property
with the landowner’s express permission.
   (c)   Penalty. Any person convicted of violating this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in accordance with the provisions
of §
1-8 of this code.
(Code 1976, § 11-1001; Ord. No. 619-79, §§ 1, 2, 11-28-79; Ord. No. 075-01HR, §
I-III, 11-6-01; Ord. No. 001-10HR, § I, 1-5-10; Ord. No. 073-10HR, § I, 12-7-
10)
   State law reference(s)--Discharging firearms at or into dwellings, S.C. Code
1976, § 16-23-440.
Sec. 18-2. Loitering.
   (a)   Definitions. As used in this section, "loitering" shall mean remaining
idle in essentially one (1) location, spending time idly, loafing or walking
around aimlessly in a public place in such manner as to:
      (1)   Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the
comfort and repose of any person;
      (2)   Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace;
      (3)   Obstruct or hinder the free passage of vehicles or pedestrians;
      (4)   Obstruct or interfere with any person lawfully in any public place;
      (5)   Engage in begging;
      (6)   Engage in gambling;
      (7)   Engage in prostitution;
      (8)   Solicit or engage in any business, trade or commercial transaction
unless specifically authorized or licensed to do so;
      (9)   Unlawfully use or possess an unlawful drug and/or paraphernalia for
drug use to include pipes, bongs, holders, wrappers or any other items normally
construed as being implemented during drug use;
      (10)   Unlawfully use or possess alcoholic beverages, beer or wine.
   (b)   Violation. Any person loitering in any public place as defined above
may be ordered by any law enforcement officer to leave that place. Any person
who shall refuse to leave after being ordered to do so by a law enforcement
officer shall be guilty of a violation of this section. Nothing in this section
shall be construed or enforced in such a manner as to restrict freedom of
speech, religion, or association.
   (c)   Penalty. Any person convicted of violating this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in accordance with the provisions
of section
1-8 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 1047-83, §§ 1, 2, 5-17-83; Ord. No. 1468-86, § 1, 5-20-86; Ord. No.
1552-86, § 1, 12-2-86; Ord. No. 070-10HR, § I, 11-16-10)
Sec. 18-3. Noise.
   (a)   Definition. As used below, plainly audible means any sound that can be
detected by a person using his or her unaided hearing facilities.
   (b)   Noise-Amplified sound from vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any
person to play, operate, or cause to be played or operated, any radio or other
vehicular music or sound amplification or reproduction equipment in such a
manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet in any direction from
the vehicle or plainly audible within the residential dwelling of another. The
detection of the rhythmic bass component of the music or sound is sufficient to
constitute a plainly audible sound. Prohibitions contained in this section
shall not be applicable to emergency or public safety vehicles for sound
emitted during job-related operation.
   (c)   Noise.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to
be continued, any loud, excessive, unnecessary, or disturbing noise, or any
noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose,
health, peace or safety of others, within the limits of the unincorporated area
of the county, except where the activity generating the noise is permitted by
lawful authority (e.g., a permitted event).
      (2)   A loud, excessive, unnecessary, or disturbing noise is defined as
any sound regulated by paragraph (1) above, which is plainly audible at a
distance of 50 feet from its source.
         i.   The following noises shall be exempt from the prohibitions of
paragraph (1);
         ii.   Noise from domestic power equipment including, but not limited
to, chain saws, sanders, grinders, lawn and garden tools or similar devices
operated after 6:00 a.m. and no later than 10:00 p.m.;
         iii.   Noise generated by any construction, demolition equipment, or
mineral extraction (including crushing, screening, or segregating) or
industrial or manufacturing noise;
         iv.   Emergency maintenance, construction or repair work;
         v.   Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicles;
         vi.   Noise from school bells, church bells or chimes;
         vii.   Any noise resulting from activities sponsored or co-sponsored
by the county;
         viii.   Noise created by any government-sponsored events or privately
organized sports, recreation, or athletic events;
         ix.   Noise generated by licensed hunting on property where it is
allowed;
         x.   Noise generated by agricultural or farming activities.
      (3)   The complaints of three or more persons, or of one or more persons
when combined with the complaint of the county sheriff or any lawful officer
serving under him, is facie evidence that a sound regulated by paragraph (a)
annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace and
safety of others, in violation of this section.
      (4)   Noises audible in public streets or public places which violate the
standards of this section are hereby declared to be public nuisances, which may
be abated by any law enforcement officer authorized to enforce the law within
Richland County or any Richland County code enforcement officer commissioned
pursuant to S.C. Code Ann. Section 4-9-145.
   (d)   This section shall be enforced by the Richland County Sheriffs
Department and by any Richland County code enforcement officer commissioned
pursuant to S.C. Code Ann. Section 4-9-145. Violations of this section shall be
punishable by a fine of up to $500.00. Each violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Ord. No. 1947-90, § I, 1-16-90; Ord. No. 2083-91, § I, 4-16-91; Ord. No. 2280-
92HR, §§ I, II, 12-15-92; Ord. 004- 19HR, § I, 2-19-19)
Sec. 18-4. Unsafe and noxious vegetation.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section:
      Developed. Having any physical structure, public utility connection, or
other public improvement.
      Rural area. Any property with an Agricultural (AG), Homestead (HM),
Residential Transition (RT), or Open Space (OC) zoning designation whose
primary use is residential or agricultural. Any property with an Agricultural
(AG), Homestead
      (HM), Residential Transition (RT), or Open Space (OC) zoning designation
whose primary use is non-residential or non-agricultural is not considered a
“rural area.”
      Unsafe and noxious vegetation. Trees, vines, grasses, shrubs, aquatic
plants, and any other flora that poses a hazard or nuisance in accordance with
the standards of this chapter.
   (b)   Standards.
      (1)   Vegetation is deemed unsafe and noxious if it exceeds any of the
following standards:
         i.   Grass or weeds in excess of twelve (12) inches in height or
trailing vines exceeding ten (10) feet in length;
         ii.   Dead or desiccated growth that poses a fire or other safety
hazard and is located within ten (10) feet of a property line;
         iii.   Dead or desiccated growth that harbors infestations of insects,
vermin, or rodents;
         iv.   Voluntary or involuntary cultivation of plants deemed by
Richland County, the State of South Carolina, or the United States to be
noxious for Richland County.
      (2)   The sheriff may also declare a nuisance if there is demonstrated
immediate or imminent physical risk.
   (c)   Declaration of nuisance. Unsafe and noxious vegetation on any lot or
parcel of land in a developed area within the county may be deemed and declared
a nuisance in the judgment of the sheriff in accordance with the provisions of
this section.
   (d)   Duty of responsible party to maintain. It shall be the duty of any
owner, lessee, occupant, agent, or representative of the owner of any lot or
parcel of land in a developed area within the county to maintain or remove all
unsafe and noxious vegetation, as described in this section, as often as may be
necessary to prevent the growth of such unsafe and noxious vegetation. However,
lots of one (1) acre or more are not required to be cut back more than fifty
(50) feet from a property line adjacent to a public right-of-way, and ten (10)
feet from all other property lines.
   (e)   Notice to responsible party to maintain. Whenever the sheriff finds
that unsafe or noxious vegetation exists upon any lot or parcel of land in a
developed area within the county in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance,
he/she may serve written notice upon the owner, the occupant of the premises,
or upon the agent or representative of the owner of such land having control
thereof to comply with the provisions of this section. It shall be sufficient
notification to deliver the notice to the responsible party in person, by
certified U.S. mail, return receipt requested, or posted upon the property in a
conspicuous location.
   (f)   Failure to comply with notice.
      (1)   If a person or entity fails to perform within fourteen (14) days
after being duly noticed of a violation in accordance with this section, such
person or entity shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
shall be subject to a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
imprisonment not exceeding thirty (30) days. Each subsequent day of non-
performance after the fourteen (14) day period constitutes a separate
violation.
      (2)   A person or entity may be cited by the sheriff without providing a
fourteen (14) day correction period for an infraction occurring within a three
(3) month period following the resolution of an initial failure to perform.
   (g)   Removal by county. In the event any property is determined to be a
nuisance and the responsible party has not adequately performed within thirty
(30) days of the provision of notice, then the department of public works or
its duly authorized agent or representative may enter upon any such lands and
abate such nuisance by cutting and removing such unsafe or noxious vegetation,
and the cost of doing so may become a lien upon the property affected, or may
be recovered by the county through judgment proceedings initiated in a court of
competent jurisdiction, or by any other means provided by law.
(Ord. No. 1130-84, §§ 1-7, 3-6-84; Ord. No. 1611-87, §§ 1-5, 5-5-87; Ord. No.
1843-89, §§ I-III, 3-7-89; Ord. No. 2086-91, §§ I, II, 4-16-91; Ord. No. 051-
02HR, § III, 9-17-02; Ord. No. 010-10HR, § I, 2-16-10; Ord. No. 002-16HR, § I,
2-19-16; Ord. No. 002-19HR, § I, 2-5-19; Ord. No. 002-24HR, § I, 2-6-24)
   Editor's note--Ord. No. 2154-91, § I, adopted Nov. 19, 1991, repealed in its
entirety former section
18-4, which restricted smoking in public places and derived from Ord. No. 1568-
86, § 1, adopted Jan. 31, 1987.
Sec. 18-5. Consumption of alcoholic beverages, beer or wine prohibited in
public places.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any beer or wine, or
other alcoholic beverage, in or from any unsealed container on any public
street or public sidewalk, in any public parking lot or public alley, or at any
public gathering or any other public place, with the exception of gatherings on
premises for which valid licenses or permits have been duly issued to allow
public consumption of beer or wine, or other alcoholic beverage.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any beer or wine, or
other alcoholic beverage, on private property without the consent of the owner.
(Ord. No. 2124-91, § I, 7-24-91)
Sec. 18-6. Smoking of tobacco products.
   (a)   Findings. As an incident to the adoption of this Section, the County
Council (“County Council”) of the County of Richland, South Carolina (the
“County”) makes the following findings:
      (1)   Secondhand smoke is the third leading cause of preventable death in
the United States, killing 53,000 Americans prematurely each year; and
      (2)   The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, U.S. Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, National Toxicology Program’s Report on carcinogens,
National Cancer Institute, and the International Agency for Research and cancer
have all reported that secondhand smoke is a group A human carcinogen, a cancer
causing substance, of which there is no safe level of exposure; and
      (3)   The health consequences of involuntary smoking have been reported
by the U.S. Surgeon General to be a cause of disease, including lung cancer, in
healthy non-smokers; and
      (4)   The U.S. Surgeon General has concluded that a simple separation of
smokers and non-smokers within the same airspace does not eliminate the
exposure of non-smokers; and
      (5)   Numerous medical and scientific studies show substantial levels of
exposure to secondhand smoke among the United States population, and over the
past two decades, the health hazards resulting from exposure to secondhand
smoke have been increasingly recognized; and
      (6)   Secondhand smoke increases the risk of developing breast cancer in
younger, pre-menopausal women; and when inhaled by pregnant women, secondhand
smoke increases the risk for low-weight babies, pre-term delivery, and Sudden
Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS); and
      (7)   Exposure to secondhand smoke by children leads to decreased lung
function, asthma, pneumonia, ear infections, bronchitis and even sudden infant
death syndrome; and
      (8)   Studies of hospital admissions for acute myocardial infarction in
Helena, Montana and Pueblo, Colorado before, during, and after a local law
eliminating smoking in workplaces and public places was in effect, has
determined that laws to enforce smoke-free workplaces and public places may be
associated with a reduction in morbidity from heart disease; and
      (9)   Workplaces have been shown to be locations of significant exposure
to secondhand tobacco smoke by employees working in the unincorporated areas of
Richland County; and
      (10)   There are laws, ordinances, and regulations in place that protect
workers from other environmental hazards, including Class A carcinogens,
asbestos, arsenic and benzene, but none which regulate exposure to secondhand
smoke; and
      (11)   The South Carolina General Assembly at Section 44-95-10 et seq.
(the “Clean Indoor Air Act of 1990") imposed certain limitations on smoking.
For example, it limited smoking in Government Buildings (the definition of
which includes County-owned buildings) except where the owner of such building
shall designate smoking areas.
      County Council has now determined that additional regulation of smoking
in areas beyond those addressed in the Clean Indoor Air Act of 1990 is
appropriate in furtherance of its duty to protect the health of its citizens
and employees in the workplace and therefore enacts this Section.
   (b)   Intent. County Council finds that it is in the best interest of the
people of the unincorporated areas of the County to protect nonsmokers from
involuntary exposure to secondhand smoke in the workplace. Therefore, County
Council declares that the purpose of this act is: 1) to preserve and improve
the health, comfort, and environment of the people of the unincorporated areas
of the County by limiting exposure to secondhand smoke in the workplace; and 2)
to guarantee the right of nonsmokers to breathe smoke-free air, and to
recognize that the need to breathe smoke-free air shall have priority over the
desire to smoke.
   (c)   Definitions.
      (1)   Employee means any person who performs services for an employer in
return for wages, profit or other valuable consideration, and/or a person who
volunteers his or her services for a non-profit entity.
      (2)   Employer means any person, partnership, association, corporation,
trust, school, college, university or other educational institution, nonprofit
entity or other organization, including any public or private employer, any
manager, supervisor, and all other persons charged with control, supervision,
and operation of any Workplace, Work Space, or Work Spaces as defined herein,
that employs one (1) or more persons.
      (3)   Enclosed means a space bounded by walls (with or without windows),
a ceiling or roof, and enclosed by doors, including but not limited to,
offices, rooms, foyers, waiting areas and halls.
      (4)   Secondhand smoke is the complex mixture formed from the escaping
smoke of a burning tobacco product (termed as “sidestream smoke”) and smoke
exhaled by the smoker. Exposure to secondhand smoke is also frequently referred
to as “passive smoking,” “secondhand smoking” or “involuntary smoking”.
      (5)   Retail Tobacco Store means any establishment which is not required
to possess a retail food permit whose primary purpose is to sell or offer for
sale to consumers, but not for resale, tobacco products and paraphernalia, in
which the sale of other products is merely incidental, and in which the entry
of persons under the age of eighteen (18) is prohibited at all times.
      (6)   Smoking means the inhaling, exhaling, burning, lighting or carrying
of a lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe, or similar device or any other lighted
tobacco product.
      (7)   Smoking Materials includes cigars, cigarettes and all other manner
of smoking devices intended to be used for the purpose of inhaling, burning,
carrying or exhaling lighted tobacco products.
      (8)   Workplace means any enclosed indoor area, structure, building or
facility or any portion thereof at which one (1) or more employee(s) perform
services for their employer, including but not limited to: retail food stores,
retail stores, restaurants, bars, cabarets, cafes, public or private clubs,
pool halls, and bowling alleys.
      (9)   Work space or work spaces means any enclosed area occupied by an
employee during the course of his or her employment, including but not limited
to: offices, customer service areas, common areas, hallways, waiting areas,
restrooms, lounges, and eating areas.
   (d)   Prohibition of Smoking in the Workplace.
      (1)   All employers shall provide a smoke-free environment for all
employees working in any work space or workplace as those terms are defined
herein. Further, the employer shall prohibit any persons present in any work
space or workplace from smoking tobacco products therein.
      (2)   No person shall smoke or possess a lighted tobacco product in any
work space or workplace.
   (e)   Exceptions. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (d) herein,
smoking may be permitted in the following places under the following
circumstances:
      (1)   Private residences;
      (2)   Hotel and motel rooms that are rented to guests and are designated
as smoking rooms; provided, however, that not more than twenty-five (25%) of
rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be so designated. All smoking
rooms on the same floor must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not
infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this
Section. The status of rooms as smoking or nonsmoking may not be changed,
except to add additional nonsmoking rooms;
      (3)   Retail tobacco stores as defined herein; and
      (4)   Religious ceremonies where smoking is part of the ritual.
   (f)   Posting of Signs. The owner, manager or person in control of a
Workplace shall post a conspicuous sign at the main entrance to the Workplace,
which shall contain the universal symbol for no smoking. Signs shall be no
smaller than 3 1/2 inches by 3 1/2 inches.
   (g)   Reasonable Distance. Smoking outside a Workplace, and any other indoor
area where smoking is prohibited, shall be permitted, provided that tobacco
smoke does not enter any Work Spaces and/or Workplaces through entrances,
windows, ventilation systems, or other means. In addition, smoking is
prohibited within fifteen (15) feet of any door used as an entrance to or exit
from an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited and from any air intake, so
as to ensure that tobacco smoke does not enter through the entry and to help
protect employees, the general public, and others from having to walk through
tobacco smoke in order to enter or exit a business or other work area. This
distance shall be measured from the center of the door in question.
   (h)   Jurisdiction, Enforcement and Penalties.
      (1)   A person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a
Workplace or Work Space and who fails to comply with the provisions of this
Section shall be deemed guilty of an infraction.
      (2)   A person smoking or possessing a lighted tobacco product in any
Work Space or Workplace shall be guilty of an infraction.
      (3)   Penalties.
         a.   An infraction is punishable by a fine of twenty-five dollars
($25). Each incidence of violation of this Section, whether by an individual or
by an owner, manager or person in control of a Workplace or Workspace, shall be
considered a separate and distinct infraction. A violation of this Section is
furthermore declared to be a public nuisance. All infractions punished
according to this Section shall be adjudicated through the State’s normal
magisterial judicial process, culmination in the collection of any fines
levied.
         b.   In an owner, manager or person in control of a Workplace of
Workspace is cited for three (3) or more infractions occurring within such
Workplace or Workspace with in a six (6) month period, the Workplace shall be
deemed a public nuisance and shall have its business license revoked, if
already issued, or its business license application denied, if a business
license has not been issued; provided, however, that this subparagraph b. shall
not apply if, after investigation, the Business Service Center Director
determines that the following conditions have been met by the Workplace:
            i.   The postings required in subsection (f) above are present and
in compliance with this section; and
            ii.   The owner, manager, person in control and/or employees of the
Workspace consistently verbally advise those customers or patrons in violation
of this section to stop smoking or otherwise comply with these regulations.
   Such determination may be reconsidered as often as is deemed necessary by
the Business Service Center Director.
   (i)   Governmental Agency Cooperation. The County Administrator shall
appropriately request other governmental and educational agencies having
facilities with the unincorporated areas of the County to establish local
operating procedures in cooperation and compliance with this Section. This
includes urging all Federal, State, County, City, and School District agencies
to update their existing smoking control regulations to be consistent with the
current health findings regarding secondhand smoke.
(Ord. No. 033-08, § I, 6-17-08; Ord. No. 067-08HR, § I, 10-28-08; Ord. No. 008-
10HR, §§ I, II, 2-2-10; Ord. No. 042-11HR, § I, 9-6-11)
Sec. 18-7. Enhanced trigger devices declared illegal; exceptions.
   (a)   Any device capable of being attached to a firearm for the purpose of
increasing the firing rate or capabilities of the firearm using recoil,
commonly known as “bump stocks” or “bump fire stocks”, are hereby declared
unlawful and any person in actual or constructive possession of such a device
is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable pursuant to Section 1-8.
   (b)   Any device capable of attaching to a firearm and which repeatedly
activates the trigger of the weapon through the use of a lever or other part
that is turned in a circular motion, commonly known as “trigger crank” or “gat
crank”, are hereby declared unlawful and any person in actual or constructive
possession of such a device is guilt of a misdemeanor punishable pursuant to
Section 1-8.
   (c)   Violations as state in section (a) or (b) above are subject to the
following exceptions:
      (1)   Any member of the United States military or any legally sworn law
enforcement personnel while engaged in the course of their duties or in
training;
      (2)   Any “bump stock” or “trigger crank” device which is possessed by a
person who is not prohibited under State or Federal law from using, owning or
possessing a firearm, and the device is completely disconnected from any
firearm in a manner which would render the device inoperable and stored in a
separate container from the firearm or weapon;
      (3)   Any law enforcement officer who has seized a firearm, with "bump
stock" or “trigger crank” attached, pursuant to a lawful seizure of a weapon,
as contraband or evidence of a crime, inside the unincorporated Richland
County; provided, however, any law enforcement agency taking possession of a
“bump stock” attached to a firearm must notify the Richland County Sheriffs
Office immediately to inform them. of the existence of the device, the location
where it was obtained, where the device will be stored and any other facts
relevant to the use or possession by any person.
      (4)   Possession of any weapon which is manufactured to fire through the
use of a crank or lever.
(Ord. No. 020-18HR, § I, 5-1-18)
Sec. 18-8. Public nuisances.
   (a)   Definitions.
      (1)   Business means any commercial establishment, use, property or
structure used in or part of a business or commercial use or establishment.
Business does not include residential property.
      (2)   Continuous breach of the peace means a pattern of repeated acts or
conduct which either (a) directly disturbs the public peace or (b) disturbs the
public peace by inciting or tending to incite violence.
      (3)   Public nuisance means conduct, conditions, events, circumstances,
or the unreasonable interference or the causing of unreasonable interference
with rights of the public, wherever occurring, including, but not limited to, a
business or commercial establishment, a public place, or where the public
congregates or is invited or permitted to congregate.
      Public nuisance includes those conditions or circumstances constituting a
nuisance as set forth in S.C. Code Ann. Section 15-43-10; specifically, the
construction, establishment, continuance, maintenance, use, ownership,
occupation, the leasing or releasing of any property, building or other place
used for the purposes of lewdness, assignation, prostitution, human
trafficking, repeated acts of unlawful possession or sale of controlled
substances, or continuous breach of the peace.
      Public nuisance also includes and is founded upon the sound principle set
forth in South Carolina case law that "if one maintains a place where the laws
are publicly, repeatedly, persistently, and intentionally violated, then such
place would become a common or public nuisance." State v. Turner, 198 S.C.
499,505, 18 S.E.2d 376, 378 (1942).
   (b)   Nuisances offending public decency, peace and order. The following are
hereby declared to be public nuisances affecting public decency, peace and
order, whether such violations are of an intermittent, cyclical, continual,
reoccurring or constant nature; and when the responsible party generates,
enables, or contributes to the occurrence of the unlawful behavior by an
absence or failure of property management policy or practice, absence or
failure of control over the property, absence or failure of supervision of
guests or invitees, or clients, customers, patrons, or any other person
providing some form of compensation for some type of product or service, or
absence or failure of security measures:
      (1)   Any business where gambling devices, slot machines, punch boards
and other such contrivances of similar character involving any elements of
chance as a consideration or any type of gambling, bookmaking, wagering or
betting is carried on, and all gambling equipment, except where such specific
form of gambling is permitted by law;
      (2)   Any business operated as a bawdy house, house of assignation, place
of prostitution or used and maintained for the commercial or criminal purposes
of unlawful sexual activity or human trafficking in violation of federal or
state law or local ordinances;
      (3)   Any business where alcohol or intoxicating liquors are
manufactured, sold, bartered or given away in violation of federal or state law
or local ordinances, or where alcohol or intoxicating liquors kept for sale,
barter or distribution in violation of federal or state law or local
ordinances, and all alcohol, liquors, bottles, kegs, pumps, bars and other
property kept at and used for maintaining such a place; or where required fire
marshal or other safety plans are not in place, or where persistent violations
of law occur under a failed or ineffective fire marshal or other safety plan;
      (4)   Any business where acts of sale, manufacture, possession or
distribution of controlled substances occur in violation of federal or state
law and local ordinances;
      (5)   Any business where violations against the federal or state laws or
county ordinances occur with such frequency or intensity that they require an
excessive public safety response cost. "Excessive public safety response"
means:
         a.   The recurring deployment of law enforcement officers, peace or
code enforcement officers commissioned pursuant to S.C. Code Ann. Section 4-9-
145, fire marshals or emergency services personnel to an emergency scene to a
business as a result of an unlawful act which results in or could result in
great bodily injury or death, or the recurring need for public safety or county
code enforcement personnel or emergency vehicles at a business when compared to
the frequency or intensity of law or regulation enforcement required at other
similarly situated businesses; or
         b.   There have been six (6) or more law or peace officer enforcement
Computer Aided Dispatches (CAD), incident reports, citations, or search
warrants executed, or a combination thereof, at a business for any of the
following during the preceding twelve (12) months:
            i.   Violation of any state or local alcohol law;
            ii.   Violation of any federal, state or local narcotics law;
            iii.   Violation of any state or local gun law;
            iv.   Assaults;
            v.   Crimes of violence against another person(s); or
            vi.   Crimes against property.
   (c)   Criminal Enforcement. Penalties.
      A person who erects, establishes, continues, maintains, uses, owns,
occupies, leases, or releases, or serves as lessor or lessee of any building in
such a way as to create a public nuisance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be subject to a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) and
imprisonment not exceeding thirty (30) days. Court costs are not included in
any fine imposed by the court.
      Each day any violation of this ordinance continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
      The Richland County Sheriffs Department shall enforce this ordinance with
the consultation and concurrence of the County Administrator ("Administrator").
The Richland County Sheriff ("Sheriff') and the Administrator, acting jointly,
may declare a business in violation of this ordinance a public nuisance, and
the Sheriff or any Deputy Sheriff may enforce the provisions of this ordinance
upon the declaration of a public nuisance as provided for herein by uniform
traffic ticket, or warrant or by any other lawful process.
   (d)   Emergency Abatement. Automatic Business License Review. If in
declaring a public nuisance the Sheriff and the Administrator determine that
there is imminent danger to the public from the continued operation of the
nuisance business the Sheriff is hereby authorized to immediately undertake
emergency abatement of the nuisance by securing, shuttering or closing the
business constituting or contributing to the nuisance to ensure that all
business activity ceases. In so securing, shuttering or closing the business,
the Sheriff shall place or cause to be placed on the exterior of the business a
notice that provides: "It shall be unlawful for any person to enter this
business except with the express written permission of the Richland County
Sheriff's Department," Permitted entry after securing, shuttering or closing
may at the discretion of the Richland County Sheriffs Department include
inspection by federal, state or local government officials, inventory or
retrieval of essential contents by the owner or lessee of the property, or
similar circumstance. A business secured, shuttered or closed pursuant to this
ordinance shall not resume business operations until permitted under the
circumstances of the appeal process set forth herein. This ordinance applies to
licensed businesses as well as those businesses that operate or attempt to
operate without proper licensing.
      (i)   Emergency abatement as described herein triggers an automatic
notification process and review of the Richland County business license(s) held
by the business so abated. That review shall consist of the following:
         (1)   Upon the exercise of emergency abatement, the Sheriff shall
immediately notify the Administrator of the securing, shuttering or closing of
business pursuant to this ordinance.
         (2)   The Administrator shall then immediately a) notify the Richland
County Business License Official ("License Official") and b) give written
notice to County Council of the emergency abatement. Written notice as
described herein includes e-mail to County Council, unless Council directs a
different medium of notice.
         (3)   Within two (2) calendar days of notice of the securing,
shuttering or closing of a business through emergency abatement, the License
Official shall determine whether to suspend or revoke or to not suspend or
revoke the business license(s) for the business subject to the emergency
abatement, pursuant to Richland County Code of Ordinances, Chapter 16, Section
16-18.
         (4)   In all cases of an emergency abatement as described herein, and
regardless of the License Official's determination pursuant to subsection (3),
there shall be an automatic review of the License Official's determination by
the Richland County County Council ("Council") within seven (7) calendar days
of that determination, or as soon thereafter as is practical, without the need
for any party to request such review. This review shall constitute an automatic
"appeal" of the matter, to be conducted in accordance with the provisions of
subsection (e), "Appeals."
   (e)   Appeals. Council's appeal hearing procedure shall be as follows:
      (i)   Record on Appeal. The record on appeal shall consist of all
documents relevant to the business license(s) and the suspension or revocation
thereof as submitted by the License Official and the license holder of the
abated business.
      (ii)   Order of Presentation. The License Official shall have up to
fifteen (15) minutes to present relevant, appropriate and non-cumulative
testimony. Witnesses, including those from the Richland County Sheriff's
Department, may be called, but no witness shall be subject to questioning from
the opposing party. Council may question any witnesses.
      (iii)   The Business subject to emergency abatement have up to fifteen
(15) minutes to present relevant, appropriate and non-cumulative testimony.
Witnesses may be called, but no witness shall be subject to questioning from
the opposing party. Council may question any witnesses.
      (iv)   The time periods set forth herein may be enlarged at Council's
discretion. Neither party is required to use all of that party's time as
allotted.
      (v)   The Chair of County Council shall preside over the appeal, and
shall rule on objections or matters of parliamentary inquiry, and in so doing
may consult with the Council parliamentarian. The rules of evidence during the
appeal shall be relaxed, although irrelevant, immaterial or cumulative
testimony or evidence is discouraged and may be ruled out of order by the
Chair.
      (vi)   Neither party shall have the right to cross examine any witnesses
or speakers during the appeal, but rather the appeal shall consist of the
argument of the parties or their representative(s), and any witnesses that
party desires to include in its presentation.
      (vii)   The Council shall conduct any deliberations on the appeal and
shall render its decision in open session. Nothing in this section prohibits
County Council from taking a recess, or from entering into executive session as
provided for pursuant to the South Carolina Freedom of Information Act,
provided that during such recess or executive session, the merits of the appeal
are not discussed.
      (viii)   A decision rendered by County Council pursuant to this ordinance
shall constitute a final decision of the County.
   (f)   Remedies not exclusive. The provisions of this ordinance are in
addition to, and not in lieu of, any other enforcement provision or process
permitted by law. Nothing in this ordinance supplants, alters, or limits a
statutory or common law right of a person to bring an action in court or the
right of Richland County to prosecute a person for the establishment of a
nuisance.
(Ord. No. 013-19HR, § II, 4-16-19)
Sec. 18-9. Fireworks and similar explosives.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, it is unlawful for a
person to use, discharge, shoot, or ignite fireworks or similar explosives
within Richland County between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. This
section may not be construed to prohibit the discharge or lighting of sparklers
or similar pyrotechnic products which generate no appreciable noise at any
time.
   (b)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), the permitted hours
for the use of fireworks must be extended on the Fourth of July and New Year's
Eve. Therefore, it is only unlawful for a person to use, discharge, shoot, or
ignite fireworks or similar explosives within Richland County between the hours
of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on July 5th and January 1st.
   (c)   It is unlawful to:
      (1)   Negligently, recklessly, or intentionally direct the discharge of
fireworks towards a structure, animal, or person;
      (2)   Intentionally detonate fireworks upon the land of another without
express prior consent;
      (3)   Intentionally dump, throw, drop, deposit, discard, or otherwise
fire onto another's property without express prior consent;
      (4)   Offer for sale or sell permissible fireworks to children under the
age of sixteen (16) years unless accompanied by a parent;
      (5)   To ignite or detonate fireworks within six hundred (600) feet of a
church, hospital, public school, other than a lawful property owner or resident
that occupies property within the six hundred (600) feet, unless authorized by
the proper officials or managers of the property, during the times allowable
under section (b);
      (6)   To ignite or detonate permissible fireworks within a motor vehicle
or discharge a permissible fireworks from a motor vehicle; and
      (7)   To place or throw an ignited firework into or at a motor vehicle.
   (d)   A County fire or law enforcement official may seize, take, remove, or
cause to be removed all stocks of fireworks or explosives held in violation of
the provisions of this section.
   (e)   A violation of this section is punishable by a civil penalty of up to:
      (1)   $500, for a 1st offense;
      (2)   $750, for a 2nd offense; and
      (3)   $1,000 for a 3rd or subsequent offense.
   (f)   2nd and 3rd offense violations are for violations occurring within a
period of five (5) years of a previous violation.
   (g)   The County Fire Marshal or his or her designee may issue a permit
authorizing the use of fireworks or a public display of fireworks or similar
explosives. The fire official may, in his or her discretion, grant or refuse to
grant the permit or grant the permit subject to restrictions and limitations
provided by this ordinance or deemed necessary in the interest of public safety
in connection with such public display or exhibition.
   (h)   Nothing in this article may be construed to prohibit the use of flares
or similar devices necessary for the safe operation of railroads, buses,
trucks, or other vehicles within the County.
   (i)   Disputed violations will be heard in the local magistrate court upon
petition of the alleged offender.
(Ord. No. 004-23HR, § I, 7-1-23)
Sec. 18-10. Desecration of a gravesite, cemetery, or burial ground.
   (a)   It is unlawful for a person to willfully and knowingly, and without
proper legal authority, to:
      (1)   Obliterate, vandalize, or desecrate a burial ground where human
skeletal remains are buried, a grave, graveyard, tomb, mausoleum, Native
American burial ground or burial mound, or other repository of human remains;
      (2)   Deface, vandalize, injure, or remove a gravestone or other memorial
monument or mark commemorating a deceased person or group of persons, whether
located within or outside of a recognized cemetery, Native American burial
ground or burial mound, memorial park, or battlefield; or
      (3)   Obliterate, vandalize, or desecrate a park, Native American burial
ground or burial mound, or other area clearly designated to preserve and
perpetuate the memory of a deceased person or group of persons.
   (b)   In addition to being subject to the criminal penalties provided in the
South Carolina Code of Laws, Section 16-17-600, an infraction of this Section
is punishable by a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500). Each day's
continued violation constitutes a separate and distinct offense. A violation is
deemed continued if a person:
      (1)   Continually engages in an activity prohibited pursuant to
subsection (a);
      (2)   Fails to report a previously committed activity prohibited pursuant
to subsection (a) to an appropriate County or State entity; or
      (3)   Fails to undertake remedial actions addressing a previously
committed activity prohibited pursuant to subsection (a).
   (c)   This section shall be enforced by the county sheriffs department and
code enforcement officers commissioned by County Council pursuant to the
provisions of Section
1-12 of this Code of Ordinances.
   (d)   During any construction, development, re-development, or ground
disturbing activity, if a person discovers or is otherwise put on notice of any
known or probable gravesites on the subject lot, including but not limited to
human remains, grave stones, grave markers, ground depressions, historical
markers, historic maps, plats or surveys, photographs, or other indicators of
probable gravesites, the person must immediately cease any ground disturbing
work and report such notice to the Department of Community Planning and
Development Services, as well as the county coroner and the appropriate state
agencies including the state historic preservation office and the South
Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control. No further ground
disturbing activities shall commence until authorization to proceed is issued
by the State and County in accordance with state law.
(Ord. No. 011-24HR, § I, 5-7-24)
Sec. 18-11. Hate intimidation.
   (a)   Definitions. Whenever used in this section, unless a contrary
intention is clearly evidenced, the following terms shall be interpreted as
herein defined.
      Minor child. A person under the age of eighteen (18).
      Ordinance offense. An offense set forth in this Chapter 18 of the
Richland County Code of Ordinances.
      State crime. An offense or crime set forth in S.C. Code 1976, Title 16,
as amended.
   (b)   Offense defined. It shall be unlawful for any person to, within the
unincorporated area of Richland County, commit a state crime or ordinance
offense with the intent, in whole or in part, to cause, or cause the fear of,
harm, injury, or damage to the victim’s person or property because of the
victim’s actual or perceived race, ethnicity, national origin, color, religion,
sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, or physical or mental disability,
whether or not the perception is correct. A person found in violation of this
section is guilty of the separate hate crime offense of hate intimidation.
   (c)   Criminal enforcement; penalty.
      (1)   A person who violates any provision of this section during the
commission of a state crime or ordinance offense and is charged by a law
enforcement officer with committing such crime or offense shall also be charged
by that officer with a violation of this section. Upon conviction, a person
charged with a violation of this section shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars
($500.00) or imprisonment not exceeding thirty (30) days, or both, and may be
required by the court to make restitution.
      (2)   The parent(s) or legal guardian(s) of a minor child convicted of
violating any provision of this section shall be liable for any damages,
pursuant to S.C. Code 1976, Title 63, as amended, caused by the minor child and
shall be required to pay any restitution ordered if any act or omission of the
parent(s) or legal guardian(s) contributed to the action(s) of the minor child.
      (3)   A court may impose community service or participation in an
educational or counseling program for the violation of this section.
   (d)   Remedies not exclusive. The provisions of this section are in addition
to, and not in lieu of, any other enforcement provision or process permitted by
law. Nothing in this section supplants, alters, or limits a statutory or common
law right of a person to bring an action in court or the right of the lawful
jurisdiction to prosecute a person for the commission of hate intimidation or
any other hate crime.
(Ord. No. 033-25HR, § I, 6-3-25)
CHAPTER 19: RESERVED
CHAPTER 20: PLANNING
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 20-1--20-10. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
Sec. 20-11. Appointive powers of council.
   The county council hereby assumes the appointive powers and authority for
the membership of the governing body of the county historic preservation
commission, pursuant to section 4-9-170 of the Code of Laws of South Carolina,
1976.
(Code 1976, § 2-7061; Ord. No. 639-79, § 1, 1-1-80)
Secs. 20-12--20-20. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Sec. 20-21. Imagine Richland 2020 Comprehensive Plan adopted.
   The Imagine Richland 2020 Comprehensive Plan adopted by County Council Ord.
No. 013-99HR, effective May 3, 1999, is hereby adopted by reference and made a
part of this code, the same as if set forth in full herein.
(Ord. No. 013-99HR, 5-3-99)
Secs. 20-22--20-30. Reserved.
CHAPTER 21: ROADS, HIGHWAYS AND BRIDGES*
   *Cross reference(s)--Department of public works and utilities, §
 2-192 et seq.; buildings and building regulations,
Ch. 6; garbage, trash and refuse,
Ch. 12; hazardous materials,
Ch. 13; motor vehicles and traffic,
Ch. 17; planning,
Ch. 20; vehicles for hire,
Ch. 25; drainage, erosion and sediment control, §
26-202; land development,
Ch. 26.
   State law reference(s)--County supervision of roads, S.C. Code 1976, § 57-
17-10.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
See. 21-1. Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to define the mission, responsibilities and
limitations of the department of public works with regard to maintenance and
construction of road and drainage infrastructure in the unincorporated portion
of the county and areas located in other jurisdictions the county provides
public works services to through an intergovernmental agreement pursuant to
S.C. Const. Article VIII, Section 13, and S.C. Code of Laws Ann. Sections 4-9-
40 and 4-9-41.
(Ord. No. 005-03HR, § I, 1-21-03; Ord. No. 043-18HR, § I, 9-18-18)
Sec. 21-2. Jurisdiction.
   The provisions of this article shall apply to all lands within the
jurisdiction of the unincorporated portion of the county and for areas located
in other jurisdictions the county provides public works services to through an
intergovernmental agreement pursuant to S.C. Const. Article VIII, Section 13,
and S.C. Code of Laws Ann. Sections 4-9-40 and 4-9-41. Notwithstanding any
other ordinance, and regardless of the scope or extent of maintenance history,
or of any recorded or unrecorded easement, license, deed of right-of-way or any
other instrument that purports to convey any property interest to Richland
County other than fee simple ownership, Richland County shall not maintain any
roads, roadways, alleyways, streets, highways, bridges, stormwater or drainage
systems, ponds, detention ponds, dams, fields, open spaces, green spaces,
developed or undeveloped property, or any other system or infrastructure in any
area that has been annexed into the limits of any municipality or any other
jurisdiction that has the power to annex property unless such maintenance is
performed pursuant to an intergovernmental agreement as provided for
hereinabove.
(Ord. No. 005-03HR, § I, 1-21-03; Ord. No. 043-18HR, § II, 9-18-18)
Sec. 21-3. Definitions.
   The following definitions apply to words and terms used in this article. All
other words shall have their customary meanings:
   (a)   "C" Construction Program. A state program by which state gasoline tax
revenues are shared with counties for transportation and road construction
activities. The funds involved are commonly referred to as "C" funds and they
are used at the discretion of a County Transportation Committee (CTC) appointed
by the county's Legislative Delegation pursuant to section 12-28-2740 of the
S.C Code of Laws.
   (b)   County. Richland County, South Carolina, its county council or its
administrative staff acting on its behalf.
   (c)   County road maintenance system. All those public highways, streets and
roads, paved and unpaved, that have been dedicated for public use and accepted
by the county as prescribed in this chapter and which have not been accepted
for maintenance by any other public entity.
   (d)   Driveway. Any paved or unpaved way located on a single parcel of
property and intended for vehicular access from a highway, street or road to
one or more residences located on that parcel.
   (e)   Easement. A grant to the general public, a corporation, a specific
person or persons or a publicentity of the right to use a strip or parcel of
land for a specific purpose. Fee simple title to the land remains with the
grantor.
   (f)   Easement and right-of-way deed. A legal document by which an easement
or right-of-way, as defined herein, is granted by a property owner to the
county. This document is executed by the property owner (grantor) and the
County and recorded in the office of the Richland County Register of Deeds so
that the easement or right-of-way becomes a permanent part of the public record
and binds the grantor's successors in title to its provisions.
   (g)   Highway, street or road. The terms "highway', "street", and "road", as
used herein, shall be general terms denoting a public way for the purpose of
vehicular travel. The terms shall refer to the entire area within the right-of-
way to include roadways, pedestrian facilities, bridges, tunnels, viaducts,
drainage structures and all other facilities commonly considered component
parts of highways, streets or roads. These terms are used interchangeably
herein.
   (h)   Prescriptive easement. An easement acquired for a specific purpose by
long continued enjoyment or usage of property for that purpose. To a certain
extent, it resembles title by adverse possession but differs to the extent that
the adverse user acquires only an easement and not title. To create an easement
by "prescription", the use must have been open, continuous, exclusive and under
claim of right for the statutory period, which in the state is twenty (20)
years.
   (i)   Private road. As it is used in this article, a private road refers to
a road that is not maintained by any public entity such as the County, the
South Carolina Department of Transportation (SCDOT) or a municipality.
Depending upon the granting of easements and accepted use, private roads may be
used by those other than the property owners.
   (j)   Public road. A public road refers to a road that is maintained by a
public entity. This would include all roads in the county road maintenance
system. In this case, the public is clearly entitled to use the road.
   (k)   Through road. A road that connects two (2) different paved roads.
   (l)   Quit-claim deed. A deed of conveyance that is intended to pass any
title, interest or claim which the grantor may have in the premises, but not
professing that such title is valid, nor containing any warranty or covenants
for title.
   (m)   Right-of-way. A strip or parcel of land occupied or intended for
occupancy by a street, road, railroad or other special use. Fee simple title
may or may not be granted to the agency or entity acquiring the right-of-way,
but the property is dedicated exclusively for the intended use and is platted
separately and distinct from the adjoining lots or parcels.
   (n)   Alternative maintenance paving. A county paving program by which
qualifying light duty/low volume unpaved public roads may be paved using non-
standard paving or treatment methods.
   (o)   Light duty/low volume unpaved road. Unpaved roads with average daily
traffic limited at 400 vehicles per day.
(Ord. No. 005-03HR, § I, 1-21-03; Ord. No. 011-09HR, § I, 2-17-09; Ord. No.
043-14HR, § I, 7-29-14)
Sec. 21-4. Drainage on private property.
   (a)   Drainage improvements and/or maintenance will be undertaken by county
forces on private property only:
      (1)   When the drainage system involved has been designed, approved and
constructed in accordance with the county's Stormwater Management, Erosion and
Sediment Control Regulations (§§
26-202,
26-203) and accepted by the county, or
      (2)   When there is a clear and substantial public interest served in
doing so and drainage easements are granted to the county on all of the
property involved. Improvements and/or maintenance with an estimated material
cost in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000) or less may be approved by
the county administrator. Drainage improvements and/or maintenance in excess
five thousand dollars ($5,000) in material costs shall be reviewed and approved
by the county council. For the purpose of this section, a public interest is
defined as:
         a.   The correction of a serious health hazard or environmental
concern, as designated by county or state health officials, affecting multiple
residences.
         b.   The correction of a malfunction or inadequacy of the drainage
system within the right-of-way of a publicly maintained street or road.
         c.   The correction of drainage problems associated with projects
constructed by the county.
         d.   The maintenance of the structural integrity of the existing
drainage infrastructure of the county.
         e.   The improvement of drainage for the benefit of the community. To
benefit the community, drainage improvements must eliminate flooding that
directly affects a minimum of four (4) residences and/or businesses situated on
individual lots or inundates a public road.Note: Correction of minor ditch
erosion problems on private property will not be considered a substantial
public interest.
         f.   However, correction of minor ditch erosion problems on private
property will not be considered a substantial public interest.
      (3)   Emergency maintenance and/or improvements of private drainage
facilities, including natural resources (such as streams), may be undertaken
when the following conditions exist and the requirements of Subsection (a) (2),
above, cannot be met:
         a.   The correction of a serious health or environmental hazard, as
designated by county or state officials, affecting a single residence and
beyond the ability of an individual property owner to resolve.
         b.   Improvements and/or maintenance that eliminate flooding of less
than four (4) residences and/or businesses.
         c.   Improvements and/or maintenance of an existing drainage facility,
failure of which may result in property damage to downstream properties or
potential loss of life.
         d.   The provision of emergency maintenance will not create a
maintenance responsibility for Richland County. A temporary right-of-entry will
be required of the property owner, covering only the time which the emergency
maintenance is performed.
         Improvements and/or maintenance with an estimated material cost in the
amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or less may be approved by the
county administrator. Drainage improvements and/or maintenance in excess of
five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in material costs shall be reviewed and
approved by County Council.
   (b)   Easements or temporary rights-of- way must be obtained for any
existing or proposed drainage facilities on private property before any work is
performed thereon by county forces. Easements for maintenance of drainage
facilities constructed without the county's approval of plans or inspections
will not be accepted unless the property owners execute a hold harmless
agreement and release the county from all claims resulting from deficiencies of
the facilities.
   (c)   Except where the county has accepted an easement for maintenance of
drainage facilities on private property as provided herein, maintenance is the
responsibility of the property owner.
(Code 1976, § 8-1001; Ord. No. 452-77, § 1, 10-26-77; Ord. No. 2372-93, § I,
11-16-93; Ord. No. 005-03HR, § I, 1-21-03; Ord. No. 037- 14HR, § II, 7-1-14)
Sec. 21-5. Maintenance of unpaved roads.
   (a)   The department of public works shall maintain all unpaved roads of the
county which have been dedicated for public use regardless of whether or not
the dedication was by law or usage. Those roads determined to have been
dedicated shall be considered to be a part of the county road maintenance
system.
   (b)   For purposes of ascertaining dedication by usage or by maintenance by
the county, all unpaved roads which have been used by the public and/or
maintained by the county for a period of twenty (20) years or more shall be
deemed dedicated and shall be maintained by the department of public works.
   (c)   The county will claim a prescriptive easement for all unpaved roads
deemed to be dedicated as public roads by usage. Such easements will be
considered as comprising the land actually maintained by the county as part of
the road.
   (d)   All unpaved roads which have been marked in either red or green on the
map presented to the county council on March 5, 1975, shall be brought within a
systematic identification process as soon as practicable and maintained by
county forces.
   (e)   Unpaved roads not maintained by the county under the provisions of (a)
through (d) above, will be accepted for maintenance only when such maintenance
will provide a substantial public benefit. For the purpose of this section, one
or more of the following characteristics will constitute "substantial public
benefit:"
      (1)   Provides access to a publicly owned facility, or
      (2)   Comprises an integral part of the comprehensive transportation plan
adopted by the county's planning agency, or
      (3)   Comprises a part of an existing street/road network as of January
21, 2003 and is used by the surrounding community, or
      (4)   Provides the principle access to a minimum of three (3) occupied
residences situated on individually owned parcels that are lots of record for
tax purposes and does not exceed one fifth (1/5) mile in length per residence
served.
   (f)    No work will be performed pursuant to subsection (e), above, except
on the basis of a right-of-way deed for rights-of-way fifty (50) feet in width
whenever possible, but in no case less than thirty (30) feet, having been
executed and accepted in accordance with section
21-7.
   (g)   Only established, passable roads with an unobstructed width of twelve
(12) feet may be accepted pursuant to subsection (e) above. Such roads will be
maintained only up to a minimum serviceable condition and will not be
substantially improved by the county.
   (h)   Any road in the county, including those created as a part of a private
driveway subdivision pursuant to the county's land development regulations, may
be accepted by the county and brought up to paved or unpaved road standards as
set forth in this article; provided that eighty percent (80%) of all property
owners within the subdivision agree to same and that all costs incurred by the
county to bring the road up to county paved or unpaved standards are paid by
the property owners. Such costs may be included as an assessment on the tax
bill of the property owners, to be paid over no more than a 15 year period with
an interest charge equal to that paid by the county for bonds issued to fund
construction. The total costs plus interest of the improvements shall be
allocated between the property owners by each lot being assessed an equal share
of the costs and interest. Any unpaved road deeded to the county under these
provisions may be eligible for "C" fund improvements.
   (i)   The county engineer and his staff shall periodically update the
existing county road map and shall add such unpaved roads which are not
presently shown thereon and attempt to determine the ownership of such unpaved
roads.
   (j)    The department of public works shall maintain those unpaved roads
determined to be dedicated under the provisions of this section. Such
maintenance shall include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Grading;
      (2)   Applying crusher-run or gravel;
      (3)   Installing street name and traffic control signs;
      (4)   Installing driveways;
      (5)   Cutting back overhanging branches;
      (6)   Mowing shoulders; and/or
      (7)   Drainage improvements.
(Code 1976, § 8-1025; Ord. No. 2372-93, § I, 11-16-93; Ord. No. 033-97HR, § II,
5-6-97; Ord. No. 005-03HR, § I, 1-21-03)
Sec. 21-5.5. Standards for improving roadways in the Town of Irmo, South
Carolina.
   On roadways being constructed or improved in the Town of Irmo, South
Carolina, which are going to be or are already located in both Richland County
and Lexington County, the following regulations shall be followed:
      (1)   If more than fifty percent (50%) of the planned roadway improvement
for all phases of the approved development are located in Lexington County:
         a.   All improvements will be constructed to the standards of
Lexington County.
         b.   Upon acceptance of improvements by Lexington County and the Town
of Irmo, Richland County will accept the improvements located in Richland
County for maintenance.
      (2)   If more than fifty percent (50%) of the planned roadway
improvements for all phases of the approved development are located in Richland
County:
         a.   All improvements will be constructed to the standards of Richland
County.
         b.   Upon acceptance of improvements by Richland County and the Town
of Irmo, Lexington County will accept the improvements located in Lexington
County for maintenance.
      (3)   The percentage of planned roadway improvements in each County will
be based upon centerline feet of roadway.
      (4)   In conformance with Section
21-6(b) of this chapter, the provisions of this section will apply to
residential, commercial and industrial subdivisions. Streets and drainage
systems serving group developments such as shopping centers, apartment
complexes, condominiums, and mobile home parks will not be accepted for
maintenance by Richland County.
(Ord. No. 056-13HR, § I, 11-5-13)
Sec. 21-6. Standards for streets and drainage.
   (a)   Except as provided for in sections
21-4,
21-5, and
21-5.5 above, only those streets, roads, and drainage systems designed and
constructed in accordance with the standards prescribed herein will be accepted
for maintenance by the County.
   (b)   Streets: The minimum acceptable street is a paved street designed and
constructed in accordance with the standards adopted by the County Engineer;
provided, however, that an exception may be allowed whenever the County Council
deems that the variance in design is minimal or of such nature that it will not
otherwise pose an undue burden or risk upon the County. Where determined
necessary and in the sole discretion of the County Council, the County, with
the agreement of those property owners served by such roadway, may consent to
accept a roadway with special conditions as to any particular non-conforming
aspects with regard to county road standards. Only those streets located in
subdivision developments where individually owned lots front directly on the
street rights-of-way will be accepted by the County. This will apply to
residential, commercial and industrial subdivisions. Streets and drainage
systems serving group developments such as shopping centers, apartment
complexes, condominiums and mobile home parks will not be accepted for
maintenance by Richland County.
   (c)   Storm drainage: Drainage systems will be designed and constructed in
accordance with Chapter 26, Article VIII, of the Richland County Code of
Ordinances, and the standards adopted by the County Engineer.
   (d)   Specifications: Materials and construction of streets and drainage
systems will be in accordance with the applicable sections of the current
edition of the Standard Specifications for Highway Construction published by
South Carolina Department of Transportation, except where specifically noted
otherwise in the standards adopted by the County Engineer.
   (e)   Acceptance: County acceptance of new streets and drainage systems
shall be accomplished through the acceptance of easement and right-of-way
deeds. The County accepts no responsibility for the streets or drainage system
until the easement documents or deeds are executed by both parties and
recorded.
   (f)   Warranty: As a prerequisite to the County's acceptance of new streets
and drainage systems, the grantor (developer) shall provide a warranty to the
County for a period of one (1) year. The warranty shall pertain to the design
and construction of the streets and drainage system in accordance with these
standards and their satisfactory performance during the warranty period. The
warranty period shall commence with the Countys formal acceptance of the roads
and drainage system. The grantor is not responsible for repairing damage done
to the roads subsequent to acceptance that was not a result of design or
construction failure.
   (g)   Inspection fee: The grantor (developer) is responsible for the costs
associated with providing all quality control/quality assurance testing and
inspections required during construction of new roads and the associated
drainage systems to ensure compliance with the applicable design and
construction standards. The County Engineers office is authorized to retain
independent engineering or geotechnical consultants to perform all or part of
the inspections and testing on behalf of the County. An inspection fee,
sufficient to cover the Countys cost for inspection and testing, will be
established and collected as a prerequisite for a developers receiving
construction plan approval for any new subdivision streets. All fees collected
will be deposited into an account set up specifically for payment of inspection
and testing costs incurred by the County.
(Code 1976, § 8-1024; Ord. No. 388-77, 4-20-77; Ord. No. 2372-93, § I, 11-16-
93; Ord. No. 015-98R, 5-5-98; Ord. No. 005-03HR, § I, 1-21-03; Ord. No. 095-
05HR, § I, 10-3-06; Ord. No. 056-13HR, § II, 11-5-13)
Sec. 21-7. Easement and/or right-of-way acceptance authority.
   The county administrator and/or his designee(s) are hereby authorized to
accept any easement or deed for rights-of-way, drainage easements, and sewer
easements; emergency maintenance easements, dirt road rights-of-way, additional
rights-of-way, sewer extension agreements, water line easements and
otherinstruments authorized by the County Code of Ordinances; and is authorized
to establish procedures for the acceptance and recording of such instruments.
(Ord. No. 005-03HR, § I, 1-21-03)
Sec. 21-8. Driveways.
   Driveway connections from the roadway to the right-of-way line will be
provided on county maintained roads by the department of public works, subject
to the following limitations:
      (1)   Only one (1) driveway connection per residence, and a maximum of
two (2) per individual parcel of property, will be provided by the county. The
public works department will not install additional driveway connections.
      (2)   Apron finish will match the finish of the county road to which it
is attached.
      (3)   A maximum of twenty-four (24) feet of pipe, not exceeding twenty-
four (24) inches in diameter, will be provided by the county. Larger diameter
pipe may be installed by the public works department provided the property
owner pays the additional costs incurred for materials.
      (4)   Pipe diameter required will be determined by the county engineer.
(Code 1976, § 8-1002; Ord. No. 005-03HR, § I, 1-21-03)
Sec. 21-9. Surplus dirt.
   Surplus dirt excavated on county projects, which must be hauled away and
disposed of off-site, may be placed on private property, with the property
owner's consent, provided that:
      (1)   Disposal there is more economical than hauling the dirt to the
nearest county owned disposal site, and
      (2)   The property owner releases and holds the county harmless for any
damages or liability resulting from placement of the dirt on his property, and
      (3)   All applicable permitting requirements (including the requirements
of section 12-44) have been or will be met.
      (4)   A reasonable effort is made to insure a fair and equitable
distribution among property owners who want the dirt.
(Code 1976, § 8-1003; Ord. No. 419-77, § 1, 8-2-77; Ord. No. 005-03HR, § I, 1-
21-03)
See. 21-10. Street name signs.
   (a)   Any sign within a new development shall be installed by the developer
at his/her own expense. Signs will be aluminum blanks on metal posts fabricated
and mounted in a standard design established by the county engineer. They will
have white reflective lettering a minimum of six (6) inches in height on a
reflective background. A green background will denote a public road and a blue
background will denote a private road. Street name signs shall conform to the
Federal Highway Administration’s Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices 2003
Edition with Revisions 1 and 2 incorporated. The department of public works
shall maintain street name signs on all public street within the jurisdiction
and authority of the county.
   (b)   The developer of any new subdivision constructed within the
jurisdiction and authority of the county is responsible for the initial
installation of street name signs in accordance with an approved signage plan.
All street signs shall comply with the county's design standard for retro-
reflectivity.
   (c)   The department of public works may erect street name signs at the
intersections of private streets with public streets, at no cost to the
residents, when there are residences with addresses on that private street.
   (d)   Overhead signs may be installed at selected intersections at the
discretion of the Director of Public Works.
   (e)   In conjunction with subsection (a) above, the county standard for
street name signs shall be included in published road design standards
developed by the county engineer. The standard shall address sign material,
installation, visibility, and color. The department of public works shall
maintain street name signs to the county standard after acceptance of the
streets.
(Ord. No. 005-03HR, § I, 1-21-03; Ord. No. 057-09HR, § I, 11-17-09)
Sec. 21-11. Traffic engineering.
   (a)   Traffic engineering on county maintained highways, streets and roads
shall be in accordance with the South Carolina Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices.
   (b)   Traffic control devices on county maintained highways, streets and
roads shall comply with the standards contained in the South Carolina Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
   (c)   The developer of any new subdivision constructed within the
jurisdiction and authority of the county is responsible for the initial
installation of all necessary traffic control devices in accordance with an
approved signage plan. The department of public works shall maintain the
devices after acceptance of the streets.
(Code 1976, § 8-1005; Ord. No. 005-03HR, § I, 1-21-03; Ord. No. 052-05HR, § I,
7-12-05; Ord. No. 046-07HR, § I, 5-15-05)
Sec. 21-12. Street lighting.
   The county shall not provide street lighting on any highway, street or road
until such time as sufficient funds are appropriated to provide that service
county-wide. Homeowners or homeowner's associations may obtain street lighting
through contractual arrangements with the electric utility serving their area.
(Ord. No. 005-03HR, § I, 1-21-03)
Sec. 21-13. Emergency maintenance of roads.
   (a)   No work may be performed on any roadway not already maintained by the
county unless the county administrator determines that access to such roadway
is necessary for the performance of one or more public functions, and the
following conditions exist:
      (1)   Such a roadway is the only access for one (1) or more property
owners or residences, and
      (2)   Emergency medical services, sheriff department vehicles and other
county vehicles cannot, in the lawful performance of their duties, gain full
and immediate access to at least one (1) residence unless road scraping is
performed, and
      (3)   At least one (1) of the properties to be accessed is used as a
primary residence.
   (b)   Any work pursuant to this section will be done on a one-time basis
only. In such cases, the county department of public works is limited to the
minimum improvements that will allow full and immediate access to the affected
residences. Crusher-run, gravel, pipe or other materials will not be routinely
provided.
(Code 1976, § 8-1007; Ord. No. 1846-89, § I, 3-21-89; Ord. No. 2372-93, § I,
11-16-93; Ord. No. 005-03HR, § I, 1-21-03; Ord. No. 032- 13HR, § I, 7-2-13)
Sec. 21-14. Abandonment of public roads and right-of-ways.
   (a)   Any person or organization wishing to close an existing public street,
road, or highway in the county to public traffic shall petition a court of
competent jurisdiction in accordance with section 57-9-10, et seq. of the state
code of laws. The petition shall name the county as a respondent (unless the
county is the petitioner). The county attorney shall advise the court with
regard to the county's concurrence or opposition after consultation with the
county's planning, public works, and emergency services departments, and after
consideration by county council. It shall be the responsibility of the
petitioner to physically close the roadway if a petition is successful. The
county attorney may submit such petition on behalf of the county if so directed
by county council.
   (b)   Any person or organization wishing the county to abandon maintenance
on an existing county-maintained street, road or highway shall submit to the
public works department a petition to do so signed by the owners of all
property adjoining the road and by the owners of all property who use the road
as their only means of ingress/egress to their property. The petition shall
state that the property owners release and indemnify the county from any duty
to maintain the road. At the recommendation of the county engineer, the county
administrator shall have the authority to act on a petition that involves a
dead-end road; county council shall have the authority to approve petitions
under all other circumstances. If the petition is approved, the county engineer
may require the property owners to place an appropriate sign alongside or at
the end of the road.
   (c)   Any person or organization wishing to acquire ownership of an unused
road right-of-way in the county (including a public right-of-way that is
dedicated either by deed, prescription, or recordation of a plat) may submit a
petition for consideration by county council. If it is determined by the
county's planning department and public works department that the right-of-way
will not be utilized by the county for road purposes, county council may
approve a quit-claim deed conveying the county's interest to the owners of the
adjoining property. Unless the owners of the adjoining property agree to
another division, each may acquire that portion of the right-of-way adjacent to
his/her property on his/her side of theright-of-way's centerline. The grantee
(s) of the quit-claim deed(s) shall be responsible for preparing the deed(s)
prior to county council's consideration of the request. Upon approval and
execution of the deed(s), the grantee(s) shall be responsible for recording the
deed(s) in the office of the register of deeds and for returning a filed copy
to the office of the county attorney. The county council may require the
grantees) to pay up to the fair market value, as determined by the county
assessor's office, in exchange for the conveyance of the right-of-way. Upon
recordation of the deed, the county assessor's office shall adjust the
appraisal of the adjoining parcels to reflect the value of the additional
property.
(Code 1976, § 8-1009; Ord. No. 071-01HR, § I, 11-6-01; Ord. No. 005-03HR, § I,
1-21-03)
Sec. 21-15. Temporary closing of streets and roads.
   (a)   Request. Any party desiring to have any street or road temporarily
closed in the county shall submit a written request to the county
administrator.
   (b)   Deadlines for requests. All written requests must be submitted to the
county administrator at least ten (10) days prior to the requested closing
date.
   (c)   Appointment of person accountable. All parties requesting such
temporary closure shall designate one (1) person who shall act as spokesman for
the party, as well as supervise all activities for the duration of such
closing.
   (d)   County administrator consideration. The county administrator shall
consider, within five (5) days, all timely submitted requests made by such
parties. If approved, the county administrator shall request the sheriff to
take appropriate action to blockade the requested streets and/or roads and the
clerk of council shall advertise to the public through the news media all
approved temporary closings. The cost of such advertising shall be borne by the
parties requesting the temporary closures.
   (e)   Duration. All streets and roads closed pursuant to this section shall
be blockaded for a period normally not to exceed twenty-four (24) hours. Such
duration, however, may be amended by the county administrator at his/her
discretion on an event basis.
   (f)   Emergency closings. Requests for temporary closing received less than
ten (10) days prior to the requested closing date may be considered as an
emergency closing if, in the opinion of the county administrator, such closing
is warranted; provided, that such action would not conflict with the public
interest and, further, that there exists sufficient time for appropriate action
to blockade requested streets and/or roads. All applicants will be placed on
notice that future requests must be submitted to the county administrator ten
(10) days prior to the requested closing date.
(Code 1976, § 8-1009.1; Ord. No. 467-77, §§ 1--5, 12-7-77; Ord. No. 506-78, §
1, 11-15-78; Ord. No. 005-03HR, § I, 1-21-03)
Sec. 21-16. Work on private property.
   The county department of public works is prohibited from performing any work
on private property not specifically authorized under the provisions of this
article except in emergency situations involving public health or safety and
authorized, in writing, by the county administrator.
(Ord. No. 005-03HR, § I, 1-21-03; Ord. No. 037-14HR, § III, 7-1-14)
Sec. 21-17. Cutting of roads.
   No roads will be cut by the county department of public works unless
specifically directed by the county council.
(Code 1976, § 8-1010; Ord. No. 005-03HR, § I, 1-21-03)
Sec. 21-18. Trees on private property.
   The county department of public works may remove dead trees on private
properly when there is a clear danger that they will fall onto a public road.
(Code 1976, § 8-1015; Ord. No. 005-03HR, § I, 1-21-03)
Sec. 21-19. "C" construction program.
   (a)    All funds available to the county council through the "C"
construction program will be used exclusively for maintenance and construction,
of publicly owned streets and roads in the county and the drainage facilities
directly related thereto.
   (b)    The director of public works will be responsible for implementing
systematic programs for resurfacing of existing streets and new construction
funded with "C" funds. New construction may include any of the following:
      (1)   Paving existing unpaved roads;
      (2)   Widening existing roads;
      (3)   Intersection improvements;
      (4)   Transportation Improvement Projects;
      (5)   Traffic Safety Projects;
      (6)   Drainage Improvements; or
      (7)   Sidewalks.
   (c)   The director of public works may provide staff support to the county
transportation committee as requested for coordination of the "C" construction
program the county.
   (d)   The county finance department may provide all financial services
required for administration of the county's "C" fluid allocation if requested
by the county transportation committee.
(Code 1976, § 8-1023; Ord. No. 1037-83, § 1, 4-19-83; Ord. No. 1682-87, § 1,
10-20-87; Ord. No. 2372-93, § I, 11-16-93; Ord. No. 005-03HR, § I, 1-21-03)
Sec. 21-20. Road paving program.
   (a)   Road construction and paving projects administered by the county and
funded from public funds shall be accomplished in accordance with a consistent,
systematic program established and administered by the Director of
Transportation, in conjunction with and with the support of the Director of
Public Works, or his/her designee. Such program shall have the following basic
characteristics:
   (1)   Only county maintained roads with recorded Easement and Right-of-Way
Deeds will be paved utilizing public funds,
   (2)   All county maintained dirt roads are eligible for paving, and
   (3)   Paving will be accomplished in priority order at a rate permitted by
availability of funding.
   (b)   The county engineer, or his/her designee, will acquire and maintain
the following data on all roads proposed for paving:
   (1)   Name;
   (2)   County road number;
   (3)   Map location code;
   (4)   Beginning and ending points;
   (5)   Length in miles and hundredths of a mile; and
   (6)   Council district.
   (c)   In addition, the following data pertaining to the roads priority for
paving will be obtained and recorded for each road:
   (1)   Number of homes accessed from the road;
   (2)   Number of businesses accessed from the road;
   (3)   Number of churches accessed from the road;
   (4)   Maintenance difficulty factor; and
   (5)   “Through road” factor.
   For the purpose of determining the number of homes, business and churches
accessed from a road, only those on parcels with no existing paved road
frontage will be counted except when the distance from the paved road to the
building exceeds 1,320 feet.
   (d)   Roads will be prioritized in accordance with the following procedure:
      A road’s priority for paving will be established by the lowest cost per
occupant, church, or business. Lowest cost per occupant (P) is calculated by
the formula:
      P   =    Cost
            H+B+C+T
      Where:
      H   =    Number of points accredited for homes.
   One point is accredited for each home accessed from the road. This will
include mobile homes as well as permanent homes. It should be noted that the
number of homes on a road is an indicator of the number of people using it as
well as the importance of the road as a possible school bus route.
      B   =   Number of points accredited for businesses.
   Two points are accredited for each business accessed from the road. To be
eligible for these points, a business must occupy a building separate from any
residence and rely on the road for either customer traffic or routine use by
company vehicles.
      C   =   Number of points accredited for churches.
   Two points are accredited for each church accessed from the road.
      T   =   Through road factor. If the road is a through road, two points
are accredited to T. If the road is not a through road, zero points are
accredited to T.
      L   =   Length of the road in miles and hundredths.
      Cost =   Estimated Cost ($800,000 per mile x L).
   (e)   A road’s paving may be given top priority provided that all costs
incurred by the county to pave it are paid by its adjacent property owners.
Such costs may be included as an assessment on the tax bill of the property
owners, to be paid over no more than a fifteen (15) year period with an
interest charge equal to that paid by the county for bonds issued to fund
construction. The county council may elect to have the total costs, plus
interest, of the improvements allocated between the property owners either by a
front footage assessment ratio, or by each lot being assessed an equal share of
the costs and interest, Establishment of this assessment shall require approval
of eighty percent (80%) of the property owners.
   (f)   Highways, streets or roads constructed or paved under the county’s
jurisdiction and maintained by the county shall meet the design and
construction standards contained in section
21-6, above.
   (g)   The Director of Transportation or his/her designee, in conjunction
with and with the support of the county engineer, or his/her designee, shall,
establish appropriate alternate design and construction standards for low
volume rural roads as a means of ensuring maximum cost effectiveness of road
paving funds.
   (h)   Road paving funds will be distributed by county council district based
on that district’s portion of total county dirt road mileage. Pro rata fund
distribution will be calculated as follows:
      District dirt road paving funds = Total dirt road paving funds x district
dirt road mileage
                            Total dirt road mileage
   Mileage refers to dirt road mileage in the county road maintenance system
(i.e. public dirt roads that are routinely maintained by county public works
forces). Roads will be selected for paving based on distribution/availability
of funds and priority within that council district, as determined by the
uniform road rating system contained in this section.
   (i)   The Alternative Maintenance Paving Program shall consist of two (2)
categories, Pave-In-Place and Alternative Surface Treatment, which are defined
as follows:
      (1)   The Pave-In-Place Program shall allow for the placement of hot-mix
asphalt on low-volume/light-duty dirt roads that meet the following criteria:
         a)   The road must be within a publicly dedicated right-of-way of a
minimum width of fifty (50) feet. A right-of-way width of no less than thirty
(30) feet may be considered if in the judgment of the director of public works
a safe roadway with adequate drainage may be constructed.
         b)   The road base may be reinforced by the use of Portland cement
stabilization of the in-place materials or other stabilization products
determined by the director of public works to be equal or better.
         c)   The road to be improved shall not interconnect existing streets
or serve developable vacant land that would result in the potential of
exceeding four hundred (400) vehicles per day. The road shall not serve
existing businesses or vacant land zoned for business uses that would generate
traffic exceeding four hundred (400) vehicles per day or truck traffic
exceeding twenty-four (24) vehicles per day.
         d)   Roads improved under this section may conform to AASHTO
Guidelines for Geometric Design of Very Low-Volume Local Roads (2001) for
horizontal and vertical alignment if determined by the director of public works
to be appropriate for the local situation.
         e)   Roadway bases reinforced by the above method shall be overlaid
with one and one-half (1½) inches of hot-mix asphalt surface course. The paved
surface width shall be no less than twenty-two (22) feet. A pavement width of
no less than eighteen (18) feet may be considered if in the judgment of the
director of public works a safe roadway with adequate drainage may be
constructed.
      (2)   Alternative Surface Treatment allows for the placement of materials
other than asphalt as the travel surface for road ways. Types of Alternative
Surface Treatment may include:
         a)   Triple treatment surface course;
         b)   Rubberized asphalt;
         c)   Milled asphalt.
      (3)   Roads in the Alternative Maintenance Paving Program may be improved
by geographical location in lieu of the priority list referenced in the
aforementioned subsection of this section to reduce mobilization cost. The
decision shall be at the discretion of the director of transportation.
      (4)   In order to incorporate community input before roads are paved,
notice shall be sent by the county transportation department, by mail to all
abutting property owners whose property would be affected by any such change. A
return receipt from the last known address of all property owners will be
required. Each such owner shall have thirty (30) days to respond. If fifty-one
(51%) percent or more of all such property owners decline said road paving,
then the subject road shall not be paved.
   (j)   Design exceptions for dirt road paved surface widths less than
eighteen (18) feet. 
Design exceptions for paved surface widths less than the minimum eighteen (18)
feet may be considered for dirt roads, as follows:
   (1)   The dirt road must be equal to or less than 1,000 feet in total
length.
   (2)   The road must be classified as low volume by traffic volume per the
County Low Volume Design Manual dated November 2013 which equates to traffic
volumes less than 400 vehicles per day.
   (3)   The road must not be classified as a through road.
   (4)   If a dirt road being considered for paving meets the criteria for
design exception stated in paragraphs (j) (1), (2), and (3), above, then
following steps must be taken before a design exception is approved:
      (a)   The Director of Transportation and the Director of Public Works
shall take a scoping visit and conduct a design field review of the road to
identify conflicts that may preclude installing a minimum paved surface width
of eighteen (18) feet.
      (b)   Staff shall obtain and review crash data for the road by number and
types of crashes, including fatal crash rate.
      (c)   A Design Exception Form shall be completed documenting the proposed
design exception and the justifications therefore.
      (d)   Then, when he/she deems it appropriate, the Director of
Transportation shall make a recommendation for a paved surface width design
exception to the Director of Public Works. The Director of Public Works shall
make the final determination of whether to approve the paved surface width
design exception and shall maintain a record of all approvals and denials.
   (5)   Regardless of the above, in no case shall a paved surface width be
allowed less than fifteen (15) feet.
   (6)   The Director of Transportation shall consider adding traffic calming
measures to dirt road paving projects in conjunction with any approved design
exception for roads that exceed 500 feet in total length.
   (7)   The above design exception shall apply only to paved surface widths of
dirt roads in limited circumstances and shall not allow for exceptions to any
other design, asphalt, drainage, or construction standards.
(Ord. No. 005-03HR, § I, 1-21-03; Ord. No. 011-09HR, § II, 2-17-09; Ord. No.
043-14HR, § II, 7-29-14; Ord. No. 047-15HR, § I, 10-20-15; Ord. No. 047-15HR, §
I, 10-20-15; Ord. No. 030-23HR, § I, 7-18-23)
Sec. 21-21. Transportation improvement program.
   (a)   All public funds available to the county for transportation system
improvements shall be expended in accordance with a comprehensive
transportation improvement plan. This would apply to:
      (1)   Connector roads;
      (2)   Intersection improvements;
      (3)   Widening;
      (4)   Turn lanes; and
      (5)   Alignment improvements.
   (b)   Road resurfacing funds, for the resurfacing of existing paved roads,
will be distributed by county council district based on that district's portion
of total county paved road mileage. Pro rata fund distribution will be
calculated as follows:
District paved road paving funds = Total paved road resurfacing funds x
district paved road mileage
                            Total paved road mileage
Mileage refers to paved road mileage in the county road maintenance system
(i.e. public paved roads that are routinely maintained by county public works
forces). Roads will be selected for paving based on distribution/ availability
of funds and priority within that council district, as determined by the
condition analysis as maintained by public works.
(Ord. No. 005-03HR, § I, 1-21-03; Ord. No. 012-13HR, § I, 3-19-13)
Sec. 21-22. Sidewalks.
   The director of public works shall be responsible for establishing a
systematic program for identifying, prioritizing, and implementing sidewalk
construction, maintenance, and/or improvement projects. The principal focus for
such program will be the safety of children walking to school, to school bus
stops, or to neighborhood/ public recreation facilities.
(Ord. No. 005-03HR, § I, 1-21-03; Ord. No. 001-13HR, § I, 1-8-13)
Sec. 21-23. Condemnation/ compensation.
   (a)   In general, the county will not compensate property owners for
easements or rights-of-way on public works projects from which they directly
benefit. Exceptions may be made, however, when:
      (1)   Unusual circumstances make payment of a reasonable amount of
compensation more economical than resorting to condemnation;
      (2)   Deadlines for completion of a project preclude the expenditure of
time required for condemnation; or
      (3)   Compensation is awarded through the condemnation process.
   (b)   Condemnation of easements or rights-of-way on any county public works
project shall require the prior approval of the county council. An appraisal of
affected property parcels shall accompany a staff recommendation to county
council for condemnation of property.
(Ord. No. 005-03HR, § I, 1-21-03)
Sec. 21-24. Encroachments on county maintained roads.
   (a)   Generally.
      (1)   An encroachment permit, approved by the county engineer's office,
shall be required for all construction, undertaken by parties other than the
county public works department or its authorized contractor, within or
affecting the right-of-way of any county maintained highway, street or road.
This requirement shall apply, but not be limited, to:
         a.   Driveway connections involving a curb cut or pipe installation;
         b.   Curb cuts;
         c.   Utility taps;
         d.   Utility installations;
         e.   Excavations within rights-of-way;
         f.   Storm drainage installation;
         g.   Storm drainage discharge; and
         h.   Subdivision entrance signs or gateways.
      (2)   The permittee shall indemnify the county for any liability incurred
or damages sustained as a result of the encroachment.
      (3)   The permittee shall be responsible for:
         a.   Notifying the county engineer's office when construction begins
on an encroachment;
         b.   Ensuring that a copy of the encroachment permit is on the
construction site; and
         c.   Ensuring that the construction and the restoration of the roadway
have been approved by the county engineer's office.
   (b)   Excavations in streets.
      (1)   An encroachment permit shall be required for each excavation in a
county road before the work is commenced. Work under such permit shall be
commenced within the time specified on the permit, otherwise the permit shall
become void. All permits shall be kept at the place of excavation while the
work is being done and exhibited whenever called for by any person having the
authority to examine the same. There shall be no more than one-half (½) the
width of any street or alley opened or obstructed at any one time; tunneling
may be allowed, provided that no authorized underground construction shall be
damaged or interfered with. All portions of the street excavated shall be put
in as good condition as before the excavation, was made. The trench or
excavation shall be refilled, thoroughly rammed and puddled within the time
specified on the permit after making the connection or repairs. When an
excavation is made in any paved county road where it is necessary to remove
paving, the person to whom the permit was issued for such excavation shall
leave a written notice with the county department of public works and such
notice shall state that the excavation has been properly filled, tamped, and is
ready for repaving. Whenever any person making any excavations in the street or
alley fails to refill, in the proper manner, as required by this section or
fails to maintain the same for a period of one year, then the county council
shall cause the work to be done and the cost thereof shall be charged against
the bond as heretofore provided in section
6-68 of this code.
      (2)   Where such excavations occur in a state or federal highway,
permission shall be obtained from the state or federal highway department
before any work is commenced.
      (3)   Public protection requirement.
         a.   It is hereby required that for every excavation made on public
property, proper safeguards shall be provided against injury to the public;
barricades shall be provided at five (5) foot distances, and such barricades
shall completely encircle all open excavations or trenches. All barricades, as
required by this section, shall have at least one sign placed thereon in a
conspicuous manner, indicating the name of the person causing such excavation.
When approved, steel plates of sufficient strength may be used to cover
excavation to prevent blocking of street.
         b.   From sunup to sundown there shall be placed, at a distance of not
less than one hundred (100) feet, sufficient numbers of red flags to warn the
public of dangerous excavation. From sunset to sunrise there shall be placed,
at a distance of not less than one hundred (100) feet, sufficient red lights or
flambeaux to indicate the length of the excavation in the public thoroughfare
and to warn the public of dangerous excavation; in addition, there shall be
placed on or by the barricades sufficient red lights or flambeaux to indicate
the point of excavation and size.
   (c)   Anyone who encroaches on the right-of-way of a county maintained
highway, street or road without securing an encroachment permit or who fails to
adequately restore the road and right-of-way after an encroachment shall be
deemed guity of a misdemeanor, and shall be subject to the general penalty
provisions of this code. Each day that the unauthorized encroachment exists, or
that the inadequacy exists following notification, shall be considered a
separate offense.
(Ord. No. 005-03HR, § I, 1-21-03)
Sec. 21-25. Use of county equipment by private parties and during public
emergencies.
   (a)   Use and operation of county equipment. Only authorized employees of
the county shall be allowed to use and operate equipment owned by the county.
No such equipment may be used at any time on private property or for private
purposes except for public emergencies as hereinafter defined and as duly
authorized by the director of public works and/or the county administrator.
   (b)   Public emergency. A public emergency is hereby defined as a flood (as
defined under Section
26-22 of this Code of Ordinances), earthquake, tornado, hurricane, plane crash,
train wreck, vehicular wrecks involving five (5) or more vehicles and/or ten
(10) or more persons, fires and other occurrences, natural or man-made, where
the public health is threatened or the potential of extensive damage to private
property exists and immediate, emergency steps are necessary to protect life,
health, the environment, and prevent substantial property loss.
   (c)   Records. In the event of such public emergency, the department of
public works must, as soon thereafter as possible, make a record of the nature
of the emergency, the property and/or owner involved, the operator of the
equipment, the names of county employees utilized, the date(s) thereof, and the
man-hours involved.
   (d)   Reimbursement. The director of public works and/or the county
administrator may apply for reimbursement for the services rendered by county
employees and equipment where the private party either had or has insurance
available for such services or where federal or state funds are available, such
as disaster aid.
   (e)   Violation. The failure to comply with this section shall be grounds
for suspension, removal or termination.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § IV, 4-4-17)
Sec. 21-26. Burial of paupers and cremains.
   The public works department shall bury paupers at a site designated for that
purpose when directed to do so by the county administrator. Further, cremains
originating from medical schools may be buried within the county cemetery by
appropriately authorized personnel of such schools. Medical schools wishing to
enter into these arrangements shall provide a list of names of authorized
personnel and shall execute appropriate releases and hold-harmless agreements
prior to any burials.
(Ord. No. 010-17HR, § IV, 4-4-17)
Secs. 21-27–21-33. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. EASEMENTS ON PUBLIC STREETS
Sec. 21-34. Easements on, over, under and across public streets and property.
   (a)   Generally.
      (1)   Easements over, under and across public streets and property
controlled by the county shall be granted only for a public purpose,
convenience, necessity, or to facilitate the provision of water, sewer,
electricity, transportation or other utility.
      (2)   The grantee of such easement shall certify the purpose of such
easement, the area affected, the necessity and the fact that the area affected
does or does not receive similar services from another public or private
utility.
      (3)   Prior to the granting of such easement, the grantee shall provide a
written assurance that he, she, or it will comply with all applicable local,
state and federal laws and regulations including, but riot limited to, public
safety, job safety, wage and hour laws, health standards and such other
requirements as are necessary to ensure the public's safety at any time, during
construction, repairs, or otherwise, should injury to person or property occur
as a result of acts and/or omissions to act by such grantee, his, her, or its
heirs, executor, successors or assigns.
      (4)   Prior to any construction, installation, erection or repair of any
such improvements and appurtenances on, over, under or across such streets or
property as may be authorized by such easement, the grantee shall notify the
county department of public works, the county sheriffs department and the
county administrator at least forty-eight (48) hours in advance.
      (5)   The grantee shall provide the director of public works or his
designee with certificate(s) of insurance verifying the grantee currently has
the insurance required by the county. All such insurance policies shall be
issued by an insurer satisfactory to the county, and the insurer shall have a
rating in the A categories of Best Insurance Reports. The certificate(s) shall
include a provision that not less than thirty (30) days notice will be given to
the county prior to cancellation, termination or reduction in coverage. In
addition, the grantee shall also provide such prior notice to the director of
public works. The term of all insurance shall be not less than any time the
grantee or anyone with a contract to perform work on the grantee's projects
shall be performing such work. Insurance shall consist of the following:
         a.   At its expense the grantee shall for the term required by the
county maintain a commercial general liability policy for bodily injury,
personal injury, completed operations and property damage in a coverage amount
of not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence and $2,000,000 annual aggregate, and
a business auto policy for bodily injury and property damage in a coverage
amount of not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence. The forms shall be ISO
(Insurance Services Office, Inc.) or comparable to them. Richland County
Government shall be named an additional insured, except when the grantee is a
governmental entity. Grantee shall provide its insurer a copy of any agreement
with or requirement by the grantee regarding insurance.
         b.   At its expense the grantee shall for the term required by the
county maintain the workers' compensation coverage required by S. C. law. The
grantee shall provide a certificate for insurance for this coverage in the
manner required by this subsection.
      (6)   The grantee shall indemnify and hold harmless the county, its
successors and assigns, from and against all loss, costs, expenses, including
attorney's fees, claims, suits and judgments whatsoever in connection with
injury to or death of any person or persons or loss of or damage to property,
and further claims, suits and judgments whatsoever in connection with injury to
or death of any person or persons or loss of or damage to property, and further
claims, suits and judgments whatsoever by third parties resulting from the
interruption of traffic caused by or in any way connected with the
construction, installation, erection, repair or maintenance, use or presence of
any such improvements or appurtenances, however caused.
      (7)   The grantee shall bear all costs of furnishing flagging protection,
warning devices and inspection services, as well as the costs of restoring the
affected area to its original condition.
   (b)   Fees, charges or water rents.
      (1)   In consideration for the granting of such easements by the county,
the grantee shall pay to the county such fees, charges, or portions of fees and
water rents as shall be from time to time established by the county council.
      (2)   Initial fees, charges, water rents or portions thereof shall be
those as are in force and effect at the time the easement is granted and shall
be remitted to the county finance department on a monthly basis.
      (3)   Prior to any increase in fees, charges or water rents, at least
thirty (30) days' notice prior to the effective date shall be given to those
grantees so affected.
      (4)   Any grantee affected by any such increase may request a hearing by
county council or its duly authorized representative, provided such hearing is
requested in writing within twenty (20) days of the giving of notice as
required in subsection (b)(3) of this division.
      (5)   Such request for hearing shall stay the implementation of such
increase for an additional fifteen (15) days beyond the 30-day notice period,
but thereafter such increase shall go into effect and so continue until such
time as changed by county council, general law, or a court of competent
jurisdiction.
      (6)   Such increase as is collected subsequent to such request for
hearing shall be placed in escrow pending a ruling by county council. In the
event of a reduction of the increase, such difference shall be refunded to the
grantee.
      (7)   Only that increase collected from a grantee that has requested a
hearing shall be so escrowed. Increases collected from grantees that do not
request a hearing will not be escrowed.
      (8)   In the event county council, after hearing, refuses to reduce the
increase, the funds so escrowed shall immediately revert to the general fund or
such other fund as has been designated by county council.
      (9)   In the event the hearing provided for in subsection (b)(4) of this
division is held by the duly authorized representative of county council, the
representative shall report his/her findings and recommendations to county
council within ten (10) working days thereafter.
      (10)   The failure of county council to affirmatively reduce the increase
by the second meeting after a receipt of such report shall constitute a
ratification of its previous action establishing such increase.
(Code 1976, § 8-1026; Ord. of 6-16-76, Arts. 1, 2; Ord. No. 005-03HR, § I, 1-
21-03)
Sec. 21-35. Adoption not to constitute waiver.
   (a)   The adoption of this chapter shall not be deemed an acceptance of
liability nor a waiver of the doctrine of sovereign immunity.
   (b)   The adoption of this chapter shall not be deemed a waiver of the
release clause contained in the standard easement and right-of-way deed.
(Code 1976, § 8-1022; Ord. No. 005-03HR, § I, 1-21-03)
CHAPTER 22: RESERVED*
   *Editor's note--Ord. No. 074-04HR, adopted November 9, 2004, provided for
the deletion of former Chapter 22, relative to land development regulations,
which derived from Ord. No. 1535-86, § 1, effective October 21, 1986, as
amended. The provisions of former Chapter 22 have been incorporated into
Chapter 26, the land development code.
CHAPTER 23: TAXATION*
   *Cross reference(s): Administration generally,
Ch. 2; director of finance and budget, §
2-118 et seq.; county treasurer, §
2-300 et seq.; county auditor, §
2-311 et seq.; tax anticipation notes, §
2-571 et seq.; purchasing, §
2-590 et seq.; licenses and miscellaneous business regulations,
Ch. 16.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 23-1. Appeals under general law.
   The right is preserved to any property owner and taxpayer to appeal from the
decision of the county board of assessment appeals to the state tax commission
for such relief as may be available to him under general law.
(Code 1976, § 6-1009)
Sec. 23-2. Publication of notice of certain tax rates.
   Immediately upon the receipt of tax duplicate for the year, the county
treasurer shall cause a notice to be inserted in one newspaper in the county
stating the rate per cent of the levy for state purposes and the rate per cent
for all other purposes on the duplicates for the current fiscal year, and if
any special levies have been made on the property of a school or other district
not affecting the entire county, the total rate of levies shall also be stated
in such notice.
(Code 1976, § 6-1010)
   State law reference(s)--Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 12-45-40.
Sec. 23-3. When taxes payable; penalties on delinquent taxes; execution.
   (a)   Real property. All taxes in the county on real property shall be paid
for in one of two methods:
      (1)   A lump sum payment between the fifteenth day of September and the
thirty-first day of January after their assessment in each year.
      (2)   In the alternative, the taxpayer may elect to prepay his taxes in
installments by filing an estimate of real property taxes due or to become due
for the forthcoming tax year, based upon the prior year's taxes. In the event
that the taxpayer makes such an election to prepay his taxes in installments,
the taxpayer shall file such estimate on a form to be provided by the office of
the county treasurer and shall make payment on such estimate in four (4)
monthly payments, the first to be due on the first day of October, and each
payment thereafter shall be due on the first day of each succeeding month. Each
payment shall be based upon the estimate as provided above, except for those
who elect to make one payment in January for the total amount for that year. In
the event that a taxpayer elects to file an estimate and pay in installments,
the payment due in January shall be increased or decreased by the difference
between the cumulative total of the four (4) monthly payments and the final tax
bill as determined by the tax notice prepared by the auditor and mailed to the
taxpayer.
      (3)   In making such election to file an estimate and pay on a monthly
basis, the taxpayer acknowledges that he has waived the assessment, levy, and
other steps which generally are taken prior to taxes becoming due and payable.
By such waiver, the taxpayer will specifically acknowledge on the form to be
provided that he is undertaking this action for his convenience and in order to
assist him in making his payments in a prompt and orderly manner, but without
undue burden to himself or without penalty.
      (4)   Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed a waiver by the
taxpayer to make payment under protest, to challenge assessments, or to
otherwise exercise his rights pertaining to assessments, levy, payment,
protest, or other challenges as set forth in the Code of Laws of the State of
South Carolina.
      (5)   In the event the property taxes have not been entered upon the
duplicate, the treasurer shall deposit any collections hereunder into an
interest-bearing escrow account until such time as the property taxes have been
entered upon the duplicate. Once such entry has been accomplished, the
treasurer may allocate such collections in accordance with law, ordinance, and
budget.
   (b)   Personal property. All taxes on personal property in the county shall
be payable between the first day of July and the fifteenth day of September.
   (c)   Penalties for late payment of real property taxes. When any portion of
the taxes for real property taxes shall not be paid on or before the thirty-
first day of January, the penalty added shall be five (5) per cent thereon on
the amount still due to the county; and if such taxes, assessments and
penalties are not paid on or before the fifteenth day of April next thereafter,
an additional penalty of seven (7) per cent of the amount still due shall be
added and the county treasurer shall issue his tax execution for such taxes,
assessments and penalties against the property of the defaulting taxpayer
according to law.
   (d)   Penalties for late payment of personal property taxes. When any
portion of the taxes for personal property taxes shall not be paid on or before
the fifteenth day of September, the penalty added shall be five (5) per cent
thereon; and if such taxes, assessments and penalties are not paid on or before
the fifteenth day of November next thereafter, an additional penalty of seven
(7) per cent thereof shall be added, and the county treasurer shall issue his
tax execution for such taxes, assessments and penalties against the property of
the defaulting taxpayer according to law.
   (e)   Postponement of penalties. The council may postpone the time within
which the penalties provided in this section shall attach. In the event that
any of the aforementioned deadline dates fall on a Saturday, Sunday, or
holiday, such deadline shall be extended to the next working day.
   (f)   Payment by mail. In instances where taxes are paid by mail, no
penalties shall be assessed when the envelope in which the taxes were received
bears the postmark date of the deadline.
(Code 1976, § 6-1011; Ord. No. 937-82, § 1, 6-16-82; Ord. No. 1321-85, § 1, 6-
4-85)
   State law reference(s)--Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, §§ 12-45-70, 12-
45-180.
Sec. 23-4. Media of payment.
   Taxes shall be payable in the following kinds of funds: Silver coin, United
States currency, United States postal money orders and checks subject to
collection. Jury certificates and per diem of witnesses in the circuit court
and all county claims which have been approved and certificates issued by the
council shall be receivable for taxes due the county in which such services
were rendered or such claims approved, not including school taxes.
(Code 1976, § 6-1012)
   State law reference(s)--Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 12-45-90.
Sec. 23-5. Refund of overpayments.
   (a)   In the event it is properly determined by the state tax commission
that there has been an overpayment of property taxes for real or personal
property due to the value of the property having been erroneously, improperly
or illegally assessed, the county council shall authorize a refund in the
amount determined to be erroneously, improperly, or illegally assessed.
   (b)   In the event that the refund referred to in paragraph (a) of this
section should be requested and authorized by county council in a year
subsequent to the fiscal year in which the overpayment was made, the county
treasurer shall charge back the amount of the refund, pro rata, to each entity
that received tax monies within the particular tax district for the specified
fiscal year. In so doing, the county treasurer shall reduce, by the total
amount of the refund, monies to be paid to each such entity during the fiscal
year in which the refund is made.
   (c)   Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 12-43-200(c)(3) of the S.C.
Code of Laws, as amended (and consistent with the provisions of Section 12-54-
85(F) of the S.C. Code of Laws, as amended), if a taxpayer believes that he or
she has overpaid his or her property taxes because the property was eligible
for the legal residence assessment pursuant to Sections 12-43-220(c)(1) and (2)
of the S.C. Code of Laws, as amended, a claim for a refund must be filed with
the County Assessor within three years from the time the return was filed, or
two years from the date the tax was paid, whichever is later. In no event shall
a refund be granted beyond this point of time.
(Ord. No. 955-82, §§ I, II, 9-1-82; Ord. No. 076-05HR, § I, 11-1-05)
Sec. 23-6. Execution fees and charges.
   Only the following fees and charges shall be collected in addition to the
penalties provided for in section
23-3: For making levy and serving execution, one dollar ($1.00), and if the
property is situated three (3) miles or more from the county courthouse an
additional one dollar ($1.00); for each advertisement of property in a
newspaper two dollars ($2.00), or the actual cost thereof, whichever is
greater; and for selling property at public auction three dollars ($3.00), out
of which a fee may be allowed to an auctioneer; the fees above provided to be
added as costs to the taxes and penalties and included in the amount for which
the property is offered to be sold at public sale. The county treasurer shall
also collect from the purchaser of the property at the sale two dollars ($2.00)
for preparing, executing and delivering deed or bill of sale for the property
purchased and fees for recording the deed, which shall be collected at the time
such deed or bill of sale is delivered to the purchaser. In addition to all
penalties charged against any property or party for taxes and assessments
placed in execution, there shall be charged and collected by the county an
additional two dollars ($2.00) execution fee.
(Code 1976, § 6-1013)
Sec. 23-7. Tax execution (nulla bona) committee; composition.
   (a)   The county council hereby designates that the composition of the
county tax execution (nulla bona) committee shall be as follows:
      (1)   Chairman of the county council or his designee from among other
council members;
      (2)   County attorney, or his designee;
      (3)   Representative of treasurer's office;
      (4)   Representative of auditor's office;
      (5)   Representative of assessor's office.
   (b)   The county council shall appoint the persons to serve as members of
the committee in accordance with Act 998 of Acts and Joint Resolutions, 1966.
(Ord. No. 805-81, §§ I, II, 5-6-81)
Secs. 23-8--23-18. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. RESERVED
Secs. 23-19--23-32. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. RESERVED
Secs. 23-33--23-47. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. BOARD OF ASSESSMENT APPEALS
   Cross reference(s): County boards, commissions and committees generally, §
2-326 et seq.
Sec. 23-48. Appointive powers of council.
   Pursuant to section 4-9-170 of the Code of Laws of South Carolina, 1976, and
section 3 of Act 283, Acts of 1975 (the Home Rule Act), the county council
hereby assumes appointive powers in regard to the county board of assessment
appeals as set forth in section
23-49.
(Code 1976, § 2-7045; Ord. No. 633-79, § 1, 1-1-80)
Sec. 23-49. Composition; terms; officers.
   The board of assessment appeals shall consist of seven (7) members to be
appointed as follows: One by the city council of the City of Columbia, who
shall reside within the corporate limits of Columbia; three (3) by a majority
of the county council; one by the board of trustees of School District No. 1 of
the county, who shall be a resident of School District No. 1; one by the board
of trustees of School District No. 2 of the county, who shall be a resident of
School District No. 2; and one by the board of trustees of School District No.
6 of the county, who shall be a resident of the county, residing in School
District No. 6. One of the members appointed by the county council shall be a
person actively engaged in the real estate business. The board shall appoint a
chairman and a secretary. The terms of the members shall be for three (3) years
or until their successors are appointed and qualify.
(Code 1976, § 2-7046; Ord. No. 633-79, § 2, 1-1-80; Ord. No. 845-81, §§ I, II,
10-7-81)
Sec. 23-50. Duties and powers.
   The board of assessment appeals shall have the following duties and powers:
      (1)   To equalize the value of the real and personal property of the
county;
      (2)   To hear all grievances and appeals from the valuation and
assessments fixed by the assessor; and
      (3)   To perform any and all other duties and powers that belonged to the
county board of equalization as of April 24, 1958, the date of the creation of
the board of assessment appeals.
(Code 1976, § 2-7047; Ord. No. 633-79, § 3, 1-1-80)
   State law reference(s)--Local boards of equalization, S.C. Code 1976, § 12-
43-10 et seq.
Sec. 23-51. Meetings; minutes.
   The board shall meet whenever necessary, but shall meet on the first Tuesday
in each month to act on appeals from the assessments of the tax assessor.
Minutes shall be taken of all meetings and shall be a matter of public record,
with a copy of the minutes duly certified by the secretary to be sent to the
tax assessor.
(Code 1976, § 2-7048; Ord. No. 633-79, § 4, 1-1-80)
Sec. 23-52. Compensation of board members.
   The board members shall be paid on a per diem basis at a figure to be
determined by the county council.
(Code 1976, § 2-7049; Ord. No. 633-79, § 5, 1-1-80)
Secs. 23-53--23-59. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. REHABILITATED HISTORIC PROPERTIES
Sec. 23-60. Special tax assessment created.
   A special tax assessment is created for eligible rehabilitated historic
properties for a period of twenty (20) years equal to the assessed value of the
property at the time of preliminary certification.
(Ord. No. 047-08HR, § II, 9-9-08; Ord. No. 019-13HR, § 1, 5-7-13)
Sec. 23-61. Purpose.
   It is the purpose of this Article to:
      (1)   Encourage the rehabilitation of historic properties;
      (2)   Promote community development and redevelopment;
      (3)   Encourage sound community planning; and
      (4)   Promote the general health, safety, and welfare of the community.
(Ord. No. 047-08HR, § II, 9-9-08)
Sec. 23-62. Eligible Properties.
   (a)   Certification. In order to be eligible for the special tax assessment,
historic properties must receive preliminary and final certification.
      (1)   Preliminary certification. To receive preliminary certification a
property must meet the following conditions:
         a   The property meets the requirements for historic designation as
established in this section.
         b.   The proposed rehabilitation work receives a recommendation of
approval from the appropriate architectural reviewing authority (hereinafter
“reviewing authority”) and is consistent with the rehabilitation standards as
set forth in this article. The reviewing authority shall review all
improvements associated with the rehabilitation and make a recommendation to
the county regarding the project’s eligibility. For the purpose of this
article, the reviewing authority shall be defined as follows:
            1.   In any municipality that has an architectural review board,
the municipal board shall serve as the reviewing authority.
            2.   In the unincorporated areas of the county, and within any
municipality that does not have an architectural review board, the South
Carolina Department of Archives and History shall serve as the reviewing
authority.
         c.   Be a project that commenced by or after August 17, 2004 to the
date of the adoption of this ordinance and work was permitted to have begun
prior to receiving preliminary certification, or
         d.   Be a project that commences on or after the date of the adoption
of this ordinance.
      (2)   Final certification. To be eligible for final certification, a
property must have met the following conditions:
         a.   The property has received preliminary certification.
         b.   The minimum expenditures for rehabilitation as set forth in this
article have been incurred and paid.
         c.   The completed rehabilitation receives a recommendation for
approval from the reviewing authority as being consistent with the plans
approved by the reviewing authority during preliminary certification.
         d.   All application fees have been paid in full by the applicant.
         e.   The property has met all other requirements of this article.
   (b)   Historic designation. In order to be eligible for the special tax
assessment, the property must meet one of the following criteria:
      (1)   The property must be listed on the National Register of Historic
Places either individually or as a contributing property in a district, or
      (2)   The property is designated as a historic property by the county
council based upon criteria established by the county council and the property
is at least fifty (50) years old.
   (c)   Historic property criteria. In order to be eligible for the special
tax assessment, the property must meet one (1) of the following criteria:
      (1)   Any property included in one (1) of the categories below is
considered a historic property:
         a.   Listed on the National Register of Historic Places,
         b.   Determined eligible for the National Register by the South
Carolina Department of Archives and History,
         c.   A contributing property in a National Register Historic District,
         d.   Listed in the Richland County Bicentennial Committee Historic
Homes and Buildings Landmark Program (1981), or
         e.   City of Columbia Historic Landmark.
      (2)   All other properties must demonstrate:
         a.   Association with events that have made a significant contribution
to the broad patterns of our history, or
         b.   Association with the lives of significant persons in our past, or
         c.   Embodiment of distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or
method of construction; or representation of the work of a master; or
possession of high artistic values.
      Property owners seeking eligibility under this section must file an
application with Richland County to receive a historic property determination.
(Ord. No. 047-08HR, § II, 9-9-08; Ord. No. 019-13HR, §§ II, III, 5-7-13)
Sec. 23-63. Eligible rehabilitation.
   (a)   Standards for rehabilitation. To be eligible for the special tax
assessment, historic rehabilitations must be conducted according to the
following standards:
      (1)   The historic character of a property shall be retained and
preserved. The removal of historic materials or alterations or of features and
spaces that characterize each property shall be avoided.
      (2)   Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its time,
place and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical development
shall not be undertaken.
      (3)   Most properties change over time. Those changes that have acquired
historic significance in their own right shall be retained and preserved.
      (4)   Distinctive features, finishes, and construction techniques or
examples of craftsmanship that characterize a property should be preserved.
      (5)   Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than
replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement or of a
distinctive feature, the new should match the old in design, color, texture,
and other visual qualities and, where possible, materials. Replacement of
missing features shall be substantiated by documentary, physical or pictorial
evidence.
      (6)   Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that cause
damage to historic materials shall not be used. The surface cleaning of
structures, if appropriate, shall be undertaken using the most gentle means
possible.
      (7)   New additions, exterior alterations, or related new construction
shall not destroy historic materials that characterize the property. The new
work shall be differentiated from the old and shall be compatible with the
massing, size, scale and architectural features to protect the historic
integrity of the historic property and its environment.
      (8)   New additions and adjacent new construction shall be undertaken in
such a manner that, if removed in the future, the essential form and integrity
of the historic property and its environment would be unimpaired.
   (b)   Work to be reviewed. The following work will be reviewed according to
the standards set forth above:
      (1)   Repairs to the exterior of the designated building.
      (2)   Alterations to the exterior of the designated building.
      (3)   New construction on the property on which the building is located,
including site work.
      (4)   Alterations to interior primary public spaces, as defined by the
reviewing authority.
      (5)   Any remaining work where the expenditures for such work are being
used to satisfy the minimum expenditures for rehabilitation, including, but not
limited to, alterations made to mechanical, plumbing and electrical systems.
   (c)   Minimum expenditures for rehabilitation. To be eligible for the
special property tax assessment, the owner or the owner’s estate must meet the
minimum expenditures for rehabilitation:
      (1)   The minimum investment shall be twenty percent (20%) of the fair
market value of the building which is to be rehabilitated.
      (2)   Fair market value means the appraised value as certified to the
county by a real estate appraiser licensed by the State of South Carolina, the
sales price as delineated in a bona fide contract of sale within twelve months
of the time it is submitted, or the most recent appraised value published by
the Richland County Tax Assessor.
   (d)   Expenditures for rehabilitation means the actual cost of
rehabilitation relating to one or more of the following:
      (1)   Improvements located on or within the historic building as
designated.
      (2)   Improvements outside of but directly attached to the historic
building which are necessary to make the building fully useable (such as
vertical circulation) but shall not include rentable/habitable floorspace
attributable to new construction.
      (3)   Architectural and engineering services attributable to the design
of the improvements.
      (4)   Costs necessary to maintain the historic character or integrity of
the building.
   (e)   Scope. The special tax assessment may apply to the following:
      (1)   Structure(s) rehabilitated;
      (2)   Real property on which the building is located.
   (f)   Time limits. If the project is not complete after two (2) years, but
the minimum expenditures for rehabilitation have been incurred, the property
continues to receive the special assessment until the project is completed.
(Ord. No. 047-08HR, § II, 9-9-08; Ord. No. 019-13HR, §§ IV, V, 5-7-13)
Sec. 23-64. Process.
   (a)   Fee required. There is a fee required for the review of rehabilitation
work during the final certification process. Final certification of the
property will not be given until the fee has been paid in full by the
applicant. Fees shall be made payable to Richland County. The amount of the fee
shall be as follows:
      (1)   For owner-occupied, non-income producing properties, the fee shall
be one hundred and fifty dollars ($150.00).
      (2)   For income-producing or non-owner occupied properties, the fee
shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00).
   (b)   Plan required. Owners of property seeking approval of rehabilitation
work must submit a completed rehabilitation of historic property application
with supporting documentation to the county administrator or his designee prior
to beginning work. Rehabilitation work conducted prior to approval of the
application is done so at the risk of the property owner.
   (c)   Preliminary certification. Upon receipt of the completed application,
the county administrator or his designee shall submit the plan to the reviewing
authority for a recommendation as to whether the project is consistent with the
standards for rehabilitation. Upon receipt of the reviewing authority’s
recommendation, the county administrator or his designee shall notify the owner
in writing. Upon receipt of this determination, the property owner may:
      (1)   If the application is approved, begin rehabilitation;
      (2)   If the application is not approved, he/she may revise such
application in accordance with comments provided by reviewing authority.
   (d)   Substantive changes. Once preliminary certification is granted to an
application, substantive changes must be approved in writing by the county
administrator or his designee. Any substantive changes made to the property
during rehabilitation that are not approved by county administrator or his
designee, upon review and recommendation of the reviewing authority, are
conducted at the risk of the property owner and may disqualify the project from
eligibility during the final certification process.
   (e)   Final certification. Upon completion of the project, the property must
receive final certification in order to be eligible for the special assessment.
The reviewing authority shall inspect completed projects to determine if the
work is consistent with the approval recommended by the reviewing authority and
granted by the county during preliminary certification. The review process for
final certification shall be established by the reviewing authority and may
include a physical inspection of the property. The reviewing authority shall
notify the applicant in writing of its recommendation. If the applicant wishes
to appeal the reviewing authority’s recommendation, the appeal must follow the
reviewing authority’s appeals process. The county administrator or his designee
may grant final certification only if the following conditions have been met:
      (1)   The completed work meets the standards for rehabilitation as
established in this article;
      (2)   Verification is made that the minimum expenditures have been have
been incurred in accordance with the provisions of this article; and
      (3)   Any fee(s) shall be paid in full.
   Upon receiving final certification, the property will be assessed for the
remainder of the special assessment period on the fair market value of the
property at the time the preliminary certification was made or the final
certification was made, whichever occurred earlier.
   (f)   Additional work. For the remainder of the special assessment period
after final certification, the property owner shall notify the county
administrator or his designee of any additional work, other than ordinary
maintenance, prior to the work beginning. The reviewing authority shall review
the work and make a recommendation to the county administrator or his designee
whether the overall project is consistent with the standards for
rehabilitation. The county administrator or his designee shall notify the
property owner in writing if the overall project is consistent with the
standards for rehabilitation. If the additional work is found to be
inconsistent by the reviewing authority, the county administrator or his
designee shall notify the owner in writing within thirty (30) days of its
decision to rescind approval. The property owner may withdraw his/her request
and cancel or revise the proposed additional work.
   (g)   Notification. Upon final certification of a rehabilitated historic
property, the Richland County Assessor, Auditor, and Treasurer shall be
notified by the county administrator or his designee that such property has
been duly certified and is eligible for the special tax assessment.
   (h)   Application. Once the final certification has been granted, the owner
of the property shall make application to the Richland County Auditor for the
special assessment provided for herein. The special assessment shall remain in
effect for the length of the special assessment period, unless the property
shall become decertified under the provisions of this section.
   (i)   Date effective. If an application for preliminary or final
certification is filed by May first or the preliminary or final certification
is approved by August first, the special assessment authorized herein is
effective for that year. Otherwise, it is effective beginning with the
following year. The special assessment only begins in the current or future tax
years as provided for in this section. The special assessment period shall not
exceed twenty (20) years in length, and in no instance may the special
assessment be applied retroactively.
   (j)   Previously certified properties. A property certified to receive the
special property tax assessment under the existing law continues to receive the
special assessment in effect at the time certification was made.
   (k)   Decertification. Once the property has received final certification
and assessed as rehabilitated historic property, it remains so certified and
must be granted the special assessment until the property becomes disqualified
by any one of the following:
      (1)   Written notice from the owner to the Richland County Auditor
requesting removal of the special assessment;
      (2)   Removal of the historic designation by the county council , based
upon noncompliance of the criteria established in Section
26-62(c); or
      (3)   Rescission of the approval of rehabilitation by the county, at the
recommendation of the reviewing authority, because of alterations or renovation
by the owner or the owner’s estate which causes the property to no longer
possess the qualities and features which made it eligible for final
certification. Notification of any change affecting eligibility must be given
immediately to the Richland County Assessor, Auditor, and Treasurer.
(Ord. No. 047-08HR, § II, 9-9-08; Ord. No. 019-13HR, §§ VI, VII, 5-7-13)
ARTICLE VI. LOCAL HOSPITALITY TAX
Sec. 23-65. Definitions.
   Whenever used in this article, unless a contrary intention is clearly
evidenced, the following terms shall be interpreted as herein defined.
   Local hospitality tax. A tax on the sales of prepared meals and beverages
sold in establishments or sales of prepared meals and beverages sold in
establishments licensed for on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages,
beer, or wine, within the incorporated municipalities and the unincorporated
areas of the county.
   Person. Any individual, firm, partnership, LLP, LLC, cooperative, nonprofit
membership, corporation, joint venture, professional association, estate,
trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, holding company, or other group or
combination acting as a unit, in the singular or plural, and the agent or
employee having charge or control of a business in the absence of the
principals.
   Prepared meals and beverages. The products sold ready for consumption either
on or off premises in businesses classified as eating and drinking places under
the Standard Industrial Code Classification Manual and including lunch counters
and restaurant stands; restaurants, lunch counters, and drinking places
operated as a subordinate facility by other establishments; and bars and
restaurants owned by and operated for members of civic, social, and fraternal
associations.
   Richland County. The county and all of the unincorporated areas within the
geographical boundaries of the county and all of the incorporated
municipalities of the county.
(Ord. No. 025-03-HR, § I, 5-6-03; Ord. No. 040-10HR, § I, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 073-
14HR, § I, 12-9-14)
Sec. 23-66. Local hospitality tax.
   A local hospitality tax is hereby imposed on the sales of prepared meals and
beverages sold in establishments within the incorporated municipalities and the
unincorporated areas of the county. The local hospitality tax shall be in an
amount equal to two percent (2%) of the gross proceeds of sales of prepared
meals and beverages sold in establishments located within the unincorporated
areas of the county and within the boundaries of the incorporated
municipalities which have consented, by resolution adopted by their governing
body, to the imposition of the local hospitality tax in the amount of two
percent (2%). The local hospitality tax shall be in an amount equal to one
percent (1%) of the gross proceeds of sales of prepared food and beverages sold
in establishments located within the boundaries of the incorporated
municipalities within the county which do not give their consent to the
imposition of the local hospitality tax. Provided, however, the county shall
not impose a local hospitality tax on those municipalities that have adopted a
two percent (2%) local hospitality tax prior to July 1, 2003. Effective July 1,
2009 through June 30, 2011, the county shall temporarily reduce the local
hospitality tax to one percent (1%) of the gross proceeds of sales of prepared
meals and beverages sold in establishments located within the unincorporated
areas of the county. This temporary suspension shall not affect the hospitality
tax rates within the boundaries of any incorporated municipality.
(Ord. No. 025-03-HR, § I, 5-6-03; Ord. No. 016-09HR, § I, 7-1-09; Ord. No. 073-
14HR, § I, 12-9-14)
Sec. 23-67. Payment of local hospitality tax.
   (a)   Payment of the local hospitality tax established herein shall be the
liability of the consumer of the services. The tax shall be paid at the time of
delivery of the services to which the tax applies, and shall be collected by
the provider of the services. The county shall promulgate a form of return that
shall be utilized by the provider of services to calculate the amount of local
hospitality tax collected and due. This form shall contain a sworn declaration
as to the correctness thereof by the provider of the services.
   (b)   The tax provided for in this article must be remitted to the county on
a monthly basis when the estimated amount of average tax is more than fifty
dollars ($50.00) a month, on a quarterly basis when the estimated amount of
average tax is twenty-five dollars ($25.00) to fifty dollars ($50.00) a month,
and on an annual basis when the estimated amount of average tax is less than
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) a month; provided, however, that notwithstanding
any other provision of this article, the deadline for required collectors of
local hospitality taxes to remit the tax provided for in this article that are
outstanding at the time of the adoption of the Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Hospitality Tax Relief Amendment shall be extended until June 20, 2020.
Thereafter, the deadline for hospitality tax remittance to the county shall be
and shall return to the regular monthly remittance schedule as provided for in
this section.
   (c)   The provider of services shall remit the local hospitality tax voucher
form, a copy of the State of South Carolina sales tax computation form and/or
other approved revenue documentation, and the hospitality taxes when due, to
the county on the 20th of the month, or on the next business day if the 20th is
not a business day.
(Ord. No. 025-03-HR, § I, 5-6-03; Ord. No. 010-08HR, § I, 3-4-08; Ord. No. 073-
14HR, § I, 12-9-14; Ord. No. 009- 20HR, § III, 5-5-20)
Sec. 23-68. Local Hospitality Tax Special Revenue Fund.
   An interest-bearing, segregated and restricted account to be known as the
"Richland County Local Hospitality Tax Revenue Fund" is hereby established. All
revenues received from the local hospitality tax shall be deposited into this
fund. The principal and any accrued interest in this fund shall be expended
only as permitted by this article.
(Ord. No. 025-03-HR, § I, 5-6-03; Ord. No. 073-14HR, § I, 12-9-14)
Sec. 23-69. Distribution of funds.
   (a)   (1)   The county shall distribute the local hospitality tax collected
and placed in the "Richland County Local Hospitality Tax Revenue Fund" to each
of the following agencies and purposes ("agency") in amounts as determined by
county council annually during the budget process:
         Columbia Museum of Art
         Historic Columbia
         EdVenture Museum
         County Promotions
         Township Auditorium
      (2)   The amounts distributed to the Columbia Museum of Art, Historic
Columbia, EdVenture Museum, and the Township Auditorium shall be paid
quarterly. The amount distributed to organizations receiving county promotions
shall be paid to the organization as a one-time expenditure.
      (3)   As a condition of receiving its allocation, the Columbia Museum of
Art, Historic Columbia, EdVenture Museum, and the Township Auditorium must
annually submit to the county an affirmative marketing plan outlining how the
agency will use its hospitality tax allocation for tourism promotion in the
upcoming fiscal year. The plan shall include a detailed project budget which
outlines the agency's proposed use of hospitality tax funds. The marketing plan
shall also outline how the agency will promote access to programs and services
for all citizens of Richland County, including documentation of "free" or
discounted services that will be offered to Richland County residents. In
addition, each agency shall demonstrate a good faith effort to expand programs
and events into the unincorporated areas of Richland County. The annual
marketing plan shall be due to the grants manager no later than March 1 of each
year. If an agency fails to comply with these requirements, its portion of the
local hospitality tax shall be retained in the Richland County Local
Hospitality Tax Revenue Fund and distributed as provided in Section
23-69(b) below.
      (4)   For the amounts distributed under the county promotions program,
funds will be distributed with a goal of seventy-five percent (75%) dedicated
to organizations and projects that generate tourism in the unincorporated areas
of Richland County and in municipal areas where hospitality tax revenues are
collected by the county. These shall include:
         a.   Organizations that are physically located in the areas where the
county collects hospitality tax revenues, provided the organization also
sponsors projects or events within those areas;
         b.   Organizations that are not physically located in the areas where
the county collects hospitality tax revenues; however, the organization
sponsors projects or events within those areas; and
         c.   Regional marketing organizations whose primary mission is to
bring tourists to the region, including the areas where the county collects
hospitality tax revenues.
   (b)   All local hospitality tax revenue not distributed pursuant to Section
23-69(a) above shall be retained in the Richland County Local Hospitality Tax
Revenue Fund and distributed as directed by county council for projects related
to tourism development, including, but not limited to, the planning,
development, construction, promotion, marketing, operations, and financing
(including debt service) of expenditures as provided in S.C. Code 1976, Article
7, Chapter 1, Title 6, as amended.
(Ord. No. 025-03-HR, § I, 5-6-03; Ord No. 081-06HR, § I, 9-12-06; Ord. No. 001-
08HR, § I, 1-8-08; Ord. No. 069-08HR, § I, 12-2-08; Ord. No. 016-09HR, § II, 7-
1-09; Ord. No. 077-09HR, § I, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 059-10HR, § I, 9-21-10; Ord.
No. 073-13HR, § I, 12-10-13; Ord. No. 061- 14HR, § I, 11-18-14; Ord. No. 073-
14HR, § I, 12-9-14)
Sec. 23-70. Oversight and accountability.
   (a)   The following organizations: the Columbia Museum of Art, Historic
Columbia, EdVenture Museum, and the Township Auditorium must submit a mid-year
report by January 31 and a final report by July 31 of each year to the Richland
County grants manager, which includes a detailed accounting of all hospitality
tax fund expenditures and the impact on tourism for the preceding fiscal year,
including copies of invoices and proof of payment. The county shall not release
hospitality tax funds to any agency unless that agency has submitted an
acceptable final report for the previous fiscal year. If an agency fails to
comply with these requirements by the July 31 deadline, its portion of the
local hospitality tax shall be retained in the Richland County Local
Hospitality Tax Revenue Fund and may be distributed as provided in Section
23-69(b).
   (b)   Any organization receiving county promotions funding must comply with
all requirements of this article, as well as any application guidelines and
annual reporting requirements as established by council, to include a detailed
reporting of all grant expenditures.
(Ord. No. 025-03-HR, § I, 5-6-03; Ord. No. 001-08HR, § II, 1-8-08; Ord. No.
069-08HR, § II, 12-2-08; Ord. No. 016-09HR, § III, 7-1-09; Ord. No. 059-10HR, §
II, 9-21-10; Ord. No. 061-14HR, § II, 11-18-14; Ord. No. 073-14HR, § I, 12-9-
14)
Sec. 23-71. Inspections, audits and administration.
   (a)   For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, the
county administrator or other authorized agent of the county is empowered to
enter upon the premises of any person subject to this article and to make
inspections, examine, and audit books and records.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to make
available the necessary books and records during normal business hours upon
twenty-four (24) hours written notice. In the event that an audit reveals that
the remitter has filed false information, the costs of the audit shall be added
to the correct amount of tax determined to be due.
   (c)   The county administrator or other authorized agent of the county may
make systematic inspections of all service providers that are governed by this
article. Records of inspections shall not be deemed public records.
(Ord. No. 025-03-HR, § I, 5-6-03; Ord. No. 040-10HR, § II, 7-6-10; Ord. No.
073-14HR, § I, 12-9-14)
Sec. 23-72. Assessments and appeals of hospitality tax.
   (a)   When a person fails to pay or accurately pay their hospitality taxes
or to furnish the information required by this article or by the business
service center, a license official of the business service center shall proceed
to examine such records of the business or any other available records as may
be appropriate and to conduct such investigations and statistical surveys as
the license official may deem appropriate to assess a hospitality tax and
penalties, as provided herein.
   (b)   Assessments of hospitality taxes and/or penalties, which are based
upon records provided by businesses, shall be conveyed in writing to
businesses. If a business fails to provide records as required by this article
or by the business service center, the tax assessment shall be served by
certified mail. Within five (5) business days after a tax assessment is mailed
or otherwise conveyed in writing, any person who desires to have the assessment
adjusted must make application to the business service center for reassessment.
The license official shall establish a procedure for hearing an application for
a reassessment, and for issuing a notice of final assessment.
   (c)   A final assessment may be appealed to the county council, provided
that an application for reassessment was submitted within the allotted time
period of five (5) business days. However, if no application for reassessment
is submitted within the allotted time period, the assessment shall become
final.
   (d)   Requests for waivers of penalties, as described in Section
23-73(b), shall be submitted to the business service center director
simultaneously with corroborating documentation relating to the validity of the
appeal within five (5) business days of receipt of a tax assessment. The
director shall determine if the provided documentation confirms the
circumstances permitting a waiver of penalties as described in the
aforementioned section. A decision shall be provided in writing within five (5)
business days of the receipt of the request. Businesses wishing to appeal the
decision of the business service center director may appeal to the county
council within five (5) business days of receipt of the director's decision.
(Ord. No. 010-08HR, § II, 3-4-08; Ord. No. 040-10HR, § III, 7-6-10; Ord. No.
073-14HR, § I, 12-9-14)
Sec. 23-73. Violations and penalties.
   (a)   It shall be a violation of this article to:
      (1)   Fail to collect the local hospitality tax as provided in this
article,
      (2)   Fail to remit to the County the Local Hospitality Tax collected,
pursuant to this Article,
      (3)   Knowingly provide false information on the form of return submitted
to the county, or
      (4)   Fail to provide books and records to the county administrator or
other authorized agent of the county for the purpose of an audit upon twenty-
four (24) hours' notice.
   (b)   The penalty for violation of this article shall be five percent (5%)
per month, charged on the original amount of the local hospitality tax due.
Penalties shall not be waived, except if the following circumstances of
reasonable cause are proven by the person. No more than six (6) months of
penalties shall be waived.
      (1)   An unexpected and unavoidable absence of the person from South
Carolina, such as being called to active military duty. In the case of a
corporation or other business entity, the absence must have been an individual
having primary authority to pay the hospitality tax.
      (2)   A delay caused by death or serious, incapacitating illness of the
person, the person's immediate family, or the person's accountant or other
third party professional charged with determining the hospitality tax owed. In
the case of a corporation or other business entity, the death or serious,
incapacitating illness must have been an individual having primary authority to
pay the hospitality tax.
      (3)   The hospitality tax was documented as paid on time, but
inadvertently paid to another taxing entity.
      (4)   The delinquency was caused by the unavailability of necessary
records directly relating to calculation of hospitality taxes, over which the
person had no control, which made timely payment impossible. For example, the
required records may have been destroyed by fire, flood, federally-declared
natural disaster, or actions of war or terrorism. Unavailability of records
caused by time or business pressures, employee turnover, or negligence are not
reasonable cause for waiver of hospitality tax penalties.
      (5)   The delinquency was the result of clear error on the part of the
business service center or treasurer's office staff in processing or posting
receipt of the person's payment(s).
      (6)   Delay or failure caused by good faith reliance on erroneous
guidance provided by the business service center or treasurer's office staff,
so long as complete and accurate information was given to either of these
offices, no change in the law occurred, and the person produces written
documentation.
   (c)   Any person violating the provision of this article shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to punishment
under the general penalty provision of Section
1-8 of this Code of Ordinances: that is, shall be subject to a fine of up to
five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for not more than thirty (30)
days or both. Each day of violation shall be considered a separate offense.
Punishment for violation shall not relieve the offender of liability for
delinquent fees, penalties, and costs provided herein.
(Ord. No. 010-08HR, § III, 3-4-08; Ord. No. 040-10HR, § IV, 7-6-10; Ord. No.
073-14HR, § I, 12-9-14)
CHAPTER 24: UTILITIES*
   *Cross reference(s)--Buildings and building regulations,
Ch. 7; garbage, trash and refuse,
Ch. 12; hazardous chemicals,
Ch. 13; health,
Ch. 14; planning,
Ch. 20; roads, highways and bridges,
Ch. 21; drainage, erosion and sediment control, §
26-202; land development,
Ch. 26.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 24-1--24-4. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. WATER AND SEWER SERVICE GENERALLY
   Editor's note--Inclusion of nonamendatory Ord. No. 1057-83, §§ 2--7,
effective June 21, 1983, as Art. II hereof has been at the discretion of the
editor. The editor has renumbered former Art. II as Art. III, and former Art.
III as Art. IV.
Sec. 24-5. Purpose and intent.
   This article applies to the establishment, operation and maintenance in the
unincorporated area of the county of facilities for the distribution of water
for industrial and domestic use and for the collection, treatment and disposal
of sewage, including industrial waste. It further authorizes the county council
to impose and enforce the payment of water and sewer service charges, to
contract with public and private agencies operating water distribution systems
for the collection of sewer charges, to adopt and enforce regulations requiring
property to connect to and use the facilities, and regulating generally the
discharge of sewage and the use of sewer facilities and to make unpaid service
charges a lien against the property served. It is adopted pursuant to the
county council's general police power to provide for the public health, safety
and general welfare of the residents of the county and specifically pursuant to
Article VIII, Sections 16 and 17 of the South Carolina Constitution and
sections 4-9-30(5), 4-9-30(14) and 44-55-1410 of the South Carolina Code of
Laws, 1976.
(Ord. No. 1057-83, § 2, 6-21-83)
Sec. 24-6. Definitions.
   For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section. When not inconsistent
with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in
the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
   Council or county council: The county council of Richland County, South
Carolina.
   County administrator: The county administrator or his designated agent.
   County: Richland County, South Carolina.
   Governing body: In the case of an incorporated municipality, the municipal
council of such municipality and, in the case of any special purpose district,
the agency or commission charged by law with performing the functions of the
special purpose district.
   Municipality: Any incorporated city or town now or hereafter existing in the
county.
   Sewage: Domestic or industrial waste requiring collection, disposal and
treatment.
   Sewer connection charge: The charge imposed upon property owners as a
condition to authorizing them to connect to and discharge sewage into the sewer
facilities.
   Sewer facilities: Any facilities used or useful in the collection, treatment
or disposal of sewage, including sewer mains, sewer trunks, sewer collecting
line, sewer lateral lines, disposal facilities, treatment facilities and any
tools or implements used in the construction, maintenance, operation,
improvement or enlargement thereof.
   Sewer service charge: The monthly, quarterly or annual charge imposed by the
county for the collection, treatment and disposal of sewage, including an
availability or stand-by charge, irrespective of whether the same be collected
by the county or by a water distribution agency or whether it shall be assessed
against the property served as provided by section
24-8.
   Special purpose district or authority: Any special purpose or public service
district or authority existing in the county on March 7, 1973, to which is
committed any of the functions of collecting, treating and disposing of sewage.
   Unincorporated area: The area, or any portion thereof, of the county that is
located outside the corporate limits of any municipality and outside the
service area of any special purpose district or authority.
   Water distribution agency: Any public or private agency operating a water
distribution system within the unincorporated area, or any portion thereof, of
the county.
   Water distribution system: Any public or private system empowered to acquire
supplies of fresh water, capable of being used for industrial and domestic
purpose, and to distribute such water for industrial and domestic use within
the unincorporated area, or any portion thereof, of the county.
   Water facilities: Any facilities used or useful in the acquisition and
distribution of water, including water mains, distribution facilities, tanks,
their several component parts, and all apparatus, equipment and property
incident thereto and used in the construction, maintenance, operation,
improvement or enlargement thereof.
   Water service charge: The monthly, quarterly or annual charge imposed by the
county for the acquisition and distribution of water.
(Ord. No. 1057-83, § 3, 6-21-83)
Sec. 24-7. Powers of the council.
   The council shall be empowered as follows:
   (1)   To enter into contracts by which any special purpose district or
municipality in the county may agree to maintain and operate any part or all of
any water and sewer facilities of the county or under its control, on a cost
basis or any reasonable basis.
   (2)   To make any and all regulations which shall be deemed appropriate in
connection with the construction, establishment, maintenance and use of any
water or sewer facilities of the county or under its control.
   (3)   To acquire, establish, maintain, operate, extend, enlarge, and improve
such system of water lines, mains and pipes and sewers, sewer lines, sewer
mains, and sewage disposal and treatment facilities as, in the opinion of the
council, is required for the maintenance of the health of the county.
   (4)   To purchase or lease existing water and sewer lines, mains, systems
and disposal or treatment plants and to make contracts whereby they may be
connected to the lines or systems which it may establish.
   (5)   To employ such engineering, clerical and other help as it deems
necessary and fix the salaries and compensation of such employees.
   (6)   To place into effect and to revise by resolution a schedule of rates
and charges upon all those who receive benefits from the water or sewer
facilities of the county.
   (7)   To build, construct, maintain and operate ditches, tunnels, culverts,
flumes, conduits, mains, pipes, dikes, dams and reservoirs.
   (8)   To contract for or otherwise acquire a supply of water and sell water
for industrial and domestic use.
   (9)   To enter into contracts for the sale of water with persons, private
corporations, municipalities or other public or private bodies.
   (10)   To prescribe such regulations as it shall deem necessary to protect
from pollution all water in its pipes, tanks, reservoirs, distribution systems
or elsewhere within its system.
   (11)   To require a permit for connection with any sewer constructed and
maintained by the county, and as a condition to the issuance of any such
permits, to promulgate regulations prescribing the type and manner of
connections permitted to be made therewith, to inspect such connections to
ensure compliance and to make a reasonable charge for permits sufficient to
cover the cost thereof and of such inspection.
   (12)   To make use of county and state highway rights-of-way in which to lay
pipes and lines in such manner and under such conditions as the appropriate
officials in charge of such rights-of-way shall approve.
   (13)   In addition to the rates and charges provided for in paragraph (6),
to place into effect and revise whenever it so wishes or may be required a
schedule of water and sewer service or connection charges for the use of and
connection to any water or sewer facilities which it may operate. Service
charges in the case of nonpayment can be imposed and subsequently increased
upon any user in the unincorporated area of the county without notice and
hearing.
   (14)   To enter into contracts with any water distribution agency upon terms
and conditions to be mutually agreed upon by which the council shall authorize
the water distribution agency to add the sewer service charges to the charge
rendered for water service in a single bill, shall constitute the water
distribution agency its agent for the purpose of collecting such sewer service
charges as the council shall from time to time impose upon those who utilize
its sewer facilities and shall empower the water distribution agency as such
agent to disconnect water service upon failure of any user to pay such sewer
service charges.
   (15)   To adopt and enforce regulations requiring all persons to whom it
shall be available to make use of any water or sewer facilities which the
county shall from time to time operate; and generally with respect to the
discharge of sewage and the use of privies, septic tanks and any other type of
sewer facilities within the unincorporated area of the county.
(Ord. No. 1057-83, § 4, 6-21-83; Ord. No. 012-15HR, § I, 5-5-15)
Sec. 24-8. Collection of unpaid water or sewer charges.
   The county is fully empowered to enforce the collection of any past due or
unpaid water or sewer service charges in any lawful manner in all or any part
of the unincorporated area of the county, including particularly by way of a
contract with a water distribution agency as authorized under paragraph (14) of
section
24-7. In addition, the county shall participate in and utilize the Setoff Debt
Collection Act (S.C. Code §§12-56-10 et seq.) and Government Enterprise
Accounts Receivable program (S.C. Code §§12-4-580 et seq.) for the collection
of unpaid water and sewer charges, including late fees.
(Ord. No. 1057-83, § 5, 6-21-83; Ord. No. 012-15HR, § II, 5-5-15)
Sec. 24-9. Administration and enforcement.
   (a)   The county administrator shall be responsible for the administration
and enforcement of the provisions of this article. He may request assistance
from the various departments and other officials of the county as may be
necessary for the orderly implementation of this article.
   (b)   In addition to any other remedy provided by law, the council may seek
and obtain compliance with this article and regulations adopted pursuant hereto
through injunctive relief in the court of common pleas for the county.
(Ord. No. 1057-83, § 6, 6-21-83)
Sec. 24-10. Injuring or tampering with facilities.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to injure or destroy or
in any other manner hurt, damage, tamper with or impair any water or sewer
facilities of the county or under its control, or any part of the same, or any
apparatus or equipment incident thereto or used or useful in the operation of
such facility or to connect to its water or sewer facilities except in
accordance with the regulations adopted by the county.
   (b)   Any violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall
be punishable by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) or more than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) or thirty (30) days of confinement for the first
offense. Each day in violation shall be a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 1057-83, § 7, 6-21-83)
ARTICLE III. PROCEDURES FOR CONSTRUCTION OF WATER AND SEWER LINES
   Editor's note--Former Art. II has been renumbered by the editor as Art. III
to allow for the inclusion of Ord. No. 1057-83 as Art. II. The editor has also
substituted the word "Construction" for the word "Management" in the title of
the article. In order to accommodate the inclusion of sewer use regulations
enacted by Ord. No. 1024-83 as a new Art. IV, the editor has included what was
Div. 2 of former Art. III as Div. 2 of current Art. III, designating §§ 24-11--
24-15 (former Art. II) as Div. 1 of new Art. III.
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 24-11. Background and policy.
   (a)   The county council, as the governing body of the county, hereby
certifies that water and sewer service is now being provided, funds have been
budgeted for such service, and funds for such services have been applied for;
and that the unincorporated areas of the county constitute a "designated
service area" within the meaning of section 5-7-60 of the South Carolina Code
of Laws, 1976.
   (b)   Pursuant to a 1978 referendum of its citizens, the county council
undertook to plan and implement a county-wide system for providing water and
sewer services under its obligations imposed by home rule (section 4-9-30(5) of
the South Carolina Code of Laws, 1976), and as authorized by section 16 of
Article VIII of the South Carolina Constitution, the county is under an
obligation to furnish the services required or to see that it is furnished in
an orderly and comprehensive plan particularly since portions of the county
have been and are at the present time in desperate need of sewer and water
facilities, and the health, safety and welfare of the county's citizens must be
protected as a part of the county's legal as well as moral obligation.
   (c)   The county further recognizes its obligations as a designated service
area as defined by section 5-7-60 of the South Carolina Code of Laws, 1976, and
therefore enacts this division, pursuant to the county's general police power
as well as the above-referenced authority.
(Ord. No. 939-82, § I, 6-16-82)
Sec. 24-12. Applicability of division 1.
   The provisions of this division are applicable to all entities and private
enterprises involved in construction of water mains and sewer interceptors in
the unincorporated areas of the county.
(Ord. No. 939-82, § II, 6-16-82)
Sec. 24-13. Purpose.
   The purpose of this division is to provide adequate and satisfactory water
and sewer service to as many citizens of the county as financial resources will
permit. To insure that adequate sewer service is provided in the future as a
companion to water service, it shall be encouraged, but not required, that the
entity and enterprises proposing new water main construction agree to also
provide for sewer service to the area served with water at the same time.
(Ord. No. 939-82, § III, 6-16-82; Ord. No. 1948-90, § I, 1-16-90)
Sec. 24-14. Implementing procedures.
   (a)   Sketch plans. Six (6) copies of the sketch plan for proposed
construction of water mains and sewer interceptors shall be submitted to the
county planning and development coordinator. The sketch plan shall show:
      (1)   Existing line (if any) that the new line(s) will be connected to;
      (2)   General alignment of the new line(s);
      (3)   Any existing line(s) which lies in the vicinity of the alignment;
      (4)   Number of taps that are presently planned for and the total number
of possible taps which the line could accommodate;
      (5)   A vicinity map with the new line(s) shown at a scale of not less
than one inch equals one mile.
   These plans shall be approved or disapproved within fifteen (15) calendar
days after receipt by the staff of the county planning commission. Failure to
act in this prescribed time shall constitute sketch plan approval, unless the
applicant consents to an extension in writing. Any changes or disapprovals by
the staff are subject to appeal at the next scheduled planning commission
meeting. Any decision by the planning commission is subject to appeal to the
county council. Such appeals to county council shall be in writing and filed
with the county council clerk within ten (10) calendar days after the decision
has been made known by the planning commission. The county council must render
its decision as to whether or not the appeal shall be heard within twenty (20)
calendar days thereafter.
   (b)   Construction plans. Six (6) copies of the proposed construction plans
for the sewer or water line(s) shall be submitted to the planning and
development coordinator. The construction plans shall show:
      (1)   Vicinity map at a scale of one inch equals one thousand (1,000)
feet with the route of travel of the proposed line(s);
      (2)   Boundaries of the right-of-way with all boundaries and distances
shown with a degree of accuracy that the error of closure is no greater than 1:
2,500;
      (3)   Cross section drawings and dimensions of all excavation, fill and
line and valve installation;
      (4)   Sufficient detailed drawings to adequately describe construction
requirements. The planning and development coordinator shall ensure that the
construction layout is in conformity with the approved sketch plan. The
planning and development coordinator shall either approve or disapprove the
construction plans within sixty (60) days of receipt of the proposed
construction plans. The grounds for disapproval of the construction plans shall
be stated writing and forwarded to the applicant within the above prescribed
sixty-day period. The applicant shall be afforded a hearing on any disapproval
action before the planning commission which are subject to appeal before the
county council. Such an appeal request shall be filed in writing with the
county council clerk within ten (10) calendar days after the decision of the
planning commission. The county council shall make a decision as to whether or
not to hear the case within twenty (20) days.
   (c)   Building permit. Upon approval of the construction plans, the planning
and development coordinator shall issue a building permit to the applicant upon
payment of a fee as established in section
24-15 of this article.
   (d)   Final plans (as-built plans). After completion of construction, six
(6) copies of the final plans shall be submitted to the planning and
development coordinator who shall submit copies to the appropriate agencies for
review and approval. The final plan shall show:
      (1)   Vicinity map at a scale of not less than one inch equals one mile;
      (2)   Sufficient data to readily determine on the site the location
hearings and length of every line and/or piece of equipment in the approved
system. The degree of accuracy for the line(s) layout will be that the raw
error of closure is no greater than 1:2,500. The planning commission shall give
approval, approval with modification or disapproval of the final plan within
sixty (60) calendar days after submission; otherwise, the final plan shall be
deemed approved, unless a written consent to an extension is accepted by the
applicant. Any decision made by the planning commission is subject to appeal to
the county council. Such appeal will be filed within ten (10) calendar days
after a decision of the planning commission with the county council clerk. The
county council will render a decision whether or not to hear the appeal within
twenty (20) calendar days after receiving notice of appeal. Upon the approval
of the final plan, a copy will be appropriately stamped by the planning and
development coordinator and recorded in the register of mesne conveyance's
office.
(Ord. No. 939-82, § IV, 6-16-82)
Sec. 24-15. Fees for building permits.
   Fees for building permits shall be computed based on the estimated cost of
construction according to the following schedule:
Estimated Construction Cost
$1.00 to $50,000.00      $3.00 per thousand or fraction thereof; minimum $5.00
$50,000.00 to $100,000.00   $150.00 plus $2.00 per thousand or fraction thereof
over $50,000.00
$100,000.00 to
$10,000,000.00         $250.00 plus $1.00 per thousand or fraction thereof over
$100,000.00
Over $10,000,000.00      $10,150.00 plus $0.50 per thousand or fraction thereof
over $10,000,000.00
(Ord. No. 939-82, § V, 6-16-82)
   Cross reference(s)--Building permit fees, §
6-51.
Secs. 24-16--24-37. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. SEWER CONSTRUCTION
Sec. 24-38. Purpose and intent.
   In order to assure adequate and orderly provision and maintenance of sewer
services for the people of the county, this division is enacted to prevent the
proliferation of private sewer systems by requiring the transference of
ownership, operation and maintenance responsibility to the county, a
municipality, or the East Richland Public Service District if the system is
within the district's service area, of all new sewer facilities constructed in
the unincorporated areas of the county. It is the intent of this division to
also encourage the eventual assimilation of existing private systems into a
public system.
(Ord. No. 899-82, § 1-1, 3-3-82)
Sec. 24-39. Authority.
   This division is adopted under the authorities and powers granted by the
General Assembly of the state.
(Ord. No. 899-82, § 1-2, 3-3-82)
Sec. 24-40. Jurisdiction.
   The provisions of this division shall apply to all new sewer facilities,
within the unincorporated area of the county.
(Ord. No. 899-82, § 1-3, 3-3-82)
Sec. 24-41. Definitions.
   The following definitions apply to words and terms used in this division;
all other words shall have their customary meanings:
   Developer. Any person acting in his own behalf as a property owner or as an
agent for a property owner, who makes application for a sewer construction
permit under the provisions of this division.
   Individual disposal system. Any on-site disposal system, such as a septic
tank or approved alternative system, which serves four (4) or less residential
units or any single commercial unit or a single industry.
   New sewer facility. Any system, or portion thereof, for the provision of
collection, treatment or disposal of wastewater for any commercial or
residential development, which may include pumping stations, lines,
interceptors, package plants or permanent plants, but not including on-site
individual disposal systems or any system or portion thereof which was in
existence on March 3, 1982, or which is connected to a system or portion
thereof which was in existence on March 3, 1982.
   Sewer construction permit. A permit authorizing the construction of a new
sewer facility issued by the county.
(Ord. No. 899-82, § 2-1, 3-3-82)
   Cross reference(s)--Rules of construction and definitions generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 24-42. Connection of existing private sewer facilities to a public system.
   At this time there are in the county existing sewer systems owned and
operated by private utility companies whose rates are regulated by the state
public service commission. The owners of these systems are encouraged to
integrate such systems into the public system at the earliest practical time.
(Ord. No. 899-82, § 3-1, 3-3-82)
Sec. 24-43. New facilities--Relationship to existing or planned public sewer
interceptors.
   Any developer planning to construct a new sewer facility in the county
shall, prior to commencing development of new sewer facility construction
plans, contact the county engineer to discuss plans for the proposed facility.
The county engineer shall determine whether:
      (1)   The proposed facility is accessible to an existing public
interceptor and which public agency will own and operate it, or
      (2)   A study must be made to ascertain whether the proposed facility is
either:
         a.   Within feasible reach of a planned portion of a public sewer
interceptor and which public agency will own and operate it, or
         b.   Not within feasible reach of a planned portion of a public sewer
interceptor and which public agency will own and operate it.
(Ord. No. 899-82, § 4-1, 3-3-82)
Sec. 24-44. Same--Submission of construction plans.
   The developer will provide to the planning and development coordinator plans
and specifications for construction of any new sewer facilities. These
documents may be the same as those required by the county subdivision
regulations where applicable. The coordinator will forward the plans and
specifications to the appropriate public agencies for review and approval or
disapproval.
(Ord. No. 899-82, § 4-2, 3-3-82)
Sec. 24-45. Same--Construction permit.
   The developer shall not commence to construct any portion of a new sewer
facility until the plans and specifications for such facility have been
approved and the planning and development coordinator has issued a sewer
construction permit. The coordinator shall not issue a sewer construction
permit for any sewer facility which is not in conformance with the sewer
facilities plan for the county or the sewer construction standards of the
public agency which will own and operate the facility.
(Ord. No. 899-82, § 4-3, 3-3-82)
Sec. 24-46. Same--Agreement for conveyance of a new sewer facility to a public
agency.
   Prior to issuance of a sewer construction permit, the developer shall
execute an agreement with the public agency which will own and operate the new
sewer facility. The agreement shall provide for the conveyance to the public
agency of all portions of such new sewer facility, including any easements and
tap fees, upon successful completion of final inspection and approval of the
facility by the state department of health and environmental control and the
public agency. Any provisions in such agreement between the developer and the
public agency to own and operate the sewer system relative to tap fee rebates
or other stipulations shall conform to the then current policy of such public
agency.
(Ord. No. 899-82, § 4-4, 3-3-82)
Sec. 24-47. Same--Construction of facilities accessible to an existing public
sewer interceptor.
   After issuance of a sewer construction permit for construction of new
facilities accessible to an existing public sewer interceptor, the developer
shall construct his new sewer facility, including connection with the public
sewer interceptor, in accordance with the approved plans.
(Ord. No. 899-82, § 4-5, 3-3-82)
Sec. 24-48. Same--Construction of facilities within feasible reach of a planned
portion of a public sewer interceptor.
   The developer shall, when the development involves construction of new sewer
facilities within feasible reach of a planned portion of public sewer
interceptor, participate in the cost of extending the public interceptor system
to serve his development and shall connect to such system. The developer shall
participate in the cost of such extension in an amount not less than the cost
of the line size necessary to serve his development. After issuance of a sewer
construction permit, the developer shall construct his new facility interceptor
in accordance with the approved plans. The feasible reach in this section for
the Broad River Basin shall be limited to current boundaries/extremities of the
sewer system and should limit the developments as infills/pockets within the
service area currently enclosed by existing sewer lines terminals/end points.
(Ord. No. 899-82, § 4-6, 3-3-82; Ord. No. 041-19HR, § I, 9- 17-19)
Sec. 24-49. Same--Construction of facilities beyond feasible reach of a planned
portion of a public sewer interceptor.
   After issuance of a sewer construction permit for new facilities beyond the
feasible reach of a planned portion of a public sewer interceptor, the
developer shall construct the sewer collection and treatment system, as well as
any other necessary sewer facilities, in accordance with the approved plans.
(Ord. No. 899-82, § 4-7, 3-3-82)
Sec. 24-49.1. Same--Exemption; requirements for exemption.
   (a)   Exemption. New sewer facilities that collect or transmit waste water
for treatment at plants outside of the county are exempt from the provisions of
this division and the obligation to obtain a building permit and to submit
sketch plans and construction plans to the county planning and development
coordinator. This exemption applies only if the provisions of subsections (b)
and (c) of this section are met.
   (b)   Topography. The collection and transmission facilities in the county
must be intended to become a part of a sewer system serving a natural drainage
basin, the upper end of which is in the county and the lower end of which is in
another county.
   (c)   Size of the area to be developed. The collection and transmission
facility must be intended to become a part of a sewer system that serves or
will serve a proposed new development of two thousand (2,000) or more total
acres, all of which is owned by one entity, at least one hundred (100) acres of
which is outside of the county.
   (d)   Application to county engineer. Any person seeking to construct a new
sewer facility in the county under the exception contained in this section
shall, before commencing construction of the facility, submit topographical
maps to the county engineer indicating the area to be served by the new sewer
system and the intended area in which the new treatment facility will be
located. The applicant must also include an affidavit from the developer, its
attorney, or one of its officers, setting forth facts establishing that the
project qualifies for the exemption under this section. Within twenty (20) days
of receipt of these documents, the county engineer will make a finding in
writing as to whether the requirements of this section are met. The applicant
may appeal any decision by the engineer adverse to it to county council which
shall provide for a hearing on the merits within thirty (30) days, and a
decision in writing within thirty (30) days thereafter.
   Upon completion of collection and transmission facilities in the county, the
developer shall file with the Regional Planning Council six (6) copies of final
(as-built) plans as those plans are defined by Richland County Code Section 24-
14(d). Such plans are to be filed for information purposes only. Approval of
them is not required.
(Ord. No. 1589-87, §§ 1--4, 3-3-87)
   Editor's note--Ord. No. 1559-57, §§ 1--4, effective March 3, 1987, amended
Art. III, Div. 2 of Ch. 24, but did not specify manner of inclusion of the
amendatory provisions. At the discretion of the editor, said provisions of Ord.
No. 1559-57 have been included as § 24-49.1 herein.
Sec. 24-50. Procedures for providing facilities in developed areas.
   (a)   Construction. When property owners in a developed area currently
served by septic tanks desire the installation of public sewer service, the
following procedures shall be followed:
      (1)   A petition containing at least fifteen (15) per cent of the
freeholders within an area defined by a legal metes and bounds description
shall be submitted to the county council.
      (2)   The county shall initiate a feasibility study of the area to
determine the extent of service, cost of installation, operation, and
maintenance, and the potential sources of funding for the sewer service.
      (3)   Upon receiving the results of the feasibility study, the county
council shall call for a referendum to be held in the legally defined area
proposed to be served to determine if the property owners will support the
issuance of revenue bonds to finance the project and to repay the bonds by a
pro rata charge to the users of the service.
   (b)   Connection with sewer facilities. Any property owner using an
individual disposal system as defined in this division shall meet one of the
following requirements whenever a public sewer collection line becomes
accessible:
      (1)   The property owner shall tap onto the public sewer collection line.
      (2)   The property owner may elect not to tap onto the public sewer
collection line as long as the individual disposal system operates properly as
determined by the county health department, but shall pay a sewer availability
fee fixed by the county.
      (3)   In the event the individual disposal system malfunctions, the
property owner is hereby prohibited from repairing such system and shall tap
onto the public sewer collection line.
      (4)   Commercial and industrial users of individual disposal systems
treating wastewater that is incompatible with the public sewer system shall not
be required or permitted to tap onto the public collection system until such
waste is pretreated to standards acceptable to the public managing agency.
(Ord. No. 899-82, §§ 5-1, 5-2, 3-3-82)
Sec. 24-51. Construction standards.
   Construction standards and specifications shall be in accordance with water
and sewer regulations for the county or the standards and specifications of the
public agency which will own and operate the system.
(Ord. No. 899-82, § 6-1, 3-3-82)
Sec. 24-52. Fees.
   Tap fees and other charges for services shall be in accordance with current
schedule of fees approved by the county council or the fees and charges of the
public agency which will own and operate the system.
(Ord. No. 899-82, § 6-2, 3-3-82)
Sec. 24-53. Applicability.
   The provisions of this division shall apply to new sewer facilities and
individual disposal systems to be constructed for the purpose of providing
sewerage services to any residential or other land development.
(Ord. No. 899-82, § 7-1, 3-3-82)
Sec. 24-54. Relationship with other laws, regulations, and ordinances.
   The issuance of a permit under this division shall not substitute for, nor
imply compliance with, any other requirements and standards of subdivision and/
or zoning ordinances of the county with regard to sewer utilities or any other
state or federal requirements or standards.
(Ord. No. 899-82, § 7-3, 3-3-82)
Secs. 24-55--24-60. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
   Editor's note--Ord. No. 1024-83, effective March 15, 1983, did not amend
this Code; at the discretion of the editor, the ordinance has been codified as
Art. IV hereof. See also the editor's footnote for Art. III.
   Cross reference(s)--Filling in septic tanks, § 21-16.
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 24-61. Purpose; authority; jurisdiction.
   (a)   Purpose and intent. In order to assure the proper use and connection
to the public sanitary sewerage system in the unincorporated areas of the
county, this article is enacted to regulate the use of sanitary sewerage
systems, the installation and connection of building sewers and the discharge
of waters and wastes into the public sewer system and providing penalties for
the violation thereof.
   (b)   Authority. This article is adopted under the authorities and powers
granted by the General Assembly of the state.
   (c)   Jurisdiction. The provisions of this article shall apply to all sewer
facilities owned, operated and maintained, in whole or in part, in the county.
(Ord. No. 1024-83, § 1, 3-15-83; Ord. No. 066-02HR, § I, 11-12-02)
Sec. 24-62. Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, wherever used in this article, shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section unless the
context plainly indicates otherwise or that a more restricted or extended
meaning is intended.
   Approving authority shall be the county administrator or his duly authorized
representative. When the application to discharge involves industrial waste,
the permit must be approved by the approving authority and the director of
utilities or his representative.
   BOD shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation
of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at
twenty (20) degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l).
   Building sewer shall mean the extension from the building drain to the
public sewer or other place of disposal.
   Color is considered to be the color of the light transmitted by the waste
solution after removing the suspended material, including the pseudocolloidal
particles.
   County is Richland County, South Carolina.
   County attorney is legal counsel for the county.
   Domestic waste is that liquid from bathrooms, shower rooms, toilet rooms,
sinks, kitchens, laundry facilities located in residences, apartments, hotels,
motels, restaurants, cafeterias, office buildings, schools, and commercial
establishments.
   Industrial wastes and other pollutants are those liquid wastes, other than
domestic waste, resulting from processes or operations employed in industrial
establishments and/or discharged from establishments providing special
services.
   Normal waste is that waste having BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand)
concentration of not more than two hundred (200) milligrams per liter (mg/l)
and suspended solids concentration of not more than two hundred (200)
milligrams per liter.
   Person is any individual, firm, company, association, corporation, or
municipal corporation.
   pH shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions
in grams per liter of solution. The stabilized pH of a waste will be considered
to be a pH which is within the specified pH limits after a sample of the waste
has been subjected to aeration.
   Public sewer or public sanitary sewer shall mean all sewer facilities owned,
operated or maintained by the county, its agents, contractors, subcontractors
or assignees, and all sewer facilities regulated by the South Carolina Public
Service Commission located in whole or in part in the county, and all sewer
facilities publicly owned, operated or maintained within the county.
   Properly shredded wastes shall mean the organic wastes resulting from the
preparation, cooking, and dispensing of foods that have been shredded to such
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle being greater than one-
half (1/2) inch in any dimension.
   Receiving stream is that body of water, stream, or watercourse receiving the
discharge from a waste treatment plant, or that body of water, stream, or
watercourse formed by the effluent from a waste treatment plant.
   Sanitary sewer is a sewer intended to receive domestic waste, industrial
waste, and other waterborne pollutants, except that of the type expressly
prohibited by this article.
   Sanitary sewerage system shall mean and include all or any part of the
lateral sewers, collecting sewers, district sewers, intercepting sewers,
wastewater pumping stations, waste treatment facilities, and outfall sewers
owned and operated by the county.
   Shall is mandatory; may is permissive.
   Strength of waste is the concentration, expressed in milligrams per liter of
BOD, suspended solids or compounds (substances) contained in the liquid waste.
   Suspended solids shall mean solids that either float on the surface of, or
are suspended in, water or liquid waste, and which are removable by laboratory
filtration.
   Unpolluted water or waste shall mean any water or waste containing none of
the following: Free or emulsified grease or oil; acids or alkalies; phenols or
other substances imparting taste and odor in receiving waters; toxic or
poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state, or solution; and noxious
or odorous gases. Unpolluted water or waste normally shall include:
      (1)   The discharge from rain downspouts and drains;
      (2)   The discharge from surface water and storm water drains;
      (3)   The discharge from air conditioning systems;
      (4)   Cooling waters containing no free or emulsified greases or oils, no
acids or alkalies, no phenols or other substances imparting taste and odor in
receiving waters, no toxic or poisonous substances (whether in suspension, in
colloidal state or in solution), and no noxious or odorous gases.
   Unpolluted water or waste shall also mean any water or waste judged to be
admissible to streams and watercourses by the state department of health and
environmental control in accordance with the standard of water quality
established by the department of health and environmental control of the state
for the particular stream or watercourse into which such unpolluted water or
waste is to be discharged.
(Ord. No. 1024-83, § 2, 3-15-83; Ord. No. 066-02HR, § II, 11-12-02)
Sec. 24-63. Applicability.
   These rules and regulations shall apply to any person discharging or
proposing to discharge waste into the sanitary sewerage system. These rules and
regulations shall not be considered as or construed to be a contract between
the county and any person. The county hereby expressly reserves the right to
amend, change, or repeal these rules and regulations at any time.
(Ord. No. 1024-83, § 11-1, 3-15-83)
Sec. 24-64. Relationship with other laws, regulations, ordinances.
   The issuance of a permit under this article shall not substitute for, nor
imply compliance with, any other requirements and standards of subdivision or
other ordinances of the county with regard to sewer utilities or any other
state or federal requirements or standards.
(Ord. No. 1024-83, § 11-3, 3-15-83)
Sec. 24-65. Bond; discontinuance of service.
   (a)   In any and all instances where the county has reasonable cause to
believe that any of the rules, regulations, or provisions set forth in this
article or that have otherwise been adopted by the county have been, may be, or
are being violated by any person discharging waste into the sanitary sewerage
system, the county may require such person to give bond or enter into an
indemnity agreement in form acceptable to the county with sufficient surety to
be approved by the county attorney to protect, indemnify, and hold harmless the
county from any loss, damage, or expense that it may suffer or incur as a
result of such noncompliance or violation by such person; and, in the event of
the failure to do so after ten (10) days' notice by United States mail that the
same will be required, the use of the sanitary sewerage system by such person
be denied or discontinued.
   (b)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this article shall
be served by the county with a written notice stating the nature of the
violation; and if the violation continues for more than ten (10) days following
such written notice, the county shall discontinue said sewer service.
(Ord. No. 1024-83, § 11-2, 3-15-83)
Sec. 24-66. Building sewers and connections.
   The construction and use of private sewerage systems and their connection to
the public system shall be in accordance with the requirements of the county
water and sewer regulations, the county sewer management and construction
ordinances, and with the following requirements pertaining to building sewers:
      (1)   Any person desiring to make connection to any sanitary sewer owned
by the county shall make written application to the approving authority and may
be required to furnish the approving authority a complete analysis of a
composite sample of the sewage as determined by an independent laboratory, in
addition to compliance with all other sections of this article. Once the county
has determined that the proposed building sewer meets the requirements of this
section and other applicable portions of this article, a permit shall be issued
by the county and connection made thereto.
      (2)   Only persons specifically authorized as part of their duties as
employees or contractors of the county, the East Richland County Public Service
District for district-owned lines, or the City of Columbia for city-owned
lines, shall make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb
any public sewer or appurtenances thereof. A violation of this paragraph shall
be a misdemeanor subject to penalty as set forth in section
24-65.
      (3)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for
every building. Where one building stands to the rear of another on a single
lot and no public sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building
through an adjoining alley, courtyard, or driveway, the county may grant
permission for the building sewer from the front building to be extended to the
rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, upon a showing by
the applicant that it is not likely that the two (2) buildings so connected
will ultimately be on separate lots.
      (4)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings
only when they are found on examination to meet all of the requirements of this
article.
      (5)   Installation and connection of building sewers to the property line
shall be completed by a person properly licensed to perform such services.
      (6)   No person shall maintain or make a connection of roof downspouts,
exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff
or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
      (7)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer and the methods to be used in excavation, placing of pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench shall conform to the requirements of the
appropriate specifications of the Standard Plumbing Code, all installations to
be subject to the expressed written approval of the appropriate public agency
and in no case shall the size of pipe installed be less than four (4) inches in
nominal diameter.
      (8)   Before any underground portions thereof are covered, the applicant
for the building sewer approval shall notify the appropriate public agency when
the sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The
connection thereof shall be made to the public sewer by a licensed plumber and
only after inspection. The inspection thereof shall be made within two (2)
working days of the receipt of notice by the public agency.
      (9)   All pertinent OSHA requirements must be met during the construction
of any portion of the treatment works.
(Ord. No. 1024-83, § 3-4, 3-15-83)
Sec. 24-67. Unauthorized connections.
   Any person making any unauthorized connection with or opening into, use,
alteration on, disturbance of any public sewer or appurtenances shall be found
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to the penalties
set out in section
1-8.
(Ord. No. 1024-83, § 11-2(b), 3-15-83)
Sec. 24-68. Protection of equipment; only authorized persons to use equipment.
   No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage,
destroy, deface, tamper with, or remove any equipment or materials used for the
purpose of making waste examinations and waste flow measurements, and left upon
the premises of a person discharging wastes into the sanitary sewerage system.
Only authorized persons will be allowed to uncover, adjust, maintain, and
remove such equipment and materials.
(Ord. No. 1024-83, § 10, 3-15-83)
Sec. 24-69. Charges.
   (a)   Charge for "normal" waste included in hydraulic charge. The total
costs incident to the supervision, inspection, sampling, analyzing, handling,
conveying, and treatment of "normal" waste shall be included in the hydraulic
charge made to any person discharging wastes into the sanitary sewerage system
as established and revised, as necessary, annually by the county and
incorporated herein as Appendix B to the ordinance from which this article
originally derives but not reproduced herein.
   (b)   Additional cost for high strength waste. If any person discharges into
the sanitary sewerage system a waste containing BOD concentration or suspended
solids in excess of three hundred (300) milligrams per liter, then such person
shall pay an additional cost according to rates determined by the appropriate
public agency.
   (c)   Unusual or burdensome wastes. If any person discharges into the
sanitary sewerage system a waste which, because of its particular or unusual
character, imposes an unusual burden on the sanitary sewerage system and the
waste treatment facilities, and causes the public agency to incur additional
expenses in the handling (conveying) and treatment of the waste by reasons of
(but not limited to) provision of additional personnel, provision of additional
equipment or structure, increase in operating costs, and decrease in efficiency
of treatment processes required by and resulting from the handling and
treatment of the waste, then such person shall be charged for such additional
expense over and above the other charges set forth hereinabove. The approving
authority shall determine whether any person is causing the public agency to
incur such additional expense and, if so, the amount of such additional
expense.
(Ord. No. 1024-83, § 9, 3-15-83)
Secs. 24-70--24-80. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
Sec. 24-81. General.
   Onsite wastewater systems are subject to rules and regulations under the
authority of the South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control
(SCDHEC). The County may, but is not required to, deny access to a public sewer
system based on operational needs or other issues, including, but not limited
to, insufficient capacity, public safety, environmental issues, or a property
owner-applicant provided onsite wastewater system (e.g., septic tank)
alternative that meets or exceeds SCDHEC standards for such systems, and which
the owner-applicant retains the responsibility to maintain in proper working
order.
(Ord. No. 1024-83, § 3-3, 3-15-83; Ord. No. 101-95HR, § I, 12-5-95; Ord. No.
020-15HR, § I, 6-16-15)
Sec. 24-82. Discharge prohibited to natural outlets.
   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within any area of
the county any sewage or other polluted waters except where suitable treatment
has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 1024-83, § 3-1, 3-15-83)
Sec. 24-83. Discharge to storm sewers prohibited.
   The discharge of wastewaters to storm sewers is, without exception,
prohibited.
(Ord. No. 1024-83, § 3-2, 3-15-83)
Sec. 24-84. Prohibited substances.
   No person shall discharge or deposit any of the following materials, waste
materials, wastes, gases, or liquids into any sewer forming a part of the
sanitary sewerage system:
      (1)   Any waste, liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one
hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit.
      (2)   Any water or waste containing more than one hundred (100)
milligrams per liter of fat, oil, or grease, exclusive of soap.
      (3)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha or other hydrocarbon solvents or
compounds, or other flammable or explosive liquids, solids, or gases.
      (4)   Any waste that has not been properly shredded.
      (5)   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, lint, glass, rags,
metals, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, insulation materials,
fibers of any kind, stock or poultry feeds, processed grains, viscera or other
solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to flow in sewers or
interference with proper operation of waste treatment facilities.
      (6)   Any waters or wastes having a stabilized pH lower than 6.0 or
higher than 10.0, or having properties capable of either causing damage or
creating a hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sanitary
sewerage system and waste treatment facilities.
      (7)   Any waters or wastes having a BOD concentration in excess of three
hundred (300) milligrams per liter, except as hereinafter provided.
      (8)   Any waters or wastes having a suspended solids concentration in
excess of two hundred fifty (250) milligrams per liter, except as hereinafter
provided.
      (9)   Any waters or wastes having a color which is not removable by the
existing waste treatment plant processes.
      (10)   Any waters or wastes containing contaminants of such character or
in such quantity as will not be amenable to the waste treatment processes, or
will injure or interfere with the waste treatment processes, or will constitute
a hazard to humans or animals, or will create a hazard in the stream or
watercourse receiving the effluent from the waste treatment plant.
      (11)   Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character
and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required in the handling or
treatment of such waste materials at the waste treatment plant.
      (12)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance, or any substance or compound which, when introduced into a
reducing environment such as might exist in the sewerage system, might cause
the evolution of a malodorous gas and thereby create a public nuisance.
      (13)   Any polluted water or waste.
      (14)   Any radioactive isotope in concentration greater than that
permitted by the latest regulations published in the "Federal Register." (See
United States Atomic Energy Commission, Rules and Regulations, Title 10, Atomic
Energy, Part 20.)
(Ord. No. 1024-83, § 4-1, 3-15-83)
Sec. 24-85. Allowance for special arrangement for industrial waste.
   No statement contained in this division shall be construed as preventing the
execution of a contract, special agreement, or arrangement between the
appropriate public agency and any person whereby an industrial waste or
pollutant of unusual strength or character may be admitted into the sanitary
sewerage system after approved pretreatment of such waste by the person
desiring to discharge such waste into the sanitary sewerage system, or the
assessment of special charges for the use of the sewer system.
(Ord. No. 1024-83, § 4-2, 3-15-83)
Secs. 24-86--24-90. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. INDUSTRIAL WASTES AND POLLUTANTS
Sec. 24-91. Permit to discharge into sanitary sewer required for industrial
waste.
   (a)   Any person desiring to deposit or discharge any industrial waste or
other pollutant into the sanitary sewerage system or any person now discharging
any industrial waste or other pollutant into the sanitary sewerage system shall
make application to the approving authority. The approving authority will
approve such application and issue "permit to discharge" only when satisfactory
evidence is submitted by the applicant to the approving authority that the
discharge of such industrial waste or other pollutant is in full compliance
with these rules and regulations.
   (b)   The responsibility for filing an application for "permit to discharge"
shall rest upon the person discharging, or proposing to discharge, industrial
wastes or other pollutant to the sanitary sewerage system. Should such person
fail to file an application for "permit to discharge," and such person is then
discharging any industrial waste or other pollutant to the sanitary sewerage
system, the approving authority shall, after twenty-four (24) hours' notice has
been given, cause such person's water service from the public water system to
be discontinued, and water service will be restored at such person's expense
only after he has complied with the provisions of these rules and regulations;
and if such person does not use water exclusively from the public water system
the approving authority shall, after twenty-four (24) hours' notice has been
given, cause such person's connection to the sanitary sewerage system to be
severed, and such connection will be restored at such person's expense only
after he has complied with the provisions of these rules and regulations.
   (c)   Should any person discharging or proposing to discharge any industrial
waste or other pollutant into the sanitary sewerage system file an application
with the approving authority for "permit to discharge" and such application not
be approved by the approving authority, and such person is then discharging any
industrial waste or other pollutant to the sanitary sewerage system, the
approving authority shall, after twenty-four (24) hours' notice has been given,
cause such person's water service from the public water system to be
discontinued, and water service will be restored at such person's expense only
after he has complied with the provisions of these rules and regulations; and
if such person does not use water exclusively from the public water system, the
approving authority shall after twenty-four (24) hours' notice has been given,
cause such person's connection to the sanitary sewerage system to be severed,
and such connection will be restored at such person's expense only after he has
complied with the provisions of these rules and regulations.
(Ord. No. 1024-83, § 6, 3-15-83)
Sec. 24-92. Conditions for allowing discharge of industrial wastes into public
system.
   It is the desire and intent of the county to cooperate with industry in the
effort to improve quality, prevent impairment of quality, and maintain quality
of streams in the county in accordance with water quality standards established
by the department of health and environmental control of the state for the
various streams and watercourses in the county area. To this end the discharge
of industrial waste into the sanitary sewerage system may be permitted provided
that:
      (1)   Sewerage capacity is available on a basis compatible with the best
overall use of the sewer.
      (2)   The waste being discharged or proposed to be discharged is amenable
to treatment by the processes employed in the waste treatment plants to receive
such waste.
      (3)   The waste being discharged or proposed to be discharged will not
cause damage to the sanitary sewerage system and/or waste treatment facilities,
will not constitute a hazard to humans or animals, nor be capable of creating a
public nuisance.
      (4)   The concentration of substances, compounds, and elements in the
waste being discharged or proposed to be discharged does not exceed the limits
established by the appropriate public agency.
      (5)   Any person now discharging or proposing to discharge waste shall
fully comply with these rules and regulations.
   Applications for permits to discharge industrial waste into the sanitary
sewerage system of the county will be reviewed by the approving authority on
the above basis.
(Ord. No. 1024-83, § 5-1, 3-15-83)
Sec. 24-93. Chemical analysis of waste required.
   (a)   Any person now discharging or any persons desiring to discharge
industrial waste into the sanitary sewerage system shall submit with his
application to the approving authority a complete chemical analysis of the
waste being discharged or proposed to be discharged, including concentrations
of BOD and suspended solids contained therein. Such person shall also submit
pertinent flow data, including rates and duration, and description of his
operations. Should the waste from such person's operations be deemed to be
inadmissible into the sanitary sewerage system because of objectionable
character as defined by these rules and regulations, because of concentration
of elements or substances in excess of the limits established by the approving
authority, or because of flow characteristics incompatible with the best use of
the receiving sewer, the approving authority will not approve the discharge of
such waste into the sanitary sewerage system until such person has employed, at
his own expense, methods and processes of pretreatment as will render the waste
admissible to the sanitary sewerage system in accordance with these rules and
regulations.
   (b)   The approving authority will not specify, suggest, or recommend
equipment, structures, or arrangements comprising the pretreatment processes.
Approval of discharge of industrial waste by any person will be given only on
the basis of performance of pretreatment processes (if pretreatment should be
required). Approval given to any person for discharge of industrial waste,
whether pretreated or not, into the sanitary sewerage system shall in no way
relieve such person of the responsibility of full compliance with these rules
and regulations at all times.
(Ord. No. 1024-83, § 5-2, 3-15-83)
Sec. 24-94. Requirements for removing certain prohibited substances.
   As stated hereinabove the discharge of any industrial waste or pollutant by
any person shall be considered to be an individual problem, and individual
application shall be made by any person now discharging or proposing to
discharge any industrial waste or pollutant into the sanitary sewerage system.
For the general information of those persons now discharging or proposing to
discharge any industrial waste or pollutant into the sanitary sewerage system
the standards as set forth hereinbelow shall apply to such discharge. All
requirements as set forth under section
24-84 shall also be applicable, except as hereinafter extended or amplified:
      (1)   Packinghouse waste. All hair, bristles, hides or parts of hides,
bones, animal parts, paunch manure, viscera, grease (in excess of concentration
specified under section
24-84), stock feeds, grit, sand, and straw shall be removed prior to discharge.
      (2)   Poultry processing waste. All feathers, parts of birds, bones,
grit, sand, poultry feeds, viscera and grease (in excess of concentration
specified under section
24-84) shall be removed prior to discharge.
      (3)   Textile wastes. All lint, thread, pieces of cloth, latex and yarn
shall be removed prior to discharge. Kiering and acid boiling wastes shall be
cooled, neutralized and stabilized within the limits specified herein.
Bleachery wastes shall be cooled, neutralized and stabilized within the limits
specified herein. Sulfur dyeing wastes shall not be admitted to the sanitary
sewerage system. Admission of other dyeing wastes will be considered as
specific problems are presented.
      (4)   BOD. Concentration of BOD in the waste shall not exceed eight
hundred (800) milligrams per liter, except that discharge of wastes having
concentration in excess of five hundred (500) milligrams per liter shall be
subject to further review before approval by the approving authority, in
particular with respect to the point of discharge into the sanitary sewerage
system and the dilution afforded by other waste flow obtaining in the sanitary
sewerage system at that point.
      (5)   Suspended solids. Concentration of suspended solids in the waste
shall not exceed seven hundred (700) milligrams per liter, except that
discharge of wastes having concentrations in excess of five hundred (500) parts
per million shall be subject to further review before approval by the approving
authority, in particular with respect to the point of discharge into the
sanitary sewerage system and the dilution afforded by other waste flow
obtaining in the sanitary sewerage system at that point.
      (6)   Ceramic glazing wastes. Ceramic glazing wastes shall not be
discharged into the sanitary sewerage system.
      (7)   Lime sludges, etc. Lime sludges shall not be discharged into the
sanitary sewerage system. Calcium sulphate and other sludges of like nature
shall not be discharged into the sanitary sewerage system.
      (8)   Toxic materials. Toxic materials shall not be discharged in such
amounts as to cause a detrimental effect upon the sewage collection system or
the wastewater treatment process. Discharge limitations are given as Appendix A
to the ordinance from which this article originally derives but are not set out
herein.
         a.   Metal salts (iron, copper, zinc, nickel, chromium, cadmium, lead,
etc.). Metal salts shall be precipitated and removed from the waste flow prior
to discharge to the sanitary sewerage system. Waste containing hexavalent
chromium shall have chromium reduced to the trivalent state, precipitated and
removed from the waste flow prior to discharge to the sanitary sewerage system.
         b.   Cyanides. Cyanides in the waste flow shall be completely reduced
to carbon dioxide and nitrogen prior to discharge to the sanitary sewerage
system.
      (9)   Phenol. Wastes containing phenol may be considered for discharge to
the sanitary sewerage system after review by the approving authority and
agreement as to volume, strength flow pattern and other pertinent factors for
each individual case.
      Any person permitted by the approving authority to discharge any waste
containing phenol into the sanitary sewerage system shall enter into an
agreement with the appropriate public agency, whereby such person shall
regulate, vary and/or maintain the discharge and/or concentration of phenol in
accordance with the requirements of the approving authority.
      (10)   Pyridine. Concentration of pyridine in the waste received at the
waste treatment facilities of the city shall not exceed fifty one-hundredths
(0.50) parts per million by weight. Quantity of pyridine in any waste
discharged by any person shall be regulated at the source, when and if required
by the approving authority, so as to prevent the concentration of pyridine in
the waste received at the waste treatment facilities from exceeding fifty one-
hundredths (0.50) per million by weight.
   The omission of any particular waste from the standards outlined hereinabove
does not apply that discharge of such waste to the sanitary sewerage system
will be permitted. Any liquid waste of peculiar character and volume, or of
toxic or unusual nature, shall be subject to review by the approving authority
and to standards deemed applicable by the approving authority.
(Ord. No. 1024-83, § 5-4, 3-15-83)
Sec. 24-95. Quantity of industrial waste discharged.
   The volume or quantity of industrial waste discharged by any person into the
sanitary sewerage system shall be measured by one or more of the following
methods:
      (1)   If the volume of water used by any person in his industrial or
process operations is substantially the same as the volume purchased from the
municipal waterworks system, then the volume of water purchased shall be
considered to be the volume of waste discharged.
      (2)   If, in the establishment of any person discharging industrial waste
into the sanitary sewerage system, a substantial portion of the water purchased
from the municipal waterworks system is used for domestic or commercial
purposes (resulting in "normal waste"), for cooling purposes, or for other
purposes that do not require the discharge of such used water to the sanitary
sewerage system, such person may, at his own expense, install a meter (or
meters) of design approved by the approving authority on the waste line (or
wastes lines) from his industrial and/or process operations. The volume of
waste flow, as measured through the meter or meters shall be considered to be
the volume of waste discharged to the sanitary sewerage system.
      (3)   If any person now discharging or proposing to discharge industrial
waste into the sanitary sewerage system does not secure his entire water supply
requirements from the municipal waterworks system, such person shall, at his
own expense, install a meter (or meters) of design approved by the approving
authority on the waste line (or waste lines) from his industrial and/or process
operations. The volume of waste flow, as measured through the meter (or meters)
shall be considered to be the volume of waste discharged to the sanitary
sewerage system.
(Ord. No. 1024-83, § 5-5, 3-15-83)
Sec. 24-96. Requirement for holding capacity.
   To utilize the capacity of the sanitary sewerage system effectively and to
facilitate operation of the waste treatment facilities it may be desirable that
discharge of industrial waste into the sanitary sewerage system be done at a
uniform rate of flow over a period of twenty-four (24) hours or bulk discharge
at specific periods of time. In order to accomplish this purpose any person now
discharging or proposing to discharge industrial waste into the sanitary
sewerage system shall provide, at his own expense, a holding tank or holding
tanks from which such waste shall be discharged at a specified rate of flow
over a twenty-four-hour period. The above requirement may be waived provided
that:
      (1)   The total daily waste flow from the establishment of such person
does not exceed fifty thousand (50,000) gallons;
      (2)   The maximum rate of discharge from said establishment does not
exceed one hundred (100) GPM; and,
      (3)   In all other respects, the discharge of such waste is in full
compliance with these rules and regulations.
(Ord. No. 1024-83, § 5-3, 3-15-83)
Sec. 24-97. Sampling of industrial waste required.
   (a)   The industrial waste and/or other pollutants being discharged by any
person into the sanitary sewerage system shall be subject to periodic
inspection; and a determination of character and strength of those wastes shall
be made quarterly, or more often as may be deemed necessary, by the approving
authority or his authorized assistants.
   (b)   Samples shall be collected in such a manner as to be representative of
the wastes being discharged. The laboratory methods followed in the examination
of those wastes shall be those as set forth in "Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater," latest edition, published by the American
Public Health Association, Inc., copy of which is on file in the office of the
approving authority for inspection by interested persons or parties.
   (c)   The determination of the character, strength, or quantity of the
wastes as made by the approving authority or his authorized assistants shall be
binding as a basis for computation of charges. The person discharging such
wastes may, however, conduct his own sampling and analytical program and submit
to the approving authority the results relating to character, strength, and
quantity of the wastes. In such cases, however, the securing of samples shall
be in accordance with method acceptable to the approving authority; and the
laboratory procedures followed in analyzing the samples shall be specified
hereinabove. Acceptance or rejection of the results thus submitted shall be a
right herein reserved for the approving authority.
(Ord. No. 1024-83, § 8, 3-15-83)
Sec. 24-98. Control manhole.
   (a)   Any person now discharging or proposing to discharge any industrial
waste into the sanitary sewerage system shall construct, at his own expense, a
control manhole on the waste line (or waste lines) from his industrial and/or
process operations for the purpose of facilitating observations, measurements,
and sampling of the industrial waste discharged from such person's
establishment. The control manhole shall be constructed in a suitable and
satisfactory location downstream from any pretreatment facilities, holding
tanks, or other approved works, and ahead of the point of discharge of such
waste into the sanitary sewerage system. The design of the control manhole
shall be in accordance with the requirements of the approving authority. The
control manhole shall be maintained by such person so as to be safe,
accessible, and in proper operating condition at all times.
   (b)   The requirement with respect to construction of a control manhole may
be waived provided that:
      (1)   Total daily waste flow from the establishment of such person does
not exceed fifty thousand (50,000) gallons;
      (2)   The maximum rate of discharge from the establishment does not
exceed one hundred (100) GPM;
      (3)   Access, means, and facilities are provided within such person's
establishment for the purpose of observing, measuring, and sampling the waste
flow from such person's establishment; and,
      (4)   The discharge of all such waste from the establishment is, in all
other respects, in full compliance with these rules and regulations.
(Ord. No. 1024-83, § 5-6, 3-15-83)
Sec. 24-99. Right of entry.
   The approving authority or his duly authorized representative, bearing
proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter upon all
properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, flow measurement,
sampling, and testing of industrial waste and other pollutants, in accordance
with these rules and regulations.
(Ord. No. 1024-83, § 7-1, 3-15-83)
Sec. 24-100. Right to refuse discharge.
   (a)   The approving authority may temporarily exclude from the sanitary
sewerage system any industrial waste or other pollutant, whether pretreated or
not, whenever in the opinion of the approving authority such action is
necessary for the purpose of determining the effects of such waste upon the
sanitary sewerage system and the waste treatment facilities.
   (b)   Any industrial waste or other pollutant may be excluded from the
sanitary sewerage system, whether pretreated or not, whenever in the opinion of
the appropriate public agency such action is necessary to protect the sanitary
sewerage system and the waste treatment facilities or to facilitate the
operation of the sanitary sewerage system and the waste treatment facilities.
(Ord. No. 1024-83, § 7-2, 3-15-83)
Secs. 24-101--24-120. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. SEWER DISTRICTS
   Editor's note--Ord. No. 1554-86, effective Dec. 2, 1986, did not
specifically amend the Code. At the discretion of the editor, §§ 2.01--2.04 and
§§ 3.01, 3.02 of said ordinance have been codified herein as Art. V, §§ 24-121-
-24-125. Catchlines and section numbers have been added to facilitate indexing.
Sections 1.01--1.03 of Ord. No. 1554-86 have been omitted from codification,
also at the discretion of the editor, inasmuch as they contained general
findings of fact.
Sec. 24-121. Chartwell Sewer District--Creation and establishment.
   There is hereby created and established a special tax district within
Richland County, South Carolina to be known as "Chartwell Sewer District," and
which shall include and be comprised of the territory in the county embraced
within the following description:
   All that certain portion of Richland County, South Carolina, located in the
vicinity of the intersection of Chartwell Road and St. Andrews Road and being
more particularly shown on the official Property Tax Maps of Richland County,
Sheets #06011 and #06012, on file in the office of the county administrator as
of July 24, 1986, as being composed of those parcels which are designated by
the numbers 06011-1-3 through 06011-1-8, inclusive; 06011-2-1 through 06011-2-
12, inclusive; 06011-3-1 through 06011-3-13, inclusive, 06011-3-23; 06012-6-
1 through 06012-6-7, inclusive; 06012-5-1 through 06012-5-11, inclusive; 06012-
4-1 through 06012-4-3, inclusive; 06012-4-15 through 06012-4-29, inclusive;
06012-2-3 through 06012-2-5, inclusive; and 06012-1-1, on said Property Tax Map
Sheet #06011 and #06012, said maps being incorporated herein as a part and
parcel of this description.
(Ord. No. 1554-86, § 2.01, 12-2-86)
Sec. 24-122. Same--Purpose; function.
   The Chartwell Sewer District is created and established for the purpose and
function of providing sewage collection services therein and council is hereby
authorized to exercise all powers and to perform all duties necessary to the
proper rendering of sewage collection services therein, including, but not
limited to, the construction and installation of such lateral and collection
lines and any and all appurtenances thereto as may be required to provide such
sewage collection services.
(Ord. No. 1554-86, § 2.02, 12-2-86)
Sec. 24-123. Ballentine Estates Sewer District--Creation and establishment.
   There is hereby created and established a special tax district within
Richland County, South Carolina to be known as the "Ballentine Estates Sewer
District" and which shall include and be comprised of the territory in the
county embraced within the following description:
   All that certain portion of Richland County, South Carolina, being located
on the shores of Lake Murray near the terminus of South Carolina Highway No. 6,
and having a more or less oval shape and being that certain area as shown on
the official Property Tax Map of Richland County, Sheet #02316 on file in the
county administrator's office as of July 24, 1986, as being composed of those
parcels which are designated by the numbers 02316-3-1 through 02316-3-22,
inclusive, on said Property Tax Map, Sheet #02316, said map being incorporated
herein as a part and parcel of this description.
(Ord. No. 1554-86, § 2.03, 12-2-86)
Sec. 24-124. Same--Purpose; function.
   The Ballentine Estates Sewer District is created and established for the
purpose and function of providing sewage collection services therein and
council is hereby authorized to exercise all powers and to perform all duties
necessary to the proper rendering of sewage collection services therein,
including, but not limited to, the construction and installation of such
lateral and collection lines and any and all appurtenances thereto as may be
required to provide such sewage collection services.
(Ord. No. 1554-86, § 2.04, 12-2-86)
Sec. 24-125. Authorization to impose sewer service charges and/or fees and/or
assessments for operation and maintenance of Chartwell and Ballentine Estates
Sewer Districts.
   (a)   In order to defray the costs of the operation and maintenance of the
facilities constructed and/or installed within the Chartwell Sewer District and
the Ballentine Estates Sewer District and pursuant to and in accordance with
the provision of Section 4-9-30(5) and the provisions of Section 6-15-60 of the
Code of Laws of South Carolina, 1976, as amended by Act. No. 499 of the 1986
Acts of the General Assembly of the State of South Carolina, the council hereby
authorizes the imposition of sewer service charges, connection charges or fees
and tapping fees upon those to whom sewage collection services are rendered
within the Chartwell Sewer District and the Ballentine Estates Sewer District.
   (b)   Pursuant to the provision of Section 6-15-80 of the Code of Laws of
South Carolina, 1976, as amended by Act No. 499 of the 1986 Acts of the General
Assembly of the State of South Carolina, the chairman is hereby authorized to
enter into such contracts with the City of Columbia and with such private
utility companies as may be necessary in order to provide a method for the
collection of such service charges and/or other fees imposed pursuant to
subsection (a) hereof upon those to whom sewage collection services are being
rendered within the Chartwell Sewer District and the Ballentine Estates Sewer
District. Such contracts may include the payment of a fee by the county to the
City of Columbia and to such private utility companies which represents an
amount necessary to defray the cost of billing and collecting the charges
imposed by the county.
(Ord. No. 1554-86, §§ 3.01, 3.02, 12-2-86)
CHAPTER 24.5: SPECIAL SEWER ASSESSMENT DISTRICTS*
   *Editor's note--Nonamendatory Ord. No. 1590-87, enacted Feb. 17, 1987, has
been codified herein as Ch. 24.5 at the direction of the county.
   Cross reference(s)--Taxation,
Ch. 23; utilities,
Ch. 24; sewer districts, §
24-121 et seq.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 24.5-1. Findings of fact concerning the public health in certain
communities.
   (a)   Richland County, South Carolina, is a political subdivision of the
State of South Carolina (the state), and as such possesses all general powers
granted by the constitution and statutes of the state to political
subdivisions, including the power to operate sewer systems and to furnish sewer
service for domestic and industrial use within the county. Pursuant to the
provisions of Section 16 of Article VIII of the South Carolina Constitution, a
referendum was conducted in Richland County on November 7, 1978, which resulted
favorable to the question of whether or not the council should take what
"action is necessary to establish and implement a complete and comprehensive
program designed to provide water and sewer services to the residents of the
County of Richland." In accordance with the authorization provided by such
referendum and pursuant to the provisions of Section 4-9-30(5)(a) of the Code
of Laws of South Carolina, 1976, as amended, the council has authorized and is
presently financing the construction of sewage collection lines in two (2)
areas of the county which were created as special taxing districts pursuant to
said Section 4-9-30(5)(a) and are known as the Ballentine Estates Sewer
District and the Chartwell Sewer District.
   (b)   The population growth pattern in the county has been such that certain
communities have developed which either have an inadequate sewer service system
which fails to meet minimally acceptable public health standards, or have no
sewer system at all. A great many of such communities in the county cannot be
served now or in the foreseeable future by either existing public service
district systems or existing municipal sewer systems.
   (c)   In order to improve the sanitary conditions in these communities to
reasonably acceptable public health standards, the council has determined to
exercise its inherent police powers and to provide sewage treatment and
disposal facilities therefor as provided in accordance with the provisions of
section 24.5-21 of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1590-87, § 1.01, 2-17-87)
Sec. 24.5-2. Statutory authorization.
   (a)   By virtue of the favorable results of the election held on November 7,
1978 and Act No. 499 enacted by the General Assembly of the State of South
Carolina on June 10, 1986, which amended and supplemented Act No. 386 of the
Acts and Joint Resolutions of the General Assembly of the State of South
Carolina for the year 1965, codified as Chapter 15 of Title 6, Code of Laws of
South Carolina, 1976, the county is authorized to contract with other
governmental entities to provide for the collection, disposal and treatment of
sewage, and further, may impose upon those persons receiving sewer service both
sewer service charges and sewer connection charges. The sewer service charge,
authorized thereby, may be sufficient to provide for all or a part of the
operating costs of the sewer facilities, and to provide debt service on bonds
issued to finance the system. The sewer connection charge is intended to
adequately reimburse the county for effecting the connection to the system.
   (b)   Moreover, by virtue of Section 8 of Act No. 212 of the Acts and Joint
Resolutions of the General Assembly of the State of South Carolina for the year
1975, which is codified as Article 15 of Title 44, Code of Laws of South
Carolina, 1976, the county is authorized to acquire, construct, improve,
enlarge, operate and maintain facilities for the collection, treatment and
disposition of sewage. The county also is authorized to place into effect and
revise from time to time a schedule of rates and charges for the use of these
sewer facilities.
(Ord. No. 1590-87, § 1.02, 2-17-87)
Sec. 24.5-3. Definitions.
   As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following terms shall have the following respective meanings:
   Authorized officer means the chairman, or the vice-chairman of the council
and any other officer or employee of the council designated from time to time
as an authorized officer by resolution of the council, and when used with
reference to any act or document also means any other person authorized by
resolution of the council to perform such act or sign such document.
   Bond ordinance means an ordinance the terms of which shall govern the
financing of the improvements to be constructed within a special assessment
district which was created in accordance with the terms and provisions of this
chapter.
   Capital sewer service charge means the assessment levied to reimburse the
county for that portion of the cost of installing sewer laterals (collection
lines) within a district.
   Chapter means this chapter [Ordinance No. 1590-87] as the same may be
amended or supplemented from time to time in accordance with the terms hereof.
It is enacted pursuant to the favorable results of the election held November
7, 1978 and all statutory provisions permitting council to construct, acquire,
finance and operate a system and to make special charges intended to reimburse
council for all debt service incurred in such acquisition or construction and
in the operation of the system.
   Council means the Richland County Council, South Carolina, the governing
body of said county or any successor governing body of said county.
   County means Richland County, South Carolina.
   County request means a written request of the county signed by an authorized
officer.
   District means any community lacking adequate sewage disposal facilities
which shall have been denominated as a special assessment district created
pursuant to the terms and provisions of this chapter.
   Lateral collection lines means the gravity system, to include pump stations,
lift stations and force drains, utilized to transmit waste to a central or
master transmission station.
   Person means an individual, a partnership, a corporation, a trust, a
trustee, an unincorporated organization, or a government or an agency or
political subdivision thereof.
   Sewage means domestic or industrial waste requiring collection, disposal and
treatment.
   Sewer connection charge means the charge imposed upon property owners of a
district by the county for providing or making available a tap in or connection
to sewer facilities.
   Sewer service charge means the monthly, quarterly or annual charge imposed
by the county for the collection, treatment and disposal of sewage irrespective
of whether the same shall be collected by the county or by any other public
entity on behalf of the county.
   System or systems mean the several systems, all property real and personal,
used and useful therefor, all apparatus and equipment used in connection
therewith, and all acquisitions, replacements, enlargements, improvements,
extensions, additions and betterments that may be made thereto at any time
thereafter, which are provided to collect and dispose of sewage in any district
or districts hereafter created by council.
(Ord. No. 1590-87, § 2.01, 2-17-87)
Sec. 24.5-4. Construction.
   In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
   (a)   Articles and sections referred to by number shall mean the
corresponding articles and sections of this chapter.
   (b)   The terms "hereby," "hereof," "hereto," "herein," "hereunder," and any
similar terms refer to this chapter, and the term "hereafter" shall mean after,
and the term "heretofore" shall mean before, the date of adoption of this
chapter [Ordinance No. 1590-87, adopted February 17, 1987].
   (c)   Words of the masculine gender shall mean and include correlative words
of the female and neuter genders, and words importing the singular number shall
mean and include the plural number and vice versa.
(Ord. No. 1590-87, § 2.02, 2-17-87)
Sec. 24.5-5. Furnishing information; keeping records.
   The council recognizes that persons owning property within the district and
those who may from time to time hereafter be holders of the bonds issued to
defray the cost of the sewer facilities in the districts may require full
information with respect to the creation of the district and the various
charges imposed upon the persons and properties located within the district. To
that end, the council covenants and agrees that it will install and thereafter
at all times maintain proper books of records and accounts, separate and
distinct from all other records and accounts, in which complete and correct
entries shall be made of the various charges and assessments charged to and
paid by each property owner within a district, and each such charge and/or
assessment shall be designated as to whether it is a sewer service charge,
sewer connection charge, or capital sewer service charge.
(Ord. No. 1590-87, § 6.01, 2-17-87)
Sec. 24.5-6. Additional covenants regarding the use of system.
   The council further covenants and agrees:
      (1)   That it will permit no free service to be rendered, or use to be
made of the services and facilities of the system by persons owning property
within a district;
      (2)   That it will permit no sewer customer to be connected to the
system, or to receive any service afforded by the system, unless a proper
account is established and charges are levied against this account for services
rendered, and such customer shall become obligated to pay for the service
rendered at the appropriate rate according to the rate schedule then in force;
and
      (3)   That it will require those persons maintaining residences or other
buildings on land within such districts to connect to and utilize the system.
Such a requirement is made in the interest of the health of persons residing
within the district, and is taken pursuant to the inherent police powers of
council.
(Ord. No. 1590-87, § 7.01, 2-17-87)
Sec. 24.5-7. Contents of ordinances passed pursuant to this chapter.
   Any ordinance creating a district pursuant to the terms and provisions of
this chapter may create more than one district.
(Ord. No. 1590-87, § 8.01, 2-17-87)
Sec. 24.5-8. Severability of invalid provisions.
   If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this chapter shall be held
invalid, the invalidity of such section, paragraph, clause or provision shall
not affect any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1590-87, § 8.02, 2-17-87)
Sec. 24.5-9. Repealer.
   All ordinances, or parts thereof, inconsistent with the provisions of this
chapter be and the same are hereby repealed to the extent of such
inconsistencies.
(Ord. No. 1590-87, § 8.03, 2-17-87)
Secs. 24.5-10--24.5-20. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. CREATION OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENT DISTRICTS
Sec. 24.5-21. Conditions for creation.
   Prior to the creation of a district by the council, a study shall be made
under the direction of the county coordinator of utilities and services which
specifically addresses the question of whether or not a system is necessary to
provide or improve sanitary conditions in the proposed district, so that the
benefits therefrom would benefit the property owners thereof in a manner
distinguishable from the general benefit which would be enjoyed by surrounding
areas as a result of the proposed extension to the system. The district shall
not be created unless such findings conclude that the benefits would meet such
criteria. Such findings shall also include the estimated cost of constructing
and installing the necessary sewer lateral and collection lines, appurtenances
and contingencies, and the estimated capital sewer service charges, sewer
connection charges and sewer service charges to be imposed upon those persons
and properties which would receive such benefits.
(Ord. No. 1590-87, § 3.01, 2-17-87)
Sec. 24.5-22. Creation of special assessment district.
   A district shall be created by council pursuant to the provisions of a
supplemental ordinance adopted in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. No. 1590-87, § 3.02, 2-17-87)
Sec. 24.5-23. Provisions for financing the improvements.
   In adopting an ordinance creating a district, the council shall state the
method of financing a system to serve such district. Such financing may be made
by the issuance of general obligation bonds of the county. In the event the
council determines to issue general obligation bonds in order to finance such
system, the debt service on such bonds shall be paid from special assessments
imposed upon the persons and properties of the district receiving the benefit
therefrom in the form of capital sewer service charges.
(Ord. No. 1590-87, § 3.03, 2-17-87)
Sec. 24.5-24. Consent of or contracts with other governmental entities.
   (a)   Either prior to or after the creation of a district which would lie in
or is partially or totally within either the territory of a special purpose
district or authority existing on March 7, 1973, or the corporate limits of an
incorporated municipality, the county shall either obtain the consent of the
governing body of such entity, or contract with such entity for the most
efficient use of the sewer facilities which are available.
   (b)   Such contracts may provide for the joint ownership of the sewer
facilities or for the ownership of such facilities by any of the contracting
parties, provided that the remaining parties shall be empowered to utilize such
sewer facilities to the extent provided for in any such contract.
   (c)   Such contracts shall be executed on behalf of each contracting party,
after it has been approved by resolution or other action taken by the governing
body thereof. An authorized officer shall sign any such contracts on behalf of
the county.
   (d)   Whenever any such contract shall be the basis for the issuance of
general obligation bonds by the county, it shall become a part of the
transcript of proceedings incident to the issuance of such bonds and shall be
filed in the manner prescribed by section 11-15-10 of the Code of Laws of South
Carolina, 1976 (as may be now or hereafter amended), and shall also be filed
with the South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control.
(Ord. No. 1590-87, § 3.04, 2-17-87)
Sec. 24.5-25. Notice and public hearings.
   Prior to the creation of a district, not less than fifteen (15) days' notice
shall be given to all affected property owners notifying them of a public
hearing to be held on the question of creating a district, such notification to
be made by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the county.
Such notice shall notify the property owners of (1) the proposed boundaries of
said district; (2) their right to appear and be heard in person or by counsel
before the council; (3) the time and place of this hearing at which they will
be afforded the opportunity to be heard; (4) the intended benefits to result
from such creation; and (5) an estimated schedule of the nature and quantum of
proposed sewer service charges, sewer connection charges, and capital sewer
service charges required to pay the operational costs of such sewer facilities
and to pay any bonded indebtedness incurred as a result of providing or
extending service within the district. The agenda for such a meeting may
include a reading of the ordinance proposing to create the district.
(Ord. No. 1590-87, § 3.05, 2-17-87)
Secs. 24.5-26--24.5-40. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. FINANCING IMPROVEMENTS; RATES AND CHARGES
Sec. 24.5-41. Issuance of general obligation bonds.
   Subject to the terms, limitations, and conditions of a bond ordinance
adopted by the county, which shall provide for the issuance of general
obligation bonds of the county to finance the extension of the system in order
to provide sewage collection services to the district, such debt to be incurred
pursuant to and within the limitations provided by Section 12 of Article X of
the South Carolina Constitution, the council shall impose upon all persons and
properties in the district and capital sewer service charges which shall be
imposed in the form of assessments as provided in sections
24.5-42 through
24.5-44 hereof and which shall be in an amount designed to provide sufficient
funds to pay the debt service on such bonds.
(Ord. No. 1590-87, § 4.01, 2-17-87)
Sec. 24.5-42. Authorization and enforcement of charges.
   The county is fully empowered to enforce the collection of any past due or
unpaid sewer service charges and capital sewer service charges in any lawful
manner which methods include the entering into contracts for the collection of
such charges with other political subdivision. In addition, the county shall
participate in and utilize the Setoff Debt Collection Act (S.C. Code §§ 12-56-
10 et seq.) and Government Enterprise Accounts Receivable program (S.C. Code §§
12-4-580 et seq.) for the collection of unpaid water and sewer charges,
including late fees.
(Ord. No. 1590-87, § 5.01, 2-17-87; Ord. No. 012-15HR, § III, 5-5-15)
Sec. 24.5-43. Sewer service charges and sewer connection charges.
   The council shall place into effect and revise whenever it so wishes or may
be required a schedule of sewer service and sewer connection charges to be
imposed within the district for the use of the connection to the system.
(Ord. No. 1590-87, § 5.02, 2-17-87; Ord. No. 1942-89, § I, 12-5-89; Ord. No.
012-15HR, § IV, 5-5-15)
Sec. 24.5-44. Capital sewer service charges.
   (a)   The council shall place into effect and revise whenever it so wishes
or may be required a schedule of capital sewer service charges which will be
used to retire debt incurred to finance that portion of the system within a
particular district. The capital sewer service charges shall be based on the
estimated cost of the establishment and construction of any sewer lateral
collection lines and any extensions thereof constructed within the district, or
so much of the estimated cost thereof as the council in its discretion deems
appropriate, and shall be assessed upon the lots and parcels of land abutting
directly on such lateral lines or extensions thereof according to the extent of
the respective frontage thereon by an equal rate per foot of such frontage; but
the council may, in its discretion, provide, in the instance of corner lots,
for a charge deemed to be equitable. If part or all of the district is part of
a development plan or zoned for residential use, then such capital sewer
service charges may be levied by the council on a parcel or per unit basis
rather than on a front-foot basis. The capital sewer service charges to be
levied in connection with such installations may be paid in equal installments
covering a period not to exceed twenty (20) years. Such deferred payments shall
be payable annually within the period that county taxes are payable and late
payments shall be penalized to the same extent as in the case of county taxes.
   (b)   In connection with the imposition of such capital sewer service
charges:
   (1)   The council shall provide a general description of the improvements to
be made and the street or parts thereof whereon the work is to be effected and
the estimated cost thereof and the amount of the cost to be assessed upon all
abutting properties and the terms and manner of payment Such description may
incorporate by reference plats and engineering reports and other data on file
in the office of the county coordinator of utilities and services provided that
the place of filing and reasonable hours for inspection by interested persons
are specified in the onlinance imposing the capital sewer service charges.
Within thirty (30) days of the creation of a district, the council shall
prepare in poster form a notice advising of the proposed capital sewer service
charges and generally describing the area to be affected and shall deliver the
notice to the register of mesne conveyances of the county. The register of
mesne conveyances shall prominently display such notice in his office until an
assessment book compiling a list of all residents and property owners of the
district has been prepared by the county auditor and filed with the council.
Failure to provide or post such notice shall not affect the validity of any
such assessment.
   (2)   Immediately after such assessment book has been completed, the council
shall forthwith cause one copy thereof to be deposited in the office of the
register of mesne conveyances for inspection by interested parties, and shall
cause to be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in
the county a notice of the completion of the assessment book. This notice shall
set forth a description in general terms of the improvements and the time fixed
for the meeting of the council for a hearing of objections in respect of the
capital sewer service charges. Such meeting shall not be earlier than ten (10)
days from the date of the publication of such notice.
   (3)   As soon as practicable after the completion of the assessment book and
prior to the publication of the notice mentioned in the preceding paragraph
(2), the council shall mail to the owner or owners of each lot or parcel of
land against which a capital sewer service charge is to be levied at his or
their address, if any, appearing on the records of the county auditor, a notice
stating the nature of the improvement, the principal amount of bonds to be
issued in order to finance the improvements, the appropriated amount to be
assessed against the particular property in order to repay the bonds, and the
frontage in feet or charge per parcel upon which the capital sewer service
charge is based, together with the terms and conditions upon which the capital
sewer service charge may be paid. This notice shall also contain a brief
description of the district together with a statement that the amount assessed
shall constitute a lien against the property superior to all other liens except
property taxes. The notice shall also state the time and place fixed for the
meeting of the council mentioned in the preceding paragraph (2) for a hearing
of objections in respect of the capital sewer service charge. Any property
owner who fails to appear at the meeting and shall have failed not later than
three (3) days prior to the date set for such meeting, to file with the council
a written objection to the capital sewer system charges against his property
shall be deemed to have waived all rights to object to such capital sewer
service charges and the notice prescribed herein shall so state.
   (4)   At the time and place specified for the meeting above-mentioned, or at
some other time to which it may adjourn, the council shall hear the objections
of all persons who have filed written notice of objection within the time
prescribed above who may appear and make proof in relation thereto either in
person or by their attorney. The council may thereupon make such corrections in
the assessment book as it may deem proper, confirm the same or set it aside and
provide for a new assessment.
      Immediately upon the confirmation of a capital sewer service charge, the
council shall mail a written notice (the confirmation notice) to all persons
who have filed written objections as hereinabove provided of the amount of the
capital sewer service charge confirmed against his property. Such notice shall
be given to the affected property owners not less than ten (10) days prior to
the effective date of the capital sewer service charge.
      Subsequent to the council’s confirming an assessment book, either as
originally prepared or as thereafter corrected, a copy thereof certified by the
clerk of the council shall forthwith be filed in the office of the register of
mesne conveyances.
   (5)   After the assessment book has been confirmed, a certified copy thereof
shall be delivered to the county treasurer who shall prepare and keep a
separate book or books in connection therewith and who shall proceed to collect
the same in the manner of county taxes and shall remit such collections on or
before April fifteenth of each year upon the direction of the council. Each
year the county auditor shall mail out notices of such capital sewer service
charges at the same time county tax notices are mailed.
   (6)   If any such person is dissatisfied with the amount of the capital
sewer service charge so confirmed, such person shall within ten (10) days after
the mailing of the confirmation notice to him, give written notice to the
council of his intent to appeal the capital sewer service charge to the court
of common pleas for the county, and shall within five (5) days after giving
such notice to the council serve upon the council a statement of facts upon
which he bases his appeal. Any property owner who fails to give the notice of
his objection prescribed by this paragraph, shall be deemed to have waived all
rights to object to the capital sewer service charge and the corifirmation
notice shall so state and shall also advise of the appeal procedure provided by
this paragraph. No such appeal shall delay the construction of the improvements
or affect the validity of the capital sewer service charges confirmed and not
appealed.
   (7)   Subsequent to the confirmation of an assessment book, the council may
correct, cancel or remit any such capital sewer service charge and may remit,
cancel or adjust the interest or penalties of any capital sewer service charge
and is empowered, when in its judgment there is any irregularity, omission,
error or lack of jurisdiction in any of the proceedings relating thereto, to
set aside the capital sewer service charge made by it and thereupon to make a
reassessment
   (c)   In the event the council provides that such capital sewer system
charges may be paid in equal annual installments, then any property owner shall
have the right at any time in his option to prepay in full the capital sewer
service charge against his property by the payment of the balance due plus
interest calculated to the date of prepayment.
(Ord. No. 1590-87, § 5.03, 2-17-87; Ord. No. 012-15HR, § V, 5-5-15)
CHAPTER 25: VEHICLES FOR HIRE*
   *Cross reference(s)--Licenses and miscellaneous business regulations,
Ch. 16; motor vehicles and traffic,
Ch. 17; roads, highways and bridges,
Ch. 21.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 25-1--25-10. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. TOWING AND WRECKER SERVICES
   State law reference(s)--Wreckers exempted from motor vehicle carriers law,
S.C. Code 1976, § 58-23-50.
Sec. 25-11. Scope.
   This article shall apply to all wrecker and towing services doing business
in the unincorporated areas of the county.
(Ord. No. 764-81, § I, 1-7-81)
Sec. 25-12. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article:
   Doing business shall mean providing, operating, or causing to be provided or
operated wrecker and towing services in the unincorporated areas of the county,
regardless of whether the principal place of business is in the unincorporated
area of the county.
   Wrecker and towing services shall mean any person providing to the public
services for the moving or transporting of vehicles.
(Ord. No. 764-81, § I, 1-7-81)
Sec. 25-13. Prohibited from going to scene of an accident unless requested.
   No wrecker, wrecker operator, or agent or employee of a wrecker service
shall proceed to the scene of an accident in the unincorporated area of the
county unless requested to do so by the owner or driver of a vehicle involved
in the accident, or the law enforcement officer in charge at the scene of the
accident.
(Ord. No. 764-81, § II, 1-7-81)
Sec. 25-14. Dispatching procedure.
   In all instances where a vehicle is to be transported or moved:
   (a)   Should the owner or driver of the vehicle involved within the
unincorporated areas of the county request the services of a particular wrecker
service or operator, whether or not such service is on the approved list
hereafter mentioned, the law enforcement officer who is in charge at the scene
of the accident shall so inform his dispatcher, who will thereupon call the
requested wrecker service or operator and ask such service or operator to
proceed to the scene of the accident.
   (b)   If the owner or driver of the vehicle involved expresses no
preference, is unable to express a preference, or has no information as to
available wrecker services, the following procedures shall apply:
      (1)   For the purposes of this article, the county will be divided into
two (2) zones which are hereafter outlined and attached, and incorporated into
this article.
      (2)   All wrecker services doing business within the unincorporated areas
of the county meeting the requirements of this article will be dispatched from
the sheriff's dispatcher's office which will have a list of participating
wrecker services.
      (3)   The wrecker services will be set up on a rotation basis for the
zones. Each zone will have a rotation list of wrecker services and will be
dispatched from the sheriff's office as they are listed. When a wrecker service
is needed, the dispatcher will rotate his list in order so all wrecker services
can participate in their turn. All heavy-duty wreckers will rotate in the same
order as regular wrecker services, and will be zoned as above mentioned. If no
particular wrecker operator or service is requested by the owner or driver, the
dispatcher will refer to the list of wrecker operators for the zone where the
vehicle is located and call the wrecker operator or service which appears next
on his list after the name of the last operator which was called (which in turn
rotates the wrecker services). The law enforcement officers will make no
recommendation to the owner or driver as to their preference of a wrecker
service.
(Ord. No. 764-81, § III, 1-7-81)
Sec. 25-15. Application for placement on rotation list; approval of list;
withdrawal of approval.
   (a)   All wrecker services operating within the unincorporated areas of the
county who wish to participate shall make application to the county
administrator's office. The county administrator will be in full charge of the
wrecker service. Wrecker services meeting the requirements of this article will
be placed on a list of participating wrecker services which shall be approved
by the county administrator and distributed to the sheriff's department
dispatcher and administered as set forth in section
25-14 of this article.
   (b)   Approval may be withdrawn from an approved wrecker service if at any
time it fails to meet the requirements of this article, but no such action
shall be taken unless the wrecker service fails to correct a deficiency after
thirty (30) days' written notice from the county administrator's office.
(Ord. No. 764-81, § IV, 1-7-81)
Sec. 25-16. Prerequisites to placement on rotation list.
   The following requirements shall be met for each wrecker and towing service
before such service shall be placed on the rotation list referred to in section
25-14 of this article:
   (a)   Standards. Minimum standards for equipment by an applicant shall be
subject to inspection and determined by the county administrator's office, and
shall comply with the following:
      (1)   Every applicant shall have at least one wrecker of not less than
one (1) ton in size with dual wheels and coaster brakes.
      (2)   Every wrecker shall be equipped with at least one (1) amber or red
mounted oscillation rotating or flashing red light.
      (3)   Each wrecker shall be equipped with a power operated winch, winch
line, and boom with a lifting capacity of not less than eight thousand (8,000)
pounds, single line capacity.
      (4)   Each wrecker shall carry as standard equipment: A tow sling, tow
bar, towing dollies, safety chains, a fire extinguisher, wrecker bar, broom,
shovel, and flares.
      (5)   Each wrecker shall be equipped with a two (2) way radio in good
working condition.
      (6)   Every heavy-duty wrecker of not less than two and one-half (2 1/2)
tons in size shall meet the requirements of subparagraph (a)(1) of this
section, and in addition thereto, shall be equipped with a power-operated
winch, winch line and boom, with a rated lifting capacity of not less than
thirty-two thousand (32,000) pounds, single or double line capacity, and a tow
sling.
      (7)   Each applicant shall maintain twenty-four-hour wrecker service.
   (b)   Business operations. Names and addresses of all persons having a
financial interest in such firm will be provided to the county administrator.
   (c)   Insurance. Each applicant shall procure and maintain in full force and
effect a policy of public liability and property damage insurance issued by a
casualty insurance company authorized to do business in the state. The policy
shall be in the form approved by the insurance commissioner of the state and
shall contain provisions insuring the public from loss or damage that may arise
to any person or property by reason of the operation of a wrecker or other
related equipment of the applicant. The policy of the applicant shall also be a
single limit policy providing minimum coverage in the amount of one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00), and shall name the county, the county sheriff,
and the county coroner as coinsureds. Should the policy be terminated or
substantially modified during a period of operation, the wrecker and towing
service will notify the county administrator of such termination or
modification. The county does not intend hereby to give its consent to be sued
and expressly reserves the right to raise all defenses, including sovereign
immunity, on its behalf and on behalf of the sheriff and coroner.
   (d)   Storage requirements. Each applicant shall have a storage lot in the
close proximity to the place of business with adequate storage space either
under cover or fenced with six-foot chain link fence and three (3) strands of
barbed wire at the top of the fence. Stored vehicles and contents must be kept
safe from pilfering.
   (e)   Hours. There shall be an attendant on call, capable of responding to
law enforcement requests for towing, as well as being present or available for
the release of vehicles to the public twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7)
days a week.
   (f)   Manner of service. Each applicant shall at all times maintain quick
and efficient service.
   (g)   Criminal history. Each applicant shall provide a criminal history
report conducted by the State Law Enforcement Division on all service drivers
and persons having a financial interest in the towing company. Any service
driver or person having a financial interest in the towing company will not be
considered for service if such person(s) has/have a criminal conviction for an
offense that carries a term of imprisonment of one (1) year or more, or any
conviction for a drug-related offense.
(Ord. No. 764-81, § V(A)--(F), 1-7-81; Ord. No. 025-97HR, § I, 4-15-97)
Sec. 25-17. Appeal from denial or withdrawal of approval.
   An applicant who has been denied approval to be placed on the rotation list
in the unincorporated areas of the county, or has had the approval withdrawn
can, upon written request, appeal to the county council within ten (10) days
after notification of disapproval or withdrawal of approval for placement on
such list.
(Ord. No. 764-81, § V(G), 1-7-81)
Sec. 25-18. Debris removal.
   All wrecker services who are called to the scene of an accident shall remove
broken glass, damaged parts, oil and other debris which remains at the location
from which the vehicle is towed.
(Ord. No. 764-81, § VI, 1-7-81)
Sec. 25-19. Records.
   Wrecker services shall keep a record of each towed vehicle which shall
include the following information: License number of vehicle, year and make of
car, date and time it was towed, location from which it was towed, and the name
of the officer ordering the towing.
(Ord. No. 764-81, § VII, 1-7-81)
Sec. 25-20. Wrecker and storage charges.
   (a)   A basic tow charge of $160 shall be made for the use of a wrecker
(other than a large wrecker) called to tow a vehicle pursuant to the provisions
of this article. An additional charge of $125 per hour shall be made if there
are special circumstances (e.g. vehicle in water, vehicle in woods) or if
special equipment (e.g. a dolly assembly) is required in order to appropriately
move the vehicle. If the tow is being used for a collision, the charge will be
$160 and will not be combined with the basic tow fee. If a large wrecker is
needed in order to move an 18-wheel vehicle, a tow charge of $250 shall be
made, plus an additional charge of $200 per hour if there are special
circumstances (e.g. overturned cab/trailer) or if special equipment is
required. In instances where a vehicle is to be towed for parking violations or
abandonment and the owner of the vehicle appears and makes claim to the vehicle
before the vehicle is towed away, but after the wrecker is called, the vehicle
shall be released to the owner upon immediate payment of $50 to the wrecker
operator if a basic tow truck was called or upon payment of $85 to the wrecker
if a large tow truck was called.
   (b)   Storage charges on stored or impounded vehicles shall be $25 per day.
   (c)   No stored or impounded vehicle shall be released until proper evidence
of ownership is exhibited and all towing and storage charges have been
collected by the wrecker service as provided by law.
   (d)   All towing and storage charges shall be itemized on an invoice or
receipt when charges are paid. No charges other than towing and storage will be
made on any vehicle without prior written approval from the owner or his or her
agent.
(Ord. No. 764-81, § VIII, 1-7-81; Ord. No. 070-00HR, § I, 11-14-00; Ord. 062-
09HR, § I, 11-17-09; Ord. No. 002-13HR, § I, 1-8-13)
Sec. 25-21. Emergencies.
   In cases of emergency, all wrecker and towing services who have been placed
on the rotation list pursuant to this article shall be available to provide
services free of charge to the county.
(Ord. No. 764-81, § IX, 1-7-81)
Sec. 25-22. Coroner's procedures, etc.
   The county coroner will follow the same procedures as set forth in section
25-14 of this article. Nothing in this article will be construed so as to
interfere with any functions or duties the coroner's office or sheriff's
department may have by state law. In order to carry out a statutory duty or
function, the coroner, sheriff or their respective representatives may direct
that a vehicle be towed to and stored at the facilities provided by the county
for storage of vehicles.
(Ord. No. 764-81, § XI, 1-7-81)
   Cross reference(s)--County coroner, §
2-277 et seq.
ARTICLE III. TAXICABS AND VANS
Sec. 25-23. Application of article.
   The following provisions shall apply to all taxicabs and vans, (as defined
herein) used for transporting passengers for a fee in the unincorporated area
of the county.
(Ord. No. 1851-89, § I, 4-4-89)
Sec. 25-24. Definitions.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
   Cruising means the driving over, on and along the streets, or public places
of the county, in search of, or soliciting prospective passengers for hire.
   Driver means any person in actual charge of the operation of a taxicab, van
or limousine, as hereinafter defined, whether as owner or agent, servant or
employee of the "owner" as herein defined.
   Limousine means a motor-driven vehicle designed to transport passengers and
charging a fee on an hourly or daily rate.
   Owner means any person who has control, direction, maintenance and benefit
of the collection of revenue derived from the operation of taxicabs or vans on
or over the streets or public ways of the unincorporated area of the county,
whether as owner, licensee, bailee or otherwise, except as "driver" as herein
defined.
   Taxicab means a motor-driven vehicle designed to transport not more than
seven passengers used for the transportation of passengers and charging a fee
on a per trip basis.
   Taximeter means an instrument or device attached to a taxicab or van
mechanically measuring the distance, time or zone unit upon which the fare to
be charged the passenger shall be based, and recording by figures on the dial
of the device the fare as it accrues.
   Vans means a motor-driven vehicle designed to transport more than seven
passengers and used to transport passengers charging a fee on a per trip basis;
provided, however, any vehicle designated a bus by the county council shall not
be considered a van. Waiting time means all time when a taxicab or van is not
in motion, occupied by a passenger, and the time consumed while standing at the
direction of a passenger, or person who has engaged such taxicab or van.
(Ord. No. 1851-89, § I, 4-4-89)
   Cross reference(s)--Rules of construction and definitions generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 25-25. Daily trip sheets.
   The driver of each and every taxicab or van shall keep a complete and
accurate record of each trip upon a daily trip sheet, the form of which shall
be approved by the sheriff, showing the time and place of origin and
destination of the trip, the number of passengers carried, the mileage, and the
amount of fare collected. This record shall be filed daily, and such record
shall be kept on file, available for inspection by the sheriff or his
designated assistants, for a period of not less than six months.
(Ord. No. 1851-89, § I, 4-4-89)
Sec. 25-26. Number of passengers to be transported.
   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any taxicab or van to transport
therein more passengers than can be comfortably seated within such taxicab or
van.
(Ord. No. 1851-89, § I, 4-4-89)
Sec. 25-27. Carrying persons without consent of passenger.
   No driver of a taxicab or van shall carry any other person than the
passenger by whom he has been engaged without the consent of such passenger.
(Ord. No. 1851-89, § I, 4-4-89)
Sec. 25-28. Driver shall convey orderly persons.
   No driver of a taxicab or van shall refuse or neglect to transport any
orderly person upon request anywhere in the county, unless previously engaged
or unable to do so.
(Ord. No. 1851-89, § I, 4-4-89)
Sec. 25-29. When driver to refuse conveyance.
   No driver of a taxicab or van shall convey a person for the purpose of
committing a crime or for the purpose of committing an immoral act.
(Ord. No. 1851-89, § I, 4-4-89)
Sec. 25-30. Driver's permit.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a driver of a taxicab or
van as herein defined, or to be in charge of any taxicab without having a
permit therefor issued by the sheriff's department or police department.
   (b)   Before issuing any permit as required by this article, the sheriff or
his designated assistant shall investigate the facts set out in such
application and shall not grant such permit to any person who has been
convicted of any major crime or the violation of laws and ordinances involving
moral turpitude, or who has a record of habitually violating traffic laws and
ordinances.
   (c)   Every driver's permit as required by this article on or after April 4,
1989, shall, thereafter, expire on the date of expiration of the permittee's
South Carolina driver's license. Provided, however, that no permit issued under
this provision shall expire within 90 days after being issued. Any permit which
would expire within 90 days after issue shall expire on the date of expiration
of the permittee's driver's license next following such 90-day period.
   (d)   On issuance of any driver's permit required by this article by the
sheriff or his designated assistant, he shall issue a card which shall bear on
its face a photograph of the permittee, the number of his permit, the
expiration date thereof, and such other information as the sheriff may direct.
   (e)   The taxicab or van driver's permit card shall at all times be kept on
display in the taxicab or van by such driver, easily visible for the passenger,
while such permittee is in control of such taxicab or van.
   (f)   No person shall be issued a taxicab or van driver's permit, under the
provisions of this article until he/she has been examined and it has been
certified, by a physician licensed to practice in the state, that the applicant
is not disabled by reason of defects of sight, hearing, body or limbs from
safely operating a motor vehicle in and upon the streets of the city. The
county reserves the right to have any applicant examined by a physician
appointed by the county before issuing a permit to such applicant to drive a
taxicab or van within the unincorporated area of the county.
   (g)   (1)Each permit required by the provisions of this article shall be
applied for in writing, on such application form as the sheriff may prescribe,
which shall show that the applicant has obtained a driver's license from the
state department of highways and public transportation after satisfactorily
completing a driver's examination, and which shall show the experience of the
applicant in driving motor vehicles, whether such applicant has been convicted
of a violation of a motor vehicle, traffic, or criminal law, giving particulars
of each offense charged, and such other information as the sheriff may
prescribe.
      (2)   Such application shall be accompanied by at least two recent
photographs of
the applicant, the size of which shall be determined by the sheriff, and the
certification of at least two reputable citizens of the county personally
acquainted with the applicant showing him/her to be a person of good moral
character.
      (3)   An application fee of $20.00 to cover the cost of investigation and
other expenses related to filing and processing shall be paid by the person
applying for a driver's permit before such permit shall be issued. Provided
that, if any permit shall expire within three years after it is issued, the
application fee shall be prorated using the following schedule:
   Period before expiration       Fee
   91 days to a year      $5.00
   1 year and 1 day to 2 years      10.00
   2 years and 1 day to 3 years      15.00
   (h)   Any person who presently is permitted by the City of Columbia shall
not be required to be examined or investigated by the sheriff but shall be
automatically entitled to a county permit upon the payment of $5.00 and proof
of the city permit.
   (i)   Any driver's permit granted under the terms of this article may be
revoked by the sheriff for violation of provisions of this article after notice
to the permittee in writing citing him or her to appear before the sheriff and
show cause why his or her permit should not be revoked. That his or her
driver's license has been revoked by the state; that he or she has willfully or
persistently violated the provisions of the ordinances of the county; or that
he or she is unfit physically or morally to operate a taxicab or van in the
county, shall be deemed sufficient reason for revocation of permit. Any permit
granted by the county as a result of the driver being permitted by the City of
Columbia shall be revoked by the county if the city permit is revoked by the
Columbia chief of police.
   (j) After the revocation of such driver's permit, it shall be unlawful for
any person to operate any taxicab or van on the streets or public ways of the
city, or to operate such taxicab after the expiration of any driver's license
or permit issued by the sheriff or while such permit is not in full force and
effect in accordance with the provisions of this article.
   (k)   Any person dissatisfied with the decision by the sheriff shall have
the right of appeal to the county administrator and thence to the county
council.
(Ord. No. 1851-89, § 1, 4-4-89)
Sec. 25-31. Rates for taxi services; establishment and charge.
   (a)   The maximum rates to be charged for taxi service are established as
follows:
   $1.55 first 1/10 mile
   $0.50 each additional 1/10 mile
   $0.50 each additional passenger over two (2)
   $0.25 each additional suitcase, briefcase or grocery parcel over one (1)
   Footlocker--$1.00 each
   Duffle bag--$0.50
   Waiting time--$10.00 per hour
   Traffic delay charge--The clock on the meter will take over after the cab's
speed goes below five (5) m.p.h. during which time the meter will register at
the rate of $10.00 per hour.
   (b)   Each taxicab or van shall keep a schedule of the rates to be charged,
not to exceed the rates prescribed by the county council, in the taxicab or
van, clearly visible to the passenger. The driver shall show the same to any
passenger upon request.
   (c)   No person owning, controlling or operating any taxicab or van shall
let the same for hire and receive a fee or charge in excess of rates
established by the county council.
(Ord. No. 1851-89, § I, 4-4-89)
Sec. 25-32. Failure to pay for taxi service.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage or use a taxicab or van in the
county not intending to pay for the same at the time such vehicle is engaged
and with the intent to defraud the owner or driver of such vehicle or the value
of the use thereof.
(Ord. No. 1851-89, § I, 4-4-89)
Sec. 25-33. Taximeters.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or driver operating any taxicab or
van under the provisions of this chapter to operate or cause to be operated, on
the streets or public ways of the unincorporated area of the county, any such
taxicab or van unless the same is equipped with a taximeter approved by the
sheriff.
   (b)   It shall be the duty of every owner using any taximeter at all times
to keep the same accurate.
   (c)   Taximeters shall be subject to inspection from time to time by the
sheriff or by his designated assistant.
   (d)   All taximeters shall be placed so that the reading dial showing the
amount to be charged shall be well lighted and readily visible to passengers
riding in such taxicabs or vans.
(Ord. No. 1851-89, § I, 4-4-89)
Sec. 25-34. Penalty provision.
   Persons convicted of violating any provisions of this article shall be
subject to the penalty provisions of section
1-8 of the county Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 1851-89, § I, 4-4-89)
CHAPTER 26: LAND DEVELOPMENT*
   *Editor's note–This chapter consolidates and establishes new regulations for
what were formerly four chapters of the Richland County Code. These include
Stormwater Management, Erosion and Sediment Control; Land Development
Regulations; Zoning; and Landscape Requirements.
   Cross reference(s)--Department of public works and utilities, §
2-192 et seq.; department of planning management, §
2-216 et seq.; buildings and building regulations,
Ch. 6; garbage, trash and refuse,
Ch. 12; Weeds and rank vegetation on lots, §
14-61 et seq.; interim zoning and land development related to 2020 Vision,
Ch. 20, Art. IV; planning,
Ch. 20; roads, highways and bridges,
Ch. 21.
   State law reference(s)– Authority to adopt subdivision regulations, S.C.
Code 1976, § 6-7-1010 et seq.; Stormwater Management and Sediment Reduction, §
48-14-10 et seq.; Standards for Stormwater Management and Sediment Reduction,
R-72-300 et seq.
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 26-1. Title.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Land Development Code of
Richland County, South Carolina.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04)
Sec. 26-2. Purpose and scope.
   (a)   Purpose. The regulations contained in this chapter have been adopted
in accordance with the comprehensive plan for Richland County, South Carolina,
and for the general purposes of guiding development in accordance with existing
and future needs and promoting the public health, safety, morals, convenience,
order, appearance, prosperity, and general welfare. Furthermore, this chapter
has been adopted with reasonable consideration of the following purposes:
      (1)   To provide for adequate light, air, and open space;
      (2)   To prevent the overcrowding of land, to avoid undue concentration
of population and to lessen congestion in the roads;
      (3)   To facilitate the creation of a convenient, attractive, and
harmonious community;
      (4)   To protect and preserve scenic, historic, cultural, or ecologically
sensitive areas;
      (5)   To regulate the density and distribution of populations and the
uses of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, residence,
recreation, agriculture, forestry, conservation, airports and approaches
thereto, water supply, sanitation, protection against floods, public activities
and other purposes;
      (6)   To facilitate the adequate provision or availability of
transportation, police and fire protection, water, sewage, schools, parks and
other recreational facilities, affordable housing, disaster evacuation, and
other public services and requirements as are set forth in this chapter;
      (7)   To secure safety from fire, flood, and other dangers;
      (8)   To encourage the development of an economically sound and stable
county;
      (9)   To assure the timely provision of required roads, utilities, and
other facilities and service to new land developments;
      (10)   To assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic
access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in and through new land
developments;
      (11)   To assure the provision of needed public open spaces and building
sites in new land developments through the dedication or reservation of land
for recreational, educational, and/or transportation purposes;
      (12)   To assure, in general, the wise and timely development of new
areas, and redevelopment of previously developed areas in harmony with the
comprehensive plans of Richland County and its municipalities;
      (13)   To assure compatibility between neighboring properties and
adjacent zoning districts; and
      (14)   To further the public welfare in any other regard specified by the
Richland County Council.
   (b)   Scope. The regulations set forth herein shall apply to all land and
improvements thereon in the unincorporated portion of Richland County, South
Carolina.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04)
Sec. 26-3. Statutory authority.
   This chapter has been adopted pursuant to the authority conferred by the
South Carolina Code of Laws, as amended. Specifically, authorization comes in
Title 6, Chapter 29, of the South Carolina Code of Laws (South Carolina Local
Government Comprehensive Planning Enabling Act of 1994). The Land Development
Code of Richland County, South Carolina also uses powers granted in other
sections of the South Carolina Code of Laws relating to particular types of
development or particular development issues.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04)
Sec. 26-4. Comprehensive plan.
   Pursuant to Title 6, Chapter 29, of the South Carolina Code of Laws, this
chapter is intended to implement the goals, objectives and purposes of the
comprehensive plan for Richland County. Any amendments to or actions pursuant
to this chapter shall be consistent with the comprehensive plan. The
comprehensive plan may be amended and the Land Development Code for Richland
County shall reflect and incorporate those amendments.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04)
Secs. 26-5 - 26-20. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; DEFINITIONS
Sec. 26-21. Rules of construction.
   (a)   Interpretation of zoning map. The following rules of interpretation
shall be applicable to the zoning map for Richland County.
      (1)   District designation. A district name on the zoning map indicates
that the regulations pertaining to the district designated by that name, or
abbreviation of the same, extend throughout the whole area bounded by the
district boundary lines within which such name or abbreviation is shown, except
as otherwise provided in this chapter.
      (2)   District boundary determination. Where uncertainty exists as to the
boundaries of any zoning district, the zoning administrator shall interpret the
location of the zoning district boundaries. An appeal from an interpretation or
finding of the zoning administrator may be taken to the board of zoning appeals
as specified in Section
26-58 of this chapter.
         a.   District boundaries indicated as approximately following
centerlines of roads, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such
centerlines.
         b.   District boundaries indicated as approximately following platted
lot lines shall be construed as following such lines.
         c.   District boundaries indicated as approximately following city or
county limit lines shall be construed as following such city or county limits.
         d.   District boundaries indicated as approximately following railroad
lines shall be construed to be the midway between the main tracks.
         e.   District boundaries indicated as approximately following
centerlines of streambeds or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow
such centerlines.
         f.   District boundaries indicated as approximately parallel to or
extensions of features indicated in subsections a. through e. above shall be so
construed and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the official copy of
the zoning map. Distances not specifically indicated on the official copy of
the zoning map shall be determined by the scale of such map.
         g.   Where the zoning map shows a district boundary dividing a lot,
each part of the lot shall conform with the standards established by this
chapter for the zoning use or overlay district in which that part is located.
   (b)   General rules of construction.
      (1)   Words to have customary meanings. The words and phrases in this
chapter shall have their customary meanings or shall be as defined in a
standard dictionary, except for the specific words and phrases as defined in
this chapter.
      (2)   Tense. Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
      (3)   Number. The singular number includes the plural number, and the
plural number includes the singular number.
      (4)   Person. The word "person" includes a firm, association,
partnership, trust, company, corporation, or any other entity usually defined
in legal usage as a person.
      (5)   Shall and may. The words "shall" "must" and "will" are mandatory in
nature. The word "may" is permissive in nature.
      (6)   Used or occupied. The words "used" and "occupied" include the words
"intended, designed, or arranged to be used or occupied."
      (7)   Lot. The word "lot" includes the words "plot" and/or "parcel."
      (8)   Structure. The word "structure" includes the word "building."
      (9)   Contiguous. The word “contiguous”, as applied to lots or districts,
shall be interpreted as meaning:
         a.   Touching along a common boundary for at least fifteen (15) feet.
         b.   The contiguity of land areas shall not be effected by existence
between them of a road or alley; a public or private right-of-way; a public or
private transportation or utility right-of-way; a river, creek, stream, or
other natural or artificial waterway; provided, however, the contiguity of land
areas shall be assumed to be disrupted by the existence of a thoroughfare road
or a principal arterial road, as they are defined under Section
26-22.
      (10)   On the premises of. The phrase "on the premises of," as applied to
accessory uses or structures, shall be interpreted to mean "on the same lot."
      (11)   Administrative personnel. The listing of any specific
administrative official (i.e., building inspector, zoning administrator) in
this chapter shall be interpreted to include an authorized designee of said
official.
      (12)   Fractional requirements. When any requirement of this chapter
results in a fraction of a unit, a fraction of one-half or more will be
considered a whole unit and a fraction of less than one half will be
disregarded.
   (c)   Types of districts or zones. Types of districts or zones, when used as
a descriptive term for purposes of identifying certain circumstances in which
particular regulations are applied (as, for example…"when such parking lot is
contiguous to a residential district…") are defined as follows:
      (1)   Residential districts include:
         a.   RR Rural Residential District
         b.   RS-E Residential, Single-Family, Estate District
         c.   RS-LD Residential, Single-Family, Low Density District
         d.   RS-MD Residential, Single-Family, Medium Density District
         e.   RS-HD Residential, Single-Family, High Density District
         f.   MH Manufactured Home Residential District
         g.   RM-MD Residential, Multi-Family, Medium Density District
         h.   RM-HD Residential, Multi-Family, High Density District
      (2)   Commercial districts include:
         a.   OI Office and Institutional District
         b.   NC Neighborhood Commercial District
         c.   RC Rural Commercial District
         d.   GC General Commercial District
      (3)   Industrial districts include:
         a.   M-1 Light Industrial District
         b.   LI Light Industrial District
         c.   HI Heavy Industrial District
      (4)   Other districts. The RU Rural District, the PDD Planned Development
District, the TC Town and Country District, and any other district not
enumerated in this subsection shall be interpreted by the zoning administrator
as being residential, commercial, or industrial, in any particular instance.
The interpretation of the zoning administrator shall be in keeping with the
protective intent and purposes of Section
26-2 of this chapter whenever an interpretation is necessary in a specific
instance.
   (d)   Application of regulations; conflict or inconsistency with other laws,
covenants or deed restrictions.
      (1)   Application of regulations.
         a.   Within each district, the regulations set forth by this chapter
shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of building, structure or land.
         b.   Agencies, departments, and subdivisions of South Carolina that
use real property, as owner or tenant, are subject to these regulations.
However, no provision of this chapter shall require a state agency, department
or subdivision to move from facilities occupied on September 7, 1977,
regardless of whether or not the location is in violation of this chapter.
         c.   A municipality or agency, department, or subdivision of it that
uses any real property, as owner or tenant, is subject to these regulations.
      (2)   Regulations regarded as minimum. In the interpretation and
application of the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the
purposes set forth in Section
26-2 of this chapter.
      (3)   Conflict or inconsistency with other laws, covenants, or deed
restrictions.
         a.   Relation of this chapter to other regulations. This chapter is
not intended to abrogate any other law, ordinance, or regulation. However,
whenever the requirements of this chapter are at variance with the requirements
of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, or ordinances, the most
restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall govern.
         b.   Conflicting provisions of this chapter.  In the event of any
conflict between the limitations, requirements, or standards contained in
different provisions of this chapter in applying them to an individual use or
structure, the more restrictive provision shall apply. However, the regulations
for overlay districts set forth in Article V., unless otherwise specified,
shall control in the event of any conflict between those regulations and
regulations which are set forth in Article V. of this chapter for the
underlying district. In the event of a conflict or inconsistency between the
text of this chapter and any caption, figure, illustration, or map contained
herein, the text shall control.
         c.   Conflicts with covenants, deed restrictions, etc. This chapter is
not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant, or other private agreement.
However, where the regulations of this chapter are more restrictive or impose
higher standards or requirements than such easement, covenant, or other private
agreement, then the requirements of this chapter shall govern. Unless deed
restrictions, covenants, or other contracts directly involve Richland County
government as a party in interest, the county shall have no administrative
responsibility for enforcing such deed restrictions or covenants.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 064-13HR, § I, 11-19-13)
Sec. 26-22. Definitions.
   Access and Roadside Management Standards (ARMS). A document promulgated by
SCDOT to establish uniformity for encroachment into the South Carolina State
Highway System facilities.
   Access management. A process of providing and managing pedestrian and
vehicular access from adjacent properties onto roadways, thus preserving safe
and efficient traffic flow on the roadway. It includes, but is not limited to,
limiting points of access, installation of medians and/or installation of
traffic signals. It specifically recognizes that all properties are entitled to
access, but not necessarily direct access, to adjacent public roads.
   Access point. An intersection, driveway, or any entry point on the right
hand side of a road. An entry point on the opposite side of a road or a median
opening may be considered an access point, if it is expected to influence
traffic flow in the direction of interest.
   Accessory use/structure (building). A structure or use that is clearly
incidental to and customarily found in connection with a principal building or
use, is subordinate to and serves that principal building or use, and is
subordinate in area, extent and purpose to the principal building or principal
use served. An accessory structure must be on the lot on which the principal
use is located.
   Accidental damage. Damage to any portion of the Richland County Stormwater
Systems, which occurs by chance and without planning or consideration prior to
occurrence.
   Accidental discharge. A discharge prohibited by this section into the
Richland County Stormwater System or receiving waters, which occurs by chance
and without planning or consideration prior to occurrence. Accidental
discharges do not include any discharges associated with other regulatory
program elements, such as sanitary sewer overflows (SSOs) or other activities
covered under National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permits
or sanitary sewer pre-treatment requirements.
   Activity area. For determining parking standards, the activity area is the
area of a recreational facility where the recreation or amusement operation is
actually conducted. This shall include all areas open to the public and used by
employees of the facility. This term shall not include open areas that are not
available to the public or storage areas.
   Activity center. A relatively compact area that provides a variety of land
uses and interconnectivity, allowing users to accomplish multiple tasks in one
location often providing the ability to walk or use multi-modal transportation
to access various site uses.
   Addition (to an existing building). An extension or increase in the floor
area or height of a building or structure. Unless otherwise specified in this
chapter, additions to existing buildings shall comply with the standards for
new construction whether or not the addition is a substantial improvement.
   AE and A1-30 Zones. Risk zones within an area of special flood hazard that
are subject to the 100-year flood. On the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs)
such areas are indicated and mandatory flood insurance applies.
   Agricultural land. Land categorized by the Richland County Assessor as
agricultural real property.
   Agricultural use. The keeping, grazing, or feeding of livestock; croplands;
aquaculture; horticulture; silviculture; and/or apiaries. Provided, however,
this definition does not include processing or distribution plants for
agricultural products and supplies.
   Airport. Jim Hamilton-L.B. Owens Airport and McEntire Air National Guard
Base.
   Airport elevation. The highest point of an airport’s usable landing area
measured in feet above mean sea level.
      (a)   For Jim Hamilton-L.B. Owens Airport the airport elevation is 194.0
feet.
      (b)    For McEntire Air National Guard Base the airport elevation is
251.0 feet.
   Alley. A private road primarily designed to serve as a secondary access to
the side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on another
road, either public or private, meeting minimum county requirements.
   AM Peak Hour (AMPH). The estimated average hourly traffic volume on a given
roadway segment between 7:00 AM and 9:00 AM.
   Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). A federal law enacted in 1990 to
protect the civil rights of individuals with physical or mental disabilities
from intentional or unintentional discrimination in housing, employment,
education, access to public services and telecommunications and to ensure that
persons with disabilities have equal access to same.
   Animal unit. A unit of measurement to compare various animal types based
upon equivalent waste generation. One animal unit equals the following: 1.0 cow
(except dairy cows); 0.5 horse; 0.7 dairy cow; 2.5 swine weighing over fifty-
five (55) pounds; fifteen (15) swine under fifty-five (55) pounds; ten (10)
sheep; thirty (30) laying hens; fifty-five (55) turkeys; one hundred (100)
chickens; or an equivalent animal unit.
   Annual Average Daily Trips (AADTs). The average twenty-four (24) hour
traffic volume on a given roadway segment over a three hundred sixty- five
(365) day period.
   Antenna. Any device for radiating or receiving electromagnetic radiation.
This definition shall specifically include, but is not limited to all radio,
television, telephone, telecommunications, microwave and satellite dish
antennas.
   AP approach zone (Jim Hamilton-L.B. Owens Airport). The inner edge of the
approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and begins two
hundred (200) feet from the runway end and is five hundred (500) feet wide. The
approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of two thousand (2,000) feet
at a horizontal distance of five thousand (5,000) feet from the primary
surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway.
   AP approach zone (McEntire Air National Guard Base). The approach zone
begins two hundred (200) feet beyond each end of the primary surface at the
centerline elevation of the runway end and extends for fifty thousand (50,000)
feet. The slope of the approach clearance zone is fifty (50) to one (1) along
the runway centerline extended until it reaches an elevation of five hundred
(500) feet above the established airport elevation (251 mean sea level). It
then continues horizontally at this elevation to a point fifty thousand
(50,000) feet from the point of beginning. The width of this surface at the
runway end is the same as the primary surface, it flares uniformly, and the
width at fifty thousand (50,000) feet is sixteen thousand (16,000) feet.
   AP conical zone (Jin Hamilton-L.B. Owens Airport). A surface extending
outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of
twenty (20) to one (1) for a horizontal distance of four thousand (4,000) feet.
   AP conical zone (McEntire Air National Guard Base). The conical surface/zone
for precision instrument runways extends from the periphery of the inner
horizontal surface outward and upward at a slope of twenty (20) to one (1) for
a horizontal distance of seven thousand (7,000) feet to a height of five
hundred (500) feet above established airfield elevation.
   AP horizontal zone (Jim Hamilton-L.B. Owens Airport). The zone established
horizontally by swinging arcs of five thousand (5,000) feet radii from the
center of each end of the primary surface of each runway and connecting the
adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone does
not include the approach and transitional zones.
   AP horizontal zone (McEntire Air National Guard Base). There are two
horizontal zones for McEntire Air Base as follows:
      (a)   Inner horizontal zone. The horizontal zone, oval in shape, at a
height of one hundred and fifty (150) feet above the established field
elevation. The plane is constructed by scribing an arc with a radius of seven
thousand five hundred (7,500) feet about the centerline at each end of each
runway and interconnecting these arcs with tangents.
      (b)   Outer horizontal zone. A plane, located five hundred (500) feet
above the established air field elevation, extending outward from the outer
periphery of the conical zone for a horizontal distance of thirty thousand
(30,000) feet.
   AP transitional surface (Jim Hamilton-L.B. Owens Airport). These surfaces
extend outward at right angles (90-degree angles) to the runway centerline at a
slope of seven (7) feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of
the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal
surfaces.
   AP transitional surface (McEntire Air National Guard Base). At military
airports these surfaces connect the primary surfaces, the first two hundred
(200) feet of the clear zone surfaces, and the approach clearance surfaces to
the inner horizontal surface, conical surface, outer horizontal surface or
other transitional surfaces. The slope of the transitional surface is seven (7)
to one (1).
   AP transitional zone. The areas beneath the AP transitional surfaces.
   APA. The symbol for “airport approach zone.”
   APAM. The symbol for “airport approach zone for McEntire Air National Guard
Base.”
   APAO. The symbol for “airport approach zone for Jim Hamilton-L.B. Owens
Airport.”
   APC. The symbol for “airport conical zone.”
   APCM. The symbol for “airport conical zone for McEntire Air National Guard
Base.”
   APCO. The symbol for “airport conical zone for Jim Hamilton-L.B. Owens
Airport.”
   APCZ. The symbol for “airport clear zone.”
   APCZM. The symbol for “airport clear zone for McEntire Air National Guard
Base.”
   APCZO. The symbol for “airport clear zone for Jim Hamilton-L.B. Owens
Airport.”
   APH. The symbol for “airport horizontal zone.”
   APHM. The symbol for “airport horizontal zone for McEntire Air National
Guard Base.”
   APHO. The symbol for “airport horizontal zone for Jim Hamilton-L.B. Owens
Airport.”
   APP. The symbol for “airport primary zone.”
   Appeal. A request for a review of a decision or interpretation made by an
administrator or reviewing body in the administration of the Richland County
Land Development Code.
   Applicant. Any person acting on his/her own behalf as a property owner, or
as an agent for a property owner, who makes application for some type of action
(plan approval, map amendment, etc.) in accordance with this chapter.
   APPM. The symbol for “airport primary zone for McEntire Air National Guard
Base.”
   APPO. The symbol for “airport primary zone for Jim Hamilton-L.B. Owens
Airport.”
   Approach clearance surface. For McEntire Air National Guard Base, an
inclined plane, symmetrical above the runway centerline and, beginning two
hundred (200) feet beyond each end of the primary surface at the centerline
elevation of the runway end and extending for fifty thousand (50,000) feet. The
slope of the approach clearance surface is fifty (50) to one (1) along the
runway centerline extending until it reaches an elevation of five hundred (500)
feet above the established airport elevation. It then continues horizontally at
this elevation to a point fifty thousand (50,000) feet from the point of
beginning. The width of this surface at the runway end is the same as the
primary surface, it flares uniformly, and the width at fifty thousand (50,000)
feet is sixteen thousand (16,000) feet.
   Approach surface. A surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway
centerline, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface
and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope set forth in
this chapter.
   APT. The symbol for “airport transitional zone.”
   APTM. The symbol for “airport transitional zone for McEntire Air National
Guard Base.”
   APTO. The symbol for “airport transitional zone for Jim Hamilton-L.B. Owens
Airport.”
   Area of shallow flooding. A designated AO Zone on the county’s Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident.
   Area of special flood hazard. The land in the floodplain subject to a one
percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This term also
includes all wetlands within a community. For purposes of these regulations,
the term “area of special flood hazard” is synonymous in meaning with the
phrase “special flood hazard area.”
   Arterial. A freeway, expressway or a road or highway that is used or
intended to be used for moving either heavy vehicular traffic volumes or high-
speed traffic or both on which average daily traffic exceeds four thousand
(4,000) vehicles or more.
   Arterial roadminor. A SCDOT designated roadway, as depicted on their
“Functional Classification Map for the Columbia Urbanized Area,” that carries a
mix of local and through traffic and which links collector roads, and sometimes
local streets, with principal arterials.
   Arterial roadprincipal. A SCDOT designated roadway, as depicted on their
“Functional Classification Map for the Columbia Urbanized Area,” that is
primarily intended to provide traffic service between urban areas.
   Authorized agent. Any person with valid authority provided by the owner, as
evidenced by a document either notarized or witnessed by at least two (2)
independent third parties authorizing the agent to represent the owner, and
acting on behalf of the owner of land seeking an amendment or some type of
approval as set forth in this chapter.
   Base flood or regulatory flood. The flood having a one percent (1%) chance
of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
   Basement. Any enclosed area of a building that is below grade on all sides.
   Bed and breakfast home or inn. A transient lodging establishment, generally
operated in a single- family dwelling, primarily engaged in providing overnight
or otherwise temporary lodging for the general public.
   Best Management Practices (Stormwater Management). A structural or
nonstructural management-based practice used singularly or in combination to
reduce nonpoint source inputs to receiving waters in order to achieve water
quality and quantity protection goals.
   Block. A unit of land bounded by roads or by a combination of roads and
public land, railroad rights- of-way, waterways, or any other barrier to the
continuity of development.
   BMPs. Best Management Practices (stormwater management: an acronym used to
describe a structural or nonstructural management-based practice used
singularly or in combination to reduce nonpoint source inputs to receiving
waters in order to achieve water quality and quantity protection goals.
   BMPs Design Manual (stormwater management). The manual of design,
performance and review standards for stormwater management BMPs to be used in
Richland County. The requirements established by the BMPs Design Manual are
mandatory.
   Board of zoning appeals. The Board of Zoning Appeals for Richland County,
South Carolina.
   Boardinghouse. See “roominghouse and boardinghouse.”
   Boat, small. Recreational boats (such as motorboats, canoes, and small
sailboats) that are eighteen (18) feet or less in length.
   Borrow pits. An excavated area where naturally occurring earthen materials
are to be removed for use as ordinary fill at another location.
   Buffer transition yard. A linear strip of land combined with a vertical
element such as natural or planted vegetation, fences or walls, berms, etc.
which physically separates and screens incompatible uses.
   Building. Any structure built for support, shelter or enclosure for any
occupancy or storage, including storage tanks.
   Building, enclosed. A structure, the inner portion of which is fully
enveloped with walls (including doorways and windows) and roofing and which has
no open sides.
   Building footprint. The outline of the total area covered by a building’s
perimeter at the ground level.
   Building, height. See “structure, height.”
   Building, high-rise. Any building that exceeds three (3) stories and thirty-
five (35) feet in height.
   Building line. The inner edge of any required yard or required setback, and
the corresponding outer edge of the buildable area. Except as specifically
provided by this chapter, no portion of any building or structure may be
extended to occupy any portion of a lot outside its building lines.
   Building permit. An authorization to construct a structure as issued by the
Richland County Office Of Building Inspections which acknowledges that such
building complies with the provisions of the county code related to building
construction and related construction (electrical, plumbing, etc.).
   Bus bench. A seating area at a designated bus stop designed for the
convenience of bus passengers.
   Bus shelter. A small roofed structure, having three (3) transparent walls,
located at designated bus stops for the protection and convenience of
passengers of public transportation systems.
   Campus, primary. A contiguous area of land constituting and making up the
grounds of a college or university containing the main buildings, including
libraries, lecture halls, residence halls, and administrative offices;
provided, however, that for the purpose of this definition the contiguity of
any land area involved shall not be deemed to be destroyed by the presence of
public rights-of-way.
   Canopy (building). A permanent attached structure which projects from and is
supported by a building, which serves as a cover providing shelter or
decoration and which extends beyond the building.
   Canopy (service station). A permanent structure, attached to or projecting
from a service station or convenience store, which serves as a cover for those
customers purchasing gasoline, etc.
   Capital Improvement Plan (CIP). A general description of all existing public
facilities and their existing deficiencies within the service area or areas of
the governmental entity, a reasonable estimate of all costs, and a plan to
develop the funding resources including existing sources of revenues related to
curing the existing deficiencies including, but not limited to, the upgrading,
updating, improving, expanding, or replacing of these facilities to meet
existing needs and usage; and otherwise complies with the requirements of
Section 6-1-960(B) of the S.C. Code of Laws.
   Central Midlands Council of Governments (CMCOG). An association of local
governments in Fairfield, Newberry, Lexington, Richland and portions of Kershaw
and Calhoun counties to address multi-jurisdictional problems and
opportunities.
   Certificate of zoning compliance. A document issued by Richland County upon
final inspection of a new use or structure indicating compliance with the
requirements of this chapter.
   Change in (of) use. Substitution of one use of land or a building for
another.
   Cigar bars. An establishment that offers a meaningful selection of cigars
and tobacco for pipes for smoking on the premises, as well as, retail purposes
and which may be licensed for the on-premise consumption of beer, wine, or
alcoholic beverages, or some combination of those, as well as, limited food
service. The term does not include any establishment which is primarily a bar
or restaurant. No bar can be considered a cigar bar unless at least fifty-one
(51) percent of its gross revenue can be demonstrated to come from the sale of
cigars, pipe tobacco, and other tobacco related products.
   Civic/institutional buildings. Churches or places of worship; public or
private schools; gymnasiums, assembly halls, community meeting rooms, and
community service centers; post offices, fire stations, libraries, and museums;
and other government or public service buildings and facilities except for
those requiring outdoor storage or maintenance yards.
   Clean Water Act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended,
codified at 33 U.S.C. §§ 1252 et seq.
   Clear zone surface. For McEntire Air National Guard Base, a surface located
at established field elevation (251 mean sea level) at each end of the primary
surface, with a length of one thousand (1,000) feet and the same width as the
primary surface.
   Clubs or Lodges. Establishments primarily engaged in promoting the civic and
social interests of their members. Such establishments must be incorporated and
operating as not-for-profit organizations.
   Collector road. A roadway which provides connection between the arterial
road system and local roads as well as traffic circulation within residential,
commercial and industrial areas.
   Collocate. The act of using a single support structure and/or site by more
than one (1) communication (i.e., wireless) provider.
   Columbia Area Transportation System (COATS).  The transportation planning
process for the Columbia metropolitan area administered by the MPO.
   Commercial and service uses. An occupation, place of employment, or
enterprise that is carried on for profit by the owner, lessee, or licensee
including but not limited to business, professional, and personal services and
retail trade and food services.
   Common area. Land within a development, not individually owned or dedicated
for public use, which is designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment
of the residents of the development.
   Common area recreation and service facilities.  Recreational (swimming
pools, etc.) and service (laundry, etc.) facilities built to serve housing
developments.
   Compatible. Design of structures and landscapes that are consistent with
structures and landscapes in the district of which they are a part, based on an
objective comparison of identified physical elements such as architectural
form, building mass, height, scale, land uses, and landscape architecture, as
determined by the Planning Department.
   Comprehensive plan. A plan for the development of Richland County, adopted
by the Richland County Council, pursuant to Title 6, Chapter 29, of the South
Carolina Code of Laws (South Carolina Local Government Comprehensive Planning
Enabling Act of 1994). The comprehensive plan includes the following planning
elements: a population element; an economic development element; a natural
resources element; a cultural resources element; a community facilities
element; a housing element; and, a land use element.
   Conservation Area. Any parcel or area of undeveloped land conserved in its
natural state for perpetuity through deeds or other legal measures.
   Conservation subdivision. A subdivision that concentrates buildings in
specific areas on site and maximizes open space, preservation of
environmentally sensitive areas.
   Controlled access zone. The area of an intersection that requires controlled
traffic movement to preserve the safety of pedestrians, drivers, and other
intersection users.
   Coordinated design. The design of a development so as to incorporate
unifying features, such as building height, articulation of building elements,
rhythm of design, massing, bulk, architectural features, etc.
   County. Richland County, South Carolina.
   County administrator. The Richland County Administrator.
   County council. Richland County Council.
   County engineer. The Richland County Engineer.
   Critical facilities. Structures or facilities that produce, use or store
highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials;
hospitals, nursing homes and housing likely to contain occupants who may not be
sufficiently mobile to avoid death or injury during a flood; police stations,
fire stations, vehicles and equipment storage facilities, and emergency
operations centers that are needed for flood response activities before,
during, and after a flood; and public and private utility facilities that are
vital to maintaining or restoring normal services to flooded areas before,
during and after a flood.
   Critical root zone. An area on the ground and adjacent to a protected tree
that encompasses a distance of one (1) foot of space for every one (1) inch of
the tree DBH measured outward from the center of the tree in all directions.
   Cross-access easement. An easement wherein a grantor conveys to a grantee,
his/her/its heirs, successors in interest, and/or assigns, a perpetual
nonexclusive easement that may include such matters as: vehicular and
pedestrian access, ingress, egress; the location and amount of parking of
vehicles; and/or landscaped areas; and/or any shared maintenance
responsibilities.
   Cul-de-sac. A road having one end open to traffic and the other end
terminated by a vehicular turnaround; a dead-end street.
   Days. Unless otherwise specified, days shall mean calendar days.
   Density. The number of dwelling units per gross acre of land.
   Design capacity. The volume of annual average daily trips (AADTs) of a given
roadway segment at which traffic flows with minimal delay. The design capacity
is based on the geometry of the roadway segment and its functional
classification.
   Designated water resource. A perennial surface water body that normally
flows or contains water throughout the year, except during extreme droughts.
These water bodies typically have a defined channel or shoreline and support a
diverse population of aquatic insects, including some with life cycles that
require permanent water. Those water bodies with channels are able to sort and
move channel materials.
   Developer. Any person acting on his own behalf as a property owner, or as an
agent for a property owner, who makes application for development plan approval
as set forth in this chapter.
   Development. Any of the following actions undertaken by a public or private
individual or entity: (a) any land altering activities associated with the
division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, plots,
sites, tracts, parcels, or other divisions by plan or deed; or (b) any human-
made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited
to, buildings or other structures, clearing, mining, dredging, filling,
grading, paving, berming, diking, excavation or drilling operations, or storage
of equipment or materials.
   Development with open space design. A development pattern that arranges the
layout of buildings in a compact area of the site which reserves a portion of a
site for open space preservation and is protected in perpetuity.
   DHEC. The South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control.
   Diameter at breast height (DBH). The standard measure of tree diameter for
trees existing on a site by measuring a tree trunk at a height of four and one-
half (4½) feet above the ground and by measuring a tree split into multiple
trunks below four and one-half (4½) feet at its most narrow point beneath the
split.
   Dormitory. A building or part of a building operated by an academic
institution containing rooms forming one (1) or more habitable units that are
used or intended to be used by enrollees or employees of the institution for
living and sleeping, but are not fully self-contained residential facilities.
   Drag strips. A roadway designed for a race between cars to determine which
can accelerate faster from a standstill. A drag strip may include seating,
concession areas, parking facilities and any accessory offices or other
buildings.
   Drainage. A general term applied to the outflow of water or other fluid from
a given area, whether by natural means (surface water runoff) or artificial
means (drains, grading, etc.).
   Drainage channel. Any natural or man-made conveyance for surface water,
including open channels, enclosed storm sewers, streams, rivers, lakes, ponds,
or marshes.
   Drainage system. The surface and subsurface system for removal of water from
the land, including both the natural elements of streams, marshes, swales, and
ponds, whether of an intermittent or continuous nature; and the manmade
elements such as improved open channels, culverts, retention facilities, and
enclosed storm sewers.
   Drive-in. A term used to describe an establishment designed or operated to
serve a patron who is seated in an automobile. This term shall include the term
“drive-thru”.
   Drive-thru. See “drive-in”.
   Driveway. Any paved or unpaved way that provides access to property and is
intended for vehicular access from a highway, street, or road.
   Duets. A structure used for residential purposes and consisting of two
living units sharing a common wall.
   Dwelling. Any building designed, occupied, or intended for human occupancy;
provided, however, dwelling shall not include a hotel, motel, rooming house,
hospital, or other accommodation used more or less for transient occupancy.
   Dwelling, accessory. A secondary dwelling unit established in conjunction
with and clearly subordinate to a principal dwelling unit, whether a part of
the same structure as the principal dwelling unit or a detached dwelling unit
on the same lot.
   Dwelling, manufactured home on individual lots.  A manufactured home
designed for occupancy by a single family and which is placed on a lot with no
other principal structure or building.
   Dwelling, multi-family. Any building or buildings containing more than two
(2) dwelling units on a single lot including apartments, condominiums, etc.
   Dwelling, principal. The main dwelling unit on a lot.
   Dwelling, single-family. A structure designed for occupancy by one (1)
family.
   Dwelling, single-family, detached. A single- family dwelling unit that is
not attached to any other dwelling unit by any means and is surrounded by
yards.
   Dwelling, single-family, zero lot line, common.  A single-family development
(attached and semi- detached units) where the units are connected on one (1)
side by means of a common dividing structural or load-bearing wall of at least
ten (10) linear feet to another one-family dwelling. Each dwelling is located
on its own individual lot and adjacent structures are placed on an alternate
side lot line.
   Dwelling, single-family, zero lot line, parallel. A detached single-family
development where the units are placed on parallel side lot lines and each
dwelling is located on its own individual lot.
   Dwelling, two-family. A building on a single lot containing two (2) dwelling
units, each of which is totally separated from the other by an unpierced wall
extending from ground to roof or an unpierced ceiling and floor extending from
exterior wall to exterior wall, except for a common stairwell exterior to both
dwelling units.
   Easement. A grant or reservation by the owner of land for the use of such
land by others for a specific purpose or purposes.
   Effective lot area. The gross horizontal area of a lot minus any portion of
the lot encumbered by a recorded driveway or roadway easement.
   Elevated building. A non-basement building having the lowest floor elevated
above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls,
piling, columns, piers or shear walls parallel to the flow of water.
   Eligible projects. Residential projects within residential infill incentive
districts established on or after August 1, 2008 that have been officially
submitted to the Richland County Planning and Development Services for review.
   Enclosed building. See “building, enclosed.”
   Encroachment (floodplain overlay district standards). The advance or
progression of uses, fill, excavation, buildings, structures, or developments
into a floodplain or floodway.
   Encroachment permit. A permit issued by the County on county maintained
roadways or by SCDOT on state maintained roadways to use a public right-of- way
for any purpose.
   Engineer. A person practicing engineering and licensed in the State of South
Carolina pursuant to the requirements of Section 40-22-10, et seq., of the
South Carolina Code of Laws, as amended.
   E9-1-1 address number. The number assigned to any building or property in a
sequential manner.
   E9-1-1 property address. The unique E9-1-1 address number and roadway name
that is used in combination with one another to effectively locate a building
for use with the E9-1-1 System.
   Entitled Property. Any property that, prior to January 19, 2010 has been
subject to either “Permitted Development Activity” or a “Valid Government
Approval.” If a Permitted Development Activity or Valid Governmental Approval
has occurred with respect to any tract and such tract was subsequently
subdivided, or in the future is subdivided, by an approved subdivision plat,
then all subdivided parcels that were part of the original tract shall be
considered Entitled Property.
   Entrance, main. The principal doorway into a building or structure through
which the majority of public entry is obtained.
   Ephemeral stream. A stream or reach of a stream that flows briefly only in
direct response to precipitation in the immediate locality and whose channel is
at all times higher than the water table.
   Erodible soils. Soils that can erode at excessive rates, such as Hydrologic
Groups B and C.
   Erosion. The general process by which soil and rock fragments are detached
and moved by the action of wind, water, ice and gravity, either naturally or
induced.
   Erosion and sediment control plan. A plan which adequately describes
necessary land management practices and control measures, including a timetable
or schedule for their installation, which will effectively minimize soil
erosion and sedimentation; prepared and approved as provided herein for
application to a particular land area. This plan shall be incorporated into the
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP).
   Existing manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision (floodplain
overlay district standards). A manufactured home park or manufactured home
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
such manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of roads, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before November 4, 1981.
   Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured home
subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of roads, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete
slabs).
   Family, immediate. A spouse, parents and grandparents, children and
grandchildren, brothers and sisters, mother-in-law, father-in-law, brothers-in-
law and sisters-in-law, daughters-in- law and sons-in law. Adopted, half and
step members are also included in this definition.
   Federal Highway Administration (FHWA). The agency that administers federal
surface transportation regulations and provides funding for federal roads and
MPO activities.
   FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   Fill. The placement of fill material at a specified location to bring the
ground surface up to a desired elevation.
   Fill material. Natural sands, dirt, soil and rock. For the purposes of
floodplain management, fill material may include concrete, cement, soil cement,
brick or similar material as approved on a case-by- case basis.
   FIRM. See “Flood Insurance Rate Map.”
   Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas, caused by the overflow of a watercourse
or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
   Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). An official map of a community on which the
FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community.
   Flood Insurance Study. An official report provided by FEMA. The report
contains flood profiles, as well as the Flood Boundary Floodway Map and the
water surface elevation of the base flood. A Flood Insurance Study may include
a study using detailed hydrologic and hydraulic analyses to model the base
flood, determine base flood elevations, and designate floodways and risk zones
(Zones AE, A1-30, AH and AO).
   Floodplain. The areas adjoining a river, stream, watercourse, lake, or other
body of standing water that have been or may be covered by floodwater.
   Floodplain development permit. A document issued by the county authorizing
the applicant to undertake development and related activity in a regulated
floodplain.
   Flood prone area. The area of land susceptible to being inundated by a flood
(see definition of “flood”).
   Floodproofing. Design and construction of nonresidential structures and
attendant utility and sanitary facilities that are watertight to at least two
(2) feet above the base flood elevation. Walls are substantially impermeable to
the passage of water and have structural components capable of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
   Flood resistant materials. Any building material capable of withstanding
direct and prolonged contact with flood waters without sustaining significant
damage. The term “prolonged contact” means at least seventy-two (72) hours, and
the term “significant damage” means any damage requiring more than low- cost
cosmetic repair (such as painting).
   Floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas which must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot.
   Foot candle. A unit for measuring illumination equal to the amount of direct
light thrown by a source of one candela on a square foot of surface every part
of which is one foot away from the source and facing directly toward the
source.
   Footprint, building. See “building footprint.”
   Forest land. Land on which an ecosystem or assemblage of ecosystems is
dominated by trees and other woody vegetation and consist of trees with
overlapping crowns forming 60% to 100% cover; the living parts of a forest land
include trees, shrubs, vines, grasses and other herbaceous (non-woody) plants,
mosses, algae, fungi, insects, mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians, and
microorganisms living on the plants and animals and in the soil.
   Forestry activity. Activity that involves timbering, including, but not
limited to, harvesting, site preparation, controlled burning, tree planting,
applications of fertilizers, herbicides, and pesticides, weed control, animal
damage control, fire control, insect and disease control, forest road
construction, and any other generally accepted forestry practices.
   Frontage. The frontage of a parcel of land is that distance where a property
line is common with a road right-of-way line or an edge of traveled way.
   Full-cutoff. With respect to lighting, a light fixture which cuts off all
upward transmission of light, with zero light above 90° horizontal.
   Functional classification. An FHWA process, adopted by SCDOT and the MPO, by
which roads are grouped into classes, or systems, according to the character of
the service they are intended to provide. The MPO classifies roads as
interstate, principal arterial, minor arterial or collector.
   Functionally dependent facility. A facility that cannot be used for its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water, such as a docking or port facility or rowing facility necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair, or
seafood processing facilities. The term does not include long- term storage,
manufacture, sales, or service facilities.
   GFA. See “gross floor area.”
   Glare. Discomfort experienced by an observer with a direct line of sight to
a light source, resulting in visual impairment.
   Grading. Any displacement of soil by stripping, excavating, filling,
stockpiling, or any combination thereof, and shall include the land in its
excavated or filled state.
   Grand tree. Any structurally sound tree, twenty-four (24) inches or greater
in diameter at breast height. Trees documented as structurally unsound by an
ISA Certified Arborist or a Registered Forester are not considered grand trees
for the purpose of this definition.
   Gross floor area (GFA). The total horizontal area of all floors of a
building, including interior balconies and mezzanines, measured from the
exterior faces of the exterior walls of a building.
   Group home. A residential home, provided by an agency, organization or
individual, for mentally or physically handicapped persons and which is
licensed by the State of South Carolina to provide such a service.
   Groupings of grand trees. Three (3) or more grand trees with overlapping
critical root zones. The area of protection includes each individual grand
tree's entire critical root zone.
   Guidelines for Road Naming and Addressing in Richland County. The manual
establishing a uniform system for road naming and addressing property and
buildings on all roads, streets, and public and private roadways in the
unincorporated area of Richland County.
   Habitable floor. Any floor useable for living purposes, which include
working, sleeping, eating, cooking and recreation, or any combination thereof.
Floor elevation is to be measured as follows:
      (a)   For slab-on-grade type buildings or buildings with basements, the
top surface of the slab or basement floor constitutes the lowest floor.
      (b)   For footing, foundation wall, or pile type buildings having crawl
spaces under the building with no basements, the top surface of the finished
flooring above the horizontal joist, beam, or other supporting member
constitutes the lowest floor.
   Hazardous material. Any substance that, because of its quantity,
concentration, or physical or chemical characteristics, poses a significant
present or potential hazard to human health and safety or to the environment if
released into the workplace or the environment.
   Heir. A person who by law received wealth, property, etc. when the owner
died.
   Height, structure (or building). See “structure, height.”
   High rise structure (or building). Any building which exceeds three (3)
stories and thirty-five (35) feet in height.
   Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface,
existing prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of the structure.
   Home occupation. An accessory use of a dwelling unit for limited non-
residential purposes which is clearly incidental and subordinate to the use of
the dwelling unit as a residence.
   Hotel. A commercial establishment offering transient lodging in ten (10) or
more rooms, in which sleeping accommodations are offered to the public, with
access through an inside lobby or the office, and in which there is a public
dining room for the convenience of the guests.
   Hunt club. A private sporting club organized and operated for the purpose of
lawfully hunting game and/or wildlife, with or without dogs, and whether on
horseback, a motorized vehicle, or on foot. A hunt club may include primary and
accessory structures, such as a clubhouse, kennels, stables, and storage
facilities.
   Illegal discharge. Any activity that results in a discharge to a stormwater
system or receiving waters that is not composed entirely of stormwater;
provided, however, this does not include: (a) discharge pursuant to an NPDES
permit (other than the NPDES permit issued for the Richland County stormwater
system and its co-permittees), (b) discharges resulting from fire-fighting
activities, and (c) any activity specifically addressed in this Code of
Ordinances or by Richland County as not being significant sources of pollution.
   Illegal dumping. The disposal of waste in an unpermitted area or the pouring
of liquid wastes or trash into stormwater drains.
   Illicit connection. A connection to a stormwater system that results in a
discharge that is not composed entirely of stormwater run-off; provided,
however, this does not include discharges pursuant to an NPDES permit (other
than the NPDES permit issued for the Richland County stormwater system and its
co-permittees).
   Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination (IDDE) Program. The third
Minimum Control Measure of the Stormwater Phase II Rule; it is a program,
employing a plan that should include procedures for locating priority areas
likely to have illicit discharges, procedures for tracing the source of an
illicit discharge, procedures for removing the source of the discharge, and
procedures for program evaluation and assessment.
   Impede the free flow of water. Any change to water elevation or velocity due
to obstructions, diversions, or retardation, including changes to the flow
characteristics of the waters of the regulatory flood as they pass both the
upstream and the downstream boundaries of the property.
   Impervious surface. Any hard-surfaced, man- made area that does not readily
absorb or retain water, including, but not limited to, building roofs, parking
and driveway areas, graveled areas, sidewalks and paved recreation areas.
   Impervious surface ratio. The ratio between the surface area of a lot that
is covered by impervious surfaces compared to the total surface area of a lot.
   Improper disposal. Any disposal other than through an illicit connection
that results in an illegal discharge, including, but not limited to, the
disposal of used oil, toxic materials or other hazardous liquids or substances
resulting from the improper management of these materials.
   Improvements. Pavements, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, paths, bikeways,
sedimentation control facilities, re-vegetation, water mains, sanitary and
storm sewers, drainways, gas lines, electrical and telephone lines and
appurtenances, street signs, trees and lights, and any other similar items
required for compliance with the regulations of this chapter or the conditions
of approval.
   Industrial road. A road for which the intended use is somewhat less than
that of an arterial road and somewhat greater than that of a collector road.
Such roads will generally be located in industrial/ commercial areas or be used
to provide access for heavy vehicles or heavy vehicular volumes to such areas.
   Infill parcel. A parcel of land that is located within the infill target
areas and is suitable for residential development of four (4) dwelling units or
less.
   Inflow and infiltration. Groundwater or stormwater entering into a sanitary
sewer system as a result of damaged collection lines or manholes or from direct
stormwater connections, such as from catch basins or roof drains.
   Infrastructure. Facilities and services that are needed to sustain industry,
residential, commercial, and all other land use activities, including water and
sewer lines and other utilities, streets and roads, communications and public
facilities, such as fire stations, parks, etc.
   Irrigation. A permanent, underground watering system equipped with surface,
subsurface or overhead emitters and which provides one hundred percent (100%)
water coverage.
   Jurisdictional line. A line identified or approved by the United States Army
Corp of Engineers (USACE) describing areas to be protected under the Federal
Clean Water Act.
   Land. Any ground, soil, or earth including marshes, swamps, drainage-ways
and areas not permanently covered by water.
   Land development permit. A document signed by an authorized county official,
as required in this chapter, as a condition precedent to the commencement of a
use or the erection, construction, reconstruction, restoration, alteration,
conversion or installation of a structure or building, which document
acknowledges that such use, structure, or building complies with the provisions
of this chapter or an authorized variance therefrom.
   Land development review, major. The review of projects, exclusive of
residential and commercial subdivisions, involving one (1) or more of the
following: one hundred thousand (100,000) or more square feet of nonresidential
floor space; one hundred and fifty (150) or more multi-family residential
units, lots or manufactured home spaces in a manufactured home district; and/or
the dedication of new public road segments or the dedication to the county of
land for open space or other public purposes.
   Land development review, minor. The review of projects, exclusive of
residential and commercial subdivisions, which do not meet the standards for
applicability for “land development compliance review” or “major land
development review.”
   Land disturbance. Any activity involving the clearing, grading,
transporting, filling, and/or any other activity which causes the land to be
exposed to the dangers of erosion.
   Land Disturbance Permit. A certificate issued by Richland County to perform
work pursuant to an approved SWPPP prepared under the provisions of this
chapter. It is issued after DHEC issues coverage under an NPDES General Permit
for Large and Small Construction Activities.
   Land surveyor. A person currently licensed pursuant to the requirements of
Section 40-22-10, et seq., of the South Carolina Code of Laws, as amended.
   Landscape architect. A person practicing landscape architecture and licensed
in the State of South Carolina pursuant to the requirements of Section 40-28-
10, et seq., of the South Carolina Code of Laws, as amended.
   LED (Light Emitting Diode). A semiconductor diode that emits light when an
electric current is applied in the forward direction of the device.
   Levee. A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control,
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
   Level of Service (LOS). A qualitative term describing how the traffic flow
on a given road segment is perceived by its users, i.e., good conditions = A or
B; tolerable conditions = C or D; and intolerable conditions = E or F. This
relationship is measured by its current traffic volume to its engineering
designed traffic volume ratio (v/c):
      LOS A = a v/c ratio of 0.00 to 0.49         LOS B = a v/c ratio of 0.50
to 0.74
      LOS C = a v/c ratio of 0.75 to 1.00         LOS D = a v/c ratio of 1.01
to 1.15
      LOS E = a v/c ratio of 1.16 to 1.34         LOS F = a v/c ratio of 1.35
plus
   Lighting, internal. With respect to signage, artificial lighting provided
either through lighting on the sign face or though lighting within a sign made
of transparent or translucent material.
   Light trespass. Light projected onto a property from a fixture not located
on that property.
   Limited storage. An area used for storage and intended to be limited to
incidental items that can withstand exposure to the elements and have low flood
damage potential. Such an area must be of flood resistant or breakaway
material, void of utilities (except for essential lighting), and cannot be
temperature controlled.
   Live-work unit. A hybrid dwelling unit that incorporates a ground level
studio, workshop, or office that opens directly to the street, with a
residential unit in the same structure that is upstairs.
   Local commercial road. A road in a commercial area used primarily for access
to abutting properties and to feed traffic to collector roads. This
classification includes roads located parallel and adjacent to limited access
roads or highways that provide access to abutting commercial properties and
protection from through traffic.
   Local residential road. A road in a residential area used primarily for
access to abutting properties and to feed traffic to collector roads. This
classification includes roads located parallel and adjacent to limited access
roads or highways that provide access to abutting residential properties and
protection from through traffic. Average daily traffic is less than two
thousand (2,000) vehicles.
   Loft dwelling. A dwelling unit established in an existing nonresidential
building; the floor placed between the roof and the floor of the uppermost
story within a single-family detached dwelling, the floor area of which is not
more than one-third of the floor area of the story or room in which it is
placed.
   Loop lane. A roadway that arches away from a road and re-intersects the same
road at some distance away from the "first" intersection.
   Lot. A parcel of land clearly defined by plat or by metes and bounds
description and held, or intended to be held, in separate lease or ownership.
   Lot, adjacent. A lot that is contiguous to another lot.
   Lot area. The horizontal area within the exterior lines of a lot.
   Lot coverage. A measure of intensity of land use that represents the portion
of a site that is impervious (i.e., does not absorb water). This portion
includes, but is not limited to, all areas covered by buildings, parked
structures, driveways, roads, sidewalks, and any area of concrete asphalt.
   Lot frontage. That part of a lot (a lot line) abutting on a road.
   Lot width. The distance between straight lines connecting front and rear lot
lines at each side of a lot, measured at the required front setback, provided
that the width between side lot lines at their foremost points (where they
intersect with the road line) shall not be less than eighty percent (80%) of
the required lot width. In the case of lots fronting on a curve or cul-de-sac,
the lot width may be measured up to a distance fifty percent (50%) greater than
the required front yard as defined within each zoning district classification,
provided the lot width at the minimum required front yard setback is eighty
percent (80%) of the minimum required yard width. The measurement shall be
taken tangent to the midpoint at the setback line. Where lots are contiguous to
a natural or man- made body of water, the lot width may be measured at the
building site line provided all required setbacks can be met and the lot has a
minimum of twenty-five (25) linear feet of public road frontage. Where lots are
one (1) acre or larger, the lot width may be measured at the building site line
provided all required setbacks can be met and the lot has a minimum of fifty
(50) linear feet of public road frontage.
   Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area. Any unfinished
or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building
access, or limited storage in an area other than a basement area, is not
considered a building’s lowest floor provided that such an enclosure is not
built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this
chapter.
   Low Impact Development (LID). An ecologically friendly approach to site
development and storm water management that aims to mitigate development
impacts to land, water, and air. The approach emphasizes the integration of
site design and planning techniques that conserve natural systems and
hydrologic functions on a site.
   Lumen/phototopic lumen. The measure of brightness of the illumination
exiting a bulb, provided by a manufacturer.
   Luminaire. The complete lighting unit, including the lamp, fixture, pole,
and/or other parts.
   Manufactured home. A factory-built, single- family structure that is
manufactured under the authority of 42 U.S.C. Sec. 5401, the National
Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act, is transportable in
one or more sections, is built on a permanent chassis and is used as a place of
human habitation. The term “manufactured home” shall not include prefabricated
modular dwellings placed on permanent foundations, nor shall it include travel
trailers, campers or similar units designed for recreation or other short term
uses.
   Manufactured home park. A lot used, designed or intended to be used for the
purpose of supplying a parking space for two (2) or more occupied manufactured
homes for rent or sale, and which includes buildings, structures, vehicles, or
enclosures used or intended to be used as part of that manufactured home park.
Sales or storage lots for unoccupied manufactured homes are not considered to
be manufactured home parks.
   Manufactured home subdivision. A parcel or contiguous parcels of land
subdivided into two (2) or more lots configured for development of manufactured
housing for rent or sale.
   Marginal access road. A service road that runs parallel to a higher order
road, which for purposes of safe ingress and egress, provides access to
abutting properties and separation of through traffic. This term shall include
the term “frontage road”.
   Market showroom. A building or structure used principally for the display of
merchandise.
   Mean sea level. The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It
is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the
floodplain.
   For purposes of this chapter, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD).
   Metropolitan Planning Organization (MPO). The transportation policy-making
body consisting of representatives of the local governments in urbanized area
of the midlands as designated by the U.S. Census Department. It includes most
of Richland and Lexington Counties and a small portion of Kershaw and Calhoun
Counties. The CMCOG is the MPO for this metropolitan area.
   Minor residential road. A loop road which serves not more than forty (40)
dwelling units or a cul-de-sac road that serves not more than twenty (20)
dwelling units, either of which carries no through traffic and is used for
access to abutting residential lots.
   More intense use. A use of greater intensity as determined by the Land Use
Impact Table set forth at Section
26-176(f)(3) of this chapter.
   Motel. A commercial establishment offering transient lodging in ten (10) or
more rooms, in which sleeping accommodations are offered to the public, and
which has individual entrances from outside the building to serve the separate
units, and which further provides a location for the parking of guests’
automobiles.
   MS4. Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System; and acronym used in the NPDES
Stormwater Permit that is synonymous with stormwater system for the purposes of
this chapter.
   Multi-use trail. A path physically separated from motor vehicle traffic by
an open space or barrier and either within a highway right-of-way or within an
independent right-of- way. A multi-use path is used by bicyclists, pedestrians,
joggers, skaters, and other non-motorized travelers.
   NAICS. The North American Industrial Classification System of 2002.
   National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). As corrected in 1929, elevation
reference points set by National Geodetic Survey based on mean sea level.
   Native plant material. Any plant material indigenous to South Carolina and
which is naturally grown or commercially propagated or cultivated for the
nursery or landscaping industry.
   Natural landscaping. An area consisting of uncultivated native plant growth
or plantings that are indigenous to the geographical area where the parcel is
located.
   Natural plant. A plant, once established, that survives on rainfall without
irrigation.
   Neighborhood green. An open space available for unstructured recreation, its
landscaping consists of grassy areas, trees and approximately one-acre or less
surrounded by structures/dwellings within the boundaries of the development.
   New construction. For purposes of floodplain management in this chapter,
this term shall mean a structure for which the start of construction commenced
on or after November 4, 1981. The term also includes any subsequent
improvements to such structure.
   New manufactured home park or new manufactured home subdivision. As
referenced in the flood regulations, this term shall mean a manufactured home
park or manufactured home subdivision for which the construction of facilities
for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
roads, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete slabs) is
completed on or after November 4, 1981.
   Nonconforming occupied lot. A lot that does not meet the minimum
requirements for the zoning district in which it is located and which contains
a structure.
   Nonconforming open uses of land. An open use on a lot when the only
structures are incidental or accessory to the principal open use, but which
would not be permitted by this chapter in the zoning district in which it is
located.
   Nonconforming structures occupying conforming lots. A structure that does
not meet the minimum requirements for the zoning district in which it is
located, but which is located on a lot that does conform to the district
requirements.
   Nonconforming uses of structures. A structure, the use of which would not be
permitted by this chapter in the zoning district in which it is located.
   Nonconforming vacant lot. A lot that is not occupied by a building,
structure, or use and that does not meet the dimensional or area requirements
for the zoning district in which it is located.
   Nonconformity. A legal use, structure, and/or development which existed
prior to the adoption of this chapter or any amendment thereto, that does not
presently conform to this chapter or its amendments.
   Non-linear projects. All construction activities and projects other than
utility line installation, pipeline construction, and other examples of long,
narrow, linear construction activities.
   Non-stormwater discharge. Any discharge to the stormwater system that is not
comprised entirely of stormwater.
   North American Industry Classification System (NAICS). A system, published
by the federal government for census and business tracking purposes, which
lists and classifies various industries.
   NPDES. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System; an acronym used to
describe the national program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing,
terminating, monitoring and enforcing permits, and imposing and enforcing
pretreatment requirements, under §§ 307, 402, 318, and 405 of the federal Clean
Water Act.
   NPDES Stormwater Permit. The permit issued by DHEC under the primacy
authority from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) that authorizes
the discharge of pollutants, in this case stormwater, to waters of the United
States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general
area-wide basis.
   Obstruction, airport. Any structure, growth or other object, including a
mobile object, which exceeds a limited height as set forth in this chapter for
airport protection overlay zones.
   One hundred year rainfall. A rainfall of an intensity expected to be equaled
or exceeded, on the average, once in one-hundred (100) years.
   On-site stormwater management. The design and construction of a stormwater
management facility within and for a single development.
   Open space. Land areas that are not occupied by buildings, structures,
impermeable areas, streets, alleys or required buffer transition and street
protective yards.
   Open space credit. The weighted amount of open space, determined by applying
a multiplier to the actual area.
   Open stormwater conveyance. A permanent, designed waterway, shaped, sized
and lined with appropriate vegetation or structural material used to safely
convey stormwater runoff within or away from developing areas.
   Open use of land. The use of a lot where the only structures on the lot are
incidental or accessory to the principal use of the land (e.g., golf course
driving ranges).
   Outdoor display. The placement of goods for sale or for advertisement,
outside of a building or structure.
   Outdoor retail. Commercial sales of large items, traditionally occurring
outside (e.g., auto dealerships, lumber yards).
   Outdoor room. A commercial area of a property that is not enclosed by
traditional walls and a roof but provides a space that shall be used to provide
services such as dining or other closely related activity and provides a
linkage between public (building) and private sphere (sidewalk).
   Outside storage. The storage of any material for a period greater than
forty-eight (48) hours including items for sale, lease, processing, and repair
(including vehicles) not in an enclosed building.
   Overlay district. A zoning district, established by this chapter, to
prescribe special regulations to be applied to a site in combination with the
base or underlying district.
   Owner. Any person, agent, firm, or corporation having a legal or equitable
interest in the property.
   Owner/operator. For the purpose of this chapter and in the context of
stormwater associated with construction activity, means any party associated
with a construction project that meets either of the following two criteria:
      (a)   The party has operational control over construction plans and
specifications. Note: A party has "operational control over construction plans
and specifications" if they have the authority to prepare or modify SWPPPs; or
      (b)   The party has “operational control over day-to-day activities” at a
Project that are necessary to ensure compliance with a SWPPP for the Site or
other permit conditions (e.g., they are authorized to direct workers at a Site
to carry out activities required by the SWPPP or comply with other permit
conditions). This definition is provided to inform permittees of the EPA’s
interpretation of how the regulatory definitions of “Owner or Operator” and
“facility or activity” are applied to discharges of storm water associated with
construction activity.
   Park. An area or facility intended to be used for recreation, exercise,
sports or similar activities, or an area intended to enhance the enjoyment of
natural features or natural beauty, but specifically excluding commercially
operated amusement parks.
   Parking lot. An off-road, open, authorized area where motor vehicles are
stored for the purpose of temporary, daily, or overnight parking.
   Parking lot, primary. The parking lot that contains the majority of the
required parking spaces for a business, institution, or other type of use.
   Parking, off-road. Space occupied by automobiles for parking on premises
other than roads.
   Parking, overflow. Parking areas designed to handle parking that is unusual
for a particular use and happens only on rare occasions such as special events.
   Parking, remote. Land within four hundred (400) feet of a use (measured from
the property line of the use to the land to be used for parking) utilized to
fulfill the parking requirements set forth in this chapter.
   Parking, shared. A parking area used jointly by two (2) or more uses.
   Parks, public. A park owned or operated by a government agency(ies) for
public recreational use.
   Pedestrian walkway. A marked path for pedestrian traffic.
   Pedestrian zone. An area where cars are prohibited, such as sidewalks,
bikeways, trails, lawns and landscaped areas.
   Performance bond. A document issued by a surety, in return for a fee or
premium, guaranteeing the performance of the terms and conditions of
development approval.
   Permitted Development Activity. The property owner has commenced
construction of a building or of any portion of a potable water distribution or
transportation system, a sanitary sewer distribution or transportation system,
a storm drainage system or a public road; or the property owner has commenced
grading or other land disturbance activities in conformance with valid permits
issued by Richland County.
   Permitted uses with special requirements. Uses permitted by right, provided
that the specific standards set forth in Article VI. are met.
   Person. Any individual or group of individuals, partnership, association,
corporation, company, firm, joint venture, trust, estate, commission, board,
public or private institution, utility, cooperative, interstate body, any
governmental or quasi-governmental entity, or other legal entity.
   Place of worship. A structure (or structures) and the parcel on which it is
located, in/on which persons regularly assemble for religious worship. The term
“place of worship” shall not include accessory uses such as day cares, schools,
thrift shops and other facilities designed for ministries incidental to the use
as a place of worship. Family life centers, church offices, regular worship
(“Sunday School”) classrooms and fellowship halls are considered accessory uses
and part of a “place of worship” as defined herein.
   Planning commission. The Richland County Planning Commission.
   Planning department. The Richland County Planning and Development Services
Department.
   Planting strip. A strip of land intended to be planted with trees, shrubs,
or other vegetation to separate a sidewalk from adjacent curbs or the edge of
interior street pavement.
   Plat. A map, or delineated representation of the subdivision of lands,
prepared by a surveyor licensed in South Carolina, being a complete and exact
representation of the subdivision or parcel and including other information,
which is in compliance with all the relevant requirements of this chapter and
other county statutes, laws and regulations.
   Plat, final. A set of drawings, and other documentation, prepared in
compliance with the requirements of this chapter and that are presented for
final approval and recordation by the county.
   PM Peak Hour (PMPH). The estimated average hourly traffic volume on a given
roadway segment between 4:00 PM and 6:00 PM.
   Pollutant. Dredged spoil; solid waste; incinerator residue; sewage; garbage;
sewage sludge; munitions; medical waste; chemical wastes; biological materials;
radioactive materials; heat; wrecked or discarded equipment; rock; sand; cellar
dirt; municipal, agricultural and industrial waste; and certain characteristics
of wastewater [e.g. the measure of acidity or basicity of a solution (pH),
temperature, Total Suspended Solids (TSS), turbidity, color, Biological Oxygen
Demand (BOD), Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD), toxicity, or odor]. A foreign
substance, that if permitted to get into the public water system, will degrade
its quality so as to constitute a moderate hazard, or impair the usefulness or
quality of the water to a degree which does not create an actual hazard to the
public health but which does adversely and unreasonably affect such water for
domestic use.
   Portable sign. See “Sign, portable.”
   Post-development. Land surface conditions as changed due to development.
   Pre-development. Natural or existing land surface conditions prior to
proposed development.
   Preserve. Land set aside for protection and propagation.
   Primary drainage channel. A drainage channel, stream, or creek draining an
area of three hundred (300) acres or more.
   Primary surface. A surface longitudinally centered on a runway.
   Primary surface (Jim Hamilton-L.B. Owens Airport). The primary surface
extends two hundred (200) feet beyond each end of the runway. The elevation of
any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest
point on the runway centerline. The width of the primary surface is five
hundred (500) feet.
   Primary surface (McEntire Air National Guard Base). The primary surface for
military airports is located on the ground or water longitudinally centered on
each runway with the same length as the runway. The width of the primary
surface for runways is two thousand (2,000) feet.
   Private roadway. An area of land that is privately owned, provides vehicular
access to residential lots, and has not been dedicated; or a private right-of-
way created by recorded easement, or other instrument, where no recording has
taken place, or no right of interest has accrued to the public and has not been
designated as part of the county road maintenance system.
   Produce stand. An open-air stand or place for the selling of agricultural
produce.
   Public nuisance (stormwater management facilities). The following conditions
constitute a public nuisance with respect to stormwater management facilities:
(a) Any condition that constitutes a breeding ground or harbor for rats,
mosquitoes, harmful insects or other pests; (b) An open place containing a
concentration of combustible items such as mattresses, boxes, paper, automobile
tires and tubes, garbage, trash, refuse, brush, old clothes, rags, or any other
combustible materials or objects of a like nature; (c) Any open place
containing a collection of garbage, food waste, animal waste, or any other
rotten or putrescible matter of any kind; (d) Any open place containing
furniture, appliances, or metal products of any kind or nature which have
jagged edges of metal or glass or areas of confinement; (e) Any condition which
blocks, hinders or obstructs in any way the natural flow of streams, creeks,
surface water, ditches, or drains, to the extent that the blockage or hindrance
or obstruction creates standing or stagnant water.
   Public recreation facilities. Facilities, other than parks, owned or
controlled by a public entity for the purpose of providing recreational
pursuits. Public recreation shall include such facilities as swimming pools,
gymnasiums and indoor tracks.
   Public works department. The Richland County Public Works Department.
   Racetrack. A facility containing a roadway that is used primarily for
automobile, animal, and/or motorcycle racing. A racetrack may include seating,
concession areas, and parking facilities along with accessory offices.
   Radio, television, and other similar transmitting towers. A mast, pole,
monopole, guyed or freestanding framework, or other vertical elements that act
as an antenna or to which an antenna is affixed or attached.
   Recreational vehicle. A vehicular-type unit primarily designed as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use, which either has its
own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle. For the
application of floodplain management ordinances only, recreational vehicle is
defined as: a vehicle which is: (a) built on a single chassis; (b) 400 square
feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; (c) designed
to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck/light duty
vehicle as defined by South Carolina Department of Motor Vehicles; and (d)
designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   Regulatory floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation by more than one
(1) foot, as identified on an official Flood Insurance Rate Map or other
available information.
   Repair and maintenance services, automobile, major.  An establishment
engaged in the significant repair and replacement of parts and motor services
to automobiles, including, but not limited to, such services as: engine
rebuilding, reconditioning of automobiles, the removal from any vehicle of a
major portion (i.e., the differential, transmission, head, engine block, or oil
pan) thereof for replacement or repair, the repair of damaged motor vehicles or
trailers (including body, frame, or fender straightening or repair), and/or the
painting of vehicles.
   Repair and maintenance services, automobile, minor. An establishment engaged
in the sale of automotive fuels or oils, and the incidental repair and
replacement of parts and motor services to automobiles, including oil change,
tire sales, and alignment, but not including any operation specified under
“repair and maintenance services, automobile, major.”
   Repetitive loss. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two (2)
separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost of repairs
at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty-
five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
   Residential footprint (lot coverage). This includes all the areas of a
parcel (lot) covered by buildings and other structures with surfaces greater
than thirty-six (36) inches above the finished and natural grade with the
exception of covered front porches, pergolas, porticos, balconies, overhangs,
and similar architectural features placed on the front (facing the street)
elevation of a building.
   Retention structure. A permanent structure whose primary purpose is to
permanently store a given volume of stormwater runoff.
   Road. An open way designed for the operation of vehicles, including, but not
limited to, streets, avenues, boulevards, highways, freeways, lanes, and/or
courts. This definition shall not include driveways or ingress/egress
easements.
   Road frontage. The distance for which a lot line of a lot adjoins a public
road, from one lot line intersecting said road to the furthest distance lot
line intersecting the same road.
   Road, half. A street or road that is intended to be developed by
constructing one-half (1/2) of a required width of a road with the remainder to
be provided at some future date.
   Road, main. The main entrance(s) to a Conservation subdivision, which
collects traffic from internal park roads, connecting to arterial roads
external to the subdivision.
   Road, minor rural. A road serving twenty (20) or fewer lots in low density,
primarily rural areas, and which does not provide connectivity to properties
other than those served.
   Road, park. A one-way road within a residential subdivision.
   Road, rural. A road serving development in low density, primarily rural
areas, and which would not be classified as a collector or arterial road.
   Road, T. A road that ends in a T shape; also known as a hammer head road.
   Roominghouse or boardinghouse. An establishment, other than a hotel, motel,
or bed and breakfast, in which more than three (3) persons who are not members
of the owner’s immediate family are housed or lodged in rooms used or intended
to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes, for
compensation, with or without meals being provided. Any dwelling in which such
accommodations are offered in ten (10) or more rooms shall be considered to be
a hotel or motel.
   Runoff. The portion of the precipitation on the land that reaches the
drainage system.
   Runway. A defined area at an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of
aircraft along its length.
   Rural road. A road serving development in low density, primarily rural
areas.
   Safe access. The minimum number of access points, direct, or indirect,
necessary to provide safe ingress and egress to the state and local road system
in consideration of the existing, and projected, traffic volume and the type
and density/intensity of adjacent land uses.
   Sanitary sewer pre-treatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a sanitary sewer
system. The reduction or alteration may be obtained by physical, chemical, or
biological processes, process changes or by other means, except as prohibited
by the Clean Water Act.
   Screen. To visually shield or obscure one abutting or nearby structure, use
or parking area from another by using fencing, walls, berms, or densely planted
vegetation.
   Sedimentation. The process which operates at or near the surfaces of the
ground, to deposit soil, debris and other materials either on other ground
surfaces or in water channels.
   Seepage. Percolation of underground water through the banks and into a
stream or other body of water, or into or out of a sewer.
   Septage. The liquid and solid material pumped from a septic tank, cesspool,
or similar domestic sewage treatment system or a holding tank when the system
is cleaned or maintained.
   Setback. The minimum distance by which any building or structure must be
separated from the lot lines of the lot on which it is located.
   Setback, front. A setback extending across the full width of a lot between
the front lot line and the foremost point of any structure on the lot.
   Setback, rear. A setback extending across the full width of a lot between
the rear lot line and the rearmost point of any structure on the lot.
   Setback, side. A setback between a side lot line and the nearmost point of
the nearest structure, extending from the required front setback to the
required rear setback.
   Sexually oriented business. An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult video
store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, sexual device
shop, or sexual encounter center. As used in this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply to such businesses:
      (a)   Adult arcade. Any place where the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or
mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other
image- producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer
persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are
distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (b)   Adult bookstore or adult video store. A commercial establishment
which, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental
(for any form of consideration) adult media.
         (1)   As used in this definition, principal business purpose or
purposes means the commercial establishment has a substantial portion of its
displayed merchandise which consists of said items; or has a substantial
portion of the wholesale value of its displayed merchandise which consists of
said items; has a substantial portion of the retail value of its displayed
merchandise which consists of said items; or derives a substantial portion of
its revenues from the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of said
items; or maintains a substantial section of its interior business space for
the sale or rental of said items.
         (2)   As used in this definition, substantial means twenty-five (25%)
or more.
      (c)   Adult cabaret. A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features, regardless of whether alcoholic
beverages are served, persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity.
      (d)   Adult media. Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed
matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or compact
discs, digital video discs, video reproductions, slides, or other visual
representations, which are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (e)   Adult motel. A hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment
that:
         (1)   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of
consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions,
films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, compact discs, digital video
discs, video reproductions or similar photographic reproductions that are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas; and advertises the availability of such material by
means of a sign visible form the public right-of-way, or by means of any on or
off- premises advertising, including, but not limited to, newspapers,
magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio or televison; or
         (2)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is
less than ten (10) hours; or
         (3)   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the
room for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours.
      (f)   Adult motion picture theater. A commercial establishment that, for
any form of consideration, exhibits or shows films, motion pictures,
videocassettes, slides, compact discs, digital video discs, video
reproductions, or similar photographic reproductions that are characterized by
their emphasis upon the display of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
      (g)   Characterized by. To describe the essential character or quality of
an item, activity, or thing. As applied in this article, no business shall be
classified as a sexually oriented business by virtue of showing, selling or
renting materials rated NC-17 or R by the Motion Picture Association of
America.
      (h)   Child care facility. A facility as defined in S.C. Code Ann. § 20-
7-2700(b).
      (i)   Establishment of a sexually oriented business. Any of the
following:
         (1)   The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as
a new business;
         (2)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a
sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
         (3)   The addition of another type(s) of sexually oriented business to
any other existing sexually oriented business, such as the addition of an adult
video store to an existing sexual device shop; or
         (4)   The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
      (j)   Nude or a state of nudity. The showing of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage or the showing of
bare female breasts.
   This definition shall not include the act of female breast-feeding a child
in a public place, nor to infants or toddlers in a public place, nor to
exposure of the human female breasts above a horizontal line across the top of
the areola exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt or other similar wearing
apparel; nor to exposure of cleavage of the human female breasts exhibited by a
dress, blouse, shirt or similar wearing apparel.
      (k)   Person. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.
      (l)   Premises. The real property upon which the sexually oriented
business is located, and all appurtenances thereto and buildings thereon,
including, but not limited to, the sexually oriented business structure, the
grounds, private walkways, and parking areas under the ownership, control, or
supervision of the sexually oriented business.
      (m)   Regularly. The consistent and repeated doing of the act so
described.
      (n)   Semi-nude. A state of dress in which the human male or female
genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, and anal cleft or cleavage are covered by
fully opaque cloth or other material.
      (o)   Sexual device shop. A commercial establishment that offers for
sale:
         (1)   Any two of the following categories: 1) adult media; 2)
lingerie; or 3) sexual devices; and combination thereof constitutes more than
ten percent (10%) of its stock in trade or occupies more than ten percent (10%)
of its interior business space.
         (2)   More than five percent (5%) of its stock in trade consists of
sexual devices; or
         (3)   More than five percent (5%) of its interior business space is
used for the display of sexual devices.
         (4)   Nothing in this definition shall be construed to include any
pharmacy, drug store, medical clinic, or any establishment primarily dedicated
to providing medical or healthcare products or services.
      (p)   Sexual device. Any three (3) dimensional object designed and
marketed for stimulation of the male or female human genital organ or anus, or
for sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others, and shall include
devices such as dildos, vibrators, penis pumps, and physical representations of
the human genital organs. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to
include devices primarily intended for protection against sexually transmitted
diseases or preventing pregnancy.
      (q)   Sexual encounter center. A business or commercial enterprise that
regularly offers, for any form of consideration, physical contact in the form
of wrestling or tumbling between persons when one or more of the persons is
semi-nude or nude.
      (r)   Specified anatomical areas. The human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks; the female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola; or male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and
opaquely covered.
      (s)   Specified sexual activities. Any of the following:
         (1)   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts;
         (2)   Actual or simulated intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation
or sodomy; or
         (3)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in subsection (1) through (2) of this definition above.
      (t)   Viewing room. A room, booth, or other enclosed or partially
enclosed area where a patron or patrons of a sexually oriented business would
ordinarily be positioned while watching adult media or live entertainment.
   Shade tree. Any tree listed as a “shade tree” in the development design
manual of the county with respect to landscaping.
   Shipping container. A structure originally, specifically or formally
designed for or used in the packing, shipping, movement or transportation of
freight, articles, goods or commodities, designed for or capable of being
mounted or moved on a rail car and/or designed for or capable of being mounted
on a chassis or bogie for movement by truck or trailer or loaded on a ship.
   Side lot line. Any boundary of a lot that is not a front lot line, a road
lot line or a rear lot line.
   Sight visibility triangle. See “vision clearance.”
   Sign. Any device (including, but not limited to, letters, numbers, words,
figures, emblems, pictures, or any part or combination) used for visual
communication intended to attract the attention of the public and visible to
the public right-of-way and other properties.
   Sign, attached. Any sign attached to, applied on, or supported by any part
of a building, including, but not limited to, a wall, window or projecting
sign, or a sign on a canopy, awning or marquee.
   Sign, bulletin or notice board. An on-premises sign on which message copy is
changed manually through attachment of letters, numbers, symbols, and other
similar characters or changeable pictorial panels. Such signs display
information related to activities or services conducted or offered on the
premises.
   Sign, canopy. A sign attached to or applied to the exterior surface of an
awning or canopy.
   Sign, combined development. A sign listing the businesses located within a
combined development. A combined development is two (2) or more establishments
or businesses occupying a common building or adjoining buildings which are
designed and developed in a coordinated manner and which share parking,
driveways and other common facilities.
   Sign, directional. Any on-premises sign that includes information assisting
in the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, such as enter, exit and one-
way.
   Sign face. The part of the sign that is or can be used to identify,
advertise or communicate information, or that attracts the attention of the
public for any purpose. The frame or structural members may be considered as
part of the sign face if it is so designed with lighting or other ornamentation
that is incorporated for the sign design.
   Sign, freestanding. A sign that is attached to, erected on, or supported by
some structure (such as a pole, mast, frame or other structure) that is not
itself an integral part of or attached to a building or other structure whose
principal function is something other than the support of a sign.
   Sign, ground-mounted. A freestanding sign, other than a pole sign, that is
located near the ground and attached to and supported by a masonry wall or
pilasters.
   Sign, hanging canopy. A sign suspended below and supported from a canopy or
awning and designed to be read by pedestrians passing below the canopy or
awning. The lowest point of a hanging canopy sign shall be no less than seven
(7) feet above the top elevation of the floor or pavement that is beneath it.
   Sign, height. The vertical distance from the highest point of a sign or its
support, whichever is greater, to the base of a sign at grade.
   Sign, incidental. Signs containing information necessary or convenient to
persons coming onto a premises. Incidental signs include, but are not limited
to, the following: signs containing information on hours of operation and
credit cards honored, signs identifying restrooms, public telephones and other
business facilities. Information signs shall not include fuel price signs or
traffic directional signs.
   Sign, marquee. A sign that is fabricated as a permanent roof-like structure
at the entry to a building, which projects beyond the building or extends along
and projects beyond the wall of the building., and which generally contains a
commercial message.
   Sign, monument. Any monolithic sign in which the bottom of the sign is flush
with the ground.
   Sign, off-premises. A sign that directs attention to a business, commodity,
service or entertainment not exclusively related to the premises where such
sign is located or to which it is affixed.
   Sign, off-premises weekend directional. An off- premise sign not greater
than twenty-four (24) inches by twenty-four (24) inches in total size and
placed only on the weekend, the purpose of which is limited exclusively to the
identification of a use or occupancy located elsewhere and which tells the
location of or route to such use or occupancy.
   Sign, on-premises. A sign relating in its subject matter to the premises on
which it is located, or to products, accommodations, services or activities on
the premises.
   Sign, portable. A sign designed or intended to be moved easily that is not
permanently embedded in the ground or affixed to a building or other structure,
including any sign that rests upon the ground, a frame, a building or other
structure. “Portable sign” shall include, but not be limited to, the following
types of signs: trailer signs (with or without wheels), menu and sandwich
boards, hot air or gas-filled balloons used for advertising, sidewalk or curb
signs, and A- frame signs.
   Sign, projecting. A sign attached to a building or other structure and
extending in whole or in part more than fourteen (14) inches beyond the
building.
   Sign, road or street. A sign placed at a roadway intersection that indicates
the road name and block number.
   Sign, roof. A sign that is mounted on the roof of a building or that is
wholly dependent upon a building for support and projects above the highest
point of a building with a flat roof, the eave line of a building with a
gambrel, gable or hip roof, or the deck line of a building with a mansard roof.
   Sign, temporary. A sign not intended or designed for permanent display.
   Sign, wall. A permanent sign mounted flat against and projecting less than
fourteen (14) inches from, or painted on the wall of, a building or structure
with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the face of the wall.
This term shall include permanent window signage.
   Sign, window. Any sign painted, drawn, or otherwise affixed to the inside of
an exterior window or glass door of a commercial or office building.
   Sketch plan. A sketch preliminary plat or site plan to enable the developer/
subdivider to save time and expense in reaching a general agreement with
authorized officials of Richland County as to the form of the plat or plan and
the objectives of this chapter.
   Sludge. Any solid, semi-solid, or liquid waste generated from a municipal,
commercial, or industrial wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment
plant, or air pollution control facility exclusive of the treated effluent from
a wastewater treatment plant.
   Small maturing tree. Any tree listed as a “small maturing tree” in the
development design manual of the county with respect to landscaping.
   Smart growth. A concept whose principals invest time, attention, and
resources in restoring a sense of community and activity to city centers and
older neighborhoods.
   South Carolina Department of Transportation (SCDOT). The State agency
responsible for maintaining state and federal roads and administering
distribution of the state and federal gas tax funds.
   Special congregate facilities. Congregate facilities characterized by a
clientele composed of persons who generally do not possess personal automobiles
to assist them in their daily transportation throughout the area and its
vicinity. Such facilities may include indigent care facilities, shelter
facilities, hostels, and similar facilities.
   Special exception. Uses that are generally compatible with land uses
permitted in a zoning district, but that because of their unique characteristic
or potential impacts on the surrounding neighborhood and or the county as a
whole, require individual consideration of their location, design,
configuration and/or operation at the particular location proposed.
   SSOs. Sanitary Sewer Overflows; an acronym used in referring to discharges
of untreated sewage from municipal sanitary sewer systems, without first
passing through a wastewater treatment plant, as a result of broken pipes,
equipment failure, or system overload. An SSO is a public health hazard and a
violation of federal, state and local discharge regulations.
   Start of construction. The date the building permit was issued; provided,
however, the actual start of construction, repair and reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or substantial improvement was within one hundred and
eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure (including a manufactured
home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of
piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or
the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction
does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of roads and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for footings, piers or foundations, or the erection of temporary
forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part
of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of
construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other
structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
   Stormwater. Any surface flow, runoff and drainage consisting entirely of
water from any form of natural precipitation and resulting from such
precipitation.
   Stormwater Design Manual. The manual of design, performance and review
standards for stormwater management, prepared under the direction of the county
engineer, with input from stakeholders. The requirements established by the
“Stormwater Design Manual” are mandatory, and shall be updated as often as
necessary.
   Stormwater management. The collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and
disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner to minimize channel erosion, flood
damage, and or degradation of water quality and in a manner to enhance and
ensure the public health, safety, and general welfare.
   Stormwater management facilities. Structures and man-made features designed
for the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater
runoff into and through the drainage system. Stormwater management facilities
include vegetative and/or structural measures, to control the increased volume
and rate of stormwater runoff caused by manmade changes to the land.
   Stormwater outfall. The point at which a stormwater system discharges to the
receiving waters.
   Stormwater runoff. The direct response of a watershed to precipitation,
including surface and subsurface flows resulting from precipitation.
   Stormwater system. The publicly-owned facilities by which stormwater is
collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to roads with drainage
systems, streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping
facilities, basins, drainage channels or other drainage structures.
   Story. That portion of a building included between the upper surface of a
floor and the upper surface of the floor or roof next above. It is measured as
the vertical distance from top to top of two (2) successive tiers of beams of
finished floor surfaces and, for the topmost story, from the top of the floor
finish to the top of the ceiling joists or, where there is not a ceiling, to
the top of the roof rafters.
   Street. See “road.”
   Street protective yard. A required open yard area in which trees are planted
abutting roads.
   Structural fill. Landfilling for future beneficial use utilizing land-
clearing debris, hardened concrete, hardened/cured asphalt, bricks, blocks, and
other materials specified by DHEC by regulation, compacted and landfilled in a
manner acceptable to DHEC, consistent with applicable engineering and
construction standards and carried out as a part of normal activities
associated with construction, demolition, and land-clearing operations;
however, the materials utilized must not have been contaminated by hazardous
constituents, petroleum products, or painted with lead-based paint. Structural
fill may not provide a sound structural base for building purposes.
   Structure. Anything constructed or erected which requires location on or in
the ground or is attached to something having a location on the ground or
anything as defined by the building code as a structure. Structures do not
include ditches and their appurtenances, poles, lines, cables or transmission
or distribution facilities of public utilities, freestanding mailboxes, on-
grade slabs, walks, driveways, landscaping materials, fences, or golf course
tee boxes, fairways, sand traps or greens. This term includes both permanent
and temporary structures. For the application of floodplain management
ordinances only, a structure is defined as a walled and roofed building,
including but not limited to a manufactured home and a gas or liquid storage
tank that is principally above ground, as defined by FEMA.
   Structure, height. The average finished ground elevation at the base of a
structure to the highest point of the roof of the structure, provided that
spires, belfries, cupolas, chimneys, antennas, water tanks, ventilators,
elevator housing, mechanical equipment or other such structures placed above
roof level and not intended for human occupancy shall not be subject to height
limitations.
   Structure, principal. A structure where the principal use of the lot on
which it is located is conducted.
   Structure size standards. Unless otherwise defined, this term means
standards regulating the building footprint of a structure relative to the area
of the lot on which the structure sits.
   Subdivision. All divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more
lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of sale, lease or building development. The definition of subdivision
includes:
   (a)   All division of land.
   (b)   Re-subdivision involving a further division or relocation of lot lines
of any lot or lots within a subdivision previously made and approved or
recorded according to law.
   (c)   The alteration of any roads or the establishment of any new roads
within any subdivision previously made and approved or recorded according to
law.
   (d)   Combinations of recorded lots.
   Subdivision, administrative. The combination or recombination of portions of
previously platted and recorded lots where the total number of lots is not
increased and the resultant lots are equal to the applicable site development
standards set forth in this chapter; the division of land into parcels of five
(5) acres or more where it does not result in the creation of a new roadway or
the widening of an existing roadway, the combination or recombination of entire
lots of record where no new road or change in existing roads is involved; or
the division of a parcel into two (2) lots which do not result in the
construction of a new road or the improvement (including, but not limited to,
paving and/or widening) of an existing road; or the construction of new water
facilities, other than private on-site wells; or the construction of new
sewerage facilities, other than on-site septic tanks; or the construction of
new storm drainage facilities, other than roadside swales and culverts; and is
not in conflict with any provision or portion of the comprehensive plan,
official map, or this chapter.
   Subdivision, major. Any subdivision that does not meet the criteria for an
administrative subdivision or a minor subdivision.
   Subdivision, minor. Those divisions of land that do not qualify for
administrative subdivision review, but which consist of less than fifty (50)
lots. Additionally, a minor subdivision shall not involve the dedication of
land to the county for open space or other public purposes.
   Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damage condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred. Such repairs may be undertaken successively and their costs
counted cumulatively during any ten (10) year period.
   Substantial improvement. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty
percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the "start of
construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures that have
incurred "repetitive loss" or "substantial damage," regardless of the actual
repair work performed. Substantial improvement shall also include any
improvements, singularly or collectively, on a structure during any ten (10)
year period for which the cost of total repairs over that period is equal to or
exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure.
   Swine farms. A tract of land devoted to raising fifty (50) or more animals
of the porcine species.
   SWPPP. Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan; an acronym used for a document
that describes the BMPs and activities to be implemented by a person or
business to identify the sources of pollution or contamination at a site and
the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater,
stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent
practicable.
   Technical representative. South Carolina Registered Professional Civil
Engineer, Registered Landscape Architect, or Tier B. Land Surveyor responsible
for sealing stormwater management plans.
   Tee box. The area in a driving range were players stand to hit golf balls
(i.e., tee shots).
   Temporary use. A land use (or structure) that is needed or is in place for a
limited duration.
   Ten-year frequency rainfall. A rainfall of an intensity expected to be
equaled or exceeded, on the average, once in ten (10) years.
   Thoroughfare road. Interstates, other freeways, expressways or major roads
that provide for the expeditious movement of high volumes of traffic within the
county.
   TMDL. Total Maximum Daily Load; an acronym used to describe the sum of the
individual wasteload allocations (WLAs) for point sources and load allocations
(LAs) for nonpoint sources and natural background. If a receiving water has
only one point source discharger, the TMDL is the sum of that point source WLA
plus the LAs for any nonpoint sources of pollution and natural background
sources, tributaries, or adjacent segments. TMDLs can be expressed in terms of
either mass per time, toxicity, or other appropriate measure.
   Top of bank. The elevation of the uppermost point on the rise of land which
borders on a water resource such as a river, creek or lake.
   Total site area. The entire area within the boundary of the parcel inclusive
of all interior future open space areas and road/utility rights-of-way.
   Townhouse. A single-family dwelling unit attached by fireproof common walls
to other similar type units, each unit having an open space for light, air, and
access in the front and rear. There shall be not less than three (3) or more
than seven (7) such units connected together.
   Townhouse dwelling unit. A one-family dwelling unit, with a private
entrance, which is part of a structure whose dwelling units are attached
horizontally in a linear arrangement, having a totally exposed front and rear
wall to be used for access, light and ventilation.
   Traditional neighborhood design. A planning concept that calls for
residential neighborhoods to be designed in the format of a small, village-type
atmosphere within neighborhoods. These are characterized by homes and buildings
on smaller lots, narrow front yards with front porches and gardens, detached
garages in the backyard, walkable streets (sidewalks), pubic parks and green
spaces.
   Traffic Impact Assessment (TIA). A document which analyzes the
transportation impacts of proposed land development projects on the adjacent
roadways, nearby intersections and affected property owners and provides
recommended mitigation measures to address the identified impacts.
   Traffic mitigation agreement. A written agreement among Richland County,
SCDOT and the applicant to allow the LOS mitigation measures identified in the
TIA to be provided in a timely manner. At a minimum, the agreement shall
include:
      1)   A specific list of the required mitigation measures and preliminary
cost estimates,
      2)   A timetable by which the improvements will be phased and/or
completed,
      3)   A proportionate cost sharing agreement for such improvements,
      4)   A designation of the party, or parties, responsible to ensure the
recommended improvement is completed in a timely manner; and
      5)   Any other such matters as may be appropriate to the specific
agreement.
   Transformer station. A utility substation where the voltage of electrical
energy is changed.
   Transient lodging. Lodging by any person who, either at his/her own expense
or at the expense of another, obtains lodging or the use of any lodging space
in any hotel or motel for any period of less than thirty (30) consecutive days.
   Transit route. The established route for public transportation services.
   Transportation Improvement Plan (TIP). A schedule of transportation capital
improvement projects prepared by the MPO which are programmed for completion
within the next six years.
   Tree. A usually tall, woody plant, distinguished from a shrub by having
comparatively greater size and longevity, and characteristically defined as:
      (a)   Large maturing tree - Single trunk whose canopy dimensions have the
potential to reach at least forty-five (45) feet tall and twenty-five (25) feet
wide at maturity.
      (b)   Medium maturing tree - Single trunk whose canopy dimensions have
the potential to reach at least twenty-five (25) feet tall and twenty (20) feet
wide at maturity.
      (c)   Small maturing tree - Single trunk or multi-stem whose canopy
dimensions have the potential to reach at least fifteen (15) feet tall and
fifteen (15) feet wide at maturity.
   Tree, mature. Any tree that has obtained the maximum capability of growth,
flowering, and reproduction.
   Tree, replacement. A new tree planted on a site after development.
   Tree Protection Plan. A plan that identifies the critical root zone where
trees are to be protected and preserved, and replacement trees planted on a
property to meet minimum requirements, as well as methods of tree protection to
be undertaken on the site.
   Twenty-five year frequency rainfall. A rainfall of an intensity expected to
be equaled or exceeded, on the average, once in twenty-five (25) years.
   USACE. United States Army Corp of Engineers.
   Use, principal. The primary use of any lot.
   Utilities. Electricity, gas, steam, communications, transportation,
wastewater, or water that is furnished to the public under state or county
regulations by a person, firm, corporation, municipal department or board.
   Utility lines and related appurtenances. All lines and supporting apparatus
or equipment related to the distribution, transmission or disposal of water,
storm and sanitary sewage, natural gas, power, telephone and telecommunication
cable.
   Utility service area. An area within a development where equipment used for
operations related to the provision, distribution, collection, transmission, or
disposal of water, storm and sanitary sewage, oil, natural gas, power,
information, telecommunication, telephone, and cable services is located.
   Utility service facilities. Facilities principally used for servicing
operations related to the provision, distribution, collection, transmission, or
disposal of water, storm and sanitary sewage, oil, natural gas, power,
information, telecommunication, telephone, and cable services.
   Utility substation. A structure or facility for transforming or transmitting
a service provided by a utility company. Such utility substation, may include
private utility systems such as telephone, electric, etc., but shall not
include telecommunication towers or other telecommunication devices.
   Valid Government Approval. The issuance by Richland County of a permit to
commence a Permitted Development Activity; or approval by Richland County of
subdivision of the property, of planned development district zoning for the
property, or of a sketch plan for development of the property.
   Variance. A device that grants a property owner relief from the provisions
of this chapter.
   Vehicular display area. An area designed and used for the display and
storage of vehicles for sale or lease.
   Vehicular surface area. The unenclosed area within a development designed
and used for the movement and storage (parking) of motor vehicles. This
definition shall not include driveways used for ingress and egress to a
development.
   Vegetation. All plant growth, including trees, shrubs, grasses, and mosses.
   Vending machine operator. A person that operates a vending machine.
   Vision clearance. An area of unobstructed vision at road intersections or
intersections between roads and driveways.
   Volume-to-Capacity Ratio (V/C). The volume of traffic on a roadway segment
(determined by traffic counts) divided by the engineering design capacity
(volume) of the roadway, expressed as a ratio. The v/c ratio is a critical
component of long range traffic forecast models and prioritizing road
improvement projects for inclusion in the TIP and the County’s CIP.
   Wastewater. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater,
discharged from a facility.
   Water quality. Those characteristics of stormwater runoff that relate to the
physical, chemical, biological and radiological integrity of water.
   Water quality protection areas. The areas that come under the current DHEC
303 (d) list, are TMDL sites, or are EP Environmental Protection Districts
identified by Richland County Council, and any other areas that are identified
by DHEC or Richland County Council.
   Water resource yard. A setback running approximately parallel to the tops of
the banks of designated water resources to be protected for, and defined by,
the location of critical riparian vegetation and habitat.
   Waters. For the purpose of identifying NPDES stormwater permit “point
discharges”, waters means surface water, within Richland County’s
jurisdictional boundaries as identified on USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle
sheets.
   Waters of the state. Refer to the State of South Carolina Department of
Health and Environmental Control, Regulation R.61-9.122, Part A, Section 122.2
“Definitions.”
   Watershed. The drainage area contributing stormwater runoff to a single
point.
   Wetlands. Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground
water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life
in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs,
and similar areas.
   Xeriscape. Quality landscapes that conserve water, protect the environment,
are adaptable to local conditions, and which are drought tolerant. The
principles of xeriscape include planning and design, appropriate choice of
plants, soil analysis (which may include the use of solid waste compost),
efficient irrigation, practical use of turf, appropriate use of mulches, and
proper maintenance.
   Yard. An open space between a building and the adjoining lot lines,
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground to the sky, except as otherwise
provided herein, on the lot on which a building is located.
   Yard sale. The sale or offering for sale to the general public of over five
(5) items of personal property on any portion of a lot containing a residential
use, whether within or outside any building.
   Zero lot line, common, single-family dwelling.  See “Dwelling, single-
family, zero lot line, common.”
   Zero lot line, parallel, single-family dwelling.  See “Dwelling, single-
family, zero lot line, parallel.”
   Zoning administrator. The zoning administrator of Richland County.
   Zoning district. Any zone shown on the Richland County zoning map for which
there are uniform regulations governing the use of buildings and premises or
the placement, size, spacing, etc. of such buildings or uses.
   Zoning map. The series of maps adopted as an ordinance by the Richland
County Council that delineates the extent of each zoning district established
in the Richland County Land Development Code.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 074-05HR, § I, 10-18-05; Ord. No.
031-06HR, § I, 4-18-06; Ord. No. 043-07HR, § I, 5-1-07; Ord. No. 019-08HR, § I,
3-18-08; Ord. No. 035-08HR, § I, 6-17-08; Ord. No. 045-08HR, § I, 7-15-08; Ord.
No. 061-08HR, § I, 6-5-08; Ord. No. 088-08HR, § I, 12-16-08; Ord. No. 005-09HR,
§ I, 2-17-09; Ord. No. 029-09HR, § I, 5-19-09; Ord. No. 038-09HR, §§ I, II, 7-
21-09; Ord. No. 053-09HR, § I, 11-3-09; Ord. No. 006-10HR, §§ I, II, 1-19-10;
Ord. No. 014-10HR, § I, 3-16-10; Ord. No. 018-10HR, § I, 5-4-10; Ord. No. 022-
10HR, § I, 5-18-10; Ord. No. 057-10HR, § I, 9-21-10; Ord. No. 060-10HR, §§
I—III, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 001-11HR, § I, 1-4-11; Ord. No. 027-11HR, § I, 5-17-
11; Ord. No. 033-11HR, § I, 6-21-11; Ord. No. 034-11HR, § I, 6-21-11; Ord. No.
064-11HR, § I, 11-15-11; Ord. No. 055-12HR, §§ I, II, III, IV, 10-16-12; Ord.
No. 045-13HR, § I, 9-10-13; Ord. No. 025-14HR, § I, 5-20-14; Ord. No. 071-14HR,
§ I, 12-9-14; Ord. No. 034-15HR, §§ I, II, III, 7-21-15; Ord. No. 036-15HR, §
I, 7-28-15; Ord. No. 016-16HR, § I, 4-19-16; Ord. No. 053-17HR, §§ I - VI, 11-
14-17)
Secs. 26-23 - 26-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 26-31. Richland County Council.
   (a)   Powers and duties pursuant to this chapter.  Without limiting any
authority granted to the Richland County Council by law or regulations, the
Richland County Council shall have the following powers and duties with respect
to this chapter, to be carried out in accordance with the terms of this
chapter:
      (1)   To adopt new text for and amendments to the text of this chapter;
      (2)   To adopt new zoning maps and amendments to the zoning maps;
      (3)   To establish fees for permits and approvals related to the
administration of this chapter; and
      (4)   Such additional powers and duties as may be set forth elsewhere in
this chapter and in other related laws and regulations.
   (b)   Reserved.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04)
Sec. 26-32. Richland County Planning Commission.
   See Section
2-332 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04)
Sec. 26-33. Board of Zoning Appeals of Richland County.
   (a)   Established; duties. The Board of Zoning Appeals of Richland County is
hereby established, which shall have the powers and duties as provided in
Sections 6-29-780 through 6-29-860 of the South Carolina Code of Laws. In
general, such powers and duties shall include the following:
      (1)   Administrative review. The board of zoning appeals shall hear and
decide appeals when it is alleged that there is error in any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by the zoning administrator or
other authorized staff of the planning department in the enforcement of this
chapter. Such appeals must be taken within thirty (30) days after the order,
requirement, decision, or determination that is alleged to be in error is made,
and must be made in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in
Section
26-58 of this chapter.
      (2)   Variances. The board of zoning appeals shall have the power to
authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this
chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special
conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter would
result in an unnecessary hardship. Such appeals shall be made in accordance
with the procedures and standards set forth in Section
26-57 of this chapter.
      (3)   Special exceptions. The board of zoning appeals shall hear and
decide applications for special exceptions as the board is specifically
authorized to pass upon by the terms of this chapter. Such appeals shall be
made in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in Section
26-56 of this chapter.
      (4)   Remand. The board of zoning appeals may remand a matter to an
administrative official, upon motion by a party or the board's own motion, if
the board determines that the record is insufficient for review. A party's
motion for remand may be denied if the board determines that the record is
sufficient for review.
   (b)   Membership; terms; vacancies.
      (1)   The board of zoning appeals shall consist of seven (7) members
appointed by the Richland County Council, a majority of which shall constitute
a quorum. Any person who is appointed to the board of zoning appeals after
September 1, 2006 must reside in Richland County. In appointing members to the
board of zoning appeals, council shall give due consideration as to whether
applicants living in an incorporated or unincorporated area of the County. None
of the members of the board of zoning appeals shall hold any other public
office or position with the county.
      (2)   Members shall be appointed for staggered terms of three (3) years
and until their respective successors are appointed and qualified. Members may
be removed for cause by the Richland County Council.
      (3)   Vacancies shall be filled by the Richland County Council for the
unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant.
   (c)   Organization; officers; rules; meetings; notice; records.
      (1)   The board of zoning appeals shall elect a chairperson, a vice-
chairperson, and a secretary from its members who shall each serve for a one
(1) year term or until re- elected or a successor is elected and qualified. The
staff of the Richland County Planning and Development Services Department shall
support the board in fulfilling its responsibilities by facilitating matters to
be brought before the board.
      (2)   The board shall adopt rules of procedure necessary to the conduct
of its affairs in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairperson
and at other times as the board may determine. Public notice of all meetings of
the board of zoning appeals shall be provided by publication in a newspaper of
general circulation within the county. The chairperson, or in his/her absence,
the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses.
      (4)   All meetings shall be open to the public. The board shall keep
minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question,
or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact. The board shall keep
records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall
immediately be filed in the office of the zoning administrator, and shall be a
public record.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 084-06HR, § I, 9-12-06)
Sec. 26-34. Development Review Team.
   (a)   Established; duties. A development review team is hereby established,
which shall have the following duties:
      (1)   Land development review. The development review team shall review
and comment on all major land development applications and minor land
development applications as needed. Such review shall be made in accordance
with the procedures set forth in Section
26-53 of this chapter.
      (2)   Subdivision review. The development review team shall review and
comment on all major subdivision plat applications and shall comment on minor
subdivision plats as needed. Such review shall be made in accordance with the
procedures set forth in Section
26-54 of this chapter.
      (3)   Assistance to the planning department. The development review team
shall review and comment on other plans or applications as requested by the
planning department and shall assist the staff of the planning department with
any studies or other land development matters as necessary.
      (4)   Other. The development review team shall perform such additional
powers and duties as may be set forth for the development review team of
Richland County elsewhere in this chapter and other laws and regulations of the
county.
   (b)   Membership; operating procedures. The development review team shall be
appointed by the planning director. It shall consist of representatives of
various departments within the county. The membership and operating procedures
shall be as determined by the planning director. The planning director shall be
a member of and shall serve as chair of the development review team.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 077-08HR, § I, 12-2-08)
Sec. 26-35. Richland County Planning and Development Services Department.
   (a)   General powers and duties pursuant to this chapter. The Richland
County Planning and Development Services Department, under the direction of the
Richland County Planning Director, shall have the following powers and duties,
to be carried out in accordance with the terms of this chapter:
   (1)   To review all applications for land development, subdivision, and
planned development approval for compliance with the terms of this chapter and
to facilitate any necessary formal review of such applications;
   (2)   To review all applications for permitted uses with special
requirements, special exceptions and variances for compliance with the terms of
this chapter and to facilitate any necessary formal review of such
applications;
   (3)    To review all applications for certificates of zoning compliance in
accordance with the terms of this chapter;
   (4)   To provide the Richland County Council, the Richland County Planning
Commission, and the Richland County Board of Zoning Appeals with reports and
recommendations regarding matters before these bodies, either as required by
this chapter, other laws and regulations, or upon the request of the body;
   (5)   To enforce compliance with the terms of this chapter in accordance
with Article XII., unless such enforcement is specifically assigned to another
county official; and
   (6)   Such additional powers and duties as may be set forth for the Richland
County Planning and Development Services Department elsewhere in this Code of
Ordinances and other laws and regulations of the county.
   (b)   Specific powers and duties of certain planning department officers:
   (1)   Planning director. The Richland County Planning Director, in addition
to having such additional powers and duties as may be assigned or as are set
forth elsewhere in this Code of Ordinances, shall serve on and coordinate the
activities of the Richland County Development Review Team as established in
Section 26-34 of this chapter.
   (2)   Zoning administrator. The Richland County Zoning Administrator, in
addition to having such additional powers and duties as may be assigned or as
are set forth elsewhere in this Code of Ordinances, shall interpret the terms
and provisions of this chapter unless such interpretation is specifically
assigned to another county official. In addition, the zoning administrator may,
for good cause shown, administratively continue any matter before the Planning
Commission, the Board of Zoning Appeals, or any matter scheduled to be heard by
County Council at a zoning public hearing prior to publication of the
respective agenda. Notice of the administrative continuance shall be made in
writing to the chair of the Planning Commission, the Board of Zoning Appeals,
or County Council, with a copy thereof served upon the parties of record.
Matters that are administratively continued shall be rescheduled for hearing as
soon as practical, consistent with the basis for the continuance.
   (3)   Land development administrator. The Richland County Land Development
Administrator, in addition to having such additional powers and duties as may
be assigned or as are set forth elsewhere in this chapter, shall be responsible
for final approval and signing of all subdivision plats to be recorded in the
jurisdiction of Richland County.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 006-10HR, § III, 1-19-10; Ord. No.
060-10HR, § IV, 9-28-10)
Sec. 26-36. Richland County Public Works.
   (a)   Powers and duties pursuant to this chapter.
   (1)   Engineering Division/Stormwater Management Division. The Richland
County Engineering Division and the Stormwater Management Division, under the
direction of the Richland County Engineer, shall have the following powers and
duties in administering and implementing Article VIII of this chapter and other
relevant laws and regulations pertaining to stormwater management and erosion
and sediment control in Richland County:
      a.   To review and approve/deny all plans for stormwater management to
assure that all applicable requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
      b.   To enforce all provisions of the stormwater management and erosion
and sediment control provisions of this chapter and other relevant laws and
regulations relating to stormwater management. (See Sections
26-64,
26-202 and
26-203 of this chapter).
      c.   To review and approve/deny all applications for land disturbance
permits to assure that all applicable requirements of this chapter have been
satisfied.
      d.   To interpret the terms and provisions of Section 26-64 and Article
VIII. of this chapter.
   (2)   Flood coordinator. The Richland County Flood Coordinator, under the
direction of the Richland County Engineer, shall have the following powers and
duties in administering and implementing Section
26-106 of this chapter and other relevant laws and regulations pertaining to
floodplain management in Richland County:
      a.   To review all applications for zoning and land disturbance permits
within the FP
         Floodplain Overlay District to assure that all applicable requirements
of this chapter have been satisfied.
      b.   To advise any applicant for a zoning and/or land disturbance permit
within the FP Floodplain Overlay District that additional federal or state
permits may be required and require that copies of any permits or permit
applications for activities on the proposed site be provided and maintained on
file with the flood coordinator.
      c.   To notify adjacent communities and the State Coordinator for the
National Flood Insurance Program of the South Carolina Department of Natural
Resources, Land, Water and Conservation Division, prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and to submit evidence of such notification to
FEMA.
      d.   To prevent encroachments within floodways unless the certification
and flood hazard reduction provisions of Section
26-106 of this chapter are met.
      e.   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of special flood hazard areas (for example, where there appears to
be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), to make
the necessary interpretation.
      f.   When base flood elevation data and floodway data have not been
provided in accordance with Section
26-106 of this chapter, to obtain, review, and reasonably utilize the best
available base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal,
state or other source at his/her discretion, in order to administer the
provisions of Section 26-106 of this chapter and other relevant laws and
regulations pertaining to floodplain management in Richland County.
      g.   When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the flood
coordinator must require that no encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development shall be permitted
within Zones AE and A1-30 on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated by
an engineer registered with the state, that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood at
any point within the community more than one (1) foot.
      h.   Mail annually a notice to owners or occupants of structures within
or touched by the regulatory floodplain areas, to provide information as to the
status of the flood hazard for each property.
      i.   To serve notices of violation, issue stop work orders, revoke or
suspend permits and take corrective actions for violations of Section
26-106 of this chapter and other relevant laws and regulations pertaining to
floodplain management in Richland County.
      j.   To maintain all records pertaining to the administration of Section
26-36, Section 26-61, 26-106, and Section 26-202, and to make these records
available for public inspection.
      k.   Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits
have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is
required by Federal or State law, including section 404 of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C 1334.
   (b)   Reserved.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 043-07HR, § XXVI, 5-1-07; Ord. No.
006-10HR, § IV, 1-19-10; Ord. No. 060-10HR, § V, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 053-17HR, §
VII, 11-14- 17)
Secs. 26-37 - 26-50. Reserved.
   ARTICLE IV. AMENDMENTS AND PROCEDURES
Sec. 26-51. General.
   This article contains the detailed procedures relevant to carrying out the
purposes set forth throughout this chapter. The processes for revising this
chapter and the official zoning map for the county are contained herein.
Additionally, all review and permitting procedures required by this chapter are
also outlined in this article.
   (a)   Permits/approval types. Any development within the jurisdiction of
Richland County may require one or more of the permits and approvals detailed
in this article to ensure that the development is consistent with the goals and
purposes of this chapter and with the public health, safety and general
welfare. Permits and approvals include, but are not necessarily limited to, the
following:
   Land Development Permits (Land Development Compliance Review, Minor Land
Development Review and Major Land Development Review). (Section
26-53).
   Subdivision Review and Approval. (Section
26-54).
   Permitted Uses with Special Requirements. (Section
26-55).
   Special Exceptions. (Section
26-56).
   Variances. (Section
26-57).
   Appeals of Administrative Decisions. (Section
26-58).
   Planned Development Review and Approval. (Section
26-59).
   Certificates of Zoning Compliance. (Section
26-60).
   Review in the FP Floodplain Overlay District. (Section
26-61).
   Sign Permits. (Section
26-62).
   Temporary Use Permits. (Section
26-63).
   Land Disturbance Permits with approved SWPPPs. (Section
26-64).
   Applications for all permits or approvals, unless otherwise specified, may
be made at the Richland County Planning and Development Services Department.
The review procedures described in this article are those required by Richland
County. Other agencies and/or departments may have separate procedures that
must be followed in order to obtain plan approval. Those agencies must be
contacted to obtain information regarding the proper procedure for approval of
plans and construction.
   (b)   Simultaneous processing of applications.  This article intends to
accommodate, where possible, the simultaneous processing of applications for
different permits and approvals that may be required for the same project in
order to make the review process as short as possible. However, some forms of
approval depend upon the applicant having previously received another form of
approval. The applicant should note that each of the permits and approvals set
forth in this section has its own review sequence, and this should be taken
into consideration when planning the development.
   (c)   Application and review fees. Requests for review of various permit and
approval applications required by this article are subject to the payment of
various fees in order to defray the county's administrative costs. The fees for
different types of permits and approvals are kept on file in the Richland
County Planning and Development Services Department and the Richland County
Public Works Department. These fees are determined by the Richland County
Council and are periodically revised by the council.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 006-10HR, § V, 1-19-10)
Sec. 26-52. Amendments.
   (a)   General. The Richland County Council may from time to time amend any
part of the text of this chapter or amend the zoning map of the county. Such
amendments shall be made in accordance with the county's comprehensive plan.
   (b)   Initiation of proposals.
      (1)   Text amendments. Amendments to the text of this chapter may be
initiated by:
         a.   Adoption of a motion by the Richland County Planning Commission.
         b.   Adoption of a motion by the Richland County Council.
         c.   Initiation by the Richland County Planning Director or the
Richland County Administrator.
      (2)   Zoning map amendments.
         a.   Initiation. Amendments to the zoning map of the county may be
initiated by:
            1.   Adoption of a motion by the Richland County Planning
Commission.
            2.   Adoption of a motion by the Richland County Council.
            3.   Initiation by the Richland County Planning Director or the
Richland County Administrator.
            4.   The filing of an application by the property owner(s) or their
authorized agent.
         b.   Minimum area for zoning map amendment application. No request for
a change in zoning classification shall be considered that involves an area of
less than two (2) acres, except changes that involve one of the following:
            1.   An extension of the same existing zoning district boundary.
            2.   An addition or extension of RM-MD zoning contiguous to an
existing RM-HD or RS-HD zoning district.
            3.   An addition of OI zoning contiguous to an existing commercial
or residential zoning district.
            4.   An addition of NC zoning contiguous to an existing commercial
or residential zoning district.
            5.   An addition of GC zoning contiguous to an existing industrial
zoning district.
            6.   An addition of LI zoning contiguous to an existing industrial
zoning district.
            7.   A zoning change where property is contiguous to a compatible
zoning district lying within another county or jurisdiction.
            8.   A zoning change for a non-conforming use created by this
chapter that is contiguous to compatible land uses.
            9.   A zoning change for a parcel located within an adopted
neighborhood master plan area and which has a compatible adopted neighborhood
zoning district.
   (c)   Petition submittal by property owners (map amendments only).
      (1)   Application. A petition for an amendment to the zoning map shall be
filed on a form provided by the Richland County Planning and Development
Services Department. Such application shall contain all the information
required on the form. The filing of a petition is not needed for a proposal for
a text amendment. In addition to the application, a digital plat representing
the proposed change shall be submitted in a format specified by the county, if
deemed necessary by the zoning administrator.
      (2)   Conference. Every applicant for a zoning map amendment is required
to meet with the planning director, in a pre-application conference, prior to
or at the time of, the submittal of the petition for amendment. The purpose of
this conference is to provide additional information regarding the review
process and to provide assistance in the preparation of the application.
      (3)   Fees. An application fee, established by the Richland County
Council shall be submitted with the petition.
   (d)   Staff review. The planning department shall review any petition for a
zoning map amendment and determine if it is complete within ten (10) days of
its submittal. If the application is complete, the planning department shall
schedule the matter for consideration at the next available meeting of the
Richland County Planning Commission. For text amendments, the department shall
schedule the matter for consideration by the planning commission when the staff
review of the proposal is complete. For all amendments, the planning department
shall prepare a staff evaluation and recommendation. Only complete application
packages received prior to the first day of the month shall be scheduled for
the following month’s planning commission meeting. The schedule for meetings of
the planning commission shall be kept and maintained in the office of the
Richland County Planning and Development Services Department.
   (e)   Planning commission review and action.
      (1)   Review. All proposed amendments shall be submitted to the planning
commission for study and recommendation. The planning commission shall study
each proposal to determine:
         a.   The need and justification for the change.
         b.   When pertaining to a change in the district classification of the
property, the effect of the change, if any, on the property and any surrounding
properties.
         c.   When pertaining to a change in the district classification of the
property, the amount of land in the general area having the same district
classification as that being requested.
         d.   The relationship of the proposed amendment to the purposes of the
general planning program, with appropriate consideration as to whether the
proposed change will further the purposes of this chapter and the purposes of
the comprehensive plan.
      (2)   Action. Within thirty (30) days from the date that any proposed
zoning amendment is first considered by the planning commission at a scheduled
meeting, unless a longer period of time has been mutually agreed upon between
the county council and the planning commission in a particular case, the
planning commission shall submit its report and recommendation to the county
council. The recommendation of the planning commission is advisory only, and
shall not be binding on county council. If the planning commission does not
submit its report within the prescribed time, the county council may proceed to
act on the amendment without further awaiting the recommendations of the
planning commission.
   (f)   Notification of public hearing.
      (1)   Publication. Fifteen (15) days in advance of the first reading on
any proposed map amendment, and fifteen (15) days in advance of the first or
second reading of any proposed text amendment (whichever is applicable), the
county council (or its designee) shall publish notice of the time and place of
the public hearing on the matter in a newspaper of general circulation within
the county. Such notices shall contain the date, time, and place of the public
hearing, and the nature and character of the proposed action. In addition, the
hearing notice shall also identify any property affected, and whenever
practical, identify the general location where affected property lines
intersect the frontage road. The notice shall further inform the public where
information may be examined and when and how written comment may be submitted
on the proposed matter.
      (2)   Posting. When a proposed amendment affects the district
classification of a particular piece of property, the planning department shall
cause to be conspicuously located on or adjacent to the property affected
hearing notices that shall be posted as follows:
         a.   Hearing notices shall indicate the nature of the change proposed,
identification of the property affected, and the time, date, and place of the
public hearing. Whenever practical, the hearing notices shall identify the
general location where property lines intersect the frontage road.
         b.   Hearing notices shall be posted at least fifteen (15) days prior
to the hearing.
         c.   Hearing notices shall be located as follows:
            1.   For lots or parcels with road frontage of 100 feet or less,
one (1) hearing notice shall be placed on each lot or parcel.
            2.   For lots or parcels with road frontage greater than one
hundred (100) feet but less than five hundred (500) feet, one (1) hearing
notice shall be placed for every one hundred (100) feet of road frontage or
portion thereof.
            3.   For lots or parcels with road frontage greater than five
hundred (500) feet but less than one thousand (1,000) feet, one (1) hearing
notice shall be placed for every two hundred (200) feet of road frontage or
portion thereof.
            4.   For lots or parcels of land with road frontage of one thousand
(1,000) feet or greater, one (1) hearing notice shall be placed for every three
hundred (300) feet of road frontage or portion thereof.
            5.   When multiple parcel rezonings are initiated by the county
council, the planning commission, the planning director, or the county
administrator, posting of property is not required. However, written notice of
the hearing shall be mailed to affected property owners in accordance with
Section
26-52(f)(3) below.
      (3)   Mailed notice.
         a.   General. Before holding a public hearing required by this chapter
for a zoning map amendment, written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by
the planning department, by first class mail, at least fifteen (15) days prior
to the day of the hearing. Notice shall be mailed to all owners of property
within, contiguous to, or directly across the road from the area proposed for
rezoning. The notice shall be sent to the address of such owners appearing on
the latest published tax listing. The failure to deliver notice as provided in
this subsection shall not invalidate any such amendment nor delay the hearing.
The notice shall contain the same information as required of notices published
in newspapers (Section
26-52(f)(1) above).
         b.   Notice to groups. Neighborhood associations and other groups as
specified by the Richland County Council shall be provided notice also. Such
notice shall be mailed at least fifteen (15) days before the day of the public
hearing and shall contain the same information as required of notices published
in newspapers (Section
26-52(f)(1) above). The failure to deliver notice as provided in this
subsection shall not invalidate any such amendment, nor delay the hearing.
   (g)   County Council review and action.
      (1)   General. Following receipt of a recommendation on a proposed
amendment, the Richland County Council shall set a date for a public hearing on
the proposed amendment. Notice shall be provided as set forth in Section
26-52(f) above. Public hearings on zoning map amendments shall be held prior to
the first reading on the matter and public hearings for text amendments shall
be held prior to first or second reading. In no event shall a public hearing on
a specific question be held contemporaneously with the third reading of said
question.
      (2)   Action. Within one hundred eighty (180) days after the public
hearing on a proposed zoning map or text amendment, the county council shall
either adopt or deny the amendment. If no action is taken by the county council
within one hundred eighty (180) days after the public hearing, the proposed
amendment shall be considered denied.
   (h)   Withdrawal or reconsideration of proposed amendments.
      (1)   Withdrawal. An applicant may only withdraw an amendment application
(which has been submitted to the Richland County Council with planning
commission recommendation) not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the
scheduled County Council Zoning Public Hearing. Less than fifteen (15) days
before the Zoning Public Hearing, the applicant may only request a withdrawal
by appearing before the County Council at the scheduled zoning public hearing.
A withdrawal shall be considered a termination of the application. Resubmission
shall be processed as a new application and all applicable fees will be
assessed.
      (2)   Major change to a proposed map amendment shall be considered a
withdrawal. A major change to a proposed map amendment application is any
change initiated by the applicant or property owner that would result in a
different zoning district classification than initially requested, or would
result in a significant alteration in the requested zoning district boundary,
or would result in a major amendment to a Planned Development District. Any
major change in a proposed map amendment application, prior to enactment of the
map amendment at third reading by County Council, shall be considered a
withdrawal. A new application shall be submitted and all applicable fees will
be assessed.
      (3)   Reconsideration after denial.
         a.   Waiting period. When an application for a change in land use
classification has been disapproved by the county council, reapplication for
the same change, for the same parcel of land, in whole or in part, shall not be
permitted until twelve (12) months from the date of final determination or
action of the council.
         b.   Waiting period waiver. The waiting period required by this
subsection shall be waived if the planning commission recommends to the county
council that reconsideration be given, after the planning commission has found
that either:
            1.   There has been substantial change in the character of the
area; or
            2.   Evidence of factors or conditions exist (that were not
considered by the planning commission or the county council in previous
deliberations), which might substantially alter the basis upon which the
previous determination was reached.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 065-05HR, § I, 9-20-05; Ord. No.
023-06HR, § I, 3-21-06; Ord. No. 064-08HR, § I, 10-21-08; Ord. No. 038-09HR, §
III, 7-21-09; Ord. No. 028-13HR, § I, 6-18-13)
Sec. 26-53. Land development permits.
   (a)   General. No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added
to, or structurally altered without a land development permit being issued by
the county. In addition to building or structural change, a land development
permit shall also be required for expansions of existing uses as well as for a
change of use. A land development permit shall not be issued by the planning
department except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, unless the
planning department receives a written order from the Richland County board of
zoning appeals in the form of an interpretation involving error (Section
26-58) or a special exception (Section
26-56) or variance (Section
26-57). If the permit is denied, reasons for the denial shall be stated. The
planning department shall notify the building and inspections department and
the emergency services department whenever plans are submitted that affect the
"emergency planning zone" (EPZ) of the V.C. Summer Nuclear Plant (which is
located in Fairfield County) that involves an entity that will employ or house
more than one hundred (100) persons in a facility on a regular basis, as in
those instances an evacuation plan must be first submitted to and approved by
the emergency services department prior to the issuance of any building permit
or land development permit.
   (b)   Processes. There are three (3) types of land development permit
processes: land development compliance review, minor land development review,
and major land development review. The type of process to be applied to a
particular development application depends on the nature of the development
proposed.
      (1)   Land development compliance review.
         a.   Applicability. Construction of detached single-family dwelling
units and two-family dwellings on individual lots of record are subject only to
land development compliance review in order to obtain a land development
permit. In addition, changes of use not involving new construction are subject
only to land development compliance review in order to obtain a land
development permit.
         b.   Plan submittal. An application for a land development permit
subject to land development compliance review shall be filed by the owner of
the property or by an authorized agent. All documents/ information required on
the application must be submitted - including the permit fee, as established by
county council.
         c.   Staff review. The planning department shall review the
application and determine if it is complete. If the application is incomplete,
the planning department shall notify the applicant of the deficiencies.
Provided the application is complete, the planning department, for projects not
involving some other form of review, shall approve or deny the approval of the
application within thirty (30) days of receipt. Failure to act within thirty
(30) days, unless extended by mutual agreement, shall be considered to
constitute approval. In most situations, land development compliance review and
the issuance of a land development permit can be handled at the time of
application submittal. A record of all actions will be maintained as a public
record and the applicant must be notified in writing of any actions taken.
         d.   Public notification. No public notification is required for land
development permit issuance subject to land development compliance review.
         e.   Formal review. No formal review is required for land development
permit issuance subject to land development compliance review.
         f.   Variances. Requests for variances, unless otherwise specified,
shall be heard by the board of zoning appeals under the procedures set forth in
Section
26-57 of this chapter.
         g.   Appeals. Appeals of the decisions of the planning department
regarding land development permit applications, which must be filed within
thirty (30) days after actual notice of the decision, shall be heard by the
planning commission under the procedures set forth at Section
26-58 of this chapter. Such appeals shall encompass all issues for appeal. An
appeal from the decision of the planning commission by a person who may have a
substantial interest in the decision must be taken to the circuit court within
thirty (30) days after actual notice of the decision. In the alternative, also
within thirty (30) days, a property owner whose land is the subject of a
decision by the planning commission may appeal by filing a notice of appeal
with the circuit court accompanied by a request for pre-litigation mediation in
accordance with S.C. Code 1976, §§ 6-29-1150 and 6-29-1155.
         h.   Permit validity. In accordance with S.C. Code 1976, §§ 6-29-1510,
et seq., as amended, upon the issuance of a land development permit, the
applicant shall have a vested right for two (2) years from the date of issuance
to undertake and complete the corresponding development of property under the
terms and conditions of the approved site specific development plan. Failure to
complete work within this time shall render the permit void. However, the
applicant may request a one (1) year extension of this time period no later
than thirty (30) days and no earlier than sixty (60) days prior to the
expiration of the permit. The request for an extension must be approved unless
otherwise prohibited by an intervening amendment to this chapter, such
amendment having become effective prior to the expiration of the permit.
Likewise, and in the same manner, the applicant may apply for four (4) more one
(1) year extensions. Any change from the approved site specific development
plan that has not first been reviewed and approved by the planning department
shall render the land development permit invalid.
      (2)   Minor land development review.
         a.   Applicability. Minor land developments are those developments
(exclusive of residential or commercial subdivisions) that do not meet the
standards for applicability for "land development compliance review" or "major
land development" review. If a phased project would reach the thresholds for a
major land development within a five (5) year period, then the project shall be
treated as a major land development, regardless of the size of the individual
phases. To be considered a minor land development, the subdividing of property
or the dedication of land to the county for open space or other public purposes
shall not be part of the development. Minor land developments are subject to
the review process outlined in subparagraphs b. through f. below in order to
obtain a land development permit.
         b.   Plan submittal. An application for a land development permit
subject to minor land development review shall be filed by the owner of the
property or by an authorized agent. All documents/ information required on the
application must be submitted - including the permit fee, as established by
county council.
         c.    Staff review. The planning department shall review the
application and determine if it is complete. If the application is incomplete,
the planning department shall notify the applicant of the deficiencies within
ten (10) days of the most recent submission date. Provided the application is
complete, the following shall occur.
            1.   Planning staff review. Plans for development requiring minor
land development review shall be reviewed by the planning department for
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
            2.   Development review team. As needed, plans for development
requiring minor land development review shall be reviewed by members of the
county's development review team for compliance with the requirements of this
chapter and other applicable county codes. No formal team review shall be
required.
            The planning department shall approve, approve conditionally, or
deny the approval of the application within thirty (30) days of receipt.
Failure to act on an application within thirty (30) days shall be considered to
constitute approval. A record of all actions will be maintained as a public
record and the applicant must be notified of any actions taken.
         d.   Public notification. No public notification is required for land
development permit issuance subject to minor land development review.
         e.   Formal review. No formal review is required for land development
permit issuance subject to minor land development review.
         f.   Variances. Requests for variances, unless otherwise specified,
shall be heard by the board of zoning appeals under the procedures set forth in
Section 26-57 of this chapter. However, requests for variances from the
requirements set forth in Article IX shall be heard by the planning commission.
         g.   Appeals. Appeals of the decisions of the planning department
regarding land development permit applications (subject to minor land
development review), which must be filed within thirty (30) days after actual
notice of the decision, shall be heard by the planning commission under the
procedures set forth in Section
26-58 of this chapter. Such appeals shall encompass all issues for appeal. An
appeal of the decision of the planning commission by a person who may have a
substantial interest in the decision must be taken to the circuit court within
thirty (30) days after actual notice of the decision. In the alternative, also
within thirty (30) days, a property owner whose land is the subject of a
decision by the planning commission may appeal by filing a notice of appeal
with the circuit court, accompanied by a request for pre-litigation mediation
in accordance with S.C. Code 1976, §§ 6-29-1150 and 6-29-1155.
         h.   Permit validity. In accordance with S.C. Code 1976, §§ 6-29-1510,
et seq., as amended, upon the issuance of a land development permit, the
applicant shall have a vested right for two (2) years from the date of issuance
to undertake and complete the corresponding development of property under the
terms and conditions of the approved site specific development plan. Failure to
complete work within this time shall render the permit void. However, the
applicant may request a one (1) year extension of this time period no later
than thirty (30) days and no earlier than sixty (60) days prior to the
expiration of the permit. The request for an extension must be approved unless
otherwise prohibited by an intervening amendment to this chapter, such
amendment having become effective prior to the expiration of the permit.
Likewise, and in the same manner, the applicant may apply for four (4) more one
(1) year extensions. Any change from the approved site specific development
plan that has not first been reviewed and approved by the planning department
shall render the land development permit invalid.
      (3)   Major land development review.
         a.   Applicability. Major land developments are those developments,
exclusive of residential or commercial subdivisions, which:
            1.   Involve one hundred thousand (100,000) or more square feet of
nonresidential floor space;
            2.   Involve one hundred and fifty (150) or more multi-family
residential dwelling units, lots or manufactured home spaces in a manufactured
home district; and/or
            3.   Involve the dedication of land to the county for open space or
other public purposes.
            Due to the size of these projects, a more formal review process is
required. This review process is established to ensure the safety of the public
and to assure that adequate services and facilities can be provided for these
developments and to assure that they do not negatively impact the area in which
they are proposed to be located or the county as a whole.
         b.   Plan submittal.
            1.   Filing of application. Applications for land development
permits subject to major land development review shall be filed by the owner of
the property or an authorized agent. All documents/information required on the
application must be submitted, including the permit fee, as established by
county council.
            2.   Preparation of plans. Site plans for developments requiring
major land development review shall be prepared by a registered architect,
engineer, landscape architect, or licensed surveyor.
         c.   Staff review. The planning department shall review the
application and determine if it is complete. If the application is incomplete,
the planning department shall notify the applicant of the deficiencies within
ten (10) days of the most recent submission date. Provided the application is
complete, the following shall occur:
            1.   Scheduling. The schedule for meetings of the development
review team shall be kept and maintained in the office of the planning and
development services department.
            2.   Development review team. The planning department shall
distribute site plans to members of the development review team. The
development review team members shall review the site plans for compliance with
the development regulations of Richland County. Upon review, the development
review team shall determine one of the following:
               [a]   The project is in compliance with the development
regulations of Richland County. If the site plan is approved by the development
review team, the planning department shall notify the applicant and transmit
the site plan to the planning commission for their information.
               [b]   The project is not in compliance with the development
regulations of Richland County. The site plan shall be denied, and the reasons
for denial shall be provided to the applicant. The site plan may be revised to
address the reasons for denial and resubmitted. Revised site plans shall be
administratively reviewed; provided, however, major changes that materially
affect the characteristics of the site plan, as determined by the planning
director, may require an additional DRT review.
               The decision of the DRT will be posted on the first day of the
month outside of the planning department office, on the bulletin board located
in the lobby of the county administration building, and on the county website.
Appeals must be filed to the planning commission within fifteen (15) days of
the posting.
         d.   Public notification. No public notification is required for land
development permit applications.
         e.   Variances. Requests for variances, unless otherwise specified,
shall be heard by the board of zoning appeals under the procedures set forth in
Section
26-57 of this chapter.
         f.   Appeals.
            1.   Appeals shall be made to the planning commission, subject to
the procedures set forth in Section
26-58 and the payment of fees as established by county council.
            2.   Pursuant to the requirements of S.C. Code 1976, § 6-29-1150
(c), any person who may have a substantial interest in the decision of the
planning commission may appeal such decision to the circuit court, provided
that a proper petition is filed with the county clerk of court within thirty
(30) days after receipt of the written notice of the decision by the applicant.
An appeal shall cease all staff review regarding the subject property. However,
a reconsideration request may be heard at the same time as an appeal is
pending. Since an appeal to the circuit court must be based on the factual
record generated during the subdivision review process, it is the applicant's
responsibility to present whatever factual evidence is deemed necessary to
support his/her position. In the alternative, also within thirty (30) days, a
property owner whose land is the subject of a decision by the planning
commission may appeal by filing a notice of appeal with the circuit court
accompanied by a request for pre-litigation mediation in accordance with S.C.
Code 1976, §§ 6-29-1150 and 6-29-1155.
            g.   Permit validity. In accordance with S.C. Code 1976, §§ 6-29-
1510, et seq., as amended, upon the issuance of a land development permit, the
applicant shall have a vested right for two (2) years from the date of issuance
to undertake and complete the corresponding development of property under the
terms and conditions of the approved site specific development plan. Failure to
complete work within this time shall render the permit void. However, the
applicant may request a one (1) year extension of this time period no later
than thirty (30) days and no earlier than sixty (60) days prior to the
expiration of the permit. The request for an extension must be approved unless
otherwise prohibited by an intervening amendment to this chapter, such
amendment having become effective prior to the expiration of the permit.
Likewise, and in the same manner, the applicant may apply for four (4) more one
(1) year extensions. Any change from the approved site specific development
plan that has not first been reviewed and approved by the planning department
shall render the land development permit invalid.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 047-05HR, § I, 6-21-05; Ord. No.
038-09HR, § II, 7-21-09; Ord. No. 011-11HR, § I, 2-15-11; Ord. No. 023-12HR, §§
I, II, 4-17- 12; Ord. No. 078-12HR, § I, 12-11-12)
Sec. 26-54. Subdivision review and approval.
   (a)   General. Pursuant to the requirements of S.C. Code 1976. §§ 6-29-1110,
et seq., as amended, no subdivision of land in Richland County may be recorded
without review and approval in accordance with this section. No road, right-of-
way, easement, or other land, shall be accepted, or maintained by the county,
be extended or connected, nor shall any certificate of occupancy be issued by a
department of the county for any building, or other improvements, until the
subdivision, and/or other property division, complies with the requirements of
this section. These review procedures are designed to ensure that the purposes
of various regulations set forth in this section are carried out and that the
objectives and policies of the comprehensive plan for the county are
implemented.
   (b)   Sketch plans and plats to show flood limit lines as depicted on the
current FIRM panel. All sketch plans for subdivisions and plats submitted for
approval pursuant to this section shall be prepared by a registered engineer or
licensed surveyor and shall contain a delineation of all flood lines and
floodway boundary lines, as shown on the county's flood insurance rate map as
adopted in Section
26-106 (b).
   (c)   Processes. There are three (3) types of subdivision review processes:
administrative review, minor subdivision review, and major subdivision review.
The type of process to be applied to a particular development application
depends on the nature of the development proposed.
   (1)   Administrative review.
      a.   Submittal. Applications for administrative subdivision review shall
be filed by the owner of the property or an authorized agent. The application
shall be filed with the planning department. All documents/information required
on the application must be submitted - including the permit fee, as established
by Richland County Council. Plats must be prepared by a South Carolina licensed
land surveyor.
      b.   Staff review. The planning department shall approve or deny the
application within thirty (30) days after the submission date of a completed
application. If the department does not provide the applicant with a notice of
the application’s status within thirty (30) days after the submission date of a
completed application, then the application shall be deemed approved.
      c.   Public notification. No public notification is required for
administrative subdivision review.
      d.   Formal review. No formal review is required for administrative
subdivision review.
      e.   Variances. Requests for variances, unless otherwise specified, shall
be heard by the board of zoning appeals under the procedures set forth in
Section
26-57 of this chapter. However, variances from the requirements set forth in
Article IX. must be approved by the planning commission.
      f.   Appeals.
         1.   Appeals shall be made to the Richland County Planning Commission,
subject to the procedures set forth in Sec.
26-58 and the payment of fees as established by Richland County Council.
         2.   Pursuant to the requirements of Section 6-29-1150(c) of the South
Carolina Code of Laws, any person who may have a substantial interest in the
decision of the planning commission may appeal such decision to the circuit
court, provided that a proper petition is filed with the Richland County Clerk
of Court within thirty (30) days after receipt of the written notice of the
decision by the applicant. An appeal shall cease all staff review regarding the
subject property. However, a reconsideration request may be heard at the same
time as an appeal is pending. Since an appeal to the circuit court must be
based on the factual record generated during the subdivision review process, it
is the applicant’s responsibility to present whatever factual evidence is
deemed necessary to support his/her position. In the alternative, also within
thirty (30) days, a property owner whose land is the subject of a decision by
the planning commission may appeal by filing a notice of appeal with the
circuit court accompanied by a request for pre-litigation mediation in
accordance with Section 6-29-1150 and Section 6-29-1155 of the South Carolina
Code of Laws.
      g.   Recordation/approval validity.
         1.   Recordation. A signed and sealed plat for an approved subdivision
must be recorded by the applicant, within thirty (30) days of approval, with
the Richland County Register of Deeds. The applicant shall provide the planning
department with at least one (1) copy of the recorded plat. No building permits
or manufactured home setup permits shall be issued until the department
receives a copy of the recorded plat of the subject property.
         2.   Approval validity. Failure to record a plat within thirty (30)
days shall invalidate the plat approval.
   (2)   Minor subdivision review.
      a.   Applicability. The minor subdivision review process is required for
those divisions of land that do not qualify for administrative subdivision
review, but which consist of less than fifty (50) lots. A minor subdivision
shall not require engineered documents pertaining to design of infrastructure
or the dedication of land to the county for open space or other public purpose.
If a phased project, with fewer than fifty (50) lots in one or more phases,
involves a total of fifty (50) or more lots within five (5) years of the
recording of any prior phase, then the project shall be treated as a major
subdivision, regardless of the size of the individual phases.
      b.   Submittal. An application for minor subdivision review shall be
filed by the owner of the property or by an authorized agent. The application
for minor subdivision approval shall be filed with the planning department on a
form provided by the department. All documents/information required on the
application must be submitted - including the permit fee, as established by
county council.
      c.   Staff review.
         1.   Planning staff review. Plans for minor subdivision developments
shall be reviewed by the planning department for compliance with the
requirements of this chapter.
         2.   Development review team. As needed, plans for minor subdivisions
shall be reviewed by members of the county’s development review team for
compliance with the requirements of this chapter and other applicable county
codes. No formal team review shall be required.
         The planning department shall approve or deny the application for a
minor subdivision within thirty (30) days after the submission date of a
completed application. If the department does not provide the applicant with a
notice of the application’s status within thirty (30) days after the submission
date of a completed application, then the application shall be deemed approved.
      d.   Public notification. No public notification is required for minor
subdivision review.
      e.   Formal review. No formal review is required for minor subdivision
plan approval.
      f.   Variances. Requests for variances, unless otherwise specified, shall
be heard by the board of zoning appeals under the procedures set forth in
Section
26-57 of this chapter.
      g.   Appeals.
         1.   Appeals shall be made to the county planning commission, subject
to the procedures set forth in Section
26-58, and the payment of fees established by the county council.
         2.   Pursuant to the requirements of S.C. Code 1976, § 6-29-1150(c),
any person who has a substantial interest in the decision may appeal such
decision of the county planning commission to the circuit court, provided that
a proper petition is filed with county clerk of court within thirty (30) days
after the applicant receives written notice of the decision. An appeal shall
cease all staff and review agency activity regarding the subject project.
However, a reconsideration request may be heard at the same time an appeal is
pending. Since an appeal to the circuit court must be based on the factual
record generated during the subdivision review process, it is the applicant’s
responsibility to present whatever factual evidence is deemed necessary to
support his/her position. In the alternative, also within thirty (30) days, a
property owner whose land is the subject of a decision by the planning
commission may appeal by filing a notice of appeal with the circuit court
accompanied by a request for pre-litigation mediation in accordance with S.C.
Code 1976, §§ 6-29-1150 and 6-29-1155.
      h.   Recordation/approval validity.
         1.   Recordation. A signed and sealed plat for a minor subdivision
must be recorded by the applicant within one hundred eighty (180) days of
approval, with the county register of deeds. Approval of the plat shall
constitute the final subdivision approval. The applicant shall provide the
planning department with at least one (1) copy of the recorded plat. No
building permits or manufactured home setup permits shall be issued until the
department receives a copy of the recorded plat of the subject property.
         2.   Approval validity. Failure to record a plat within one hundred
eighty (180) days shall invalidate plat approval.
   (3)   Major subdivision review.
      a.   Applicability. The major subdivision review process is required for
all those subdivisions of land in Richland County that do not meet the
requirements for exemption from the subdivision review process (See definition
of “subdivision” in Section
26-22 above) and that do not qualify for administrative or minor subdivision
review (Section
26-54(b) and Section
26-54(b)(2)). Any subdivision that involves the dedication of land to the
county for open space or other public purposes shall be considered a major
subdivision. Any major subdivision with fewer than fifty (50) lots shall not be
required to install sidewalks along roads abutting the development.
      b.   Sketch plan review and approval.
         1.   Plan submittal. An application for major subdivision review shall
be filed by the owner of the property or by an authorized agent. All documents/
information required on the application must be submitted -including the permit
fee, as established by county council. Sketch plans shall be prepared by a
registered architect, engineer, landscape architect, or licensed surveyor.
         2.   Staff review. The planning department shall review the
application and determine if it is complete. If the application is incomplete,
the planning department shall notify the applicant of the deficiencies within
ten (10) days of the most recent submission date. Provided that the application
is complete, the following shall occur:
            [a]   Scheduling. The schedule for meetings of the development
review team shall be kept and maintained in the office of the county planning
and development services department.
            [b]   Development review team. The planning department shall
distribute sketch plans to members of the development review team. The
development review team members shall review the sketch plans for compliance
with the development regulations of Richland County. Upon review, the
development review team shall determine one (1) of the following:
               [1]   The project is in compliance with the development
regulations of Richland County. If the sketch plan is approved by the
development review team, the planning department shall notify the applicant and
transmit the sketch plan to the planning commission for their information only.
               [2]   The project is not in compliance with the development
regulations of Richland County. The sketch plan shall be denied, and the
reasons for denial shall be provided to the applicant. The sketch plan may be
revised to address the reasons for denial and resubmitted. Revised sketch plans
shall be administratively reviewed; provided, however, major changes that
materially affect the characteristics of the sketch plan, as determined by the
planning director, may require an additional DRT review.
               The decision of the DRT will be posted on the first day of the
month outside of the planning department office, on the bulletin board located
in the lobby of the county administration building, and on the county website.
Appeals must be filed to the planning commission within fifteen (15) days of
the posting.
         3.   Variances. Requests for variances, unless otherwise specified,
shall be heard by the board of zoning appeals under the procedures set forth in
Section 26-57 of this chapter.
         4.   Appeals.
            [a]   Appeals shall be made to the county planning commission,
subject to the procedures set forth in Section 26-58 and the payment of fees as
established by county council.
            [b]   Pursuant to the requirements of S.C. Code 1976, § 6-29-1150
(c), any person who may have a substantial interest in the decision of the
planning commission may appeal such decision to the circuit court, provided
that a proper petition is filed with the county clerk of court within thirty
(30) days after receipt of the written notice of the decision by the applicant.
An appeal shall cease all staff review regarding the subject property. However,
a reconsideration request may be heard at the same time as an appeal is
pending. Since an appeal to the circuit court must be based on the factual
record generated during the subdivision review process, it is the applicant’s
responsibility to present whatever factual evidence is deemed necessary to
support his/her position. In the alternative, also within thirty (30) days, a
property owner whose land is the subject of a decision by the planning
commission may appeal by filing a notice of appeal with the circuit court
accompanied by a request for pre-litigation mediation in accordance with S.C.
Code 1976, §§ 6-29-1150 and 6-29-1155.
         5.   Approval validity. In accordance with S.C. Code 1976, §§ 6-29-
1510, et seq., as amended, upon written notice of sketch plan approval for a
subdivision phase, the applicant shall have a two (2) year vested right to
proceed with the development of the approved subdivision phase under the
requirements of Article V (Zoning Districts and District Standards) of this
chapter, which are in effect on the date of sketch plan approval. Failure to
submit an application for preliminary plan approval within this two (2) year
period shall render the sketch plan approval void. However, the applicant may
request a one (1) year extension of this time period no later than thirty (30)
days and no earlier than sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the sketch
plan approval. The request for an extension must be approved unless otherwise
prohibited by an intervening amendment to this chapter, such amendment having
become effective prior to the expiration of the approval. Likewise, and in the
same manner, the applicant may apply for four (4) more one (1) year extensions.
Any change from the approved sketch plan that has not first been reviewed and
approved by the planning department shall render the sketch plan approval
invalid.
      c.   Preliminary (construction drawings) subdivision plan review and
approval.
         1.   Submittal. An application for preliminary plan review shall be
filed by the owner of the property or by an authorized agent. All documents/
information required on the application must be submitted, including the permit
fee, as established by county council.
         2.   Staff review. The planning department shall review the
preliminary plan submittal and determine if it is complete. The applicant shall
be notified within ten (10) days of submittal if the application is not
complete. Provided that the application is complete, the following shall occur:
            [a]   Development review. The preliminary plat for developments
requiring major subdivision review shall be reviewed by county development
review staff for compliance with the development regulations of Richland County
and conformity with the approved sketch plan and preliminary plan.
            [b]   The planning department shall approve or deny the application
for a preliminary subdivision within thirty (30) days after the submission date
of a completed application. If the department does not provide the applicant
with a notice of the application’s status within thirty (30) days after the
submission date of a completed application, then the application shall be
deemed approved.
         3.   Public notification. No public notification is required for major
subdivision preliminary plan review and approval.
         4.   Formal review. No formal review is required for major subdivision
preliminary plan review and approval.
         5.   Variances. Requests for variances, unless otherwise specified,
shall be heard by the board of zoning appeals as set forth in Section
26-57 of this chapter.
         6.   Approval validity. In accordance with S.C. Code 1976, §§ 6-29-
1510, et seq., as amended, upon written notice of preliminary plan approval for
a subdivision phase, the applicant shall have a two (2) year vested right to
proceed with the development of the approved subdivision phase under the
requirements of Article VII (General Development, Site, and Performance
Standards) and Article VIII (Resource Protection Standards) of this chapter,
which are in effect on the date of preliminary plan approval. Failure to submit
an application for either bonded plat or final plat approval within this two
(2) year period shall render the preliminary subdivision plan approval void.
However, the applicant may request a one (1) year extension of this time period
no later than thirty (30) days and no earlier than sixty (60) days prior to the
expiration of the preliminary subdivision plan approval. The request for an
extension must be approved unless otherwise prohibited by an intervening
amendment to this chapter, such amendment having become effective prior to the
expiration of the approval. Likewise, and in the same manner, the applicant may
apply for four (4) more one (1) year extensions. Any change from the approved
preliminary plan that has not first been reviewed and approved by the planning
department shall render the preliminary subdivision plan approval invalid.
Preliminary subdivision plan approval allows the issuance of building permits
or manufactured home setup permits in the name of the subdivision developer
only, for one model dwelling unit per subdivision phase, as well as for a
temporary construction office or storage structure or a temporary security
office/quarters.
      d.   Bonded subdivision plat review and approval.
         1.   Submittal. An application for bonded plat review shall be filed
by the owner of the property or by an authorized agent. All documents/
information required on the application must be submitted, including the permit
fee, as established by county council.
         2.   Staff review. The planning department shall review the bonded
plat submittal and determine if it is complete. If the application is
incomplete, the planning department shall notify the applicant of the
deficiencies within ten (10) days after the most recent submission date.
Provided that the application is complete, the following shall occur:
            [a]   Development review. Bonded plats shall be reviewed by county
development review staff for compliance with the development regulations of
Richland County and conformity with the approved sketch plan and preliminary
plan.
            [b]   The planning department shall approve or deny the bonded
subdivision plat application based on written findings of fact. Approval of the
bonded subdivision plat shall not constitute final subdivision plat approval
(see subparagraph e. below on final subdivision plat approval). Failure on the
part of the planning department to act on the bonded plat within thirty (30)
days after receiving a complete application shall constitute approval.
         3.   Public notification. No public notification is required for major
subdivision bonded plat review and approval.
         4.   Formal review. No formal review is required for major subdivision
bonded plat review and approval.
         5.   Variances. Requests for variances, unless otherwise specified,
shall be heard by the board of zoning appeals as set forth in Section
26-57 of this chapter.
         6.   Recordation. Once approved, prior to recordation, the bonded plat
must be signed by the land development administrator or his/her designee.
            The approval of a bonded plat for a major subdivision shall not
automatically constitute or affect an acceptance by the county of the
dedication of any road, easement, or other ground shown upon the plat. Public
acceptance of the lands must be by action of the Richland County Council, A
bonded plat for a major subdivision must be recorded by the applicant within
thirty (30) days of approval with the Richland County Register of Deeds. The
applicant shall provide the planning department with at least five (5) copies
of the recorded plat. Except as allowed under Section
26-54(c)(3)c.6, of this chapter, no building permits or manufactured home setup
permits shall be issued until the department receives a copy of the recorded
plat of the subject property. If the developer fails to complete the bonded
infrastructure improvements and submit a complete application for final
subdivision plat approval within the specified time period, the county may
proceed to collect the financial surety and assume responsibility for
completing the required infrastructure improvements.
      e.   Final subdivision plat review and approval.
         1.   Submittal. An application for final plat review shall be filed by
the owner of the property or by an authorized agent. All documents/ information
required on the application must be submitted, including the permit fee, as
established by county council.
         2.   Staff review. The planning department shall review the final plat
submittal and determine if it is complete. If the application is incomplete,
the planning department shall notify the applicant of the deficiencies within
ten (10) days after the most recent submission date. Provided that the
application is complete, the following shall occur:
            [a]   Development process. The final plat for developments
requiring major subdivision review shall be reviewed by county development
review staff for compliance with the department regulations of Richland County
and conformity with the approved sketch plan and preliminary plan.
            [b]   The planning department shall approve or deny the final
subdivision plat application based on written findings of fact. Failure on the
part of the planning department to act on the final plat within thirty (30)
days after receiving a complete application shall constitute approval.
         3.   Public notification. No public notification is required for major
subdivision final plat review and approval.
         4.   Formal review. No formal review is required for major subdivision
final plat review and approval.
         5.   Variances. Requests for variances, unless otherwise specified,
shall be heard by the board of zoning appeals as set forth in Section
26-57 of this chapter.
         6.   Recordation. Once approved, prior to recordation, the final plat
must be signed by the land development administrator or his/her designee. A
final plat for a major subdivision must be recorded by the applicant within
thirty (30) days of approval with the Richland County Register of Deeds. The
applicant shall provide the planning department with at least five (5) copies
of the recorded plat. The approval of a final plat for a major subdivision
shall not automatically constitute or affect an acceptance by the county of the
dedication of any road, easement, or other ground shown upon the plat. Public
acceptance of the lands must be by action of the Richland County Council.
Except as allowed under Section
26-54(c)(3)c.6., or unless an optional bonded plat has already been approved
and recorded, no building permits or manufactured home setup permits shall be
issued until the department receives a copy of the recorded final plat of the
subject property.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 065-05HR, §§ II, III, IV, V, VI,
VII, 9-20-05; Ord. No. 074-05HR, §§ II, III, 10-18-05; Ord. No. 075-05HR, §§ I,
II, 10-18-05; Ord. No. 031-06HR, §§ II, III, 4-18-06; Ord. No. 038-09HR, §§ II,
IV-VI, 7-21-09; Ord No. 056-09HR, § I, 11-3-09; Ord. No. 065-10HR, § I, 10-19-
10; Ord. No. 023-2HR, §§ III, IV, V, VI, VII, 4-17-12; Ord. No. 045-12HR, § I,
9-11-12; Ord. No. 055-12HR, § V, 10-16-12; Ord. No. 079-12HR, § I, 12- 11-12;
Ord. No. 018-13HR, § I, 4-16-13; Ord. No. 034-15HR, §§ IV, V, 7-21-15; Ord. No.
035-15HR, §§ I, II, 7-21-15)
Sec. 26-55. Permitted uses with special requirements.
   (a)   Purpose. Permitted uses with special requirements are uses permitted
by right, provided that the special requirements set forth in Article VI. of
this chapter are met. The special requirements are intended to ensure that the
uses fit the intent of the zoning districts within which they are permitted,
and that the uses are compatible with other developments permitted within the
zoning district. Unless otherwise provided, review and approval of these uses
are handled by the planning department. The department has no discretion to
modify the special requirements.
   (b)   Pre-application procedure. No pre- application conference is required
prior to applying for a land development permit for a permitted use with
special requirements unless required elsewhere in this article. Applicants are
encouraged to call or visit the planning department prior to submitting an
application to determine what information is required for the application.
   (c)   Plan submittal.
      (1)   Filing of application. An application for a permitted use with
special requirements shall be included on a land development permit application
form. Such application shall contain completed information as required on the
application form, and shall be accompanied by plans of the development drawn to
scale. Other information necessary to show that the use or structure complies
with the standards set forth in this chapter shall also be provided.
      (2)   Fees. A permit fee, as established by the Richland County Council,
shall be submitted with the application.
      (3)   Coordination with land development permit review. Review of a
permitted use subject to special requirements takes place as part of the
applicable land development permit review.
   (d)   Staff Review. The planning department shall review the application and
determine if it is complete within fifteen (15) days of its submittal. If the
application is found to be incomplete, the planning department shall notify the
applicant of any deficiencies. Provided the application is complete, the
planning department, for projects not involving some other form of review,
shall review the proposed use and determine if the special requirements for
that use have been met. If the special requirements have been met, the
application shall be approved. Failure to meet all the special requirements
shall result in a denial of a permit for the proposed use. The planning
department shall approve or deny the application for a permitted use with
special requirements in accordance with the time frame set forth for the
applicable land development permit review.
   (e)   Public notification. No public notification is required for permitted
uses with special requirements unless the approval of such a use is part of a
project that requires review as a major development by the planning commission.
   (f)   Formal review. Formal review of a permitted use with special
requirements is required only when a project is reviewed for a land development
permit as a major development.
   (g)   Variances. Unless otherwise specified, variances from the special
requirements are not permitted. Other variances shall be reviewed as set forth
for the applicable land development permit process.
   (h)   Appeals. Appeals of the decisions of the planning department regarding
applications for permitted uses with special requirements shall be heard by the
board of zoning appeals under the procedures established at Section
26-58 of this chapter.
   (i)   Permit validity. Permit validity for permitted uses with special
requirements shall be the same as those required for a land development permit
(Section
26-53 of this chapter).
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04)
Sec. 26-56. Special exceptions.
   (a)   Purpose. Special exceptions are established to provide for the
location of those uses that are generally compatible with other land uses
within a zoning district. However, because of their unique characteristics or
potential impacts on the surrounding neighborhood and the county as a whole,
these uses require individual consideration of their location, design,
configuration, and/or operation at the particular location proposed. Such
individual consideration may also call for the imposition of individualized
conditions in order to ensure that the use is appropriate at a particular
location and to ensure protection of the public health, safety, and general
welfare. Any use identified in this chapter as a special exception in a zoning
district shall not be permitted without the approval of the Richland County
Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with the requirements and procedures set
forth in this section.
   (b)   Pre-application procedure.
      (1)   Conference. Every applicant for a special exception is required to
meet with the planning department in a pre-application conference prior to, or
at the time of, the submittal of a request for approval of a special exception.
The purposes of this conference are to provide additional information regarding
the review process and to assist in the preparation of the application.
      (2)   Neighborhood meeting. Although not required, it is highly
recommended that the applicant of the proposed special exception use meet with
representatives of the neighborhood in which the proposed use will be located.
This meeting will allow the applicant the opportunity to explain the proposed
use and to be informed of the concerns of the neighborhood.
   (c)   Plan submittal.
      (1)   Application. An application for a special exception shall be filed
by the owner of the property or an authorized agent on a form provided by the
planning department. Other information necessary to show that the use or
structure complies with the standards set forth in this chapter shall also be
provided.
      (2)   Fees: An application fee, as established by the Richland County
Council, shall be submitted with the application.
      (3)   Coordination with land development permit review. Completion of the
applicable land development permit review will take place following review of
the special exception by the board of zoning appeals. The ruling of the board
of zoning appeals, including any conditions on approval added by the board of
zoning appeals, shall be incorporated into the project approval by the staff
and/or planning commission.
   (d)   Staff review. The planning department shall review the application and
determine if it is complete within fifteen (15) days of its submittal. If the
application is complete, the planning department shall schedule the matter for
consideration at a public hearing by the board of zoning appeals. The planning
department shall prepare a staff evaluation and recommendation regarding the
submitted special exception application. The schedule for meetings of the board
of zoning appeals and application deadlines for such meetings shall be
maintained in the office of the planning department.
   (e)   Public notification. Notice of the public hearing shall be posted on
the property for which a special exception is sought. Notice shall also be
published in a newspaper of general circulation within the county no less than
fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing on the matter.
   (f)   Formal review.
      (1)   Action by the board of zoning appeals.  Upon receipt of the
application for a special exception from the planning department, the board of
zoning appeals shall hold a public meeting on the proposed special exception.
Any party may appear in person, or be represented by an authorized agent. After
conducting the public hearing, the board of zoning appeals may:
         a.   Approve the proposed special exception;
         b.   Continue the matter to a date certain for additional
consideration; or
         c.   Deny the proposed special exception.
   Any approval or denial of the request must be by a concurring vote of a
majority of those members of the board both present and voting. Such votes must
be permanently filed in the planning department as a public record. The written
decision of the board of zoning appeals must be delivered to the applicant.
      (2)   Standard of review. The board of zoning appeals shall not approve a
special exception unless it finds that the regulations of this chapter have
been met. The conditions set forth in Article VI. of this chapter, which set
forth specific standards for a special exception, shall be binding on the board
of zoning appeals and may not be varied. In addition to the definitive
standards set forth in this chapter, the board of zoning appeals shall consider
the following in reviewing a special exception:
         a.   Traffic impact;
         b.   Vehicle and pedestrian safety;
         c.   Potential impact of noise, lights, fumes, or obstruction of air
flow on adjoining properties;
         d.   Adverse impact of the proposed use on the aesthetic character of
the environs, to include the possible need for screening from view; and
         e.   Orientation and spacing of improvements or buildings.
      (3)   Conditions: In granting a special exception, the board of zoning
appeals may prescribe conditions and safeguards in addition to those spelled
out in this chapter. The board of zoning appeals may also prescribe a time
limit within which the special exception shall be begun or completed, or both.
All conditions placed on the project by the board of zoning appeals shall be
incorporated into such project.
     (g)   Variances. Unless otherwise specified, variances from the specific
standards for a special exception, set forth in Article VI. of this chapter,
are not permitted. Other variances shall be reviewed as set forth for the
applicable land development permit process.
   (h)   Appeals. A person who may have a substantial interest in the decision
of the board of zoning appeals regarding a special exception may appeal from a
decision of the board of zoning appeals to the circuit court, by filing with
the clerk of the court a petition in writing setting forth plainly, fully and
distinctly why the decision is contrary to law. The appeal must be filed within
thirty (30) days after the decision of the board of zoning appeals is mailed.
In the alternative, also within thirty (30) days, a property owner whose land
is the subject of a decision by the board of zoning appeals may appeal by
filing a notice of appeal with the circuit court accompanied by a request for
pre-litigation mediation in accordance with Section 6-29-1150 and Section 6-29-
1155 of the South Carolina Code of Laws.
   All appeals must be taken in accordance with all applicable laws of the
State of South Carolina.
   (i)   Permit validity. Permit validity for special exceptions shall be the
same as those required for the applicable land development permit unless
otherwise stated in the special exception order.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04)
Sec. 26-57. Variances.
   (a)   Purpose. The variance process administered by the board of zoning
appeals is intended to provide limited relief from the requirements of this
chapter. The board of zoning appeals may not grant a variance, the effect of
which would be to allow the establishment of a use not otherwise permitted in a
zoning district, to extend physically a nonconforming use of land, to change
the zoning district boundaries shown on the official zoning map, to permit a
decrease in the minimum lot size, to decrease the minimum lot width, or in any
other manner create a nonconforming lot, or to grant a variance to permit an
increase in density allowing more units on a lot than that permitted under
minimum lot area requirements. The fact that property could be utilized more
profitably, should a variance be granted, may not be considered grounds for a
variance.
   (b)   Pre-application procedure. Before filing an application for a
variance, an applicant must meet with the planning department to discuss the
proposed variance and to become more familiar with the applicable requirements
and approval procedures of the county.
   (c)   Plan submittal.
      (1)   Application. An application for a variance shall be filed by the
owner of the property or an authorized agent on a form provided by the planning
department. Such application shall contain the information required on the
application form, and shall be accompanied by plans of the development drawn to
scale. Other information necessary to show that the use or structure complies
with the standards set forth in this chapter shall also be provided.
      (2)   Fees. An application fee, as established by the Richland County
Council, shall be submitted with the application.
      (3)   Schedule. Once an application is accepted as complete by the
planning department, the application will be scheduled for consideration at a
public hearing by the board of zoning appeals. The schedule for meetings of the
board of zoning appeals shall be maintained in the planning department.
   (d)   Staff review. The planning department shall review the application and
determine if it is complete within fifteen (15) days of its submittal. If the
application is complete, the planning department shall prepare a staff
evaluation and recommendation regarding the submitted variance request.
   (e)   Public notification. Notice of the public hearing on a variance shall
be posted on the property for which a variance is sought. Notice shall also be
published in a newspaper of general circulation within the county no less than
fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing.
   (f)   Formal review.
      (1)   Action by the board of zoning appeals.  Upon receipt of the
application for a variance request from the planning department, the board of
zoning appeals shall hold a public meeting on the proposed variance request.
Any party may appear in person or be represented by an authorized agent. In
considering the application, the board of zoning appeals shall review the
application materials, the staff comments and recommendations, the general
purpose and standards set forth in this chapter, and all testimony and evidence
received at the public hearing. After conducting the public hearing, the board
of zoning appeals may:
         a.   Approve the request;
         b.   Continue the matter for additional consideration; or
         c.   Deny the request.
   Any approval or denial of the request must be by a concurring vote of a
majority of those members of the board of zoning appeals both present and
voting. The decision of the board of zoning appeals shall be accompanied by
written findings that the variance meets or does not meet each of the standards
set forth in subparagraph (2) below. The decision and the written findings
shall be permanently filed in the planning department as a public record. The
written decision of the board of zoning appeals must be delivered to the
applicant.
      (2)   Standard of review. The board of zoning appeals shall not grant a
variance unless and until it makes the following findings:
         a.   That there are extraordinary and exceptional conditions
pertaining to the particular piece of property; and
         b.   That these conditions do not generally apply to other property in
the vicinity; and
         c.   That because of these conditions, the application of this chapter
to the particular piece of property would effectively prohibit or unreasonably
restrict the utilization of the property; and
         d.   That the authorization of a variance will not be of substantial
detriment to adjacent property or to the public good, and the granting of the
variance will not harm the character of the district.
      (3)   Conditions. In granting a variance, the board of zoning appeals may
attach to it such conditions regarding the location, character, or other
features of the proposed building, structure or use as the board of zoning
appeals may consider advisable to protect established property values in the
surrounding area, or to promote the public health, safety, or general welfare.
The board of zoning appeals may also prescribe a time limit within which the
action for which the variance was sought shall be begun or completed, or both.
   (g)   Appeals. A person who may have a substantial interest in any decision
by the board of zoning appeals regarding a variance may appeal from such
decision to the circuit court, by filing with the clerk of the court a petition
in writing setting forth plainly, fully, and distinctly why the decision is
contrary to law. The appeal must be filed within thirty (30) days after the
decision of the board of zoning appeals is mailed. In the alternative, a
property owner whose land is the subject of a decision of the board of zoning
appeals may file a notice of appeal, also within thirty (30) days, with the
circuit court accompanied by a request for pre-litigation mediation in
accordance with Section 6-29-1150 and Section 6-29-1155 of the South Carolina
Code of Laws.
   All appeals must be taken in accordance with all applicable laws of the
State of South Carolina.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04)
Sec. 26-58. Appeals of administrative decisions.
   (a)   Purpose. The board of zoning appeals shall hear and decide appeals
when it is alleged that there is any error in any order, requirement, decision,
or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this
chapter. Provided, however, the planning commission shall hear and decide
appeals from staff decisions on land development permit applications and
subdivision applications.
   (b)   Appeal submittal.
      (1)   Application. An appeal of an administrative decision may be taken
by any person who may have a substantial interest in the decision; provided,
however, appeals pursuant to Section
26-54(c)(3)d.1. or Section
26-54(c)(3)e.6. above may only be taken by the applicant, a contiguous
landowner, or an adjacent landowner. All appeals must be filed with the
planning department on a form provided by the department, and must contain all
information and plans as required on the application form. Such appeal must
include the specific section of this chapter (or the specific design detail)
from which the appeal is taken and the basis or reason for the appeal. All
appeals must be filed no later than thirty (30) days after the order,
requirement, decision, or determination that is alleged to be in error is made.
      (2)   Fees. An application fee, as established by the Richland County
Council, shall be submitted with the application.
      (3)   Stay of proceedings pending appeal. An appeal stays all proceedings
in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the
appeal is taken, certifies to the board of zoning appeals or planning
commission, as applicable, after notice of appeal is filed with them, that by
reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in their opinion,
cause imminent peril to life or property. In that case, proceedings may not be
stayed other than by a restraining order that may be granted by the board or
commission or by a court of competent jurisdiction on application, on notice to
the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown.
   (c)   Staff review. Once an appeal is received by the planning department,
the matter will be scheduled for consideration at a public hearing by the board
of zoning appeals or planning commission, as applicable. The schedule for
meetings of these boards shall be maintained in the planning department. Staff
shall prepare a report detailing the regulations and interpretation behind the
matter being appealed.
     (d)   Public notification. Notice of the public hearing on the appeal
shall be published at least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing in a
newspaper of general circulation in the county, as well as due notice given to
the parties in interest.
   (e)   Formal review. Upon receiving the application, the board of zoning
appeals or planning commission (as applicable) shall conduct a public hearing
on the appeal. Any party may appear in person or be represented by an agent.
After conducting the public hearing, the board of zoning appeals or planning
commission (as applicable) shall adopt an order reversing or affirming, wholly
or in part, or modifying the order requirements, decision, or determination in
question. These boards shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the
appeal is taken, and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit. These boards
in the execution of the duties specified herein may subpoena witnesses and in
case of contempt may certify this fact to the circuit court having
jurisdiction. The decision of these boards must be in writing and permanently
filed in the planning department as a public record. All findings of fact and
conclusions of law must be separately stated in final decisions or orders of
these boards, which must be delivered to parties of interest by certified mail.
   (f)   Appeals: A person who may have a substantial interest in the decision
of the board of zoning appeals or planning commission (as applicable) regarding
an appeal of an administrative decision, may appeal from such decision of the
board or commission to the circuit court, by filing with the clerk of the court
a petition in writing setting forth plainly, fully, and distinctly why the
decision is contrary to law. The appeal must be filed within thirty (30) days
after the decision of the board or commission is mailed. In the alternative,
also within thirty (30) days, a property owner whose land is the subject of a
decision by the board or commission may appeal by filing a notice of appeal
with the circuit court accompanied by a request for pre-litigation mediation in
accordance with Section 6-29-1150 and Section 6-29-1155 of the South Carolina
Code of Laws. All appeals must be taken in accordance with all applicable laws
of the State of South Carolina.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 059-12HR, § I, 10-16-12)
Sec. 26-59. Planned development review/ approval.
   (a)   Purpose. In order to achieve the objectives of the comprehensive plan
of Richland County, and to allow flexibility in development that will result in
the improved design, character and quality of new mixed use developments, and
to preserve natural and scenic features of open spaces, the county may approve
planned development districts (PDDs) as amendments to the official zoning map.
The PDD review process is a two-part procedure that involves the rezoning of
the property to a PDD district (see Section
26-100 of this chapter) and the approval of a master plan for the site. It is
the intent of this procedure that the public interest will be served not only
by consideration of those specific criteria set forth in this chapter, but also
by consideration of the total anticipated effect of the planned development
upon the community at large. The provisions of the planned development district
represent a relaxation of specific site design requirements as applied to other
districts provided for in this chapter. In return for design flexibility, the
applicant for amendment to a PDD district classification shall agree to furnish
information about the proposed development and later abide by certain
conditions and safeguards as may be imposed by the county council in
establishing such districts.
   (b)   Pre-application procedure.
      (1)   Conference. Prior to the submittal of a request for approval of a
planned development district, a PDD applicant is required to meet with the
planning department in a pre-application conference. The purpose of this
conference is to provide clarification and assistance in the preparation and
submission of the plans for approval.
      (2)   Neighborhood meeting. Although not required, it is highly
recommended that the applicant (or his/her agent) of the proposed PDD meet with
representatives of the neighborhood in which the proposed district will be
located. This meeting will allow the applicant the opportunity to explain the
proposed PDD and to be informed of the concerns of the neighborhood.
   (c)   Plan submittal.
      (1)   Filing of application. Each application for a PDD shall consist of
an application for a zoning map amendment (see Section
26-52 of this chapter) and an application for a land development permit (see
Section
26-53 of this chapter) for the proposed development plan. Plans shall be
submitted by the property owner or an authorized agent.
      (2)   Fees. An application fee, as established by the Richland County
Council, shall be submitted with the application.
   (d)   Staff review. The planning department shall review the application and
determine if it is complete within fifteen (15) days of its submittal. If the
application is found to be incomplete, the planning department shall notify the
applicant of any deficiencies. Provided the application is complete, the
planning department shall schedule the matter for consideration by the planning
commission within sixty (60) days of receipt; provided, however, the planning
department may request one thirty (30) day extension, with the consent of the
applicant. The planning department shall prepare a staff recommendation on the
PDD application and the zoning map amendment. The schedule for meetings of the
planning commission and applications shall be maintained in the planning
department.
   (e)   Public notification. Public notification shall be made in conformance
with the requirements set forth in Section
26-52 of this chapter for zoning map amendments.
   (f)   Formal Review:
      (1)   Action by the planning commission.
         a.   Review. All applications for a planned development shall be
submitted to the Richland County Planning Commission for study and
recommendation.
         b.   Recommendation. Within thirty (30) days from the date that any
PDD application is first considered by the planning commission at a scheduled
meeting, unless a longer period of time has been mutually agreed upon between
the county council and the planning commission in a particular case, the
planning commission shall submit its report and recommendation to the Richland
County Council. The recommendation of the planning commission shall be advisory
only and shall not be binding on county council. If the planning commission
does not submit its report within the prescribed time, the county council may
proceed to act on the application without further awaiting the recommendation
of the planning commission.
         c.   Procedures. The planning commission shall follow those procedures
as set forth for a zoning map amendment in Section
26-52 of this chapter and as set forth for land development permit review in
Section
26-53 of this chapter.
      (2)   Action by the county council.
         a.   Public hearing. Following the review and recommendation by the
planning commission, the PDD application shall be presented for review and
consideration by the Richland County Council. A public hearing shall be held in
accordance with the procedures set forth in Section
26-52(f) of this chapter.
         b.   Approval. After conducting the public hearing, the county council
may:
            1.   Approve the application to and amend the zoning map; or
            2.   Continue the matter for additional consideration; or
            3.   Deny the application.
      The regulations for PDD Districts (Section
26-102 of this chapter) are minimum requirements and the county council may
impose conditions and safeguards in excess of, or in addition to, the specific
requirements set forth therein. Ability to meet the minimum requirements does
not per se create an indication that an applicant should be entitled to a map
amendment and PDD approval.
   (g)   Appeals. Any person who may have a substantial interest in a PDD
decision made by the county council may appeal from a decision of the council
to the circuit court of Richland County by filing with the clerk of court a
petition in writing setting forth why the decision is contrary to law. The
appeal must be filed within thirty (30) days after the decision of the council
to deny the application or after the council has given third reading approval
to amend the property to a PDD District.
   (h)   Issuance of land development and building permits. The planning
department shall not issue any land development permit, and the building
official shall not issue any building permit for work to commence within any
PDD District, until the property owner, or authorized agent, has:
      (1)   Recorded with the Register of Deeds of Richland County, plats
showing all proposed features of the PDD as approved by the county council, and
submitted a true copy of such plats to the planning department.
      (2)   Completed any necessary agreements with the county so that the
county may become a party to deed restrictions and other such restrictive
covenants related to the planned development (as deemed necessary by the
county) and recorded such agreements with the register of deeds for the county
and submitted a true copy of such agreements to the planning department.
      (3)   Recorded with the Register of Deeds of Richland County all deed
restrictions and/or restrictive covenants as required by the Richland County
Council upon approval of the amendment establishing the PDD, and submitted true
copies of such deed restrictions and/or restrictive covenants to the planning
department.
      (4)   Recorded with the Register of Deeds of Richland County the
descriptive statement, as approved by the Richland County Council, setting
forth and committing the developer to certain design standards, development
phasing schedules, and other pertinent matters, and submitted a true copy of
such descriptive statement to the planning department.
      (5)   Completed the posting of a bond or the giving of other surety that
adequate progress will be made in developing the project.
   (i)   District map. The site development plan as approved by the Richland
County Council in establishing the PDD District shall be the zoning district
map for the PDD and this shall be the basis for issuance of land development
permits and building permits for construction of buildings within the planned
development.
   (j)   Changes to plans. Any change to the boundaries of an established PDD
District shall be accomplished only by following procedures set forth above.
Changes in the approved characteristics or agreements relating to a PDD, but
not involving a change to the boundary thereof, shall be classified as either
major changes or minor changes and shall be approved or disapproved as follows:
      (1)   Major changes. Major changes that materially affect the
characteristics of the planned development, such as changes in location of land
uses, increases in density, or changes in traffic flow, shall follow the same
procedural requirements as for the amendment originally establishing the PDD,
including review by the development review team, planning commission review,
public hearing, and county council determination as set forth above.
      (2)   Minor changes. The revision of any minor characteristic of a
planned development (such as relocation of driveways or revision of floor plans
of specific structures) may be authorized by the planning director. However,
the ability to make minor changes comes only when such authority is granted to
the planning director within the approved and recorded descriptive statement
concerning development of the PDD. If the planning director fails to approve
the request for a minor change, the applicant or other party at interest may
then seek a change by the regular amendment process as outlined for major
changes.
      (3)   Determination of requirements. It shall be the duty of the planning
director to determine whether any specific request shall be considered a major
change or a minor change. The applicant for any change shall have the right to
have any request for change processed as a major change.
      (4)   Recording. The planning department shall not issue a land
development permit or certificate of zoning compliance, and the building
official shall not issue a building permit in connection with any action
related to such changes, until such changes have been duly recorded as for the
original documents. The requirements for recordation are set forth in
subsection (h) above.
   (k)   Permit/approval validity. The descriptive statement as approved by
Richland County Council and duly recorded shall set forth the development for
the project, including phasing of development of nonresidential uses in
relationship to residential use. The county council may require the posting of
a bond with a corporate surety to guarantee that the schedule set forth in the
descriptive statement will be materially adhered to in order to guarantee
construction of roads, utilities, and other facilities and amenities. A bond
may also be used to allow for rectification of improper development
characteristics, such as failure to begin, or failure to complete, or failure
to make adequate progress as agreed to in the descriptive statement. If
performance differs from that set forth in the statement approved by county
council, the council may:
      (1)   Enforce and collect upon such bonds or sureties as described in
this subsection;
      (2)   Change the district classification of the planned development and
thus terminate the right of the applicant to continue development;
      (3)   Initiate action to charge the developers with specific violation of
this chapter subject to the penalties set forth in Article XI. of this chapter;
or
      (4)   Take any appropriate combination of these actions.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 077-08HR, §§ II, III, 12-2-08; Ord.
No. 077-08HR, § III, 12-2-08; Ord. No. 038-09HR, §§ II, VII, 7-21-09; Ord. No.
046-10HR, § I, 7-20-10)
 Sec. 26-60. Certificates of zoning compliance.
   (a)   Purpose. It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or
occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof, hereafter
created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly or partially altered or
enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of zoning compliance shall
have been issued by the planning department, or unless a temporary
nonconforming use permit has been issued by the planning department. The
certificate shall state that the building or the proposed use of the building
or land conforms to the requirements of this chapter.
   (b)   Application. Application for a certificate of zoning compliance may be
made by the owner of the property or by an authorized agent
   (c)   Staff review. Upon receipt of the request for a certificate of zoning
compliance, the planning department shall inspect the project building(s) and
site for compliance with the approved site plan or permit. The certificate
shall be issued only upon finding that the building(s) and site comply with all
applicable requirements, including any additional conditions placed on the
project under the provisions of this chapter.
   (d)   Public notification. No public notification is required for requests
for certificates of zoning compliance.
   (e)   Formal review. No formal review is required.
   (f)   Appeals. Appeals of the decisions of the planning department regarding
certificates of zoning compliance shall be heard by the board of zoning appeals
under the procedures established in Section
26-58 of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04)
Sec. 26-61. Review in FP Floodplain Overlay District.
   (a)   Purpose. A floodplain development permit is required in conformance
with the provisions of this chapter (particularly Section 26-106) prior to the
commencement of any development activities in the FP Overlay District. The
purpose of this permit is to ensure that compliance with all regulations
concerning floodplain development is achieved.
   (b)   Pre-application procedure. No pre-application conference is required
prior to applying for a floodplain development permit. Applicants are
encouraged to call or visit the county's flood coordinator prior to requesting
a floodplain development permit to determine what information is required for
the application.
   (c)   Plan submittal. Application for a floodplain development permit shall
be made to the flood coordinator on forms furnished by the county or through
the county's electronic permitting system. The scaled plans shall include, but
are not limited to: the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the
project area; existing and proposed structures; and the location of fill and
compensation areas. Specifically the following information is required:
      (1)   A plot plan that shows the 100-year floodplain contour or a
statement that the entire lot is within the floodplain must be provided by the
applicant when the lot is within or appears to be within the floodplain as
mapped by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The plot plan must be
prepared by or under the direct supervision of a South Carolina licensed
registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by such
professional. The plot plan must show the floodway, if any, as identified by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
      (2)   When base flood elevation data is available, plan submittal for a
development permit within the flood hazard area shall show:
         a.   The elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor
of all new and substantially improved structures; and
         b.   If the structure will be flood-proofed in accordance with the
Non-Residential Construction requirements, must include the elevation to which
the structure will be flood-proofed.
      (3)   When base flood elevation data is not available, the provisions in
the standards for streams without estimated base flood elevations and floodways
must be met. (Section 26-106(e)).
      The information submitted for the permit shall be certified by a South
Carolina licensed registered land surveyor, engineer, or architect authorized
by law to certify the required information and plans.
   (d)   Staff review. The county flood coordinator shall review all
applications for a flood development permit and approve or deny such
applications. Approval or denial of a flood development permit shall be based
on all applicable provisions of this chapter and the following relevant
factors:
      (1)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (2)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (3)   The danger that material may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (4)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (5)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (6)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of roads and bridges and public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; and
      (7)   The relationship of the proposed use to any comprehensive planning
document for that area.
   (e)   Public notification. No public notification is required for floodplain
development permit issuance.
   (f)   Formal review. No formal review is required for floodplain development
permit review.
   (g)   Variances. The variance procedure for floodplain management shall be
reviewed as set forth under Section
26-57 of the County Land Development Code.
      1)   The board of zoning appeals shall not grant a variance unless and
until all the criteria found in Subsection
26-61(g)(2) and the following criteria are met:
         (a)   That there are extraordinary and exceptional conditions
pertaining to the particular piece of property; and
         (b)   That these conditions do not generally apply to other property
in the vicinity; and
         (c)   That because of these conditions, the application of this
chapter to the particular piece of property would effectively prohibit or
unreasonably restrict the utilization of the property; and
         (d)   That the authorization of a variance will be of no detriment to
adjacent property or to the public good, the granting of the variance will not
harm the character of the district.
      2)   The following special uses shall be allowed with an approved
variance:
         a)   Historic Structures - A floodplain development permit shall be
issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon the
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is
the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure. A historic structure is defined as buildings listed in or that are
eligible for listing the National Register of Historical Places, or designated
as historic under an appropriate state or local law.
         b)   Agricultural Structures - A floodplain development permit shall
be issued to wet floodproof an agricultural structure provided it is used
solely for agricultural purposes.
            In order to minimize flood damages during the base flood and the
threat to public health and safety, the following requirements must be met:
            i.   Use of the structure must be limited to agricultural purposes
as listed below:
               a.   Pole frame buildings with open or closed sides used
exclusively for the storage of farm machinery and equipment;
               b.   Steel grain bins and steel frame corncribs;
               c.    General-purpose barns for the temporary feeding of
livestock that are open on at least one side;
            ii.   The agricultural structure must be built or rebuilt, in the
case of an existing building that is substantially damaged, with flood-
resistant materials for the exterior and interior building components and
elements below the base flood elevation.
            iii.   The agricultural structure must be adequately anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. All of the structure's
components must be capable of resisting specific flood-related forces including
hydrostatic, buoyancy, hydrodynamic, and debris impact forces. Where flood
velocities exceed 5 feet per second, fast-flowing floodwaters can exert
considerable pressure on the building's enclosure walls or foundation walls.
            iv.   The agricultural structure must meet the venting requirement
as outlined Section
26-106(d)(2) (b) of this ordinance.
            v.   Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility equipment must be
located a minimum of 2 feet above the base flood elevation (BFE) or be
contained within a watertight, floodproofed enclosure that is capable of
resisting damage during flood conditions.
            vi.   The agricultural structure may not be constructed in the
floodway.
            vii.   Major equipment, machinery, or other contents must be
protected. Such protection may include protective watertight floodproofed areas
within the building, the use of equipment hoists for readily elevating
contents, permanently elevating contents on pedestals or shelves above the base
flood elevation, or determining that property owners can safely remove contents
without risk to lives and that the contents will be located to a specified site
out of the floodplain.
         Findings - Findings listed above shall be submitted to the appeal
board, in writing, and included in the application for a variance.
         Conditions - Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the
purposes of this ordinance, the board of zoning appeals may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the
purposes of this ordinance. The following conditions shall apply to all
variances:
            (a)   Variances may not be issued when the variance will make the
structure in violation of other federal, state, or local laws, regulations, or
ordinances.
            (b)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
            (c)   Variances shall only be issued upon a showing of good and
sufficient cause, a determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship, and a determination that the granting of a
variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to
public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
            (d)   The local floodplain manager shall maintain the records of
all appeal actions and report any special exceptions to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) upon request.
            (e)   Variances shall not be issued for unpermitted development or
other development that is not in compliance with the provisions of this
ordinance.
            (f)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation (BFE)
and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and a written statement
that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk.
Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions.
   (h)   Appeals. The Richland County Administrator shall hear and decide
appeals from determinations made by the flood coordinator. Any owner who has
received a decision from the coordinator may appeal this decision to the
Richland County Administrator by giving notice of appeal in writing to the
flood coordinator within twenty (20) days following issuance of the decision.
In the absence of an appeal, the order of the flood coordinator shall be final.
The Richland County Administrator shall hear an appeal within a reasonable time
and may affrrm, modify and affirm, or reverse the decision of the coordinator.
Written record of the appeal decision shall be provided by the Richland County
Administrator to the flood coordinator.
   (i)   Permit validity. The effective date of a floodplain development permit
shall be the date as stamped on the permit. Permits shall be valid only when
signed by the flood coordinator. Any floodplain development permit issued shall
become invalid if the authorized work is not commence within twelve (12) months
after the issuance of the permit, or if the authorized work is suspended or
abandoned for a period of twelve (12) months after the time of commencing the
work, unless an extension has been granted in writing by the flood coordinator.
   (j)   Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of Section
26-106, all provisions shall be considered as minimum requirements, liberally
construed in favor of Richland County, and deemed neither to limit nor repeal
any other powers granted under State law.
26-106 is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements,
covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where the provisions of Section
26-106 and another provision conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 032-06HR, §§ I, II, 5-2-06; Ord. No.
053-17HR, § VIII, 11-14-17)
Sec. 26-62. Sign permits.
   (a)   Purpose. In order to regulate the provision of sign standards and sign
restrictions within the unincorporated areas of Richland County, it shall be
unlawful to erect or maintain any sign or sign structure without first
obtaining a sign permit unless exempted. (See regulations at Section
26-180 of this chapter).
   (b)   Pre-application procedure. There is no pre- application procedure for
sign permits.
   (c)   Application submittal.
      (1)   Application. An application for a sign permit may be filed by the
owner of the property or sign or by an authorized agent. Applications for sign
permits shall be filed with the Richland County Planning and Development
Services Department on a form provided by the department. An application shall
contain all information requested by the department and other data as
determined by the department to be necessary for review of the application.
      (2)   Fees. A permit fee, as established by the Richland County Council,
shall be submitted with the application.
   (d)   Staff review. The planning department shall review the application and
determine if it is complete. Provided that the application is complete, the
planning department shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the
application within fifteen (15) days of submittal. In most instances, the
permit may be reviewed and issued upon submittal.
   (e)   Public notification. No public notification is required for sign
permit requests.
   (f)   Formal review. No formal review of sign permit applications is
required.
   (g)   Variances. Requests for variances from sign regulations shall be heard
by the board of zoning appeals under the procedures established at Section
26-57 of this chapter.
   (h)   Appeals. Appeals of the decisions of the planning department on any
sign application shall be heard by the board of zoning appeals under the
procedures established at Section
26-58 of this chapter.
   (i)   Permit validity. If actual work for the permitted sign on the site is
not commenced within ninety (90) days from the date of the issuance of a sign
permit, or if substantial work for a permitted sign is suspended for a period
of sixty (60) consecutive days, the permit shall automatically become null and
void. Provided, however, that for signs being erected in conjunction with new
construction, the sign permit shall not become null and void until sixty (60)
days after the certificate of zoning compliance has been issued for the
development. In all cases, the planning department may grant up to a six (6)
month extension of time within which work on a permitted sign must be started
or resumed. All requests for such extensions and approval thereof shall be in
writing.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04)
Sec. 26-63. Temporary use permits.
   (a)   Purpose. To ensure that proposed temporary uses comply with the
requirements of this chapter, no use that is classified as a temporary use in
the zoning district in which it is located shall be placed or established on
the property without first receiving a temporary use permit from the planning
department.
   (b)   Pre-application procedure. No pre- application procedure is required
prior to applying for a temporary use permit.
   (c)   Plan submittal.
      (1)   Filing of application. An application for a temporary use permit
may be filed by the owner of the property or by an authorized agent. An
application for a temporary use permit shall be filed in the planning
department on a form provided by the department. The application shall contain
all information required on the form and any additional information deemed
necessary by the department in reviewing the application for the permit.
      (2)   Fees. A permit fee, as established by the Richland County Council,
shall be submitted with the application.
   (d)   Staff review. The planning department shall review the application and
determine if it is complete. Provided that the application is complete, the
planning department shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the
application within fifteen (15) days of submittal. In most instances, the
permit may be reviewed and issued upon submittal.
   (e)   Public notification. No public notification is required for temporary
use permit requests.
   (f)   Formal review. No formal review of temporary use permit applications
is required.
   (g)   Variances. Requests for variances from the requirements for temporary
uses shall be heard by the board of zoning appeals under the procedures
established at Section
26-57 of this chapter.
   (h)   Appeals. Appeals of the decisions of the planning department on any
temporary use permit application shall be heard by the board of zoning appeals
under the procedures established at Section
26-58 of this chapter.
   (i)   Permit validity. The temporary use permit shall be valid only for the
time period stated on the permit, which in no event shall exceed the time
periods set forth in Section
26-185 of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04)
Sec. 26-64. Stormwater pollution prevention plans.
   (a)   Purpose. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, a land disturbance
permit shall not be issued for any purpose except in accordance with a SWPPP
that has been approved by the Public Works Department. In addition, prior to
any grading, construction, or land disturbance of any nature, a land
disturbance permit shall be obtained from Richland County. The SWPPP shall
include a plan to control erosion and sedimentation and provide for stormwater
management (See Section 26-202 of this chapter). The purpose of this
requirement is to provide proper management of the quality and quantity of
stormwater runoff in Richland County. The SWPPP must be approved prior to the
issuance of a land development permit, floodplain development permit or
building permit. No land disturbance permit shall be issued until DHEC grants
coverage under the NPDES General Permit for Large and Small Construction
Activities, if applicable. No building permit shall be issued until the
required drainage improvements, as set forth in an approved design plan, are
installed or an acceptable bond is posted in lieu of completion of the
improvements. The approved SWPPP must be maintained at the active construction
site until a Notice of Termination (NOT) is issued. In addition, a copy of the
Notice of Intent (NOI), NPDES General Permit for Large and Small Construction
Activities, and letter from DHEC granting coverage under the NPDES General
Permit for Large and Small Construction activities must be maintained at the
site at all times until a Notice of Termination is issued.
   (b)   Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
      (1)   Land disturbing activities on agricultural land for production of
plants and animals, except that the construction of an agricultural structure
or structures which, singularly or collectively total one or more acres, such
as broiler houses, machine sheds, repair shops and other major buildings and
which require the issuance of a building permit shall require the submittal and
approval of a SWPPP prior to the start of the land disturbing activity.
      (2)   Land disturbing activities undertaken on forest land for the
production and harvesting of timber and timber products.
   (c)   Pre-application procedure. No pre-application conference is required
prior to the submittal of a SWPPP for a Land Disturbance Permit. Applicants are
encouraged to call or visit the county engineer prior to submitting a SWPPP to
determine what information is required for the application for the approval.
   (d)   Plan submittal.
      (1)   Application. Application for approval of a SWPPP shall be made on
forms furnished by the county and shall include all items required on that
application and shall be accompanied by a fee as established by the Richland
County Council. Application may be made by the owner of the property or by an
authorized agent. If any construction or land disturbance activities are to
take place in any unincorporated Richland County, the owner/operator must apply
for a Land Disturbance Permit before land is disturbed. The SWPPP shall include
such stream flow and stormwater runoff calculations and other information as
may be reasonably required by the county engineer under the requirements of
this chapter. The SWPPP shall be certified by the applicant and sealed by a
South Carolina registered professional engineer, registered landscape
architect, or Tier B land surveyor. The SWPPP must meet the objectives of
Section 26-203. A landowner may develop and certify his/her own plan for a
tract of land containing one (1) acre or less, provided:
         a.   The property is not part of a larger common disturbance impacting
more than one acre; and
         b.   Water shall not be allowed to flow in any one (1) direction more
than two hundred (200) feet over disturbed land; and
         c.   The cuts and fills established will not exceed a height or depth
of over five (5) feet; and
         d.   There will be no concentrated off-site water to be controlled on
the site.
      (2)   Inclusion in other permit requirements. The requirement for
submittal of a SWPPP maybe included under other permits as follows:
         a.   The county may review industrial SWPPP(s), as required under a
facility’s NPDES storm water discharge permit, when outfall monitoring
indicates a suspected violation.
         b.   The county may review reclamation plan(s), as required under a
mining and mineral resource extraction operation’s operating permit, when
outfall monitoring indicates a suspected violation.
         c.   The county may review certificate(s) of environmental
compatibility, as required by the South Carolina Public Service Commission,
when outfall monitoring indicates a suspected violation of a utility.
      (3)   Fees.
   (e)   Types of SWPPPs. SWPPPs shall be divided into two land disturbance
levels: Level I and Level II. The designs, presentations and submittals shall
be the responsibility of the person responsible for the land disturbing
activity.
      (1)   Level I SWPPPs shall be submitted for all land disturbing
activities with disturbed area less than one (1) acre which are not part of a
larger common plan of development or sale. A Level I Plan shall be prepared in
accordance with the requirements of Section 26-64(f) of this chapter.
      (2)   Level II SWPPPs shall be submitted for all land disturbing
activities with disturbed areas of one (1) acre or greater. However, the use of
measures other than ponds to achieve water quality improvements is recommended
on sites containing less than ten (10) disturbed acres. A Level II Plan shall
be prepared in accordance with the requirements of Section 26-64(g) of this
chapter.
   (f)   Level I SWPPP Requirements. A Level I SWPPP shall be submitted for all
land disturbing activities with disturbed area less than one (1) acre which are
not part of a larger common plan of development. The SWPPP shall contain the
following information, as applicable:
      (1)   An anticipated starting and completion date of the various stages
of land disturbing activities and the expected date the final stabilization
will be completed.
      (2)   A narrative description of the SWPPP to be used during land
disturbing activities.
      (3)   General description of topographic and soil conditions of the
tract, including showing the intent of the drainage pattern for each individual
lot.
      (4)   A general description of adjacent property and a description of
existing structures, buildings, and other fixed improvements located on
surrounding properties:
         a.   The boundary lines of the site on which the work is to be
performed;
         b.   A topographic map of the site if required by the county;
         c.   The location of temporary and permanent vegetative and structural
stormwater management and sediment control measures; and
         d.   Water quality buffers and setbacks requirements to protect
receiving water bodies shall be maintained as required.
      (5)   SWPPPs shall contain certification by the person responsible for
the land disturbing activity that the land disturbing activity will be
accomplished pursuant to the plan.
      (6)   All SWPPPs shall contain certification by the person responsible
for the land disturbing activity of the right of the county or DHEC to conduct
on-site inspections.
The requirements contained above may be indicated on one plan sheet. More
detailed hydrologic or soils information may be required on a case by case
basis by the implementing agency. Storm water detention/retention may be
required if excessive water problems exist in the area.
   (g)   Level II SWPPP Requirements. A Level II SWPPP shall be submitted for
all land disturbing activities with disturbed areas of one (1) acre or greater,
and for all land disturbing activities with disturbed areas of less than one
(1) acre if it is part of multiple construction in a subdivision development.
The use of measures other than ponds to achieve water quality improvements is
recommended on sites containing less than ten (10) disturbed acres. All of the
requirements included in the most recent version of the “Stormwater Design
Manual” must be met. The SWPPP shall contain the following information, as
applicable:
      (1)   General submission requirements for all projects requiring SWPPP
approval will include the following information as applicable:
         a.   A standard application form (NOI) must be submitted to the
county,
         b.   A vicinity map indicating north arrow, scale, and other
information necessary to locate the property or tax parcel,
         c.   A current existing aerial photo of the site, as taken from the
county's Internet Mapping Service (IMS).
         d.   A plan at an appropriate scale accompanied by a design report and
indicating at least:
            1.   The location of the land disturbing activity shown on a United
States Geological Survey (USGS) 7.5 minute topographic map or copy.
            2.   he existing and proposed topography, overlaid on a current
plat showing existing and proposed contours as required by Richland County.
This includes showing the intent of the drainage pattern for each individual
lot.
            3.   The proposed grading and earth disturbance including:
               i.   Surface area involved; and
               ii.   Limits of grading including limitation of mass clearing
and grading whenever possible.
            4.   Stormwater management and stormwater drainage computations,
including:
               i.   Pre- and post-development velocities, peak rates of
discharge, and inflow and outflow hydrographs of stormwater runoff at all
existing and proposed points of discharge from the site,
               ii.   Site conditions around points of all surface water
discharge including vegetation and method of flow conveyance from the land
disturbing activity, and
               iii.   Design details for structural controls.
            5.   Erosion and sediment control provisions, including:
               i.   Provisions to preserve topsoil and limit disturbance;
               ii.   Details of site grading; and
               iii.   Design details for structural controls which includes
diversions and swales.
         e.   FEMA flood maps and federal and state wetland maps, where
appropriate.
         f.   Plans and design reports shall be sealed by a qualified design
professional. The design professional shall certify that the plans have been
designed in accordance with approved stormwater-related ordinances, programs,
regulations, standards and criteria.
         g.   Additional information necessary for a complete project review
may be required by Richland County, as deemed appropriate. This additional
information may include items such as public sewers, water lines, septic
fields, wells etc.
         h.   All SWPPPs submitted for approval shall contain certification by
the person responsible for the land disturbing activity that the land
disturbing activity will be accomplished pursuant to the approved plan.
         i.   All SWPPPs shall contain certification by the person responsible
for the land disturbing activity of the right of the county or DHEC to conduct
on-site inspections.
         j.   All Level II SWPPPs submitted to the appropriate plan approval
agency for approval shall be certified by the designer as stated in 26-64(c)
(1).
      (2)   Specific requirements for the erosion and sediment control portion
of the SWPPP approval process include, but are not limited to, the following
items, Richland County may modify the following items for a specific project or
type of project.
         a.   All plans shall include details and descriptions of temporary and
permanent erosion and sediment control measures and other protective measures
shown on the SWPPP. Procedures in a SWPPP shall provide that all sediment and
erosion controls are inspected at least once every seven (7) calendar days, or
at least once every fourteen (14) calendar days and within twenty-four (24)
hours of the end of a storm event of 0.5 inches or greater.
         b.   Specifications for a sequence of construction operations shall be
contained on all plans describing the relationship between the implementation
and maintenance of sediment controls, including permanent and temporary
stabilization and the various stages or phases of earth disturbance and
construction. The specifications for the sequence of construction shall, at a
minimum, include the following activities:
            1.   Clearing and grubbing for those areas necessary for
installation of perimeter controls;
            2.   Installation of sediment basins and traps;
            3.   Construction or perimeter controls;
            4.   Remaining clearing and grubbing;
            5.   Road grading;
            6.   Grading for the remainder of the site;
            7.   Utility installation and whether storm drains will be used or
blocked until after completion of construction;
            8.   Final grading, landscaping, or stabilization; and
            9.   Removal of sediment controls.
   The sequence of construction operations may be modified with prior approval
by Richland County. In addition, if there is to be no construction activity for
fourteen (14) or more days, the site must be temporarily stabilized.
         c.   The plans shall contain a description of the predominant soil
types on the site, as described in the United States Department of Agriculture
(USDA) comprehensive soils classification system.
         d.   When work in a live waterway is performed such as utility or road
crossing, the appropriate BMPs shall be utilized to minimize encroachment,
protect the water quality buffer, control sediment transport and stabilize the
work area to the greatest extent possible during construction.
         e.   Vehicle tracking of sediments from land disturbing activities
onto paved public roads shall be minimized by utilizing the appropriate BMPs.
         f.   Locations of all waters of the U.S. and State (including
wetlands) shall be shown on the plan.
         g.   Locations of all preconstruction stormwater discharge points and
post construction stormwater discharge points shall be shown on the plan.
      (3)   Specific requirements for the permanent stormwater management
portion of the SWPPP approval process include, but are not limited to, the
following items. Richland County may modify the following items for a specific
project or type of project.
         a.   Stormwater management shall be addressed on a watershed basis to
provide a cost-effective water quantity and water quality solution to the
specific watershed problems. This chapter provides general design requirements
that must be adhered to in the absence of designated watershed specific
criteria.
         b.   All hydrologic computations shall be accomplished using a volume
based hydrograph method acceptable to Richland County. The storm duration for
computational purposes for this method shall be the 24-hour rainfall event,
applicable National Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) distribution with a
0.1 hour burst duration time increment. The rational and/or modified rational
methods are acceptable for sizing individual culverts or storm drains that are
not part of a pipe network or system and do not have a contributing drainage
area greater than twenty (20) acres. The storm duration for computational
purposes for this method shall be equal to the time of concentration of the
contributing drainage area or a minimum of 0.1 hours, whichever is less.
         c.   Stormwater management requirements for a specific project shall
be based on the entire area to be developed, or if phased, the initial
submittal shall control that area proposed in the initial phase and establish a
procedure for total site control, as shown the approved set of development
plans.
         d.   Water quantity control is an integral component of overall
stormwater management. The following design criteria for flow control are
established for water quantity control purposes:
            1.   Post-development peak discharge rates shall not exceed pre-
development discharge rates for the 2, 10 and 25-year frequency 24-hour
duration storm event. The county may utilize a less frequent storm event (e.g.
50 or 100-year, 24-hour) to address existing or future stormwater quantity or
quality problems.
            2.   Discharge velocities shall be reduced to provide a non-erosive
velocity flow from a structure, channel, or other control measure or the
velocity of the 10-year, 24-hour storm runoff in the receiving waterway prior
to the land disturbing activity, whichever is greater.
            3.   Watersheds, including designated watersheds, which have well
documented water quantity problems, may have more stringent or modified design
criteria as determined by Richland County.
         e.   Water quality control is also an integral component of stormwater
management. The following design criteria are established for water quality
protection:
            1.   When ponds are used for water quality protection, the ponds
shall be designed as both quantity and quality control structures. Sediment
storage volume shall be calculated considering the clean out and maintenance
schedules specified by the designer during the land disturbing activity.
Sediment storage volumes may be predicted by the Universal Soil Loss Equation
or methods acceptable to the county.
            2.   Stormwater runoff that drains to a single outlet from land
disturbing activities which disturb ten (10) acres or more shall be controlled
during the land disturbing activity by a sediment basin where sufficient space
and other factors allow these controls to be used until the final inspection.
The sediment basin shall be designed and constructed to accommodate the
anticipated activity and meet a removal efficiency of eighty percent (80%)
suspended solids or 0.5 ML/L peak settleable solids concentration, whichever is
less. The outfall device or system design shall take into account the total
drainage area flowing through the disturbed area to be served by the basin.
            3.   Other practices may be acceptable to Richland County if they
achieve an equivalent removal efficiency of eighty percent (80%) for suspended
solids or 0.5 ML/L peak settable solids concentration, which ever is less. The
efficiency shall be calculated for disturbed conditions for the 10-year 24-hour
design event.
            4.   Permanent water quality ponds having permanent pool shall be
designed to store and release the first 1/2-inch of runoff from the entire site
or the first one inch of runoff from the impervious area, whichever is greater,
over a twenty-four (24)-hour period.
            5.   Permanent water quality ponds, not having permanent pool,
shall be designed to release the first inch of runoff from the site over a
twenty-four (24)-hour period.
            6.   Permanent infiltration practices, when used, shall be designed
to accept, at a minimum, the first inch of runoff from all impervious areas.
            7.   Water quality buffers and setbacks required to protect
receiving water bodies shall be maintained as required by this chapter.
            8.   Watersheds, including designated watersheds, which have been
documented by Richland County or DHEC as impaired or have established TMDLs,
will have more stringent or modified design criteria as determined by Richland
County.
            9.   For sites with storm water discharges to receiving water that
is listed as impaired in South Carolina's 303(d) List of Impaired Waters the
following requirements apply:
               i.   If a TMDL that is applicable to stormwater construction
discharges has been established and is in effect, the requirements of the NPDES
General Permit for Large and Small Construction Activities must be met.
               ii.   If a TMDL has not been established or is not in effect,
the requirements outlined in Section 3.4 of the NPDES Permit for Large and
Small Construction Activities must be met.
            10.   Untreated storm water runoff from developed areas shall not
be directly discharged to wetlands, as wetland boundaries are defined at the
time of site plan approval.
            11.   Any storm sewers and/or constructed/altered channels that
discharge into a water quality buffer area shall be constructed in such a way
as to dissipate the energy of flow and create even sheet flow into the buffer
area.
         f.   Where ponds are the proposed method of control, the person
responsible for the land disturbing activity shall submit to Richland County,
when required, an analysis of the impacts of stormwater flows downstream in the
watershed for the 10 and 100-year frequency storm event. The analysis shall
include hydrologic and hydraulic calculations necessary to determine the impact
of hydrograph timing modifications of the proposed land disturbing activity,
with and without the pond. The results of the analysis will determine the need
to modify the pond design or to eliminate the pond requirement. Lacking a
clearly defined downstream point of constriction, the downstream impacts shall
be established, with the concurrence of the county.
         g.   Where existing wetlands are intended as a component of an overall
stormwater management system, the approved SWPPP shall not be implemented until
all necessary federal and state permits have been obtained. Copies of the
federal and state permits shall be furnished to Richland County.
         h.   Designs shall be in accordance with standards developed or
approved by the county. The Public Works Department shall maintain the “Storm
Water Design Manual” and the “BMP Manual”, and these guidelines must be
followed.
         i.   Ease of maintenance must be considered as a site design
component. Access to the stormwater management structure must be provided. A
maintenance plan shall be included in the SWPPP.
         j.   A clear statement of defined maintenance responsibility shall be
established during the plan review and approval process. This statement ensures
that structural BMPs will be maintained post-construction. If they are not
being properly maintained, the county has the authority to require maintenance
to be done at the expense of the person responsible for maintenance.
         k.   Infiltration practices have certain limitations on their use on
certain sites. These limitations include the following items:
            1.   Areas draining to these practices must be stabilized and
vegetative filters established prior to runoff entering the system.
Infiltration practices shall not be used if a suspended solids filter system
does not accompany the practice. If vegetation is the intended filter, there
shall be, at least a twenty (20)-foot length of vegetative filter prior to
stormwater runoff entering the infiltration practice.
            2.   The bottom of the infiltration practice shall be at least 0.5
feet above the seasonal high water table, whether perched or regional,
determined by direct piezometer measurements which can be demonstrated to be
representative of the maximum height of the water table on an annual basis
during years of normal precipitation, or by the depth in the soil at which
mottling first occurs.
            3.   The infiltration practice shall be designed to completely
drain of water within seventy-two (72) hours.
            4.   Soils must have adequate permeability to allow water to
infiltrate. Infiltration practices are limited to soils having an infiltration
rate of at least 0.30 inches per hour. Initial consideration will be based on a
review of the appropriate soil survey, and the survey may serve as a basis for
rejection. On-site soil borings and textural classifications must be
accomplished to verify the actual site and seasonal high water table conditions
when infiltration is to be utilized.
            5.   Infiltration practices greater than three (3) feet deep shall
be located at least ten (10) feet from basement walls.
            6.   Infiltration practices designed to handle runoff from
impervious parking areas shall be a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet
from any public or private water supply well.
            7.   The design of an infiltration practice shall provide an
overflow system with measures to provide a non-erosive velocity of flow along
its length and at the outfall.
            8.   The slope of the bottom of the infiltration practice shall not
exceed five percent (5%). Also, the practice shall not be installed in fill
material.
            9.   An infiltration practice shall not be installed on or atop a
slope whose natural angle of incline exceeds twenty percent (20%).
            10.   Clean outs will be provided at a minimum, every one hundred
(100) feet along the infiltration practice to allow for access and maintenance.
         l.   A regional approach to stormwater management is an acceptable
alternative to site-specific requirements and is encouraged.
      (4)   All stormwater management and sediment control practices shall be
designed, constructed, and maintained with consideration for the proper control
of mosquitoes and other vectors. Practices may include, but are not limited to:
         a.   The bottom of retention and detention ponds should be graded and
have a slope not less than 1.0 percent.
         b.   There should be no depressions in a normally dry detention
facility where water might pocket when the water level is receding.
         c.   Normally dry detention systems and swales should be designed to
drain within three (3) days.
         d.   An aquatic weed control program should be utilized in permanently
wet structures to prevent an overgrowth of vegetation in the pond. Manual
harvesting is preferred.
         e.   Fish may be stocked in permanently wet retention and detention
ponds.
      (5)   A SWPPP shall be filed for a residential development and the
buildings constructed within, regardless of the phasing of construction.
         a.   In applying the stormwater management and sediment control
criteria, individual lots in a residential subdivision development shall not be
considered to be separate land disturbing activities and shall not require
individual permits. Instead, the residential subdivision development, as a
whole, shall be considered to be a single land disturbing activity. Hydrologic
parameters that reflect the ultimate subdivision development shall be used in
all engineering calculations.
         b.   If individual lots or sections in a residential subdivision are
being developed by different property owners, all land-disturbing activities
related to the residential subdivision shall be covered by the approved SWPPP
for the residential subdivision. Individual lot owners or developers must sign
a certification of compliance that all activities on that lot will be carried
out in accordance with the approved SWPPP for the residential subdivision.
Failure to provide this certification will result in owners or developers of
individual lots developing a SWPPP meeting the requirements of this chapter.
         c.   Residential subdivisions which were approved prior to the
effective date of these regulations are exempt from these requirements.
Development of new phases of existing subdivisions which were not previously
approved shall comply with the provisions of these regulations.
      (6)   Risk analysis may be used to justify a design storm event other
than prescribed or to show that rate and volume control is detrimental to the
hydrologic response of the basin and therefore, should not be required for a
particular site.
         a.   A complete watershed hydrologic/hydraulic analysis must be done
using a complete model/procedure acceptable to Richland County. The level of
detail of data required is as follows:
            1.   Watershed designation on the 7.5 minute topo map exploded to a
minimum of 1" = 400'.
               i.   Include design and performance data to evaluate the effects
of any structures which affect discharge. Examples may be ponds or lakes, road
crossings acting as attenuation structures, and others which must be taken into
account.
               ii.   Land use data shall be taken from the most recent aerial
photograph and field checked and updated.
               iii.   The water surface profile shall be plotted for the
conditions of pre and post-development for the 10-, and 100-year 24-hour storm.
               iv.   Elevations of any structure potentially damaged by
resultant flow shall also be shown.
         b.   Based on the results of this type of evaluation, the Public Works
Department shall review and evaluate the proposed regulation wavier or change.
      (7)   The Level II SWPPP shall be prepared in accordance with South
Carolina NPDES General Permit for Storm Water Discharges from Large and Small
Construction Activities (SCR 100000). The SWPPP must be prepared, amended when
necessary, certified, and stamped by a qualified individual who is licensed as
follows:
         a.   Registered professional engineers as described in Title 40,
Chapter 22;
         b.   Registered landscape architects as described in Title 40, Chapter
28, Section 10, item (b);
         c.   Tier B land surveyors as described in Title 40, Chapter 22; or
         d.   Federal government employees as described by Title 40, Chapter
22, Section 280(A)(3).
   (h)   Staff review. The county engineer shall review all SWPPPs and approve
or deny such plans. Approval or denial of a SWPPP shall be based on all
applicable provisions of this chapter. SWPPPs shall be reviewed within thirty
(30) days from the date of submittal of the plan. If the county engineer
determines that the size and scope of the proposed plan requires additional
time for adequate review, the review period shall be extended as determined
appropriate by the county engineer, but in no event shall the review period
exceed forty-five (45) days. If at the end of the forty-five (45) day period a
decision has not been reached, the plan shall be deemed approved; however, the
applicant may waive this requirement and consent in writing to the extension of
that period. In the absence of an appeal, the order of the county engineer
shall be final. Approval of plans by the county engineer does not relieve the
applicant’s technical representative from his/her responsibility for the
correctness of the plans or the accuracy of his/her calculations, nor does it
relieve the owner or the applicant from his/her obligation to comply with any
applicable laws. Upon review and approval by Richland County, the approval
letter to issue a land disturbance permit, the NOI and the $125 fee will be
sent to DHEC. DHEC then has seven (7) business days to review the completed
application and issue a letter either granting or denying coverage under the
NPDES General Permit for Storm Water Discharges from Large and Small
Construction Activities (SCR 100000), or requesting additional information. If
DHEC does not send a letter within the designated time period, then coverage
under the above permit may be deemed automatically granted.
   (i)   Public notification. No public notification is required for review of
a SWPPP.
   (j)   Formal review. No formal review is required for SWPPP review.
   (k)   Permit validity. The effective date of a SWPPP shall be the date the
Public Works Department approved the plan. Plans shall be valid only when
signed by the county engineer. Any SWPPP approval issued shall become invalid
if the authorized work is suspended or abandoned for a period of six (6) months
after the time of commencing the work, or if the work is not completed within
two (2) years, unless an extension has been granted in writing by the county
engineer. The applicant is responsible for requesting an extension and setting
forth reasons for the requested extension. No more than four (4) 1-year
extensions shall be granted. An annual plan review fee and inspection fee shall
be paid each time a request is made for an extension. The applicant shall be
responsible with carrying out the proposed work in accordance with the approved
SWPPP. The applicant shall be responsible for notifying the Public Works
Department a maximum of twenty-four (24) hours after the start of construction.
   (l)   Inspections. The SWPPP shall specify the inspection frequency for the
land disturbance activity which must be done in accordance with the NPDES
General Permit for Large and Small Construction Activities. The county engineer
or his/her designee shall periodically inspect the work done under an approved
SWPPP. Any violations will be enforceable as established in this chapter. For
each inspection, an inspection report must be completed. A record of each
inspection and any actions taken must be retained as part of the SWPPP for at
least three (3) years. Inspections must be conducted by an inspector meeting at
least one of the requirements in Section 26-64(g)(7), and at a minimum either:
      (1)   At least once every seven (7) calendar days, or
      (2)   At least once every fourteen (14) calendar days and within twenty-
four (24) hours of the end of a storm event of 0.5 inches or greater.
   (m)   Preconstruction Conference.
      (1)   For non-linear Projects that disturb ten (10) acres or more, the
permittee must conduct a pre-construction conference with each co-permittee,
and contractor who is not a co-permittee, in person at the site prior to the
co-permittee or contractor performing construction related work intended to
disturb soils at the site that may affect the implementation of the SWPPP
unless it is justified in the SWPPP and approved by the county to conduct the
conference off-site. This pre-construction conference can be with all
contractors or the pre-conference may be conducted separately with one or more
contractors present so that all contractors who perform land disturbing
activity are aware of the requirements of the SWPPP before they start
construction.
      (2)   For linear construction of roads or utilities (such as roads built
by SCDOT, utility construction including electrical power lines, gas lines,
sewer lines, and water lines that are not part of a subdivision) neither of
which is part of a subdivision or other type of development, the pre-
construction conference may be conducted off-site unless specifically required
by the county to be conducted on site. The purpose of this conference is to
explain the whole SWPPP to the co-permittees and contractors, and to
specifically go over areas of the SWPPP that are related to the work to be
performed by the co-permittees and the contractors.
   (n)   Monthly reporting requirements. For land disturbance activities
impacting ten (10) acres or more, there is a monthly reporting requirement in
the NPDES General Permit for Large and Small Construction Activities which
requires monthly reports to be submitted to DHEC. Richland County also requires
these monthly reports to be submitted to the Public Works Department for
review. These reports may be submitted electronically.
   (o)   NOT.  The owner/operator of a site may apply for a NOT when seventy
percent (70%) of the site is stabilized. The county has the authority to grant
or deny the request for a NOT at its discretion. Any recurring fees will
continue to be applicable until the NOT is submitted to Richland County and
approved by DHEC. Richland County will forward the request for NOT to DHEC.
   (p)   Supplemental regulations. All applicable provisions of the Standards
for Stormwater Management and Sediment Reduction (Sections 72-301, 302, 305,
307, 308, 312, 313, 314, 315, 316) administered by the South Carolina
Department of Health and Environmental Control pursuant to the South Carolina
Stormwater Management and Sediment Reduction Act of 1991 are incorporated by
reference herein.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 065-05HR, § VIII, 9-20-05; Ord. No.
006-10HR, § VI, 1-19-10; Ord. No. 055-12HR, §§ VI, VII, 10-16-12)
Sec. 26-65 - 26-80. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. ZONING DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT STANDARDS
Sec. 26-81. Purpose.
   For the purpose of guiding development in accordance with existing and
future needs and promoting the public health, safety, morals, convenience,
order, appearance, prosperity and general welfare of Richland County, Richland
County is hereby divided into districts as enumerated in this article.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04)
Sec. 26-82. Official zoning map.
   (a)   Official map. The boundaries of the zoning districts established by
this article shall be shown on a series of maps entitled, "Zoning Map of
Unincorporated Richland County, South Carolina".
   (b)   Maintenance of official copy of zoning map.  The official copy of the
zoning map shall be maintained in the office of the Richland County Planning
and Development Services Department and all amendments that reflect a change in
the zoning map shall be recorded upon it. The official copy of the zoning map
shall be available for inspection by the general public at any time during the
county's normal business operating hours.
   (c)   Zoning maps other than official copy. The planning department may
distribute copies of the zoning map to the general public for reference
purposes. However, the official copy of the zoning map, maintained in the
office of the Richland County Planning and Development Services Department,
plus official records of the clerk of council regarding actions of the county
council to amend district boundaries, shall constitute the only official
description of the location of zoning district boundaries.
   (d)   Interpretation of zoning map. See Section
26-21(a) of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04)
Sec. 26-83. Establishment of zoning districts.
   (a)   General. Within the unincorporated areas of Richland County there are
four (4) types of zoning districts: general use districts, planned development
districts, overlay districts, and neighborhood master plan overlay districts.
The regulations of this chapter shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of
structure or land located within any of the enumerated district
classifications. Within the districts as established by this chapter, the
requirements as set forth in these sections shall be complied with in addition
to any other general or specific requirements of this chapter.
   (b)   General use districts. General use districts are those in which a
variety of uses are permitted. For the purpose of this chapter, the zoning
jurisdiction of Richland County, South Carolina, is hereby divided into the
following general use zoning districts:
PR   Parks and Recreation District
TROS   Traditional Recreation Open Space District
RU   Rural District
RR   Rural Residential District
RS-E   Residential, Single-Family - Estate District
RS-LD   Residential, Single-Family - Low Density District
RS-MD   Residential, Single-Family - Medium Density District
RS-HD   Residential, Single-Family - High Density District
MH   Manufactured Home District
RM-MD   Residential, Multi-Family - Medium Density District
RM-HD   Residential, Multi-Family - High Density District
OI   Office and Institutional District
NC   Neighborhood Commercial District
RC   Rural Commercial District
GC   General Commercial District
M-1   Light Industrial District
LI   Light Industrial District
HI   Heavy Industrial District
   (c)   Planned development districts. A planned development district is a
zoning designation of a lot or tract of land that permits development as is
specifically depicted on plans approved in the process of zoning such lot or
tract of land. For the purpose of this chapter, the following planned
development districts are available for tracts meeting the specified
requirements in the zoning jurisdiction of Richland County, South Carolina:
PDD   Planned Development District
TC   Town and Country District
   (d)   Overlay districts. Overlay districts are zoning districts that overlap
one or more general use districts. Overlay districts involve additional
regulations on some or all of the property within the underlying general use
districts. For the purpose of this chapter the following overlay districts are
established in the zoning jurisdiction of Richland County, South Carolina:
AP   Airport Height Restrictive Overlay District
C   Conservation Overlay District
FP   Floodplain Overlay District
RD   Redevelopment Overlay District
EP   Environmental Protection Overlay District
   (e)   Neighborhood Master Plan districts. Neighborhood Master Plan districts
are general use or overlay zoning districts that are intended to promote
the revitalization of existing blighted commercial and residential areas, while
encouraging reinvestment in and reuse of areas in the manner consistent with
the specific master planning area and Comprehensive Plan
for Richland County. Revitalization initiates housing and economic
opportunities, which promotes socially vibrant centers of community life
through the coordinated efforts of public, private, and community
organizations. For the purpose of this chapter, the following neighborhood
Master Plan districts are established in the zoning jurisdiction of Richland
County, South Carolina:
CRD    Corridor Redevelopment Overlay District
DBWP   Decker Boulevard/Woodfield Park Neighborhood Redevelopment Overlay
District
CC   Crane Creek Neighborhood District, which includes:
   CC-1   Residential
   CC-2   Neighborhood Mixed Use
   CC-3   Activity Center Mixed Use
   CC-4   Industrial
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 043-07HR, § II, 5-1-07; Ord. No.
019-08HR, §§ II, III, 3-18-08; Ord. No. 005-09HR, § II, 2-17-09; Ord. No. 054-
09HR, § I, 11-3-09; Ord. No. 006-10HR, § VIII, 1-19-09; Ord. No. 018-10HR, §
II, 5-4-10)
Sec. 26-84. PR Parks and Recreation District.
   (a)   Purpose. In order to ensure the preservation of substantial green
areas devoted to passive and/or active recreational uses.
   (b)   Permitted uses. The following passive and/or active recreational uses
are permitted within the “PR” Parks and Recreation zoning classification:
      (1)   Golf courses, driving ranges, and appurtenances.
      (2)   Indoor and/or outdoor recreational courts and appurtenances,
including, but not limited to, those devoted to tennis, volleyball, basketball,
or bocce.
      (3)   Recreational fields and appurtenances, including, but not limited
to, those devoted to football, soccer, baseball, or lacrosse, and to include
sports lighting systems.
      (4)   Community meeting and security sub station space, including Sheriff
Department satellite locations.
      (5)   Picnic areas, trails, tracks, amphitheaters, and appurtenances.
      (6)   Playgrounds.
      (7)   Museums and historic displays.
      (8)   Any other recreational or community service use substantially
similar to those specifically listed above.
      (9)   A State Park and all facilities associated with the operation and
maintenance of the park to provide public recreation.
   (c)   Accessory uses. The following accessory uses are permitted in
association with the “permitted uses” listed above:
      (1)   Pavilions.
      (2)   Restroom facilities.
      (3)   Parking areas.
      (4)   Bleachers and other seating areas intended for public viewing of
recreational activities.
      (5)   Concession stands, press boxes, dugouts, and associated athletic
facility support structures.
      (6)   Batting cages, and athletic field and security fencing.
      (7)   Administrative and park operation offices and storage buildings.
      (8)   Any other accessory use substantially similar to those specifically
listed above.
   (d)   Development standards. See also Article V., Section
26-131. Table of Area, Yard, and Height Requirements.
      (1)   Minimum lot area/maximum density: Minimum lot area: no minimum lot
area except as required by DHEC. Maximum density standard: no maximum density
standard.
      (2)   Minimum lot width: None.
      (3)   Structure size standards: None.
      (4)   Setback standards: The following minimum setbacks shall be required
for principal uses in the PR District:
         a.   Front: 25 feet.
         b.   Side: 20 feet.
         c.   Rear: 20 feet.
      The minimum side and rear setback requirement for accessory buildings/
structures, such as club houses, rest room and locker facilities, snack bars,
and parking areas, in the PR District is ten (10) feet.
      The landscape and bufferyard standards of Section
26-176 may require setback distances; if so, the most restrictive requirements
shall apply.
      (5)   Height standards: The maximum height of structures in the PR
District shall be 45 feet.
      (6)   Landscaping/bufferyard standards: Landscaping and bufferyards shall
be provided in accordance with Section
26-176 of this chapter; provided, however, there shall be no landscaping
requirements for “golf courses” and “golf course with country clubs.”
      (7)   Parking/loading standards: Parking and loading facilities shall be
provided as required by Section
26-173 and Section
26-174 of this chapter. No parking lots shall be permitted within any required
setback.
      (8)   Sidewalk and pedestrian amenities: Sidewalks and other pedestrian
amenities shall be provided as required by Section
26-179 of this chapter; provided, however, there shall be not sidewalk or
pedestrian amenities required for “golf courses” and “golf course with country
clubs.”
      (9)   Signs: Signs shall be regulated by the requirements of Section
26-180 of this chapter.
      (10)   Recreation/open space standards: None.
      (11)   Design and operation standards: None.
(Ord. No. 054-09HR, § XXIX, 11-3-09)
Sec. 26-85. TROS Traditional Recreation Open Space District.
   (a)   Purpose. In order to ensure the preservation of conservation,
recreation, and/or open space; and to lessen the diminution of property values
from the loss of open space commonly provided for in a community; and to
provide opportunities for improved public and/or private recreation activities;
and to provide for a community-wide network of open space, buffer zones, and
recreation spaces.
   (b)   Permitted uses, permitted uses with special requirements and special
exceptions. See Article V., Section
26-141. Table of Permitted uses, Permitted Uses with Special Requirements, and
Special Exceptions.
   (c)   Development standards. See also Article V., Section
26-131. Table of Area, Yard and Height Requirements.
      (1)   Minimum lot area/maximum density: Minimum lot area: no minimum lot
are except as required by DHEC. Maximum density standard: no maximum density
standard.
      (2)   Minimum lot width: None.
      (3)   Structure size standards: None.
      (4)   Setback standards: The following minimum setbacks shall be required
for principal uses in the TROS District:
         a.   Front: 25 feet.
         b.   Side: 20 feet.
         c.   Rear: 20 feet.
      The minimum side and rear setback requirement for accessory buildings/
structures, such as club houses, rest room and locker facilities, snack bars,
and parking areas, in the TROS District is ten (10) feet.
      The landscape and bufferyard standards of Section
26-176 may require setback distances; if so, the most restrictive requirements
shall apply.
      (5)   Height standards: The maximum height of structures in the TROS
District shall be 45 feet.
      (6)   Landscaping/bufferyard standards: Landscaping and bufferyards shall
be provided in accordance with Section
26-176 of this chapter; provided, however, there shall be no landscaping
requirements for “golf courses” and “golf courses with country clubs”.
      (7)   Parking/loading standards: Parking and loading facilities shall be
provided as required by Section
26-173 and Section
26-174 of this chapter. No parking lots shall be permitted within any required
setback.
      (8)   Sidewalk and pedestrian amenities: Sidewalks and other pedestrian
amenities shall be provided as required by Section
26-179 of this chapter; provided, however, there shall be no sidewalk or
pedestrian amenities required for “golf courses” and “golf course with country
clubs”.
      (9)   Signs: Signs shall be regulated by the requirements of Section
26-180 of this chapter.
      (10)   Recreation/open space standards: None.
      (11)   Design and operation standards: None.
(Ord. No. 043-07HR, § XXV, 5-1-07; Ord. No. 054-09HR, § II, 11-3-09)
Sec. 26-86. RU Rural District.
   (a)   Purpose. The RU District is intended to provide areas for low
intensity agricultural uses and very-low density single-family, detached
residential home construction. RU zoning is intended to provide for the
preservation of open space, farmland and rural areas, and to protect and
encourage the integrity of existing rural communities.
   (b)   Permitted uses, permitted uses with special requirements and special
exceptions. See Article V., Section
26-141. Table of Permitted Uses, Permitted Uses with Special Requirements, and
Special Exceptions.
   (c)   Development standards. See also Article V., Section
26-131. Table of Area, Yard, and Height Requirements. Provided, however, if a
developer can meet the requirements found within Section
26-186, the development standards of
26-186(i) may be substituted for the standards required in this subsection.
      (1)   Minimum lot area/maximum density: Minimum lot area: 33,000 square
feet (one acre), or as determined by the DHEC, but in no case shall it be less
than 33,000 square feet. Maximum density standard: no more than one (1)
principal dwelling unit may be placed on a lot except for permitted accessory
dwellings.
      (2)   Minimum lot width: 120 feet.
      (3)   Structure size standards: None.
      (4)   Setback standards: The following minimum setbacks shall be required
for principal uses in the RU District:
         a.   Front:   40 feet.
         b.   Side:   20 feet.
         c.   Rear:   50 feet.
      The minimum side and rear setback requirement for accessory buildings/
structures in the RU District is twenty (20) feet. See also Section
26-185(b) of this chapter.
      The landscape and bufferyard standards of Section
26-176 may require additional setback distances; if so, the most restrictive
requirements shall apply.
      (5)   Height standards: The maximum height of structures in the RU
District shall be 45 feet. Silos, barns, windmills, or other similar structures
used for agricultural purposes are exempt from height requirements.
      (6)   Landscaping/bufferyard standards:  Landscaping and bufferyards
shall be provided in accordance with Section
26-176 of this chapter.
      (7)   Parking/loading standards: Parking and loading facilities shall be
provided as required by Section
26-173 and Section
26-174 of this chapter. No parking lots shall be permitted within any required
setback.
      (8)   Sidewalk and pedestrian amenities:  Sidewalks and other pedestrian
amenities shall be provided as required by Section
26-179 of this chapter.
      (9)   Signs: Signs shall be regulated by the requirements of Section
26-180 of this chapter.
      (10)   Recreation/open space standards: Open space may be provided for
new developments and expansions of existing developments in accordance with the
Green Code standards of Section
26-184 of this chapter.
      (11)   Design and operation standards: None.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 043-07HR, § III, 5-1-07; Ord. No.
035-08HR, § III, 6-17-08; Ord. No. 027-09HR, § II, 5-19-09; Ord. No. 054-09HR,
§ III, 11-3-09)
Sec. 26-87. RR Rural Residential District.
   (a)   Purpose. The RR District is intended to be used for single-family
detached dwelling units and limited, private agricultural endeavors. The
requirements for this district are designed to provide suitable open space for
very low-density residential development so as to retain an optimum amount of
open space to maintain a rural setting, yet afford residential developments a
minimal amount of urban character. This district is a transition zone between
the RU Rural District and the more urban RS-E and RS- LD Residential, Single-
Family Low Density Districts.
   (b)   Permitted uses, permitted uses with special requirements, and special
exceptions. See Article V., Section
26-141. Table of Permitted Uses, Permitted Uses with Special Requirements, and
Special Exceptions.
   (c)   Development standards. See also Article V., Section
26-131. Table of Area, Yard, and Height Requirements.
      (1)   Minimum lot area/maximum density:  Minimum lot area: 33,000 square
feet, or as determined by DHEC, but in no case shall it be less than 33,000
square feet. Maximum density standard: no more than one (1) principal dwelling
unit may be placed on a lot except for permitted accessory dwellings.
      (2)   Minimum lot width: 120 feet.
      (3)   Structure size standards: None.
      (4)   Setback standards: The following minimum setbacks shall be required
for principal uses in the RR District:
         a.   Front:   40 feet.
         b.   Side:   20 feet.
         c.   Rear:   50 feet.
      The minimum side and rear setback requirement for accessory buildings or
structures in the RR District is ten (10) feet.
      The landscape and bufferyard standards of Section
26-176 of this chapter may require additional setback distances; if so, the
most restrictive requirements shall apply.
      (5)   Height standards: The maximum height of structures in the RR
District shall be 45 feet. Silos, barns, windmills or other similar structures
used for agricultural purposes are exempt from height requirements.
      (6)   Landscaping/bufferyard standards:  Landscaping and bufferyards
shall be provided in accordance with Section
26-176 of this chapter.
      (7)   Parking/loading standards: Parking and loading facilities shall be
provided as required by Section
26-173 and Section
26-174 of this chapter. No parking lots shall be permitted within any required
setback.
      (8)   Sidewalk and pedestrian amenities: Sidewalks and other pedestrian
amenities shall be provided as required by Section
26-179 of this chapter.
      (9)   Signs: Signs shall be regulated by the requirements of Section
26-180 of this chapter.
      (10)   Recreation/open space standards: Open space may be provided for
new developments and expansions of existing developments in accordance with the
Green Code standards of Section
26-184 of this chapter.
      (11)   Design and operation standards: None
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 043-07HR, § IV, 5-1-07; Ord. No.
027-09HR, § III, 5-19-09; Ord. No. 054-09HR, § IV, 11-3-09)
Sec. 26-88. RS-E Residential, Single-Family - Estate District.
   (a)   Purpose. The RS-E District is intended to be used for single-family
detached dwelling units on large “estate” lots. The requirements for this
district are designed to provide for a low to medium density rural setting for
residential development in areas that separate more urban communities from the
truly rural portions of Richland County.
   (b)   Permitted uses, permitted uses with special requirements, and special
exceptions. See Article V., Section
26-141. Table of Permitted Uses, Permitted Uses with Special Requirements, and
Special Exceptions.
   (c)   Development standards. See also Article V., Section
26-131. Table of Area, Yard, and Height Requirements. Provided, however, if a
developer can meet the requirements found within Section
26-186, the development standards of 26-186(i) may be substituted for the
standards required in this subsection.
      (1)   Minimum lot area/maximum density:  Minimum lot area: 20,000 square
feet, or as determined by DHEC, but in no case shall it be less than 20,000
square feet. Maximum density standard: no more than one (1) principal dwelling
unit may be placed on a lot, except for permitted accessory dwellings. However,
see the special requirement provisions for single-family zero lot line
dwellings at Section
26-151(c) of this chapter.
      (2)   Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
      (3)   Structure size standards: None.
      (4)   Setback standards: The following minimum setbacks shall be required
for principal uses in the RS-E District.
         a.   Front:   35 feet.
         b.   Side:   10 feet.
         c.   Rear:   30 feet.
      Where zero lot line developments are permitted, the side setback shall
meet the special requirements for such developments as set forth in Section
26-151 of this chapter.
      The minimum side and rear setback requirement for accessory buildings/
structures in the RS-E District is ten (10) feet.
      The landscape and bufferyard standards of Section
26-176 of this chapter may require additional setback distances; if so, the
most restrictive requirements shall apply.
      (5)   Height standards: The maximum height of structures in the RS-
E District shall be 45 feet. Silos, barns, windmills or other similar
structures used for agricultural purposes are exempt from height requirements.
      (6)   Landscaping/bufferyard standards:  Landscaping and bufferyards
shall be provided in accordance with Section
26-176 of this chapter.
      (7)   Parking/loading standards: Parking and loading facilities shall be
provided as required by Section
26-173 and Section
26-174 of this chapter. No parking lots shall be permitted within any required
setback.
      (8)   Sidewalk and pedestrian amenities:  Sidewalks and other pedestrian
amenities shall be provided as required by Section
26-179 of this chapter.
      (9)   Signs: Signs shall be regulated by the requirements of Section
26-180 of this chapter.
      (10)   Recreation/open space standards: Open space may be provided for
new developments and expansions of existing developments in accordance with the
Green Code standards of Section
26-184 of this chapter.
      (11)   Design and operation standards: None.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 043-07HR, § V, 5-1-07; Ord. No. 035-
08HR, § IV, 6-17-08; Ord. No. 027-09HR, § IV, 5-19-09; Ord. No. 028-09HR, § I,
5-19-09; Ord. No. 054-09HR, § V, 11-3-09)
Sec. 26-89. RS-LD Residential, Single-Family - Low Density District.
   (a)   Purpose. The RS-LD District is intended as a single-family, detached
residential district, and the requirements for this district are designed to
maintain a suitable environment for single family living. Non- single family
development normally required to provide the basic elements of a balanced and
attractive residential area is also permitted.
   (b)   Permitted uses, permitted uses with special requirements, and special
exceptions. See Article V., Section
26-141. Table of Permitted Uses, Permitted Uses with Special Requirements, and
Special Exceptions.
   (c)    Development standards. See also Article V., Section
26-131. Table of Area, Yard, and Height Requirements. Provided, however, if a
developer can meet the requirements found within Section
26-186, the development standards of 26-186(i) may be substituted for the
standards required in this subsection.
      (1)   Minimum lot area/maximum density:  Minimum lot area: 12,000 square
feet or as determined by DHEC, but in no case shall it be less than 12,000
square feet. Maximum density standard: no more than one (1) principal dwelling
unit may be placed on a lot except for permitted accessory dwellings. However,
see the special requirement provisions for single-family zero lot line
dwellings at Section
26-151(c) of this chapter.
      (2)   Minimum lot width: 75 feet.
      (3)   Structure size standards: None.
      (4)   Setback standards: The following minimum setbacks shall be required
for principal uses in the RS-LD District:
         a.   Front:   25 feet.
         b.   Side:   16 feet total for side setbacks, with 5 feet minimum on
any one side.
         c.   Rear:   20 feet.
      Where zero lot line developments are permitted, the side setback shall
meet the special requirements for such developments as set forth in Section
26-151 of this chapter.
      The minimum side and rear setback requirement for accessory buildings/
structures in the RS-LD District is five (5) feet.
      The landscape and bufferyard standards of Section
26-176 of this chapter may require additional setback distances; if so, the
most restrictive requirements shall apply.
      (5)   Height standards: The maximum height of structures in the RS-LD
District shall be 45 feet.
      (6)   Landscaping/bufferyard standards:  Landscaping and bufferyards
shall be provided in accordance with Section
26-176 of this chapter.
      (7)   Parking/loading standards: Parking and loading facilities shall be
provided as required by Section
26-173 and Section
26-174 of this chapter. No parking lots shall be permitted within any required
setback.
      (8)   Sidewalk and pedestrian amenities:  Sidewalks and other pedestrian
amenities shall be provided as required by Section
26-179 of this chapter.
      (9)   Signs: Signs shall be regulated by the requirements of Section
26-180 of this chapter.
      (10)   Recreation/open space standards: Open space may be provided for
new developments and expansions of existing developments in accordance with the
Green Code standards of Section
26-184 of this chapter.
      (11)   Design and operation standards: None.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 043-07HR, § VI, 5-1-07; Ord. No.
035-08HR, § V, 6-17-08; Ord. No. 027-09HR, § V, 5-19-09; Ord. No. 028-09HR, §
II, 5-19-09; Ord. No. 054-09HR, § VI, 11-3-09)
Sec. 26-90. RS-MD Residential, Single-Family - Medium Density District.
   (a)   Purpose. The RS-MD District is intended as a single family, detached
residential district of medium densities, and the requirements for this
district are designed to maintain a suitable environment for single family
living.
   (b)   Permitted uses, permitted uses with special requirements, and special
exceptions. See Article V., Section
26-141. Table of Permitted Uses, Permitted Uses with Special Requirements, and
Special Exceptions.
   (c)   Development standards. See also Article V., Section
26-131. Table of Area, Yard, and Height Requirements. Provided, however, if a
developer can meet the requirements found within Section
26-186, the development standards of 26-186(i) may be substituted for the
standards required in this subsection.
      (1)   Minimum lot area/maximum density:  Minimum lot area: 8,500 square
feet, or as determined by DHEC. Maximum density standard: no more than one (1)
principal dwelling unit may be placed on a lot except for permitted accessory
dwellings. However, see the special requirement provisions for single-family
zero lot line dwellings at Section
26-151(c) and the special exception provisions for single-family zero lot line
dwellings at Section
26-152(d) of this chapter.
      (2)   Minimum lot width: 60 feet.
      (3)   Structure size standards: None.
      (4)   Setback standards: The following minimum setbacks shall be required
for principal uses in the RS-MD District:
         a.   Front:   25 feet.
         b.   Side:   13 feet total for side setback, with 4 feet minimum for
any one side.
         c.   Rear:   20 feet.
      Where zero lot line developments are permitted, the side setback shall
meet the special requirements for such developments as set forth in Section
26-151 and Section 152 of this chapter.
      The minimum side and rear setback requirement for accessory buildings/
structures in the RS-MD District is five (5) feet.
      The landscape and bufferyard standards of Section
26-176 of this chapter may require additional setback distances; if so, the
most restrictive requirements shall apply.
      (5)   Height standards: The maximum height of structures in the RS-MD
District shall be 45 feet.
      (6)   Landscaping/bufferyard standards:  Landscaping and bufferyards
shall be provided in accordance with Section
26-176 of this chapter.
      (7)   Parking/loading standards: Parking and loading facilities shall be
provided as required by Section
26-173 and Section
26-174 of this chapter. No parking lots shall be permitted within any required
setback.
      (8)   Sidewalk and pedestrian amenities: Sidewalks and other pedestrian
amenities shall be provided as required by Section
26-179 of this chapter.
      (9)   Signs: Signs shall be regulated by the requirements of Section
26-180 of this chapter.
      (10)   Recreation/open space standards: Open space may be provided for
new developments and expansions of existing developments in accordance with the
Green Code standards of Section
26-184 of this chapter.
      (11)   Design and operation standards: None.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 043-07HR, § VII, 5-1-07; Ord. No.
035-08HR, § VI, 6-17-08; Ord. No. 027-09HR, § VI, 5-19-09; Ord. No. 028-09HR, §
III, 5-19-09; Ord. No. 054-09HR, § VII, 11-3-09)
Sec. 26-91. RS-HD Residential, Single-Family - High Density District.
   (a)   Purpose. The RS-HD District is intended as a predominately single-
family, detached residential district, and the requirements for this district
that has higher densities and smaller permitted lot sizes are designed to
maintain a suitable environment for single-family living. In addition to
detached single-family development, the RS-HD District also permits attached
single-family dwellings and nonresidential development typically found in
residential areas.
   (b)   Permitted uses, permitted uses with special requirements, and special
exceptions. See Article V., Section
26-141. Table of Permitted Uses, Permitted Uses with Special Requirements, and
Special Exceptions.
   (c)   Development standards. See also Article V., Section
26-131. Table of Area, Yard, and Height Requirements. Provided, however, if a
developer can meet the requirements found within Section
26-186, the development standards of
26-186(i) may be substituted for the standards required in this subsection.
      (1)   Minimum lot area/maximum density:  Minimum lot area: 5,000 square
feet, or as determined by DHEC. In no case shall the lot size be less than
5,000 square feet. Maximum density standard: no more than one (1) principal
dwelling unit may be placed on a lot except for permitted accessory dwellings.
However, see the provisions for single-family zero lot line dwellings at
Section
26-151(c) and the special exception provisions for single-family zero lot line
dwellings at Section 152(d) of this chapter.
      (2)   Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
      (3)   Structure size standards: None.
      (4)   Setback standards: The following minimum setbacks shall be required
for principal uses in the RS-HD District:
         a.   Front:   25 feet.
         b.   Side:   12 feet total for side setbacks, with 4 feet minimum
setback for any one side.
         c.   Rear:   20 feet.
      The minimum side and rear setback requirement for accessory buildings or
structures in the RS-HD District is five (5) feet.
      Where zero lot line developments are permitted, the side setback shall
meet the special requirements for such developments as set forth in Section
26-151 and Section
26-152 of this chapter.
      The landscape and bufferyard standards of Section
26-176 of this chapter may require additional setback distances; if so, the
most restrictive requirements shall apply.
      (5)   Height standards: The maximum height of structures in the RS-HD
District shall be 45 feet.
      (6)   Landscaping/bufferyard standards:  Landscaping and bufferyards
shall be provided in accordance with Section
26-176 of this chapter.
      (7)   Parking/loading standards: Parking and loading facilities shall be
provided as required by Section
26-173 and Section
26-174 of this chapter. No parking lots shall be permitted within any required
setback.
      (8)   Sidewalk and pedestrian amenities: Sidewalks and other pedestrian
amenities shall be provided as required by Section
26-179 of this chapter.
      (9)   Signs: Signs shall be regulated by the requirements of Section
26-180 of this chapter.
      (10)   Recreation/open space standards: Open space may be provided for
new developments and expansions of existing developments in accordance with the
Green Code standards of Section
26-184 of this chapter.
      (11)   Design and operation standards: None.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 043-07HR, § VIII, 5-1-07; Ord. No.
035-08HR, § VII, 6-17-08; Ord. No. 027-09HR, § VII, 5-19-09; Ord. No. 028-09HR,
§ IV, 5-19-09; Ord. No. 054-09HR, § VIII, 11-3-09)
Sec. 26-92. MH Manufactured Home Residential District.
   (a)   Purpose. The MH District is intended as a residential district
allowing for single-family development, but also permitting the development of
manufactured home parks subject to special requirements (see Section
26-151 of this chapter). This district will expand the range of housing
opportunities available to the residents of Richland County while assuring that
manufactured home parks are compatible with existing development in the area.
Nonresidential uses normally required to provide the basic elements of a
balanced and attractive residential area are also permitted.
   (b)   Permitted uses, permitted uses with special requirements, and special
exceptions. See Article V., Section
26-141. Table of Permitted Uses, Permitted Uses with Special Requirements, and
Special Exceptions.
   (c)   Development standards. See also Section
26-131. Table of Area, Yard, and Height Requirements, and the special
requirement provisions for manufactured home parks at Section
26-151(c).
      (1)   Minimum lot area/maximum density:  Minimum lot area: 7,260 square
feet, or as determined by DHEC. In no case shall the lot size be less than
7,260 square feet. Maximum density standard: except in manufactured home parks,
no more than one (1) principal dwelling unit may be placed on a lot. The
minimum area required for the development of a manufactured home park shall be
five (5) acres.
      (2)   Minimum lot width: 60 feet.
      (3)   Structure size standards: None.
      (4)   Setback standards: The following minimum setbacks shall be required
for principal uses in the MH District:
         a.   Front:   25 feet.
         b.   Side:   8 feet.
         c.   Rear:   20 feet.
      The minimum side and rear setback requirement for accessory buildings/
structures in the MH District is five (5) feet.
      The landscape and bufferyard standards of Section
26-176 of this chapter may require additional setback distances; if so, the
most restrictive requirements shall apply.
      (5)   Height standards: The maximum height of structures in the MH
District shall be 35 feet.
      (6)   Landscaping/bufferyard standards:  Landscaping and bufferyards
shall be provided in accordance with Section
26-176 of this chapter.
      (7)   Parking/loading standards: Parking and loading facilities shall be
provided as required by Section
26-173 and Section
26-174 of this chapter. No parking lots shall be permitted within any required
setback.
      (8)   Sidewalks and pedestrian amenities:  Sidewalks and other pedestrian
amenities shall be provided as required by Section
26-179 of this chapter.
      (9)   Signs: Signs shall be regulated by the requirements of Section
26-180 of this chapter.
      (10)   Recreation/open space standards: Open space may be provided for
new developments and expansions of existing developments in accordance with the
Green Code standards of Section
26-184 of this chapter.
      (11)   Design and operation standards: None.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 043-07HR, § IX, 5-1-07; Ord. No.
027-09HR, § VIII, 5-19-09; Ord. No. 028-09HR, § V, 5-19-09; Ord. No. 054-09HR,
§ IX, 11-3-09)
Sec. 26-93. RM-MD Residential, Multi-Family - Medium Density District.
   (a)   Purpose. The RM-MD District is intended to permit a full range of low
to medium density multi- family housing types, along with single-family
detached and zero lot line housing units. Non- residential development that is
normally required to provide for the basic elements of a balanced and
attractive residential area is also permitted. This district is intended to
provide a transitional area between high-density areas and to permit medium
density multi-family development in areas where existing conditions make higher
density development inappropriate.
   (b)   Permitted uses, permitted uses with special requirements, and special
exceptions. See Article V., Section
26-141. Table of Permitted Uses, Permitted Uses with Special Requirements, and
Special Exceptions.
   (c)   Development standards. See also Article V., Section
26-131. Table of Area, Yard, and Height Requirements.
      (1)   Minimum lot area/maximum density:  Minimum lot area: no minimum lot
area requirement except as determined by DHEC. Maximum density standard: no
more than eight (8) units per acre. See also the special requirement provisions
for single-family zero lot line dwellings at Section
26-151(c) of this chapter.
      (2)   Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
      (3)   Structure size standards: None.
      (4)   Setback standards: The following minimum setbacks shall be required
for principal uses in the RM-MD District:
         a.   Front:   25 feet.
         b.   Side:   7 feet.
         c.   Rear:   20 feet.
      Where zero lot line developments are permitted, the side setback shall
meet the special requirements for such developments as set forth in Section
26-151 of this chapter.
      The minimum side and rear setback requirement for accessory buildings/
structures in the RM-MD District is five (5) feet.
      The landscape and bufferyard standards of Section
26-176 of this chapter may require additional setback distances; if so, the
most restrictive requirements shall apply.
      (5)   Height standards: The maximum height of structures in the RM-MD
District shall be 45 feet.
      (6)   Landscaping/bufferyard standards:  Landscaping and bufferyards
shall be provided in accordance with Section
26-176 of this chapter.
      (7)   Parking/loading standards: Parking and loading facilities shall be
provided as required by Section
26-173 and Section
26-174 of this chapter. No parking lots shall be permitted within any required
setback.
      (8)   Sidewalk and pedestrian amenities: Sidewalks and other pedestrian
amenities shall be provided as required by Section
26-179 of this chapter.
      (9)   Signs: Signs shall be regulated by the requirements of Section
26-180 of this chapter.
      (10)   Recreation/open space standards: Open space may be provided for
new developments and expansions of existing developments in accordance with the
Green Code standards of Section
26-184 of this chapter.
      (11)   Design and operation standards: None.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 043-07HR, § X, 5-1-07; Ord. No. 027-
09HR, § IX, 5-19-09; Ord. No. 028-09HR, § VI, 5-19-09; Ord. No. 054-09HR, § X,
11-3-09)
Sec. 26-94. RM-HD Residential, Multi-Family - High Density District.
   (a)   Purpose. The RM-HD District is established to provide for high-density
residential development in Richland County, allowing compact development
consisting of the full spectrum of residential unit types where adequate public
facilities are available. This district is intended to allow a mix of
residential unit types to provide a balance of housing opportunities while
maintaining neighborhood compatibility. This district may serve as a
transitional district between lower density residential and low intensity
commercial uses.
   (b)   Permitted uses, permitted uses with special requirements, and special
exceptions. See Article V., Section
26-141. Table of Permitted Uses, Permitted Uses with Special Requirements, and
Special Exceptions.
   (c)   Development standards. See also Section
26-131. Table of Area, Yard, and Height Requirements and Section
26-151(c) and Section
26-152(d) for standards for high-rise buildings.
      (1)   Minimum lot area/maximum density.  Minimum lot area: no minimum lot
area requirement except as required by DHEC. Maximum density standard: no more
than sixteen (16) units per acre. See also the special requirement provisions
for single- family zero lot line dwellings at Section
26-151(c) of this chapter.
      (2)   Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
      (3)   Structure size standards: None.
      (4)   Setback standards: The following minimum setbacks shall be required
for principal uses in the RM-HD District:
         a.   Front:   25 feet.
         b.   Side:   7 feet.
         c.   Rear:   20 feet.
      Where zero lot line developments are permitted, the side setback shall
meet the special requirements for such developments as set forth in Section
26-151 of this chapter.
      The minimum side and rear setback requirement for accessory buildings or
structures in the RM-HD District is five (5) feet.
      The landscape and bufferyard standards of Section
26-176 of this chapter may require additional setback distances; if so, the
most restrictive requirements shall apply.
      (5)   Height standards: The maximum height of structures in the RM-HD
District shall be three (3) stories or forty-five (45) feet, whichever is
taller. However, high rise structures may be permitted as a permitted use
subject to special requirements (4 - 5 stories) or as a special exception (6 or
more stories), as set forth in Section
26-151(c) and Section
26-152(d) of this chapter.
      (6)   Landscaping/bufferyard standards:  Landscaping and bufferyards
shall be provided in accordance with Section
26-176 of this chapter.
      (7)   Parking/loading standards: Parking and loading facilities shall be
provided as required by Section
26-173 and Section
26-174 of this chapter. No parking lots shall be permitted within any required
setback.
      (8)   Sidewalk and pedestrian amenities:  Sidewalks and other pedestrian
amenities shall be provided as required by Section
26-179 of this chapter.
      (9)   Signs: Signs shall be regulated by the requirements of Section
26-180 of this chapter.
      (10)   Recreation/open space standards: Open space may be provided for
new developments and expansions of existing developments in accordance with the
Green Code standards of Section
26-184 of this chapter.
      (11)   Design and operation standards: None.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 043-07HR, § XI, 5-1-07; Ord. No.
027-09HR, § X, 5-19-09; Ord. No. 028-09HR, §§ VII, VIII, 5-19-09; Ord. No. 054-
09HR, § XI, 11-3-09)
Sec. 26-95. OI Office and Institutional District.
   (a)   Purpose. The OI District is intended to accommodate office,
institutional, and certain types of residential uses in an area whose
characteristics are neither general commercial nor exclusively residential in
nature. Certain related structures and uses required to serve the needs of the
area are permitted outright or are permitted as special exceptions subject to
restrictions and requirements intended to best fulfill the intent of this
chapter.
   (b)   Permitted uses, permitted uses with special requirements, and special
exceptions. See Article V., Section
26-141. Table of Permitted Uses, Permitted Uses with Special Requirements, and
Special Exceptions.
   (c)   Development standards. See also Article V., Section
26-131. Table of Area, Yard, and Height Requirements, and Section
26-151(c) and Section
26-152(d) for standards for high-rise buildings.
      (1)   Minimum lot area/maximum density.  Minimum lot area: no minimum lot
area requirement, except as determined by DHEC. Maximum density standard: for
residential uses, no more than sixteen (16) dwelling units per acre. See also
the special requirement provisions for single-family zero lot line dwellings at
Section
26-151(c) of this chapter.
      (2)   Minimum lot width: 50 feet for residential uses. No minimum lot
width required for nonresidential uses.
      (3)   Structure size standards: None.
      (4)   Setback standards: The following minimum setbacks shall be required
for principal uses in the OI District:
         a.   Front:   25 feet.
         b.   Side:   7 feet.
         c.   Rear:   20 feet.
      The minimum side and rear setback requirement for residential accessory
buildings or structures in the OI District is five (5) feet. Other accessory
structures must comply with the side and rear setback standards enumerated
above.
      The landscape and bufferyard standards of Section
26-176 of this chapter may require additional setback distances; if so, the
most restrictive requirements shall apply.
      (5)   Height standards: The maximum height of structures in the OI
District shall be 35 feet. However, high rise structures may be permitted as a
permitted use subject to special requirements (4 - 5 stories) or as a special
exception (6 or more stories), as set forth in Section
26-151(c) and Section
26-152(d) of this chapter. In no case shall high rise structures be higher than
seventy-five (75) feet.
      (6)   Landscaping/bufferyard standards:  Landscaping and bufferyards
shall be provided in accordance with Section
26-176 of this chapter.
      (7)   Parking/loading standards: Parking and loading facilities shall be
provided as required by Section
26-173 and Section
26-174 of this chapter.
      (8)   Sidewalk and pedestrian amenities: Sidewalks and other pedestrian
amenities shall be provided as required by Section
26-179 of this chapter.
      (9)   Signs: Signs shall be regulated by the requirements of Section
26-180 of this chapter.
      (10)   Recreation/open space standards: None.
      (11)   Design and operation standards: None.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 043-07HR, § XII, 5-1-07; Ord. No.
027-09HR, § XI, 5-19-09; Ord. No. 028-09HR, §§ IX, X, 5-19-09; Ord. No. 054-
09HR, § XII, 11-3-09)
Sec. 26-96. NC Neighborhood Commercial District.
   (a)   Purpose. The NC District is intended to accommodate commercial and
service uses oriented primarily to serving the needs of persons who live or
work in nearby areas. This district is designed to be located within or
adjacent to residential neighborhoods where large commercial uses are
inappropriate, but where small neighborhood oriented businesses are useful and
desired.
   (b)   Permitted uses, permitted uses with special requirements, and special
exceptions. See Article V., Section
26-141. Table of Permitted Uses, Permitted Uses with Special Requirements, and
Special Exceptions.
   (c)   Development standards. See also Article V., Section
26-131. Table of Area, Yard, and Height Requirements.
      (1)   Minimum lot area/maximum density: Minimum lot area: no minimum lot
area requirement except as required by DHEC. Maximum density: for residential
uses, no more than eight (8) dwelling units per acre.
      (2)   Minimum lot width: None.
      (3)   Structure size standards: New structures in the NC District shall
have a building footprint of not more than 6,000 square feet. The gross floor
area of new structures shall not exceed 12,000 square feet. Existing structures
shall not be expanded to exceed a footprint or gross floor area of 12,000
square feet.
      (4)   Setback standards: The following minimum setbacks shall be required
for principal uses in the NC District:
         a.   Front:   25 feet.
         b.   Side:   None.
         c.   Rear:   10 feet.
      The minimum side and rear setback requirement for residential accessory
buildings and structures in the NC District is five (5) feet. Other accessory
structures must comply with the side and rear setback standards enumerated
above.
      The landscape and bufferyard standards of Section
26-176 of this chapter may require additional setback distances; if so, the
most restrictive requirements shall apply.
      (5)   Height standards: The maximum height of structures in the NC
District shall be 35 feet. However, buildings between 35 and 50 feet may be
allowed, provided that there is an increase in all required yards over the
minimum of one (1) foot for each additional three (3) feet in height.
      (6)   Landscaping/bufferyard standards:  Landscaping and bufferyards
shall be provided in accordance with Section
26-176 of this chapter.
      (7)   Parking/loading standards: Parking and loading facilities shall be
provided as required by Section
26-173 and Section
26-174 of this chapter.
      (8)   Sidewalk and pedestrian amenities:  Sidewalks and other pedestrian
amenities shall be provided as required by Section 179 of this chapter.
      (9)   Signs: Signs shall be regulated by the requirements of Section
26-180 of this chapter.
      (10)   Recreation/open space standards: None.
      (11)   Design and operation standards:
         a.   Outdoor operations. Any business must be conducted wholly within
an enclosed building. There shall be no curb service, drive-in trade, outdoor
facilities, outdoor services, outside storage, or outdoor display of any kind,
except as follows:
            1.   Outdoor dining facilities associated with a restaurant;
            2.   Produce display associated with a convenience store or
farmer’s market;
            3.   Vending machines; and/or
         4.    Walk-up automated teller machines.
      b.    Hours of operation.
            1.   Deliveries. All deliveries (including loading and unloading)
and refuse collection shall be conducted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:
00 p.m.
            2.   Equipment operation.  Nonresidential uses shall not include
the operation of equipment that creates a nuisance situation due to noise (e.g.
outside air compressors, speakers, etc.) between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 043-07HR, § XIII, 5-1-07; Ord. No.
027-09HR, § XII, 5-19-09; Ord. No. 054-09HR, § XIII, 11-3-09)
Sec. 26-97. RC Rural Commercial District.
   (a)   Purpose. The RC District recognizes the need to provide for areas
within Richland County where residents of the more isolated agricultural and
rural residential districts and residents located beyond the limits of service
of the municipalities can receive certain convenience merchandising and
services. It is intended to be a flexible district allowing a mixture of uses
in order to accommodate commercial and service activities oriented primarily to
serving the needs of persons who live in nearby areas. The RC District is
proposed to be within or adjacent to residential neighborhoods where large
commercial uses are inappropriate, but where small neighborhood oriented
businesses are useful and desired. This district is further designed to be
located at or near intersections of arterial and/or major collector roads so as
to prevent the spreading of commercial uses down the major corridors or into
the surrounding countryside.
   (b)   Permitted uses, permitted uses with special requirements, and special
exceptions. See Article V., Section
26-141. Table of Permitted Uses, Permitted Uses with Special Requirements, and
Special Exceptions.
   (c)   Development standards. See also Article V., Section
26-131. Table of Area, Yard and Height Requirements.
      (1)   Minimum lot area/maximum density: Minimum lot area: 22,000 square
feet or as required by DHEC. Maximum density standard: there is no maximum
density standard.
      (2)   Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
      (3)   Structure size standards: The maximum structure coverage in the RC
District shall be fifty percent (50%). New structures in the RC District shall
have an aggregate building footprint of not more than twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet. The aggregate gross floor area of new structures shall not exceed
twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. Existing structures shall not be expanded
to exceed an aggregate building footprint or aggregate gross floor area of
twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
      (4)   Setback standards: The following minimum setbacks shall be required
for principal uses in the RC District:
         a.   Front:   25 feet.
         b.   Side:   None.
         c.   Rear:   20 feet.
   The landscape and bufferyard standards of Section
26-176 of this chapter may require additional setback distances; if so, the
most restrictive requirements shall apply.
      (5)   Height standards: The maximum height of structures in the RC
District shall be 45 feet.
      (6)   Landscaping/bufferyard standards:  Landscaping and bufferyards
shall be provided in accordance with Section
26-176 of this chapter.
      (7)   Parking/loading standards: Parking and loading facilities shall be
provided as required by Section
26-173 and Section
26-174 of this chapter.
      (8)   Sidewalk and pedestrian amenities:  Sidewalks and other pedestrian
amenities shall be provided as required by Section
26-179 of this chapter.
      (9)   Signs: Signs shall be regulated by the requirements of Section
26-180 of this chapter.
      (10)   Recreation/open space standards: None.
      (11)   Design and operation standards:
         a.   Outdoor operations.
            1.   General. To the extent possible, all business shall be
conducted within an enclosed building. Any curb service, drive-in trade,
outdoor facilities, outdoor services, outside storage, or outdoor display of
any kind shall not be conducted within any required yard, and must be located
behind the principal building. Screening for outdoor facilities, services,
storage, or display shall be provided in accordance with Section
26-176(h) of this chapter.
            2.   Outdoor operations in front of principal building.
Notwithstanding the provisions required in subparagraph 1. above, the following
uses shall be allowed in front of the principal structure provided that they
are not located in the street protective yard as required in Section
26-176(e) of this chapter:
               [a]   Outdoor dining facilities associated with a restaurant,
               [b]   Produce and/or display associated with a convenience
store, garden center, or farmer’s market,
               [c]   Vending machines, and/or
               [d]   Gasoline or fuel pumps associated with convenience stores
and automotive service stations.
            3.   Hours of operation for nonresidential use. All activities
associated with nonresidential uses, including deliveries and refuse
collection, shall be conducted between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
Provided, the Richland County Board of Zoning Appeals may permit, as a special
exception, hours of operation before 6:00 a.m. and/or after 10:00 p.m. in any
case where the board makes the following findings:
               [a]   The nonresidential use complies with all the standards set
forth for the RC Rural Commercial District.
               [b]   The nonresidential use does not include the operation of
equipment during the extended hours that could create a nuisance situation due
to noise (i.e. outside air compressors, speakers, etc.) between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
               [c]   The nonresidential use does not include the loading or
unloading of trucks or delivery vehicles during the extended hours.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 043-07HR, § XIV, 5-1-07; Ord. No.
027-09HR, § XIII, 5-19-09; Ord. No. 054-09HR, § XIV, 11-3-09)
Sec. 26-98. GC General Commercial District.
   (a)   Purpose. The GC District is intended to accommodate a variety of
general commercial and nonresidential uses characterized primarily by retail,
office, and service establishments and oriented primarily to major traffic
arteries or extensive areas of predominately commercial usage and
characteristics.
   (b)   Permitted uses, permitted uses with special requirements, and special
exceptions. See Article V., Section
26-141. Table of Permitted Uses, Permitted Uses with Special Requirements, and
Special Exceptions.
   (c)   Development standards. See also Article V., Section
26-131. Table of Area, Yard, and Height Requirements, and Section
26-151(c) and Section
26-152(d) for standards for high-rise buildings.
      (1)   Minimum lot area/maximum density:  Minimum lot area: no minimum lot
area except as required by DHEC. Maximum density standard: for residential
uses, no more than sixteen (16) dwelling units per acre. See also the special
requirement provisions for single-family zero lot line dwellings at Section
26-151(c) of this chapter.
      (2)   Minimum lot width: None.
      (3)   Structure size standards: None.
      (4)   Setback standards: The following minimum setbacks shall be required
for principal uses in the GC District:
         a.   Front:   25 feet.
         b.   Side:   None.
         c.   Rear:   10 feet.
      The minimum side and rear setback requirement for residential accessory
buildings and structures in the GC District is five (5) feet. Other accessory
structures must comply with the side and rear setback standards enumerated
above.
      The landscape and bufferyard standards of Section
26-176 of this chapter may require additional setback distances; if so, the
most restrictive requirements shall apply.
      (5)   Height standards: The maximum height of structures in the GC
District shall be forty- five (45) feet (3 stories or less). High rise
structures may be permitted as a permitted use subject to special requirements
(4 - 5 stories) or a special exception (6 or more stories), as set forth in
Section
26-151(c) and Section
26-152(d) of this chapter.
      (6)   Landscaping/bufferyard standards:  Landscaping and bufferyards
shall be provided in accordance with Section
26-176 of this chapter.
      (7)   Parking/loading standards: Parking and loading facilities shall be
provided as required by Section
26-173 and Section
26-174 of this chapter.
      (8)   Sidewalk and pedestrian amenities:  Sidewalks and other pedestrian
amenities shall be provided as required by Section
26-179 of this chapter.
      (9)   Signs: Signs shall be regulated by the requirements of Section
26-180 of this chapter.
      (10)   Recreation/open space standards: None.
      (11)   Design and operation standards: None.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 022-06HR, § I, 3-21-06; Ord. No.
043-07HR, § XV, 5-1-07; Ord. No. 027-09HR, § XIV, 5-19-09; Ord. No. 028-09HR,
§§ XI, XII, 5-19-09; Ord. No. 054-09HR, § XV, 11-3-09)
Sec. 26-99. M-1 Light Industrial District.
   (a)   Purpose. The M-1 District is intended to accommodate wholesaling,
distribution, storage, processing, light manufacturing, and general commercial
or agricultural uses. Certain related structures and uses required to serve the
needs of such uses are permitted outright or are permitted with special
requirements and/or special exceptions.
   (b)   Permitted uses, permitted uses with special requirements, and special
exceptions. See Article V., Section
26-141. Table of Permitted Uses, Permitted Uses with Special Requirements, and
Special Exceptions.
   (c)   Development standards. See also Article V., Section
26-131. Table of Area, Yard, and Height Requirements.
      (1)   Minimum lot area/maximum density:  Minimum lot area: no minimum lot
area except as required by DHEC. Maximum density standard: no maximum density
standard.
      (2)   Minimum lot width: None.
      (3)   Structure size standards: None.
      (4)   Setback standards: The following minimum setbacks shall be required
for principal uses in the M-1 District:
         a.   Front:   25 feet.
         b.   Side:   None.
         c.   Rear:   10 feet.
      Accessory structures must comply with the setback standards enumerated
above.
      The landscape and bufferyard standards of Section
26-176 of this chapter may require additional setback distances; if so, the
most restrictive requirements shall apply.
      (5)   Height standards: None.
      (6)   Landscaping/bufferyard standards:  Landscaping and bufferyards
shall be provided in accordance with Section
26-176 of this chapter.
      (7)   Parking/loading standards: Parking and loading facilities shall be
provided as required by Section
26-173 and Section
26-174 of this chapter.
      (8)   Sidewalk and pedestrian amenities:  Sidewalks and other pedestrian
amenities shall be provided as required by Section
26-179 of this chapter.
      (9)   Signs: Signs shall be regulated by the requirements of Section
26-180 of this chapter.
      (10)   Recreation/open space standards: None.
      (11)   Design and operation standards: None.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 043-07HR, § XVI, 5-1-07; Ord. No.
027-09HR, § XV, 5-19-09; Ord. No. 054-09HR, § XVI, 11-3-09; Ord. No. 030-12HR,
§ I, 5-15-12)
Sec. 26-100. LI Light Industrial District.
   (a)   Purpose. The LI District is intended to accommodate wholesaling,
distribution, storage, processing, light manufacturing, and general commercial
uses. Such uses are usually controlled operations, relatively clean, quiet, and
free of objectionable or hazardous elements, such as smoke, noise, odor or
dust. In addition, such uses usually operate and/or have storage within open or
enclosed structures; and generating no nuisances.
   (b)   Permitted uses, permitted uses with special requirements, and special
exceptions. See Article V., Section
26-141. Table of Permitted Uses, Permitted Uses with Special Requirements, and
Special Exceptions.
   (c)   Development standards. See also Article V., Section
26-131. Table of Area, Yard, and Height Requirements.
      (1)   Minimum lot area/maximum density:  Minimum lot area: no minimum lot
area except as required by DHEC. Maximum density standard: no maximum density
standard.
      (2)   Minimum lot width: None.
      (3)   Structure size standards: None.
      (4)   Setback standards: The following minimum setbacks shall be required
for principal uses in the LI District:
         a.   Front:   25 feet.
         b.   Side:   None.
         c.   Rear:   10 feet.
      Accessory structures must comply with the setback standards enumerated
above.
      The landscape and bufferyard standards of Section
26-176 of this chapter may require additional setback distances; if so, the
most restrictive requirements shall apply.
      (5)   Height standards: None.
      (6)   Landscaping/bufferyard standards:  Landscaping and bufferyards
shall be provided in accordance with Section
26-176 of this chapter.
      (7)   Parking/loading standards: Parking and loading facilities shall be
provided as required by Section
26-173 and Section
26-174 of this chapter. No parking lots shall be permitted within any required
setback.
      (8)   Sidewalk and pedestrian amenities:  Sidewalks and other pedestrian
amenities shall be provided as required by Section
26-179 of this chapter.
      (9)   Signs: Signs shall be regulated by the requirements of Section
26-180 of this chapter.
      (10)   Recreation/open space standards: None.
      (11)   Design and operation standards: None.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 043-07HR, § XVII, 5-1-07; Ord. No.
027-09HR, § XVI, 5-19-09; Ord. No. 054-09HR, XVII, 11-3-09)
Sec. 26-101. HI Heavy Industrial District.
   (a)   Purpose. The HI District is intended to accommodate primarily those
uses of a manufacturing and industrial nature, and secondly, those uses that
are functionally related thereto, such as distribution, storage, and
processing. General commercial uses are allowed, but are considered incidental
to the predominantly industrial nature of this district.
   (b)   Permitted uses, permitted uses with special requirements, and special
exceptions. See Article V., Section
26-141. Table of Permitted Uses, Permitted Uses with Special Requirements, and
Special Exceptions.
   (c)   Development standards. See also Article V., Section
26-131. Table of Area, Yard, and Height Requirements.
      (1)   Minimum lot area/maximum density:  Minimum lot area: no minimum lot
area except as required by DHEC. Maximum density standard: no maximum density
standard.
      (2)   Minimum lot width: None.
      (3)   Structure size standards: None.
      (4)   Setback standards: The following minimum setbacks shall be required
for principal uses in the HI District:
         a.   Front:   25 feet.
         b.   Side:   None.
         c.   Rear:   10 feet.
      Accessory structures must comply with the setback standards enumerated
above.
      The landscape and bufferyard standards of Section
26-176 of this chapter may require additional setback distances; if so, the
most restrictive requirements shall apply.
      (5)   Height standards: None.
      (6)   Landscaping/bufferyard standards:  Landscaping and bufferyards
shall be provided in accordance with Section
26-176 of this chapter.
      (7)   Parking/loading standards: Parking and loading facilities shall be
provided as required by Section
26-173 and Section
26-174 of this chapter. No parking lots shall be permitted within any required
setback.
      (8)   Sidewalk and pedestrian amenities:  Sidewalks and other pedestrian
amenities shall be provided as required by Section
26-179 of this chapter.
      (9)   Signs: Signs shall be regulated by the requirements of Section
26-180 of this chapter.
      (10)   Recreation/open space standards: None.
      (11)   Design and operation standards: None.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 043-07HR, § XVIII, 5-1-07; Ord. No.
027-09HR, § XVII, 5-19-09; Ord. No. 054-09HR, § XVIII, 11-3-09)
Sec. 26-102. PDD Planned Development District.
   (a)   Purpose. The PDD District is intended to allow flexibility in
development that will result in improved design, character, and quality of new
mixed-use developments, and that will preserve natural and scenic features of
open spaces. Planned development districts must involve innovation in site
planning for residential, commercial, institutional, and/or industrial
developments within the district. Such developments must be in accordance with
the comprehensive plan for the county, and in doing so, may provide for
variations from the regulations of the county’s zoning districts concerning
use, setbacks, lot size, density, bulk, and other such requirements.
   (b)   Applicability/establishment: The PDD District shall only be
established after a master plan for the planned development proposed for the
site to be rezoned is submitted and approved. The procedures for establishing a
PDD district are set out in Section
26-59 of this chapter. Project planning and design for a PDD shall be performed
by a licensed architect, landscape architect, or registered land surveyor, with
site engineering performed by a registered engineer.
   (c)   Permitted uses, permitted uses with special requirements, and special
exceptions. The uses permitted in a PDD District shall be the permitted uses
set forth in the approved site plan. However, manufactured home parks are not
permitted as part of a PDD District. No special exception actions are required
to establish any specific use in a PDD District. Provided, however, the
planning commission and the county council shall ascertain that the effect and
benefits that are usually derived from safeguards and conditions normally
imposed upon special exception uses will substantially be met by the site plan
and development controls of the proposed planned development.
   (d)    Development standards.
      (1)   Minimum lot area/maximum density:  Minimum area: the minimum area
for the entire Planned Development District shall be two (2) acres. The minimum
lot size within the PDD shall be as established by the general development plan
for the PDD District and any regulations of DHEC. Maximum density: no maximum
density requirement for a Planned Development District. The density shall be as
established by the general development plan for the PDD District and any
regulations of DHEC.
      (2)   Minimum lot width, setback and height standards: Minimum lot width,
setback requirements, and maximum height are not stipulated in this chapter for
PDD Districts. However, the planning commission and county council, in
approving a PDD, shall ascertain that the characteristics of building siting as
shown on the development plan is appropriate as related to structures within
the planned development and otherwise fulfill the intent of this chapter and
the county’s comprehensive plan.
      (3)   Structure size standards: Structure size standards are not
stipulated in this chapter for PDD Districts. However, the planning commission
and the county council, in approving a PDD, shall ascertain whether structure
size proposals as shown on the planned development site plan are appropriate
and whether such structures otherwise fulfill the intent of this chapter and
the county’s comprehensive plan.
      (4)   Landscaping/bufferyard standards:  Landscaping and bufferyards
shall be provided in accordance with Section
26-176 of this chapter.
      (5)   Parking/loading standards: Parking and loading facilities shall be
provided as required by Section
26-173 and Section
26-174 of this chapter. In areas devoted to residential uses, no parking lots
shall be permitted within any required setback.
      (6)   Sidewalk and pedestrian amenities:  Sidewalks and other pedestrian
amenities shall be provided as required by Section
26-179 of this chapter.
      (7)   Signs: Signs shall be regulated by the requirements of Section
26-180 of this chapter.
      (8)   Recreation/open space standards.
         a.   Purpose. The common open space and park standards contained
herein are established to provide for the reservation of open space in planned
development districts. Preservation of open space and parks in developing areas
serves a variety of purposes, including meeting the recreational needs of
residents, reducing stormwater runoff, and enhancing air quality.
         b.   Minimum amount of park land or open space to be reserved.
Developers must reserve at least ten percent (10%) or the total project area as
park land or open space, which shall be usable, i.e., common areas made
accessible for pedestrian and/or aquatic use.
         c.   Acceptable land for park land or open space reservation:
            1.   Water features. Bodies of water, such as ponds, lakes,
streams, wetlands, and flood plains, may be used to fulfill the open space
requirement.
            2.   Land burdened with easements. Land that is burdened with
easements may be used, provided that the easements do not interfere with the
use of the land for open space and recreation purposes and do not permit future
development.
         d.   Unacceptable land for park or open space reservation. The
following types of land are unacceptable for park or open space reservation:
            1.   Occupied land. Land occupied by roads, drives, parking areas,
or structures, other than those related to recreational structures or parks.
            2.   Land with hazardous materials. Land containing or contaminated
by hazardous materials.
            3.   Narrow areas. Land with a width of less than twenty-five (25)
feet, unless such land is a bicycle or walking trail at least ten (10) feet
wide, or unless such land is a “pocket park” that is no less than ten (10) feet
by ten (10) feet in size, or unless specifically approved by the planning
department.
         e.   Maintenance. Arrangements for the perpetual maintenance of open
space that meet these requirements must be approved by the planning department.
Any conveyance to a homeowner’s association shall be subject to appropriately
recorded and filed restrictive covenants and easements. The covenants and
easements shall prohibit future development of the open space for other than
open space and recreation purposes and shall provide for continued maintenance
of the open space and recreation facilities. Failure to maintain the area
designated for open space shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
      (9)   Design and operation standards: A PDD District shall be located
only on a road capable of accommodating the projected traffic needs of the
proposed development. A traffic impact assessment must accompany the
application for a PDD District.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 043-07HR, § XIX, 5-1-07; Ord. No.
027-09HR, § XVIII, 5-19-09; Ord. No. 038-09HR, § II, 7-21-09; Ord. No. 054-
09HR, § XIX, 11-3-09)
Sec. 26-103. TC Town and Country District.
   (a)   Purpose. The Town and Country District is intended to promote the
development of land in a manner consistent with the comprehensive plan for
Richland County, in particular the Town and Country Planning Concept promoted
therein. It is designed to promote, in various parts of the county, mixed-use
development that has a distinct village edge, along with amenities that promote
walkability and ties to transit throughout the community.
   (b)   Applicability/establishment: The Town and Country District shall only
be established after a master plan for the neighborhood development proposed
for the site to be rezoned is submitted and approved. The procedures for
establishing a TC district are the same as those set out for a Planned
Development District at Section
26-59 of this chapter. Project planning and design for a TC District shall be
performed by a licensed architect, landscape architect, or registered land
surveyor, with site engineering performed by a registered engineer.
   (c)   Permitted uses, permitted uses with special requirements, and special
exceptions.
      (1)   General. Carefully blended land uses form the essence of Town and
Country Development. Different land uses may abut at any point, subject to the
provisions of this section. All residential, institutional, office, and
commercial uses are allowed in this district, as are all uses permitted in the
LI district.
      (2)   Permitted special exceptions. No special exception actions are
required to establish any specific use in a Town and Country District. Uses and
structures permitted, permitted with special requirements, or allowed by
special exception in the districts indicated in subsection (c)(1) above for any
specific site are permitted outright. Provided, however, the planning
commission and county council shall ascertain that the effect and benefits that
are usually derived from safeguards and conditions normally imposed upon
special exceptions will substantially be met by the site plan and development
controls of the proposed town and country development.
   (d)   Development Standards.
      (1)   Minimum lot area/maximum density:  Minimum lot area: there is no
minimum lot area for the entire Town and Country District. However, the
recommended minimum size shall be forty (40) acres. The minimum lot size within
the Town and Country District shall be as established by the general
development plan for the TC District and any regulations of the DHEC. Maximum
density: no maximum density requirement for a Town and Country District. The
density shall be as established by the general development plan for the TC
District and any regulations of DHEC.
      (2)   Subareas: The TC District shall be divided into the following
subareas:
         a.   Town center. The town center shall consist of a blend of civic,
retail, office and multi-family uses. The size of the town center shall be a
minimum of two percent (2%) of the entire site area.
      b.    Neighborhoods. A neighborhood or series of neighborhoods consisting
of blended multi-family and single-family uses, small-scale retail and workshop
uses, and public outdoor gathering places shall be a part of any town and
country district. It is the intent of this section that all areas within a town
and country neighborhood are within walking distance from edge to center.
         c.   Greenways. Greenway areas that provide a greenway system for the
community, open space for community residents, and natural areas for stormwater
management shall be a part of any town and country development. Greenways may
border or traverse the district.
      (3)   Minimum lot width, structure size, setback and height standards:
There are no minimum lot width, structure size, setback, or maximum height
requirements for TC Districts. However, the planning commission and county
council, in approving a TC District, shall ascertain that the characteristics
of building siting, as shown on the development plan, shall be appropriate as
related to structures within the town and country village, and otherwise
fulfill the intent of this chapter and the comprehensive plan for the county.
      (4)   Land allocation and location:
         a.   Town center. A minimum of two percent (2%) of the gross area of
the T and C District shall be required for the town center.
         b.   Open spaces. Land designated for parks, greenways, or public
squares shall constitute a minimum of ten percent (10%) of the gross area of
the district.
      (5)   Landscaping/bufferyard standards:  Landscaping and bufferyards
shall be provided in accordance with Section
26-176 of this chapter. However, in order to provide a continuous pedestrian
transition for residential neighborhoods and commercial areas, retail land use
categories shall not be separated from residential land use categories by berms
or buffers. Adequate design measures shall be taken to minimize potential use
conflicts. Limited fences and walls may be used when other design methods are
ineffective.
      (6)   Parking/loading standards: Except as otherwise provided in this
section, parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by
Section
26-173 and Section
26-174 of this chapter. However, due to the pedestrian nature of the TC
District, parking requirements for retail, business/service, and institutional
uses may be reduced by twenty- five percent (25%) of any use related parking
standards established in Section
26-173. Additionally, on-road parking shall count toward any minimum parking
requirements.
         a.   On-street parking. On-street parking is required when a
particular land use will generate regular guest or customer parking use.
Occasional on-street parking (such as within a single-family neighborhood) can
be accommodated without additional pavement width or delineation. On-street
parking shall be provided on roads abutting squares, small parks, or other
urban spaces.
         b.   Off-street parking.
            1.   Location. For interior commercial parcels, no less than
seventy-five percent (75%) of the parking spaces shall be located to the rear
of the building being served. Commercial parking fronting on non-pedestrian
oriented major arterials may locate primary parking lots along this frontage.
Where primary parking abuts roads within the interior of the TC District,
screening, a minimum of four (4) feet in height, shall be erected on the
frontage line, where primary parking lots are located. This screening
requirement may be met by the use of berms, walls or densely planted
vegetation, providing for visual obstruction of the parking area from the
abutting road(s). Primary parking lots (over 24 spaces) and parking garages
shall not: [1] abut road intersections, [2] be located adjacent to squares or
parks, or [3] occupy lots that terminate a road vista.
            2.   Connections. Adjacent parking lots shall have vehicular
connections from an alley.
            3.   Small retail and service/business uses. Uses involving a gross
floor area of less than twenty-five hundred (2,500) square feet shall not
require on-site parking, provided that the required parking is available within
a six hundred (600) foot radius of the activity.
         c.   Loading. Loading areas shall adjoin alleys or parking areas to
the rear of the principal building unless otherwise approved in the TC District
plan.
      (7)   Sidewalk and pedestrian amenities:  Sidewalks and other pedestrian
amenities shall be provided as required by Section
26-179 of this chapter.
      (8)   Signs: Signs shall be regulated by the requirements of Section
26-180 of this chapter.
      (9)   Recreation/open space standards.
         a.   Purpose. The common open space and park standards contained
herein are established to provide for the reservation of open space in Town and
Country Development districts. Preservation of open space and parks in
developing areas serves a variety of purposes, including meeting the
recreational needs of residents, reducing stormwater runoff, and enhancing air
quality.
         b.   Minimum amount of park land or open space to be reserved.
Developers must reserve at least ten percent (10%) or the total project area as
park land or open space, which shall be usable, i.e., common areas made
accessible for pedestrian and/or aquatic use.
         c.   Acceptable land for park land or open space reservation:
            1.   Water features. Bodies of water, such as ponds, lakes,
streams, wetlands, and flood plains, may be used to fulfill the open space
requirement.
            2.   Land burdened with easements. Land that is burdened with
easements may be used, provided that the easements do not interfere with the
use of the land for open space and recreation purposes and do not permit future
development.
         d.   Unacceptable land for park or open space reservation. The
following types of land are unacceptable for park or open space reservation:
            1.   Occupied land. Land occupied by roads, drives, parking areas,
or structures, other than those related to recreational structures or parks.
            2.   Land with hazardous materials. Land containing or contaminated
by hazardous materials.
            3.   Narrow areas. Land with a width of less than twenty-five (25)
feet, unless such land is a bicycle or walking trail at least ten (10) feet
wide, or unless such land is a “pocket park” that is no less than ten (10) feet
by ten (10) feet in size, or unless specifically approved by the planning
department.
         e.   Maintenance. Arrangements for the perpetual maintenance of open
space that meet these requirements must be approved by the planning department.
Any conveyance to a homeowner’s association shall be subject to appropriately
recorded and filed restrictive covenants and easements. The covenants and
easements shall prohibit future development of the open space for other than
open space and recreation purposes and shall provide for continued maintenance
of the open space and recreation facilities. Failure to maintain the area
designated for open space shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
      (10)   Design and operation standards:
         a.   Lots and buildings.
            1.   Frontage. All lots shall include frontage abutting a road,
square, or common open space.
            2.   Entryway. The main entrance of all principal structures shall
open to a road, square, or common open space of at least twenty (20) square
feet in area. Front or side yard porches shall be encouraged on all single-
family dwelling units.
            3.   Scale. The character of the town center is primarily aimed at
small- scale retail, service, and office uses. However, larger anchor stores or
uses may be included as part of an overall commercial package if approved at
the time of TC plan review.
         b.   Roads/traffic impacts.
            1.   Roadway design. The road standards for the TC District may be
different from those set forth in Section
26-181 of this chapter, but must be approved by the county engineer during the
TC plan review process. Reduced roadway widths are encouraged for traffic
calming and also due to a comprehensive approach to travel in a TC District
that includes roads and alleys.
            2.   Alleys. There shall be a continuous network of alleys to the
rear of building lots within the TC District, except when topography or
physical feature makes such alleyways impractical. Dead end alleys are
prohibited.
            3.   Street furnishings. Street furnishings shall be included in a
TC District. In commercial areas such furnishings shall include, but not be
limited to: pedestrian scale decorative streetlights, decorative road signs,
benches, trash receptacles, water fountains, etc. In residential areas,
pedestrian scale decorative streetlights and decorative road signs shall be
included.
         c.   Utilities. To the extent possible, underground utilities (and
associated pedestals, cabinets, junction boxes, and transformers), including
electric, cable, telephone, and natural gas service, shall be located within
the alley right-of-way and not along the streetscape frontage. Domestic water
service and sanitary sewer must be located in such a way to cause the least
impact on the streetscape planting strip and required street trees.
Unless otherwise approved by the planning commission and the county council,
all utilities shall be placed underground.
         d.   Transit. Land for an on-site transit stop shall be reserved
within the district when the proposed TC District is within the service area of
a public transit system.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 043-07HR, § XX, 5-1-07; Ord. No.
027-09HR, § XIX, 5-19-09; Ord. No. 038-09HR, §§ II, VIII, 7-21-09; Ord. No.
054-09HR, XX, 11-3-09)
Sec. 26-104. AP Airport Height Restrictive Overlay District.
   (a)   Purpose. It is the intent of the AP Overlay District to restrain
influences that are adverse to the property and safe conduct of aircraft
operations in the vicinity of Jim Hamilton-L.B. Owens Airport and McEntire Air
National Guard Base. Furthermore, it is the intent of this overlay district to
prevent creation of conditions hazardous to aircraft operation, to prevent
conflict with land development that may result in loss of life and property,
and to encourage development that is compatible with airport use
characteristics.
   (b)   Applicability/Establishment. The AP Overlay District shall function as
an overlay district, providing additional requirements to the regulations of
the underlying general use zoning classification(s).
   (c)   Permitted uses, permitted uses with special requirements, and special
exceptions. The AP Overlay District may contain several different underlying
general use zoning classifications. All uses permitted in the respective
underlying zoning districts shall be permitted in the AP Overlay District.
Provided, however, when the provisions of this section impose higher standards
than are required for that zoning classification, the provisions of this
section shall apply. However, no use may be made of land or water within the AP
Overlay District in such a manner as to cause or create electrical interference
with navigational signals or radio communication between any airport and the
aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights
and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using any airport, create
bird strike hazards, or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the
landing, take off, or maneuvering of aircraft using or intending to use any
airport.
   (d)   Development standards.
      (1)   General. Except as specifically provided for below, no material
changes shall be made in the use of land, no structure shall be erected or
otherwise established, and no tree shall be planted in any AP Overlay District
unless a permit is applied for and granted. The following exceptions shall
apply:
         a.   In the area lying within the limits of the AP horizontal zone
(see subparagraph (2)e. below) and the AP conical zone (see subparagraph (2)f.
below), no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than
seventy-five (75) feet in vertical height above the ground, except when, due to
terrain, land contour, or topographic features, such tree or structure would
extend above the height limits prescribed for such zones.
         b.   In areas lying within the limits of the AP approach zones (see
subparagraph (2)b. below), but at a horizontal distance of not less than four
thousand two hundred (4,200) feet from each end of the runway, no permit shall
be required for any tree or structure less than seventy- five (75) feet in
vertical height above the ground, except when, due to terrain, land contour, or
topographic features, such tree or structure would extend above the height
limits prescribed for such zones.
         c.   In the areas lying within the limits of the AP transition zones
(see subparagraph (2)d. below), no permit shall be required for any tree or
structure less than seventy-five (75) feet in vertical height above the ground,
except when, due to terrain, land contour, or topographic features, such tree
or structure would extend above the height limits prescribed for such zones.
      (2)   Height standards: Except as otherwise provided in this section, no
structure shall be erected, altered, or maintained, and no trees shall be
allowed to grow in any zone created by this section to a height in excess of
the applicable height limitations established in this section for each zone in
question, as follows:
         a.   Primary zones: APP.
            1.   McEntire Air National Guard Base (APPM): The primary zone is
established at field elevation, two hundred fifty-one (251) feet, mean sea
level, longitudinally centered on each runway with the same length as the
runway. The width of the primary zone is two thousand (2,000) feet.
            2.   Jim Hamilton-L.B. Owens Airport (APPO): None.
         b.   Approach zones: APA.
            1.   McEntire Air National Guard Base (APAM): The approach zone
begins two hundred (200) feet beyond each end of the primary surface at the
centerline elevation of the runway end and extends for fifty thousand (50,000)
feet. The slope of the approach clearance zone is fifty (50) to one (1) along
the runway centerline extended until it reaches an elevation of five hundred
(500) feet above the established airport elevation (equal to 251 feet mean sea
level). It then continues horizontally at this elevation to a point fifty
thousand (50,000) feet from the point of beginning. The width of this surface
at the runway end is the same as the primary surface, flaring uniformly, with
width at the fifty thousand (50,000) feet point being sixteen thousand
(16,000).
            2.   Jim Hamilton-L.B. Owens Airport (APAO): The approach zone
slopes twenty (20) feet outward for each one (1) foot upward beginning at the
end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a
horizontal distance of five thousand (5,000) feet along the extended runway
centerline.
         c.   Clear zones: APCZ.
            1.   McEntire Air National Guard Base (APCZM): The clear zone is
established at field elevation (251 feet mean sea level) and extends outward
from the primary surface to the length of one thousand (1,000) feet. The width
is equal to the width of the primary surface.
            2.   Jim Hamilton-L.B. Owens Airport (APCZO): None.
         d.   Transitional zones: APT.
            1.   McEntire Air National Guard Base (APTM): The transitional
zones connect the primary surface, the first two hundred (200) feet of the
clear zone surface, and the approach clearance surface to the inner horizontal
surfaces, conical surface, and outer horizontal surface. The slopes of the
transitional surface are seven (7) to one (1) outward and upward at right
angles to the runway centerline beginning at the sides of and at the same
elevation as the primary surface (251 feet mean sea level).
            2.   Jim Hamilton-L.B. Owens Airport (APTO): The transitional zone
slopes seven (7) feet outward for each one (1) foot upward beginning at the
side of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the approach
surface, and extend to a height of one hundred fifty (150) feet above the
airport elevation (194 feet mean sea level). In addition to the foregoing,
there are established height limits sloping seven (7) feet outward for each one
(1) foot upward beginning at the sides and at the same elevation as the
approach surface, and extending to where they intersect the horizontal surface.
         e.   Horizontal zones: APH.
            1.    McEntire Air National Guard Base (APHM): The horizontal zones
for McEntire National Guard Base are separated into the inner horizontal zone
and the outer horizontal zone. Their dimensions are:
         Inner: The inner horizontal zone is an oval shape at a height of one
hundred fifty (150) feet above the established airfield (equal to 401 feet mean
sea level).
         Outer: The outer horizontal zone is a plane located five hundred (500)
feet above the established airfield elevation (equal to 751 feet mean sea
level), extending outward from the outer periphery of the conical surface for a
horizontal distance of thirty thousand (30,000) feet.
            2.   Jim Hamilton-L.B. Owens Airport: The horizontal zone is
established at one hundred fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation (equal
to 344 feet mean sea level).
         f.   Conical zones: APC.
            1.   McEntire Air National Guard Base (APCM): The conical zone is a
surface extending from the periphery of the inner horizontal surface outward
and upward at a slope of twenty (20) to one (1) for a horizontal distance of
seven thousand (7,000) feet to a height of five hundred (500) feet above the
established airfield elevation (equal to 751 feet mean sea level).
            2.   Jim Hamilton-L.B. Owens Airport: The conical zone slopes
twenty (20) feet outward for each one (1) foot upward beginning at the
periphery of the horizontal zone and at one hundred fifty (150) feet above the
airport elevation (equal to 344 feet mean sea level) and extending to an
elevation of three hundred fifty (350) feet above the airport elevation (equal
to 544 feet mean sea level) at a horizontal distance of four thousand (4,000)
feet.
      (3)   Other dimensional and use regulations.  Permitted accessory
structures, prohibited uses and structures, minimum lot area, minimum lot
width, minimum yard requirements, maximum lot coverage, minimum off-street
parking and loading requirements, regulation of signs, and provisions of
sidewalks and open space shall be provided as regulated in the general zoning
district to which the AP Overlay District is appended, unless the AP Overlay
District has a greater requirement upon such dimensions and characteristics of
use, in which case the stricter shall prevail.
      (4)   Obstruction marking and lighting. Any permit or variance granted
may, if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this
section and is reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require
the owner of the structure or tree in question to install, operate, and
maintain, at the owner’s expense, such markings and lighting as may be
necessary. If deemed proper by the board of zoning of appeals and acceptable to
the county, this condition may be modified to require the owner to permit the
county, at the county’s expense, to install, operate, and maintain the
necessary markings and lights.
   (e)   Variances.
      (1)   General. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any
structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use the property not in
accordance with the regulations provided in this section, may apply to the
board of zoning appeals for a variance from such regulations.
      (2)   FAA review. The application for a variance shall be accompanied by
a determination of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) as to the effect
of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe,
efficient use of navigable airspace. Such variances shall be allowed when it is
duly found that a literal application or enforcement of the regulations will
result in unnecessary hardship, and relief, if granted, will not be contrary to
the public interest, will not create a hazard to air navigation, will do
substantial justice, and will be in accordance with the spirit of this chapter.
      (3)   Airport management review. No application for a variance of these
regulations may be considered by the board of zoning appeals unless
notification of the request and a copy of the application have been furnished
to the airport manager for advice as to the aeronautical effects of the
variance. If the airport manager does not respond to the notification within
fifteen (15) days after receipt, the board of zoning appeals may act on its own
to grant or deny the application.
   (f)   Nonconforming uses.
      (1)   General. The regulations prescribed by this section shall not be
construed to require the removal, lowering, or other change or alteration of
any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective
date of this chapter, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of a
nonconforming use. However, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure
or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation, and
maintenance thereon of such markers or lighting as shall be deemed necessary by
the county to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the
airport the presence of such airport obstruction. Such markers shall be
installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the county.
      (2)   Abandoned or destroyed.
         a.   Structure. Whenever the zoning administrator determines that a
nonconforming structure has been destroyed or torn down beyond seventy- five
percent (75%) of its most recent appraised value, no permit shall be granted
that would allow such structure to exceed the applicable height limit or
otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations.
         b.   Tree. Whenever the zoning administrator determines that a
nonconforming tree has been destroyed, torn down, decayed or deteriorated,
below the applicable height limit, no permit shall be granted that would allow
another tree to be planted which would exceed the applicable height limit or
otherwise deviate from the regulations contained in this section.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 043-07HR, § XXI, 5-1-07; Ord. No.
029-09HR, § II, 5-19-09; Ord. No. 054-09HR, § XXI, 11-3-09)
Sec. 26-105. C Conservation Overlay District.
   (a)   Purpose. The C Overlay District is intended to provide for safe,
suitable development along designated water resources throughout Richland
County. It is intended to allow development that will assist in the
preservation of views from the water and of the water resources, is consistent
with the shoreline areas that surround these features, and will provide
adequate measures of safety to property and life during periodic flooding.
   (b)   Applicability/establishment. The C Overlay District shall function as
an overlay district providing additional requirements to the regulations of the
underlying general use zoning classification(s), and shall only be applied to
individual water resource areas after study and rezoning by the Richland County
Council.
   (c)   Permitted uses, permitted uses with special requirements, and special
exceptions. The C Overlay District may contain several different underlying
general use zoning classifications. All uses permitted in the underlying zoning
district shall be permitted in the C Overlay District. Provided, however, when
the provisions of this section impose higher standards than are required for
that zoning classification, the provisions of this section shall apply.
Furthermore, additional overlay districts may be affixed to the general zoning
district (e.g. the Floodplain Overlay District). Provisions of any or all
overlay districts must be satisfied. However, in the case of conflict between
overlay district regulations, the stricter regulations shall apply.
   (d)   Development standards.
      (1)   Dimensional regulations. Uses within the C Overlay District shall
comply with the regulations of the underlying district, except uses on lots
abutting a water resource. For uses on lots abutting the water, a water
resource yard shall be provided as a setback within which no structures, except
approved uncovered docks, shall be erected. A setback from the top of the bank
of the water resource shall be required for a distance of twenty percent (20%)
of the lot depth (measured at the time of site plan approval), with a maximum
setback of fifty (50) feet and a minimum setback of twenty (20) feet. Existing
continuous tree stands shall be preserved to stabilize the water resource
banks. Walkways, trails, access areas, and similar activities may occur within
the water resource yard.
      (2)   Landscaping/bufferyard standards.  Landscaping and bufferyards
shall be provided in accordance with Section
26-176 of this chapter. Species suitable for a riparian environment shall be
utilized for required landscaping and buffering in a C Overlay District.
      (3)   Parking/loading standards. Parking and loading facilities shall be
as required in Section
26-173 and Section
26-174 of this chapter. Shared parking arrangements and common parking areas
are encouraged in the C Overlay District; however, in no instance are parking
or loading areas permitted in the water resource yard.
      (4)   Sidewalk and pedestrian amenities.  Sidewalks and other pedestrian
amenities shall be provided as required by Section
26-179 of this chapter. Public pedestrian trail/greenway easement segments
designed and approved as part of the site approval process may be provided in
lieu of sidewalks. The County shall not use its power of eminent domain to
condemn private land within a C Overlay District for the purpose of creating a
public pedestrian trail/greenway easement segment.
      (5)   Signs. Signs shall be regulated by the requirements of Section
26-180 of this chapter.
      (6)   Recreational/open space standards: Open space shall be provided for
new developments and expansions of existing developments in accordance with the
provisions established in Section
26-186 of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 043-07HR, § XXII, 5-1-07; Ord. No.
054-09HR, § XXII, 11-3-09; Ord. No. 003-12HR, § I, 1-17-12)
Sec. 26-106. FP Floodplain Overlay District.
   (a)   General.
   (1)   Purpose. Certain areas within Richland County are subject to periodic
inundation by floodwater, which results or may be reasonably foreseen to result
in loss of life or property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce
and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood
protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety,
and general welfare of the citizens of Richland County. These hazards are
caused or extended in part by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses that
increase flood damage upon other lands, or uses that are vulnerable to floods
because they are inadequately elevated or not otherwise protected from flood
damages. In order for owners of property located within the county that is
subject to periodic inundation to obtain flood damage insurance through the
National Flood Insurance Program, the United States government, by statute and
through regulations promulgated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) requires that the county enact floodplain regulations designed to reduce
the amount of potential flood losses. It is, therefore, the intent of this
section to lessen such hazards and losses and ensure insurance coverage by
those affected property owners by restricting or prohibiting uses that are
dangerous to health, safety, or property in times of flood or that cause
excessive increases in flood heights or velocities. This shall be accomplished
by requiring that uses vulnerable to floods be protected against flood hazards
at the time of initial construction, and by controlling filling, grading,
mineral extraction, placing of obstructions within the flood channels, and
other activities, uses, or characteristics of use which may increase flood
damage.
   (2)   Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection
required by this Section is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and
is based on scientific and engineering standards. Larger floods can and will
occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This Section does not imply that land outside the areas of special
flood hazard, or uses permitted within such areas, will be free from flooding
or flood damages. This Section shall not create liability on the part of
Richland County or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that
results from reliance on the provisions contained herein or on any
administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
   (b)   Applicability/establishment. The FP Overlay District shall function as
an overlay district providing additional requirements to the regulations of the
underlying general use zoning classification(s). It shall be applied to those
areas designated on the Federal Emergency Management Agency's Flood Insurance
Study, dated December 21, 2017, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps
(FIRM), dated December 21, 2017, as areas of special flood hazard. In addition
to other required development approvals, development applicants subject to the
FP Overlay District must also receive a floodplain development permit from the
county's flood coordinator. Review of developments subject to these
requirements shall be conducted as part of the review for a grading or land
development permit, whichever is applicable.
   (c)   Permitted uses, permitted uses with special requirements, and special
exceptions.
      (1)   General: Any use permitted outright, with special requirements, or
permitted as an accessory use in the general use district(s) to which the FP
Overlay District is affixed to, is permitted; provided that such use complies
with all applicable regulations set forth below and in the other sections of
this chapter. (See however, restrictions for development in the designated
floodway as set forth in subsection (d)(2)h. below). All applications for land
development permits for uses permitted in the FP Overlay District shall be
reviewed by the flood coordinator in accordance with the requirements of
subsection (d) below. Before the planning department may issue a land
development permit, a floodplain development permit must be issued. The
findings and recommendations of the flood coordinator shall be binding upon the
planning department unless otherwise appealed.
      (2)   Permitted special exceptions. Any use listed as a special exception
in the general use district(s) to which the FP Overlay District is affixed to
may be permitted by the Richland County Board of Zoning Appeals as set forth in
Section 26-56 of this chapter; provided that such uses comply with all
applicable regulations set forth below and in the other sections of this
chapter. (See, however, restrictions for development in the designated floodway
as set forth in subsection (d)(2)h. below). All applications for special
exceptions in the FP Overlay District shall be reviewed by the flood
coordinator prior to review by the board of zoning appeals in accordance with
the requirements of subsection (d) below. Before the board of zoning appeals
may approve a special exception, a floodplain development permit must be
issued. The findings and recommendations of the flood coordinator shall be
binding upon the board of zoning appeals.
   (d)   Standards in the floodplain.
      (1)   General standards.
      a.   Before a permit is issued, the applicant shall demonstrate that
encroachments onto the floodplain are minimized. New development, if permitted
in the area of special flood hazard, shall minimize disruption to shorelines,
stream channels, stream banks, and the regulatory floodway. As used in this
paragraph, the term "minimize" shall mean the lowest degree of interruption
(i.e. the uniformity or continuity) to the natural course of action or
activity. All permit applications will be reviewed to determine whether
proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding.
      b.   Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be designed and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of
the structures.
      c.   Materials/methods to be used. All new construction and substantial
improvements shall be constructed with flood resistant materials and utility
equipment resistant to flood damage. All new construction and substantial
improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood
damages.
      d.   Electric, ventilation, plumbing, heating, and air conditioning
equipment. Electric, ventilation, plumbing, heating, and air conditioning
equipment (including ductwork), and other service facilities, shall be designed
and elevated two (2) feet above the base flood elevation so as to prevent water
from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding as specifically provided for below:
         1.   When not substantial improvement. The replacement of existing
electrical, ventilation, plumbing, heating, and air conditioning equipment
(including ductwork) and other service facilities, that do not constitute a
substantial improvement, are encouraged to be elevated at least two (2) feet
above the base flood elevation, but they may be located at the original
location and elevation.
         2.   New construction and substantial improvement. All electrical,
ventilation, plumbing, heating, and air conditioning equipment (including
ductwork), and other service facilities, for new construction and substantial
improvement must be elevated at least two (2) feet above the base flood
elevation.
         3.   Outdoor faucets. The requirements listed above do not preclude
the installation of outdoor faucets for shower heads, sinks, hoses, etc. as
long as cut off devices and back flow devices are installed to prevent
contamination to the service components and thereby minimize any flood damages
to the building.
      e.   Water and sanitary sewage systems. All new and replacement water
supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the sanitary
sewage systems into flood waters.
      f.   On-site waste disposal systems. On-site waste disposal systems shall
be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from
them during flooding.
      g.   Foundation systems. Hydrodynamic pressure must be considered in the
design of any foundation system when velocity waters or the potential for
debris flow exists. If flood velocities are excessive (greater than five (5)
feet per second), foundation systems other than solid foundation walls should
be considered so that obstructions to damaging flood flows are minimized.
      h.   Non-conforming buildings or uses (see also Article X of this chapter
on nonconforming uses generally). Non-conforming buildings or uses may not be
enlarged, replaced, or rebuilt unless such enlargement or reconstruction is
accomplished in conformance with the provisions of this section. Provided,
however, nothing in this section shall prevent the repair, reconstruction, or
replacement of an existing building or structure located totally or partially
within the floodway, if the bulk of the building or structure below base flood
elevation in the floodway is not increased, and provided that such repair,
reconstruction, or replacement meets all of the other requirements of this
section. Reconstructions or replacements of existing buildings or structures
sh.all be placed with their longitudinal axis parallel to the predicted
direction of the flow of flood waters or be placed so that their longitudinal
axis are on lines parallel to those of adjoining structures so as to offer the
minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
      i.   American with Disabilities Act (ADA). A building must meet the
specific standards for floodplain construction as outlined in subsection (d)(2)
below, as well as any applicable ADA requirements. The cost of improvements
required to meet the ADA provisions shall be included in the costs of the
improvements for calculating substantial improvement.
      j.   Watercourse alterations and maintenance. In addition to the
notifications required for watercourse alterations per Section
26-36(a)(2)c., a maintenance requirement will be included in Floodplain
Development Permits whenever a watercourse is altered or relocated within a
Special Flood Hazard Area. Such maintenance activities shall ensure that the
flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse is not diminished, and shall consist
of periodic inspections, and routine channel clearing and dredging, or other
related functions. In addition, the permittee shall keep a written record
describing all maintenance activities performed, the frequency of performance,
and the name of the person(s) responsible for such maintenance and provide
copies to the Flood Coordinator. The Flood Coordinator shall keep permitting
records on file for FEMA inspection.
   (2)   Specific standards.
      a.   Residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall
have the lowest floor elevated no lower than two (2) feet above the base flood
elevation. No basements are permitted. Should solid foundation perimeter walls
be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with subsection f.
below.
      b.   Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial industrial, or nonresidential structure shall
have the lowest floor (including basement), or mechanical and utility
equipment, elevated no lower than two (2) feet above the level of the base
flood elevation or be flood-proofed to a level no lower than two (2) feet above
the level of the base flood elevation, provided that all areas of the building
(including mechanical and utility equipment) below the required elevation are
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and
use structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. Should solid foundation
perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to
facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in
accordance with subsection f. below. A South Carolina licensed registered land
surveyor, engineer, or architect authorized by law to certify such information
shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Flood-
proofed structures shall have an approved maintenance plan with an annual
exercise as required by FEMA. The maintenance plan must be approved by the
flood coordinator and notification of the annual exercise shall be provided to
same.
      c.   Foundation protection. A land surveyor, engineer, or architect
authorized by law to certify such information shall develop or review the
structural design, specifications, and plans for the foundation of all new
buildings and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in
accordance with accepted practices to withstand flotation, collapse, lateral
movement, erosion, scour, undermining, and the effects of water and wind acting
simultaneously on all building components during the occurrence of the base
flood.
      d.   Manufactured homes.
         1.   Substantially damaged homes.  Manufactured homes that are on
sites outside a manufactured home park or subdivision, in a new manufactured
home park or subdivision, in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park
or subdivision, or in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, which
have incurred “substantial damage,” must be subsequently elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is
elevated no lower than two (2) feet above the base flood elevation and must be
securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
         2.   Existing manufactured homes.  Manufactured homes proposed to be
placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park
or subdivision that are not subject to the provisions of subsection d.1. above,
must be elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated
no lower than two (2) feet above the base flood elevation, and must be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse,
and lateral movement.
         3.   Anchoring. Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. For the purpose of this requirement,
manufactured homes must be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement in accordance with Section 19-425.42 of the South Carolina
Manufactured Housing Board Regulations, effective date May 25, 1990, as
amended. Additionally, when the elevation requirement would be met by an
elevation of the chassis at thirty-six (36) inches or less above the grade at
the site, the chassis shall be supported by reinforced piers or other
foundation elements of at least equivalent strength. When the elevation of the
chassis is above thirty-six (36) inches in height, an engineering certification
is required.
         4.   Evacuation plan for parks and subdivisions. An evacuation plan
indicating vehicular access and escape routes for residents of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions located in or surrounded by an area of special
flood hazard must be developed. The owner of the manufactured home park or
subdivision shall be responsible for filing this plan with the flood
coordinator and shall see that each tenant thereof has received an evacuation
plan prior to the tenant’s moving into the manufactured home park or
subdivision. This plan shall be approved by the flood coordinator and the local
emergency preparedness coordinator.
      e.   Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles placed on sites within
a floodplain shall either be on site for fewer than one hundred and eighty
(180) consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or meet
the general standards listed in subsection (d)(1) above, as well as the
standards for manufactured housing in subsection (d)(2)d. above. A recreational
vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on wheels or a jacking system, is
attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security
devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
      f.   Elevated buildings. New construction and substantial improvements of
elevated buildings that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and
other exterior walls and are used solely for the parking of vehicles, building
access, or limited storage in an area other than a basement, and are subject to
flooding, shall be designed to preclude finished space and shall be designed to
automatically equalize flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of floodwaters.
         1.   Designs for elevated buildings. Designs for complying with this
requirement must either be certified by a South Carolina licensed registered
land surveyor, engineer, or architect authorized by law to certify such
information, or meet the following minimum criteria:
            [a]   Provide a minimum of two (2) openings on different walls
having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square
foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
            [b]   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1)
foot above grade;
            [c]   Only the portions of openings that are below the base flood
elevation can be counted towards the required net opening amount;
            [d]   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or
other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of
floodwaters in both directions, including engineered vents; and
            [e]   Fill placed around foundation walls shall be graded so that
the grade inside the enclosed area is equal to or higher than the adjacent
grade outside the building on at least one side of the building.
         2.   Access to enclosed area. Access to the enclosed area shall be the
minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited
storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises
(standards exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator).
         3.   Interior portion of enclosed area. The interior portion of such
enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms, except
to enclose a limited storage area. In addition, the interior portion must be
void of utilities, except for essential lighting as required, and cannot be
temperature controlled. One wet location switch and/or outlet connected to a
ground fault interrupt breaker may be installed below the required lowest floor
elevation as specified in subsections (d)(2)a., b., and d., above.
         4.   Construction materials. All construction materials below the
required lowest floor elevation, as specified in subsections (d)(2)a., b., and
d. above, shall be of flood resistant materials.
      g.   Accessory structures. An accessory structure or garage, the cost of
which is greater than $1,000.00 must comply with the elevated structure
requirements of subsection (d)(2) a. and b. above. When accessory structures of
$1,000.00 or less are to be placed in the floodplain, the following criteria
shall be met:
         1.   One-story. Accessory structures shall be no higher than a single-
story building.
         2.   Not for habitation. Accessory structures shall not be used for
human habitation (including work, sleeping, living, cooking, or restroom
areas);
         3.   Flood damage potential. Accessory structures shall be designed to
have low flood damage potential;
         4.   Placement. Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed
on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of
floodwaters;
         5.   Anchoring. Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure;
         6.   Service facilities. Service facilities, such as electrical and
heating equipment, shall be installed in accordance with subsection (d)(1) f.
above; and
         7.   Openings. Openings to relieve hydrostatic pressure during a flood
shall be provided below base flood elevation in conformance with subsection (d)
(2) f. above.
      h.   Floodways. The following provisions shall apply within the floodway
areas:
         1.   Permitted uses, excluding buildings. The following uses shall be
permitted in areas designated floodway areas, but only if such uses are
permitted within the basic district to which the FP overlay is appended, and
excluding buildings in connection with such uses:
            [a]   Agricultural and horticultural uses, and plant nurseries.
            [b]   Parking and loading areas.
            [c]   Open-air uses generally accessory to residential uses, such
as lawns, gardens, play areas, and parking areas.
            [d]   Recreational uses which are primarily open-air uses and which
do not offer a substantial impediment to water flow, such as swimming areas,
fishing areas, beaches, boat launching ramps, floating docks, life guard
stations, parks, playgrounds, play fields, picnic grounds, wildlife or nature
preserves, hiking trails, horseback riding trails, golf courses, driving
ranges, archery ranges, and tennis courts.
            [e]   Airport runways and landing strips.
            [f]   Streets, bridges, overhead utility lines, storm drainage
facilities, sewerage lines, waste treatment plant outlets, water supply intake
structures, and electronic transmission structures; provided that the structure
is demonstrated, by hydraulic and hydrologic analysis performed with standard
engineering practice and reviewed and approved by the County Floodplain
Coordinator, to cause no rise in the base flood elevation as established by the
Flood Insurance Study and further provided that:
               [1]   All structures are designed and constructed to minimize
infiltration by floodwaters; and
               [2]   The lowest horizontal member of bridges, excluding pilings
or columns, is elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation and
the superstructure attached thereto is designed to resist flotation, collapse,
and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water loads acting
simultaneously on all structural components.
         2.   Permitted uses, other. The following uses shall be permitted in
areas designated floodway areas, but only if such uses are permitted within the
basic district to which the FP overlay is appended:
            [a]   Any existing or future facility that is or will be a part of
or used by any public or private school that was constructed and operated
before January 1, 2001 on property subsequently classified as a regulatory
floodway;
            [b]   Any existing or future facility that is or will be a part of
or used by any publicly owned wastewater treatment facility that was
constructed and operated before January 1, 2001 on property subsequently
classified as a regulatory floodway.
      i.   Fill. Fill is the placement of natural sands, dirt, soil, or rock
above the natural grade in order to raise the elevation of the ground. Dredged
material may only be used as fill upon certification of suitability by a South
Carolina licensed registered professional geotechnical engineer. The use of
fill shall be limited to the elevation of individual structures (including
garages and garage aprons), utilities, infrastructure, and public road
crossings. Other methods of elevating structures should be considered first.
         1.   To allow the elevation of individual structures, the amount of
fill used shall be the minimum necessary. Floodplain authorization for fill
shall be based on findings by the county engineer that the minimum fill being
used for raising the structure is the most feasible alternative.
         2.   Fill, if approved, shall meet the following conditions:
            [a]   The flood storage capacity of the floodplain shall not be
affected and flood heights shall not be increased. The space occupied by the
authorized fill below Base Flood Elevation for all encroachment within the
special flood hazard areas within unincorporated Richland County, with the
exception of the special flood hazard area adjacent to Lake Murray, shall be
compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation
taken from below the Base Flood Elevation. All such excavations shall be
constructed to drain freely to the watercourse.
            [b]   Flooding from any source shall not be increased for
neighboring properties. Neighboring and adjacent properties shall not be
adversely affected in any way nor shall drainage problems be caused or
aggravated as a result of fill.
            [c]   Fill shall not be placed in the floodway except for essential
utilities and necessary infrastructure, and must meet the approval of the
county engineer.
            [d]   Fill shall not be placed in nontidal wetlands without the
required state and federal permits.
         3.   In the event buildings on adjacent properties are known or
determined to be subject to flooding under current conditions, the county
engineer may require submission of hydrologic and hydraulic analyses to
adequately demonstrate that the effects of the proposed fill wiil not increase
flooding on neighboring properties. Additional fill for landscaping purposes is
not permitted. Landscaping mulch (tree bark or pine needles) is not considered
fill and is allowed.
         4.   Where allowed, fill material shall meet the following additional
requirements:
            [a]   Fill material shall be compacted to 95% of the maximum
density, obtainable with the standard proctor test method issued by The
American Society For Testing And Materials (ASTM standard D-698) to provide the
necessary stability and resistance to erosion, scouring or settling.
            [b]   Fill shall be performed in such manner as to maintain or
increase flood storage and conveyance capacity, and to not increase FEMA base
flood elevations, nor to have an adverse impact on neighboring properties.
            [c]   All fill placed at or below the flood elevation in the
floodplain shall be balanced with at least an equal amount of soil material
removal from the same parcel(s) or from subwatershed for all special flood
hazard areas within unincorporated Richland County, with the exception of the
special flood hazard area adjacent to Lake Murray. Compensatory storage
required to offset floodplain fill must be created before the project begins
and should be available throughout the construction period. The required volume
of compensatory storage must be provided within the project boundary.
            [d]   Excavation shall not be counted as compensating for fill if
such areas will be filled with water in non-storm conditions.
            [e]   Fill shall be performed in a manner to maintain or increase
slope stability and maintain or decrease erosive velocities. Fill slopes shall
be no greater than two (2) horizontal to one (1) vertical. Flatter slopes may
be required where velocities may result in erosion.
            [f]   Applicants must submit an as-built survey certification by a
South Carolina registered professional engineer that demonstrates that the
required volume of storage has been created on site in order to ensure no net
loss as outlined and demonstrated per the approved plans.
         5.   Any change in the flood flow within a regulatory floodplain
through fill must be submitted and approved through the FEMA "Letter of Map
Revision" process in addition to review by the flood coordinator and county
engineer.
         6.   A South Carolina registered professional engineer shall certify
that all of the above standards and requirements within this subsection
26-106(i) have been met.
      j.   Critical facilities. Construction of critical facilities is
prohibited in the five hundred (500) year floodplain (A, 1AE and X500 Zones on
the FIRM).
   (e)   Standards for streams not having established base flood elevations and
floodways. Located within the areas of special flood hazard are small streams
where no base flood elevation data have been provided and where no floodways
have been identified. The following provisions shall apply to these areas:
      No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvement, or other development shall be permitted within one hundred (100)
feet of the stream bank unless certification (with supporting technical data by
a South Carolina licensed registered land surveyor, engineer, or architect
authorized by law to certify such information) is provided demonstrating that
such encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge. Such data shall be submitted to the
flood coordinator.
      (1)   Standards for determining a Base Flood Elevation. When base flood
elevation (BFE) data is not available from a federal, state or other source one
of the following methods may be used to determine a BFE. For further
information regarding the methods for determining the BFEs listed below, refer
to FEMA's manual Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas:
         a.   Contour Interpolation.
            1.   Superimpose approximate zone A boundaries onto a topographic
map and estimate a BFE.
            2.   Add one-half of the contour interval of the topographic map
that is used to the BFE.
         b.   Data Extrapolation - A BFE can be determined if a site within 500
feet upstream of a stream reach for which a 100-year profile has been computed
by detailed methods, and the floodplain and channel bottom slope
characteristics are relatively similar to downstream reaches. No hydraulic
structures shall be present.
         c.   Hydrologic and Hydraulic Calculations - Perform hydrologic and
hydraulic calculations to determine the BFEs using FEMA approved methods and
software.
   (f)   Standards for streams with established base flood elevations without
floodways. Along rivers and streams where Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is
provided but no floodway is identified for a Special Flood Hazard Area on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS).
      No encroachments including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, or other development shall be permitted unless certification with
supporting technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided
demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase
the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point
within the community. Any increase shall not adversely impact any portion of
the community.
      (1)   General. All subdivisions, planned development communities, and
large-scale development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize
or eliminate flood damage. In all areas where base flood elevation data is not
available, applications for subdivision proposals and other proposed
developments containing at least 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is less, shall
include a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that generates base flood
elevations. In lieu of the aforementioned, the entire Zone A special flood
hazard area shall be placed in a perpetual deeded open space with no future
construction authorized.
      (2)   Public utilities. All subdivisions, planned development
communities, and large scale development proposals shall have public utilities
and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electric and water systems, located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
      (3)   Access. An access road above the base flood elevation shall be
provided for all subdivision, planned development community, or other large-
scale development proposals to allow emergency access to flooded areas during
flood conditions.
      (4)   Drainage. All subdivision, planned development community, or other
large-scale development proposals shall have adequate drainage, in compliance
with all other applicable code regulations provided to reduce or eliminate
exposure to flood hazards.
   (g)   Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO and AH Zones). Located
within the areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as shallow
flooding.
      The following provisions shall apply within such areas:
      (1)   Residential structures. All new construction and substantial
improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the
depth number specified in feet on the FIRM. If no depth number is specified,
the lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated at least three (3) feet
above the highest adjacent grade.
      (2)   Nonresidential structures. The lowest floor (including the
basement) for all new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures shall meet one of the following standards:
         a.   Elevation. The nonresidential structures(s) shall be elevated
above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified
in feet on the FIRM. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor
(including basement) shall be elevated at least three (3) feet above the
highest adjacent grade; or
         b.   Construction. The nonresidential structure(s), together with
attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed so that below the
base flood elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of
buoyancy. A South Carolina licensed registered land surveyor, engineer or
architect authorized by law to certify such information shall submit a
certification to the flood coordinator that the standards of this section are
satisfied. There shall be adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes
to guide floodwaters around and away from the proposed structures.
      (3)   Slopes. All structures on slopes must have drainage paths around
them in order to guide water away from such structure; provided, however, such
drainage paths must not adversely affect adjacent properties. (Design
information is defined in the Richland County Stormwater Design Manual).
   (h)   Standards for levees.
      (1)   General standards. All levees protecting residential structures or
nonresidential structures that are not flood-proofed shall be designed,
constructed, and maintained to provide protection against the 500-year flood,
plus three (3) feet of freeboard. Flood elevations shall be as shown on the
latest Flood Insurance Rate Maps as determined by appropriate hydrologic
methods. Any levee constructed or improved under this subsection shall also
comply with the other applicable provisions of Section 26-202 of this chapter.
      (2)   Specific standards.
         a.   Design and construction. Design and construction shall be in
accordance with the latest edition of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers'
(USACE's) Manual EM 1110-2-1913 Design and Construction of Levees. The design
and construction of drainage systems within levees shall be in accordance with
the latest edition of the USACE's Manual EM 1110-2-1413 Hydrologic Analysis of
Interior Areas. A South Carolina Registered Professional Engineer shall certify
that he has been involved in the design, construction, and inspection phases
and shall certify that the construction meets requirements of the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers.
         b.   Records. Owners of levees will perform the necessary and required
maintenance and provide appropriate records to the county engineer. These
records shall include:
            1.   Signed agreements of perpetual operation and maintenance
between the constructor and/or owner and Richland County;
            2.   As-built construction plans sealed by a South Carolina
Registered Professional Engineer;
            3.   A description of the levee maintenance program in accordance
with Levee Maintenance Standards and Procedures of Richland County (see
subsection (h)(3) below); and
            4.   Periodic maintenance reports as required by the county
engineer.
      (3)   Maintenance standards and procedures.  Levees shall be maintained
as necessary to ensure serviceability against flood at all times, as follows:
         a.   Sod growth. Maintenance of a sturdy sod growth on levee
embankments is highly important, as sod is one of the most effective means of
protecting the levee against erosion from rain, water current, and wavewash.
Periodic mowing with tractor-operated equipment is essential to maintaining a
good sod growth, and shall be done at such intervals as necessary to keep down
weeds and other noxious growth and to prevent the grass height from exceeding
twelve (12) inches. However, the grass shall not be mowed to a height of less
than two (2) inches. The number of mowings required each season will depend on
local conditions. The last mowing of the season will be accomplished under
conditions that allow the grass to obtain a height of approximately eight (8)
inches to ten (10) inches entering the winter season. Mowing will be performed
to a distance of at least five (5) feet beyond the toe of the levee or berm.
Burning grass and weeds is not permitted in the levee maintenance program,
except during appropriate seasons when it is not detrimental to sod growth.
During the growing season, spraying with herbicides on an as-needed basis is
permissible and desirable for weed and brush control on levees and berms.
Reseeding and fertilizing shall be completed frequently enough to sustain sod
growth on levee embankments for erosion control.
         b.   Earth embankments. Levee embankments shall be maintained to not
less than the grade and section, as designed, by replacing any material lost
from the crown or slopes. Ruts, washes, slides, and subsidence should be
promptly repaired and the entire embankment maintained sufficiently smooth for
power mowing. Levee crowns shall be graded as necessary to drain freely and
prevent impoundment of rainwater. All brush, trees, and other undesirable
growth shall be removed from the levee embankment.
         c.   Animal burrows. Levees and adjacent landward areas shall be
maintained free of all types of animal burrows. Animal burrows, when found,
shall be backfilled with compacted material and sodded. To prevent recurrence,
effort shall be made to exterminate the burrowing animals.
         d.   Prevention of encroachment. Care shall be taken to assure that
levees are not encroached upon. Buildings, structures, and storage of materials
or equipment are not permitted on the levee. Refuse dumps are not permitted.
Following each high water, any debris deposited on the riverside slope of the
levee shall be removed promptly.
         e.   Roads and ramps. Access roads to and on the levees, including
ramps, shall be bladed as necessary to keep the roadway shaped properly and
free of ruts, pockets, and washes. Ramp embankments shall be maintain the
section and grade as designed.
            Maintenance shall be performed as necessary to correct any
encroachment into the levee crown where roads cross levees. Road surfacing
material shall be replaced as necessary to maintain the road surface in good
condition.
         f.   Miscellaneous levee facilities and appurtenances. Levee
facilities and appurtenances that are constructed on, over, or through the
levee shall be maintained in a good state of repair and/or inspected at least
annually. Facilities and appurtenances that operate only during high water must
be checked carefully and repaired as necessary, immediately prior to high water
season. Relief wells shall be checked during periods of high water. Wells that
do not flow for an extended period of time may have to be tested by pumping to
determine the extent of deterioration. Critically deteriorated wells shall be
rehabilitated by cleaning, surging, and pumping. Check valves shall be
inspected to ensure that they open freely and that the gaskets are in good
condition. The most common of the facilities and appurtenances referred to
herein are:
            1.   Drainage structures through the levee,
            2.   Toe drainage systems,
            3.   Relief wells,
            4.   Levee slope protection and protection on dike ends,
            5.   Gates, cattle guards, and fences, and
            6.   Siphons and pipe crossings.
      (4)   Inspection. Frequent inspections are essential to a good levee
maintenance program. In addition to the formal inspections required by the
county engineer, inspections will be made prior to the beginning of the flood
season, during and immediately following each high water period, and at such
intermediate times as necessary to ensure satisfactory care of the levee.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 032-06HR, § III, 5-2-06; Ord. No.
114-06HR, § I, 12-5-06; Ord. No. 043-07HR, § XXIII, 5-1-07; Ord. No. 061-08HR,
§ 2, 6-5-08; Ord. No. 054-09HR, § XXIII, 11-3-09; Ord. No. 056-09HR, § II, 11-
3-09; Ord. No. 060-10HR, § VI - VIII, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 053-17HR, §§ IX - XX,
11-14-17)
Sec. 26-107. RD Redevelopment Overlay District.
   (a)   Purpose. The RD Overlay District is intended to promote the
revitalization of existing blighted commercial strips and residential areas
while encouraging reinvestment in and reuse of areas in a manner consistent
with the Comprehensive Plan for Richland County. Revitalization initiates
housing and economic opportunities, which promotes socially vibrant centers of
community life through the coordinated efforts of public, private and community
organizations.
   (b)   Applicability/establishment. The RD Overlay District may be approved
and designated by County Council if two or more of the following conditions or
circumstances are evident:
      (1)   Loss of retail, office, and/or industrial activity, use or
employment;
      (2)   Forty percent (40%) or more of households are low-income
households;
      (3)   A predominance of residential or nonresidential structures that are
deteriorating or deteriorated;
      (4)   Abandonment of residential or nonresidential structures;
      (5)   Environmentally contaminated land;
      (6)   The existence of unsanitary or unsafe conditions that endanger
life, health, or property;
      (7)   Deterioration in public improvements, such as streets, street
lighting, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, related pedestrian amenities, and parks
and recreational facilities;
      (8)   Recent occurrence of a disaster; or
      (9)   Any combination of factors that substantially impairs or arrests
the sound growth and economic development of government, or adversely affects
the public, health, safety, or general welfare due to the redevelopment area’s
present condition and use.
   (c)   Permitted uses, permitted uses with special requirements, and special
exceptions. Reserved.
   (d)   Development standards.
      1.   Redevelopment Plan Requirement. A Redevelopment Plan shall be
submitted for approval prior to designating an RD Overlay District, and shall
include, without limitation, a capital improvement plan that identifies the
improvements required to achieve the objectives of the plan and its funding
sources. The capital improvement plan shall demonstrate that adequate funding
will be secured, including the commitment of County resources for
implementation.
      2.   Reserved.
   (e)   Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan.  The proposed Redevelopment
Plan Area must be consistent with and compliment the Richland County
Comprehensive Plan, the land use plan, and the capital improvement plan for the
planning area in which it is located. In addition, it is recommended that the
Redevelopment Plan be more clearly defined in the Comprehensive Plan update.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 043-07HR, § XXIV, 5-1-07; Ord. No.
054-09HR, § XXIV, 11-3-09)
Sec. 26-108. EP Environmental Protection Overlay District.
   (a)   Purpose. The EP Overlay District is intended to address general
environmental concerns within a designated area. In an effort to address some
of the most critical water resource problems that exist within Richland County,
environmental protection overlay districts may be initiated by the Public Works
Department as necessary and appropriate.
   (b)   Applicability/establishment. EP Overlay Districts may be approved and
designated by County Council in order to promote the general welfare of
Richland County and of the public generally where Richland County seeks to
regulate and control development activities adjacent to special protection
areas, impaired water bodies within Richland County and/or where TMDLs may have
been designated. The EP Overlay District map may be requested from the Public
Works Department.
   (c)   EP Overlay District sub-areas. Within the EP overlay district, there
is a sub-area classification, which is identified as follows:
      Gills Creek Environmental Protection Overlay District (EP-GC District).
Richland County seeks to preserve the Gills Creek Floodway in order to protect
and improve the water quality, scenic beauty, and wildlife habitat of the
creek. The creation of the EP-GC District for Richland County is done in order
to establish a mechanism for the accomplishment of these objectives. There is
hereby established one (1) EP overlay district  in the Gills Creek area of
Richland County. The boundaries of the EP-GC District shall be the Gills Creek
Floodway as shown on the FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Maps.
   (d)   Development requirements. Variances and exemptions shall not be
permitted within the EP Environmental Protection Overlay Districts; however,
the Public Works Department may consider applications for waivers where the
applicant demonstrates that alternative protection measures can be provided
that exceed the protection afforded by the requirements of this Section.
      (1)   Water Quantity Problem Areas. In EP Environmental Protection
Overlay Districts where flooding problems exist, the Public Works Department
may require additional design criteria in addition to the minimum design
standards as follows: The post-development peak discharge rates shall be
restricted to 1/2 the pre-development rates for the 2, 5, 10, and 25-year storm
events or to the downstream system capacity, whichever is less. Additional
design procedures are contained in the “Stormwater Design Manual”.
      (2)   Water Quality Protection Areas. In conjunction with the NPDES
permitting program, DHEC identifies impaired water bodies bi-annually and
reports them in accordance with Section 303 of the Clean Water Act. If a water
body is listed on the 303(d) as an impaired stream or a TMDL has been
established. Richland County will require a plan be implemented that uses
structural and nonstructural BMPs to reduce the current pollutant loading to
either a certain maximum total load or by a percentage. In no case will
Richland County approve a land development activity that increases the
pollutant loading to an impaired stream. In EP Environmental Protection Overlay
Districts where impairments exist, all sites which disturb one (1) acre or more
shall have a permanent water quality BMP in place to treat at least the first
1-inch of runoff from the entire site. This volume shall be held for a minimum
period of twenty-four (24) hours.
(Ord. 006-10HR, § IX, 1-19-09)
Sec. 26-109. CRD Corridor Redevelopment Overlay District.
   (a)   Purpose. The CRD Overlay District is intended to promote the
revitalization of existing underutilized, vacant, or abandoned commercial
strips while encouraging reinvestment in and reuse of areas in a manner
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan for Richland County. Revitalization
initiates housing and economic opportunities, which promotes socially vibrant
centers of community life through the coordinated efforts of public, private
and community organizations.
   (b)   Applicability/Establishment.
      (1)   The CRD Overlay District may be approved and designated by County
Council for any area within the county that has already had a Master Plan
approved and adopted by the County Council; provided, however, the standards of
such district shall remain optional, as described in subparagraph (2), below.
      (2)   Once a CRD Overlay District is applied to a designated area of the
county, the development standards of the underlying district shall remain in
place until such time as a property owner applies to the Planning and
Development Services Department to have the standards of the CRD Overlay
District apply to his/her property. Only one set of standards shall apply to
any one parcel of land, and a property owner is not allowed to simultaneously
use the development standards of both districts.
      (3)   Development in a CRD Overlay District shall consist of higher
density mixed-use building types that accommodate retail, offices, and
residential uses. Allowed uses include those uses allowed in the underlying
zoning districts. Additional permitted uses and exceptions are listed in
subsection (c), below Development within identified CRD zones shall conform to
the form-based standards found in subsection (d), below. The CRD Overlay
District has detailed provisions for uses, building types, density, height,
street design, design of public spaces, the mix of uses, building design,
parking, and other aspects of the human environment.
   (c)   Permitted uses, permitted uses with special requirements, and special
exceptions.
      (1)   The following uses are NOT permitted in the CRD District:
         a.   Car and light truck washes.
         b.   Construction, building, general contractors, with outside
storage.
         c.   Go-cart, motorcycle, and similar small vehicle tracks.
         d.   Manufacturing uses.
         e.   Freestanding outdoor advertising signs.
         f.   Pawn shops.
         g.   Pay day lending, car title, or check cashing establishments.
         h.   Rental centers.
         i.   Repair and maintenance services, automobile.
         j.    Sexually oriented businesses.
         k.   Truck washes, medium and heavy.
         l.   Truck stops.
         m.   Warehouses, self-storage.
      (2)   The following uses ARE permitted, with special requirements:
         a.   Automobile rental or leasing. No vehicles for sale or rent may be
displayed in any front yard, nor shall such displays be permitted to encroach
on any required landscaping areas or buffer yards. All vehicle display/parking
areas shall conform to dimensional and landscaping and other design standards
set forth for parking areas.
         b.   Bars and Other Drinking Places. In addition to the standards in
Section
26-151, “bars and other drinking places”, as a principal use, shall be subject
to the standards of the CRD Overlay District and be at least 400 feet from any
residential use in a residential zoning district outside of the CRD District.
         c.   Motor Cycle Dealers. Motorcycles may be displayed in a showroom
only. No motorcycles for sale or rent may be displayed in outside of a showroom
building.
         d.   Motor Vehicle Sales Vehicles may be displayed in a showroom only.
No vehicles for sale or rent may be displayed in outside of a showroom
building.
         e.   Drive-thru Windows. Drive-thru windows for retail and office
uses, where permitted, must be located to the rear of the building.
      (3)   Residential uses permitted in the CRD Overlay District:
         a.   The following residential uses, which may not be permitted in
some existing base zoning districts, shall be permitted by-right in the CRD
Overlay District as part of mixed-use projects, subject to the standards of
this district:
            1.   Accessory dwellings.
            2.   Dwellings, single-family, detached.
            3.   Dwellings, single-family, zero lot line, common.
            4.   Dwellings, single-family, zero lot line, parallel.
            5.   Dwellings, two-family.
            6.   Dwellings, multi-family.
         b.   Residential uses shall not comprise more than seventy-five (75%)
percent of the square footage of a development project in the CRD Overlay
District.
   (d)   Development Standards.
      (1)   Form-Based Standards:
CRD Overlay District Form-based Standards
                          Civic/Institutional
                          House
Building Types Allowed    Townhouse
                          Apartment/Loft
                          Mixed-Use
                          Commercial
Permitted Uses            As permitted in underlying zoning district, except as
                          indicated in preceding sections
Max. Density (Units/Acre) As determined by dimensional standards
Min. Height               2 stories for Mixed-Use buildings
Max. Height               Width of fronting roadway (face-of-curb to face-of-
                          curb)1
Open Space Dedication     Yes2
On-Street Parking         Allowed where permitted by SCDOT; shall be marked
Lighting                  Pedestrian-Scaled, 12-16 ft
Curb                      Standard
Drainage                  Closed and LID3
Street Trees              40 ft average spacing in planting strip or tree
                          wells4
Sidewalk                  5-16 feet both sides5
1   The building height may increase one (1) story above a base height of three
(3) stories for every 100 feet in distance from the property line of the
nearest site zoned for single-family uses (RS-LD, RS-MD, RS-HD, or similar)
that contain existing, single-family dwellings. The maximum height shall be as
indicated above. One additional story of height above the maximum is permitted
per subsection (d)(4)(a)[b] for parking behind primary buildings.
2    Dedication is required for residential development only.
3    Low Impact Development techniques.
4    Tree wells are required where ground floor retail abuts the sidewalk or
right-of-way and on-street parking is provided on the fronting street.
5   Sidewalk Width: 6 ft min. for multi-family residential or attached
residential uses along thoroughfares or collector streets; 12 ft min.
(including area for tree wells) for retail, restaurants, or mixed-uses along
streets with on-street parking, ground floor retail, and buildings built lo the
sidewalk; 16 ft min (including area for trees wells) for outdoor seating areas
along streets with on-street parking, ground floor retail, and buildings built
to the sidewalk.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b8ca58bf1d09401f12aa24500886bd119d34fc76/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6473.jpg]   
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b8ca58bf1d09401f12aa24500886bd119d34fc76/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6475.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b8ca58bf1d09401f12aa24500886bd119d34fc76/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6477.jpg]
      (2)   Building Types:
      The building types outlined in this Section will provide the predominant
form for new CRD development. While it is expected that some new building types
will be introduced in this district, these variations should be based upon the
types listed in this section. Innovative planning or design ideas for
development where the proposed building types are different than those allowed
in the CRD Overlay District may be approved subject to review by the Planning
Commission.
                        a. Civic and Institutional Buildings
                        The Civic & Institutional Building type includes public buildings such as
1. Building Type        libraries, governmental offices, post offices, and schools; semi-public buildings
Defined                 such as museums and hospitals; and private buildings such as churches, and long-
                        term care facilities, and non-profit or charitable offices.
                        [a].   Buildings should be of sufficient design to create visual anchors for the
                        community.
2. General Standards    [b].   Building(s) incidental to the principal structure shall be a minimum of 20
                        ft behind the front facade of the structure, and if more than one, shall be
                        arranged to create secondary gathering spaces within the lot.
3. Facade Standards     Not applicable
                        Flat roofs are allowed, but principal buildings adjacent to residential
4. Roof                 structures are required to have pitched roofs or similar architectural features
                        to ensure compatibility.
5. Dimensional
Standards
[a]. Lot Width1         50 ft
   (Minimum)
[b]. Front Setback2     10 ft
   (Minimum)
[c]. Front Setback2     n/a
   (Maximum)
[d]. Front Yard         10 ft
   Encroachment3
[e]. Side Setback       10 ft between buildings
   (Minimum)
[f]. Rear Setback       30 ft
   (Minimum)
[g]. Rear Setback from  n/a
   Alley4 (Minimum)
[h]. Accessory
Structure               5 ft
   Side/Rear Setback
   (Minimum)
1   For lots less than 60 feet wide and multi-family uses, alley/rear access to all off-street parking
areas is required. For lots greater than 60 feet wide, access to off-street parking is permitted from the
fronting street or alley.
2   Minimum setbacks along major arterials shall be 20 feet.
3   Balconies, stoops, stairs, chimneys, open porches, bay windows, and raised doorways are permitted to
encroach into the front setback.
4   For lots that provide access to off-street parking from a alley
 
            b. Detached   c. Townhouse d. Apartment/Loft Building
            House
            The House has
            four yards
            (Front/Sides/
            Rear) though
            variations
            include
            setting the   The
            building on   Townhouse
            one of the    typically
            side property has 1 yard
            lines to      (Rear)
            create a      though
            larger side   variations
            yard on the   include a
            opposite side small front
            (i.e.         setback to
            Charleston    provide some
            Single). The  landscaping.
            House is      The          The Apartment/Loft Building typically
            flexible in   townhouse is has 1 yard (Rear) though variations
            use,          a building   include a small front setback to provide
            accommodating with two or  landscaping. A multiple-unit building
            single family more         with units vertically arranged
1. Building uses, multi-  residential  (generally) and with
Type        family uses   units that   parking located below or behind the
Defined     up to four    are located  building. Units may be for rental or for
            units, home   side-by-     sale in condominium ownership or may be
            occupations,  side. When   designed as continuing care facilities.
            professional  an entrance  The ground floor may be available for
            offices, and  is provided  commercial uses. The uses permitted
            limited       at-grade,    within the building are determined by
            retail uses.  the          the approved site plan.
            There are two townhouse
            House types   may be used
            with Alley or as a live-
            with Driveway work unit.
            based on how  The use
            the lot is    permitted
            accessed with within the
            an            building is
            automobile.   determined
            In general,   by the
            within a      approved
            block,        site plan.
            building
            types should
            be uniform in
            their use of
            driveways or
            alleys.
            [a] . Raised Entries: To provide privacy, all residential entrances
            within 15 of the sidewalk shall be raised from the finished grade
2. Ground   (at the building line) a minimum of IV2 feet.
Level       [b] . Porches: Useable porches and stoops should form a predominate
Treatment   motif of the building design and be located on the front and/or
            side of the building. Useable front porches are at least six (6)
            feet deep and twelve (12) feet in width.
            [c] . Crawlspace: The crawlspace of buildings shall be enclosed.
                          [a]. Detailed Design: All building elevations visible
                          from the street shall provide doors, porches,
                          balconies, and/or windows. A minimum of 60% of front
                          elevations, and a minimum of 30% of side and rear
3. Facade   Not           building elevations, as applicable, shall meet this
            applicable    standard. “Percent of elevation” is measured as the
                          horizontal plane (lineal feet) containing doors,
                          porches, balconies, terraces and/or windows. This
                          standard applies to each full and partial building
                          story.
 
 
                  b. Detached House c. Townhouse d. Apartment/Loft Building
                  [a]. Main roofs on detached house and townhouse buildings
                  shall have a pitch between 8:12 and 12:12. Monopitch (shed)
                  roofs are allowed only if they are attached to the wall of
                  the main building. No monopitch roof shall have a pitch less
                  than 4:12. A pitched roof shall be profiled by eaves a
4. Roof and Eaves minimum of 6 inches from the building face or with a gutter.
                  [b]. Overhanging eaves may expose rafters. Flush eaves shall
                  be finished by profiled molding or gutters.
                  [c]. All rooftop equipment shall be screened from view.
                  [d]. Apartment/Loft buildings may have roof pitches less than
                  3:12 and flat roofs, however such roofs will require a
                  parapet wall.
 
          [a].   Garage doors are not permitted on the front elevation of any detached   [a].
          house on a lot less than 50 feet wide.                                            Garage
          [b].   Garages with front loading bays shall be recessed from the front facade doors are
5. Garage the house by a minimum of five (5) feet and visually designed to form a secondary not
          building volume. Garage doors shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the     permitted
          back of sidewalk.                                                                 on the
          [c].   At no time shall the width of an attached garage exceed 40% of the totalfront
          building facade.                                                                  elevation.
          [a].   Building Walls: Residential building walls shall be primarily clad in wood clapboard,
          cemetitious fiber board, wood shingle, wood drop siding, primed board, wood board and
6.        batten, brick, stone, stucco, vinyl, or synthetic materials similar and/or superior in
Materials appearance and durability.
          [b].   Roof Materials: Residential roofs shall be clad in wood shingles, standing seam
          metal, terne, slate, dimensional asphalt shingles or synthetic materials similar and/or
          superior in appearance and durability.
 
                                  b. Detached c. Townhouse  d. Apartment/Loft
                                  House                     Building
7. Dimensional Standards
[a]. Lot Width1                   30 ft       n/a           n/a
   (Minimum)
[b]. Front
   Setback2                    10 ft       0 ft          0 ft
   (Minimum)
[c]. Front
   Setback2                    n/a         25 ft         25 ft
   (Maximum)
[d]. Front Yard    Encroachment5 ft        5 ft*         8 ft
[e]. Side Setback                 20% of lot  10 ft between 10 ft between
   (Minimum)                   width6      buildings     buildings
[f]. Rear Setback                 5 ft        5 ft          5 ft
   (Minimum)
[g]. Rear Setback                 15 ft from  15 ft from    15 ft from
   from Alley4                 centerline  centerline    centerline
   (Minimum)
1   For lots less than 50 feet wide and multi-family uses, alley/rear access
to all off-street parking areas is required. For lots greater than 50 feet
wide, access to off-street parking is permitted from the fronting street or
alley.
2   Unless setbacks for specific streets are established by an approved
Redevelopment Plan.
3   Balconies, stoops, stairs, chimneys, open porches, bay windows, and
raised doorways are permitted to encroach into the front setback.
4   For lots that provide access to off-street parking from an alley
5   Upper story balconies may encroach into the right-of-way (over sidewalk
only) with permission from the County and/or SCDOT.
6   In new developments, the entire setback may be allocated to one side with
a minimum of 6 feet of total building separation, providing the setback
condition is consistent with the block.
 
 
                  e. Mixed-Use         f. Commercial Building
                  Building
                  A multi-story small
                  scale structure
                  which can
                  accommodate a
                  variety of uses. A
                  group of mixed-use
                  buildings can be
                  combined to form a   A single or multi-story medium to large
                  mixed-use            structure which generally accommodates
                  neighborhood center. automobile-oriented uses that are found
                  Individual mixed-use along major thoroughfares. A group of
                  buildings can be     commercial buildings can be combined to
                  used to provide some form a community center. This building
                  commercial service,  type provides convenient automobile
                  such as a            access from the fronting thoroughfare,
1. Building Type  neighborhood store,  while minimizing the negative impacts of
Defined           in close proximity   parking lots on an active pedestrian
                  to homes. The Mixed- realm. The Commercial Building typically
                  Use Building         has 1 yard (Rear) though variations
                  typically has 1 yard include: (1) a small front plaza or
                  (Rear) though        courtyard to provide public space for
                  variations include a outdoor seating; or (2) a building with
                  small front plaza or complete lot coverage where parking is
                  courtyard to provide handled in a manner other than on-site
                  public space for     surface parking.
                  outdoor seating as
                  well as a building
                  with complete lot
                  coverage where an
                  alternative to on-
                  site surface parking
                  is provided.
2. Minimum Height 2 Stories            Not Applicable
                  [a].   Street Walls: The first floors of all mixed-use and
                  commercial buildings shall be designed to encourage and
                  complement pedestrian-style interest and activity by
                  incorporating the following elements:
                  [b].   Canopies/Awnings: A building canopy, awning, or
3. Ground Level   similar weather protection may be provided and should project
Treatment         a minimum of 3-5 feet from the facade.
                  [c].   Blank Walls. Expanses of blank walls may not exceed 20
                  feet in length. (A “blank wall” is a facade that does not
                  contain transparent windows or doors.)
                  [d].   Ventilation grates or emergency exit doors located at
                  the first floor level in the building facade, which are
                  oriented to any public street, shall be decorative.
                  [a].   Windows and Doors: The first floor of all buildings
                  fronting directly on a street shall include transparent
                  windows and doors arranged so that the uses inside are
                  visible from and/or accessible to the street on at least 60%
                  of the length of the first floor building elevation along the
                  first floor street frontage.
4. Fenestration   [b].   Building Entrances: A primary entrance facade shall be
                  oriented toward the street, be designed for the pedestrian,
                  and be distinguishable from the rest of the building. Such
                  entrances shall provide a sense of entry and add variety to
                  the streetscape. Additional entrances may be oriented toward
                  side or rear parking lots. Service entrances for shipping and
                  receiving shall be oriented away from the public street.
 
                         e. Mixed-Use Building         f. Commercial Building
                         Building Walls: Commercial
                         building walls shall be
                         brick, stone, cementitious
                         fiber board, or wood
                         clapboard. Regular or
                         decorative concrete block and
5. Materials             EIFS-type stucco may be used
                         on building walls not visible
                         from a public street or as an
                         accent material only. All
                         accessory buildings shall be
                         clad in materials similar in
                         appearance to the principal
                         structure.
6. Dimensional Standards
[a]. Lot Width1          32 ft                         32 ft
   (Minimum)
[b]. Front                                             0 ft (10 ft from major
   Setback2           0 ft                          arterials)
   (Minimum)
[c]. Front                                             20 ft (minor arterial/
   Setback2           10 ft                         collector) 50 ft (major
   (Maximum)                                        arterial)
[d]. Front Yard          8 ft5                         8 ft5
Encroachment3
[e]. Side Setback        0 ft within development,      0 ft within development,
   (Minimum)          otherwise 5 ft                otherwise 5 ft
[f]. Rear Setback        0 ft                          0 ft
   (Minimum)
[g]. Rear Setback
   from Alley4        0 ft                          0 ft
   (Minimum)
1   For lots less than 50 feet wide and multi-family uses, alley/rear access to
all off-street parking areas is required. For lots greater than 50 feet wide,
access to off-street parking is permitted from the fronting street or alley.
2   Unless setbacks for specific streets are established by an approved
Redevelopment Plan.
3   Balconies, stoops, stairs, chimneys, open porches, bay windows, and raised
doorways are permitted to encroach into the front setback.
4   For lots that provide access to off-street parking from an alley.
5   Upper story balconies may encroach into the right-of-way (over sidewalk
only) with permission from the County and SCDOT.
      (3)   Landscaping, bufferyard, and screening standards:
         a.   Bufferyards: Where a proposed use in a CRD Overlay District abuts
a lower impact residential use in a residential zoning district outside of the
CRD District, landscaping and bufferyards shall be provided in accordance with
Section
26-176 of this chapter. However, in order to provide a continuous pedestrian
transition for residential neighborhoods and commercial areas within CRD
developments, institutional, office/commercial, or recreational land use
categories shall not be separated from residential land use categories by berms
or buffers.
         b.   Solid waste storage areas: All trash containment devices -
including compactors, dumpsters, commercial roll-out bins, and areas for
storing cardboard - shall be located and designed so as not to be visible from
the view of nearby streets and properties and shall be placed in the side or
rear yards only, away from pedestrian circulation routes.
            1.   In all cases, trash containment devices shall be enclosed to
prevent windblown litter. The enclosure shall be at least as high as the
highest point of the container.
            2.   The enclosure shall be made of a material that is opaque at
the time of installation and compatible with and/or similar to the design and
materials of the principal building. Landscaping that will reach at least 6
feet in height at maturity shall be provided around the enclosure where it
abuts a single family residential use or zoning district.
         c.   Mechanical and utility equipment: Mechanical and utility
equipment shall be screened from view from nearby streets and properties in the
same manner as trash containment areas. If the equipment is not visible off-
site, then it need not be screened. The type of screening used shall be
determined based on the proposed location of the equipment, existing site
conditions, and the type and amount of existing and proposed vegetation on the
site.
            1.   Ground mounted: Ground mounted equipment shall be located in
the rear or side yard and screened.
            2.   Roof mounted: Such equipment located on the roof of the
building shall be made invisible from nearby streets and properties through the
use of setbacks from the edge of the roof or through the use of a screen
exceeding the height of the equipment and using building materials and design
which are compatible with those used for the exterior of the building.
      (4)   Parking/loading standards: Except as otherwise provided in this
section, parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by
Section
26-173 and Section
26-174 of this chapter. However, due to the intended pedestrian nature of the
CRD Overlay District area, minimum parking requirements are reduced, parking
maximums established, on-street parking encouraged, and bicycle parking
required.
         a.   Off-street parking:
            1.   Parking ratios for motor vehicle Parking:
Use Type                       Auto Parking Spaces1
                               Minimum Required              Maximum Permitted
Residential                    1 per unit                    2 per unit
Lodging                        1 per room or suite
Office/Service Uses            1 per 1,000 sq ft             3 per 1,000 sq ft
Retail Uses                    1 per 1,000 sq ft             3 per 1,000 sq ft
Restaurants                    1 per 4 seats                 1 per 2 seats
Entertainment/ Recreation Uses 1 per 1,000 sq ft             6 per 1,000 sq ft
Theaters                       1 per 4 seats
Civic/Institutional (Schools)  1 per 1,000 sq ft
Civic/Institutional (Non-
Assembly Uses, e.g. Hospital,  1 per 1,000 sq ft
Public Safety Station)
Civic/Institutional Uses       1 per 8 seats (or 1 per 12 ft
(Assembly Uses Only, e.g.,     for benches or pews)
Religious Institutions)
1 All square footage is in gross square feet.
 
            2.   Small retail and service/business uses: Uses involving a gross
floor area of less than twenty-five hundred (2,500) square feet shall not
require on-site parking, provided that the required parking is available within
a six hundred (600) foot radius of the activity.
            3.   Shared parking. Shared parking is encouraged for all uses and
shall meet the requirements of Section
26-173(e)(2).
            4.   Location:
               [a]   No off-street parking shall be located within any front
yard except parking for disabled or drop off spaces.
               [b]   For non-residential buildings, no more than 33% of the lot
width may be allocated to parking on the side of the building. Commercial and
Mixed-Use buildings that provide 100% of the parking to the rear of the
building shall be permitted one additional story of height above the maximum
building height permitted.
               [c]   All off-street parking spaces for townhouse and multi-
family buildings shall be in the rear yard only and access to any garages shall
be from the rear.
               [d]   Parking areas in the side yards shall be located a minimum
of 10 feet behind the frontage line of the building.
               [e]   Where primary parking abuts sidewalks or roads within the
CRD District, screening, a minimum of four (4) feet in height, shall be erected
on the frontage line, where primary parking lots are located. This screening
requirement may be met by the use of walls or densely planted vegetation,
providing for visual obstruction of the parking area from the abutting road(s).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b8ca58bf1d09401f12aa24500886bd119d34fc76/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6479.jpg]
 
               [f]   Primary parking lots (over 24 spaces) and parking garages
shall not:
                  [1]   Abut street intersections;
                  [2]   Be located adjacent to squares or parks; or
                  [3]   Occupy lots which terminate a street vista.
            5.   Paving material: Surface parking spaces provided in excess of
the minimum required shall be paved with porous paving blocks or other
engineered, permeable paving material.
            6.   Connections: Adjacent parking lots shall have vehicular
connections and/or shall have vehicular connections from an alley.
            7.   Transit stop provision: Developments that provide a covered
transit stop with seating and approved by the Central Midlands Regional Transit
Authority (CMRTA) along an existing or planned transit route shall be allowed
to reduce their required off-street parking by ten (10) spaces.
         b.   On-street parking: On-street parking is encouraged on all streets
in CRD Districts. On-street parking shall count toward any minimum parking
requirements. The provision of on-street parking on thoroughfare or collector
streets within the CRD Overlay District will require the coordination with
SCDOT and appropriate County agencies and may require modification of the
existing curbline at the expense of the property owner or developer.
         c.   Bicycle parking: Bicycle parking for all non-residential uses and
for residential uses of more than four (4) units per building is required.
Bicycle parking shall be provided based on the use of the building and the
number of motor vehicle parking spaces. Where fewer than 2 bicycle spaces are
required, at least two spaces or one rack must be provided.
 
Use Type                  Required Bicycle Parking   Maximum Number of Bicycle
                          Spaces per 100 Auto Spaces Spaces
Multi-family Residential
(4 or more units/building
only)
Office/Business Services  5                          20
Retail Trade (except
Lodging) Institutional/
Civic (Non-Assembly Uses)
Lodging Wholesale/
Manufacturing/Industria 1 2                          20
Institutional/Civic
(Assembly Uses Only)
Institutional/Civic       10                         No max.
(Schools)
 
            1.   Required racks: “Inverted U” type racks or other racks that
support the bicycle at two points on the bicycle frame are required. A single
inverted U rack shall count as two bicycle parking spaces. Long term bicycle
parking, which protects the entire bicycle and its components from theft,
vandalism, and weather (such as bike lockers, locked rooms) may be provided for
use by employees, residents, and students and may count toward fulfillment of
the bicycle parking requirements.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b8ca58bf1d09401f12aa24500886bd119d34fc76/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6481.jpg]
 
            2.   Bicycle rack siting and dimensions:
               [a]   Racks shall be secured to the ground on a hard surface
such as concrete, asphalt, or unit pavers.
               [b]   Each bicycle parking space shall provide six (6) feet by
two (2) feet in area per bicycle plus the area needed for access.
               [c]   Bicycle racks shall be located no closer than five (5)
feet from any wall or three (3) feet from face of curb to provide adequate
space for access and maneuvering.
               [d]   At least four (4) feet between parallel racks shall be
provided for access.
               [e]   Bicycle racks installed on sidewalks shall provide for a
clear, unobstructed width of at least five (5) feet for pedestrians and shall
be installed parallel to the curb.
               [f]   Racks should be placed along a major building approach
line and clearly visible from the approach and no more than 50 feet from
building entrances or no further than the closest motor vehicle parking space,
whichever is less. Rack placement should allow for visual monitoring by persons
within the building and/or persons entering the building.
               [g]   If required bicycle parking is not visible from the street
or main building entrance, a sign shall be posted at the main entrance
indicating the location of the parking.
               [h]   Uses with several major, actively used entrances shall
locate a portion of the required bicycle parking at each entrance.
         d.   Loading: Loading areas shall be to the rear of the principal
building and may adjoin alleys or parking areas.
         e.   Parking area landscaping: Parking lots shall be landscaped in
accordance with the standards in Section
26-176(g), Vehicular Surface Area Landscaping, except as specified below.
            1.   Vehicle surface area interior landscaping: Vehicle parking
areas are to be planted with one (1) large shade tree for every five (5)
parking spaces.
            2.   Bioretention: required vehicle surface area interior
landscaping (Section
26-176(g)(3)) may be substituted with one or more consolidated bioretention
areas with minimum side dimensions measuring at least 38 X 12 feet each.
Bioretention areas shall be designed and landscaped to trap and mitigate runoff
from paved surfaces consistent with the description and intent of EPA Storm
Water Technology Fact Sheet - Bioretention (EPA 832-F-99-012, September 1999),
or equivalent. Bioretention areas may be sited anywhere in the parking lot that
is convenient to capture stormwater and manage parking lot traffic and
facilitate pedestrian use, including adjacent to and connecting with vegetated
areas on the perimeter of a parking lot. Bioretention areas shall be considered
part of the minimum required open space.
            3.   A portion of a parking space may be landscaped instead of
paved, as follows:
               [a]   The landscaped area may include up to 2 feet of the front
of the parking space as measured from a line parallel to the direction of the
bumper of a vehicle using the space, as shown at right;
               [b]   Landscaping must be ground cover plants; and
               [c]   The landscaping may count towards any parking lot interior
landscaping requirements and toward any overall site landscaping requirements.
However, the landscaped area does not count toward perimeter landscaping
requirements
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b8ca58bf1d09401f12aa24500886bd119d34fc76/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6483.jpg]
 
            4.   Garbage receptacles: For every 100 parking spaces, one garbage
receptacle shall be provided and centrally located in parking areas.
         f.   Parking structures:
            1.   Liner buildings required. The ground-level of a parking
structure shall be wrapped by retail, office or some other active use along at
least the primary facade. All levels of a structured parking facility shall be
designed and screened in such a way as to minimize visibility of parked cars
from surrounding streets.
            2.   High-quality materials: Parking structure facades shall be
treated with high quality materials and given vertical articulation and
emphasis compatible to the principal structure. The facade should be designed
to visually screen cars. In no instance will rails or cabling alone be
sufficient to meet this screening requirement.
            3.   Clear entries: Pedestrian entries shall be clearly visible.
The vertical circulation should not be located in the center of the structure
or so that it is difficult or circuitous to locate.
            4.   Vents and utility openings: In addition to the above
requirements, in the event that any openings for ventilation, service, or
emergency access are located at the first floor level in the building facade,
then they shall be an integral part of the overall building design. These
openings as well as pedestrian and vehicular entrances shall be designed to
minimize visibility of parked cars. The remainder of the street level frontage
shall be either commercial space or an architecturally articulated facade
designed to minimize the visibility of parked cars.
         g.   Circulation drives: Along major thoroughfares, a circulation
drive may be permitted around the front of the building but may not encroach
into the front setback or any required landscape area. If provided, this drive
shall be designed to be the minimal width required for one-way circulation (not
to exceed 12 feet in width) and shall be constructed using alternative paving
treatments such as pavers or stamped concrete.
      (5)   Sidewalk and pedestrian amenities:
         a.   Sidewalks: Sidewalks shall be constructed along both sides of all
streets in CRD overlay districts.
            1.   Sidewalks on local streets shall be a minimum of 5 feet in
width.
            2.   Sidewalks on collectors or arterials shall be a minimum of 6
feet in width. Sidewalks should be a minimum of 8 feet in front of retail uses
within 10 feet of the right-of-way. Sidewalks located in a mixed-use area with
sidewalk-fronting, ground-floor retail and on-street parking may extend from
the back of curb to the buildings and/or plaza areas and shall be a minimum of
12 feet wide. When outdoor, cafe-seating is expected, the sidewalk shall be a
minimum of 16 feet wide.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b8ca58bf1d09401f12aa24500886bd119d34fc76/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6485.jpg]
 
         b.   Pedestrian network:
            1.   Developers shall provide a complete network of pedestrian
paths that interconnect building entrances, parking, transit stops, public
sidewalks and crosswalks, adjacent properties, adjoining off-street paths, and
other key destinations on or adjacent to the site. If no immediate benefit can
be derived from pedestrian links between adjoining properties, a future at-
grade link shall be provided for through a construction easement to the
adjoining property.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b8ca58bf1d09401f12aa24500886bd119d34fc76/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6487.jpg]
 
            2.   Pedestrian pathways shall be provided from buildings to the
sidewalk and through parking areas to ensure safe, direct, and convenient
pedestrian access to building entrances and off-street parking.
      (6)   Signs: Sign standards shall be governed by Section
26-180 of this Chapter with the following exceptions:
         a.   Existing signs not conforming to the standards above shall be
governed by the provisions of subsection
26-180(o), Non-conforming Signs. Furthermore, all existing non-conforming signs
must be removed in order to utilize the CRD Overlay provisions.
         b.   No permanent detached pole signs shall be permitted in the CRD
District.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b8ca58bf1d09401f12aa24500886bd119d34fc76/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6489.jpg]
 
         c.   Ground mounted or monument signs are allowed as follows:
            1.   Not to exceed 5 feet in height and forty (40) square feet in
area per side.
            2.   Up to an additional fifteen (15) square feet of sign area is
permitted for a monument sign that has a rock or brick base and a routed or
sandblasted sign that is made out of wood.
            3.   Located behind the right-of-way and out of any sight distance
triangle prescribed by SCDOT and Richland County Public Works.
         d.   No outdoor advertising signs will be permitted.
         e.   Signs are allowed to project nine (9) feet into the required
setback or one-half the width of the required setback, whichever is less. A
minimum overhead clearance of eight (8) feet from the sidewalk must be
maintained.
      (7)   Recreation/open space standards: All CRD developments that include
residential units shall be required to dedicate open space. The amount of
useable open space required for dedication shall be determined using the Open
Space Dedication Matrix below. Unless otherwise specified below, the
requirements of Section
26-186 of this chapter shall apply.
         a.   Open space dedication requirements: This matrix has been
developed with regard to the availability of accessible open space in close
proximity to the proposed development. Credits are granted to developments
within a l/4 mile (5 minute) walk (along sidewalks or other pedestrian access)
to existing, publicly dedicated open space (parks, greenways, etc.).
Developments that are adjacent to existing publicly dedicated open space are
granted a fifty (50%) percent reduction in required dedication.
 
                        Required Open Space
                        Base open space required  200 sq ft per residential
                                                  unit
Required Open Space Per Within 1/4 mile of public 100 sq ft per residential
Residential Unit        park                      unit
                        Adjacent to public park   None required
                        Mixed-Use Development     2% of Lot or Development
 
         b.   Payment in lieu of dedication of open space:
            1.   The County Council may, at its discretion, accept either an
equitable amount of land in another location within 1/2 mile of the development
site or a fee paid to the County in lieu of dedication. A combination of
recreational open space dedication and payments-in-lieu of dedication may be
permitted. The following formula shall be used to determine the fee:
               Post Development Appraised Value of Entire Development X
Required Recreational Open Space Dedication=Payment in Lieu Dedication Fee
            2.   The post development appraised value of the entire development
shall be established by an appraiser who is a member of the American Institute
of Real Estate Appraisers.
            3.   Payments-in-lieu-of-dedication shall be approved as part of
the development plan. Any disagreement in the amount of required payment shall
be resolved by conducting a professional appraisal of the fair market value of
the property. The professional appraiser shall be mutually agreed upon by the
developer and County. An appraiser shall be appointed by the County should an
agreement not be reached. All payments made in lieu of dedication shall be made
at the time of preliminary plat approval. Failure to submit the required fee
along with such applications will delay approval of such submissions until
payment is rendered. All funds received for payment in lieu of dedication shall
be deposited in a special fund or line item to be used only for the
acquisition, development, or redevelopment of public recreation space within
the CRD Overlay District or other approved location.
            4.   Reasons for payments-in-lieu- of-dedication may include, but
are not limited to, proximity to existing public parks and/or existing
topographic or geographic conditions.
         c.   Open space improvement standards:
            1.   Inaccessible land: No more than 25% of open space may be
provided in “inaccessible land”, including: any land where no zoning or
building permits may be issued (such as dedicated easements and rights-of-way
except those existing only to protect underground utilities such as water or
sewer lines - wetlands, bodies of water, etc., as determined by County Planning
staff ); and, any land with a post-development slope greater than 3:1, which
would severely limit its usefulness as open space.
            2.   Natural areas: Significant stands of trees, streambed areas,
and other valuable topographic features shall be preserved within the required
open space areas where practical. Areas noted an the adopted Redevelopment Plan
as open space should be preserved and dedicated where practical and feasible
and may be left unimproved in accordance with the plan (e.g., greenways).
            3.   Location: The design and location of public open space on a
site is perhaps the most important determinant in a successful pedestrian
environment. To ensure that public open space is well-used, it is essential to
locate and design it carefully.
               [a]   Public open space should be fronted by streets and
buildings to encourage their use and patrol their safety.
               [b]   The space should be located where it is visible and easily
accessible from homes and public areas (building entrances, streets,
sidewalks). No residential unit shall be more than one thousand (1,000) feet
from any dedicated open space.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b8ca58bf1d09401f12aa24500886bd119d34fc76/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6491.jpg]
 
               [c]   Take views and sun exposure into account in design and
location.
               [d]   The space should be well-buffered from moving cars so that
users can enjoy and relax in the space.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b8ca58bf1d09401f12aa24500886bd119d34fc76/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6493.jpg]
 
               [e]   The space may be visible from streets or internal drives
but should not be wholly exposed to them.
               [f]   Partially enclose the space with building walls,
freestanding walls, landscaping, raised planters, or on-street parking to help
buffer it and create comfortable “outdoor rooms”.
            4.   Public seating: Publicly accessible places to sit in the
public realm are important not only as basic amenities, but also in encouraging
casual social interaction. Seating can be both formal and informal, including
both park benches on the tops of garden walls or monumental stairs at the
entrance to public buildings. Planter walls should be set at a maximum height
of 2 l/2 feet to allow for their use as seating. Moveable chairs and sidewalk
cafes are strongly encouraged in public open spaces in the CRD Overlay
District.
            5.   Minimum amenities: The following requirements apply to
squares, plazas and other urban open spaces in the CRD Overlay District:
               [a]   One (1) tree (3 inch caliper minimum measured 6" above the
ground at installation) to be planted in at least 350 square feet of soil for
every 1,000 square feet of provided open space.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b8ca58bf1d09401f12aa24500886bd119d34fc76/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6495.jpg]
 
               [b]   A minimum of twenty-five (25) linear feet of seating
should be provided for every 1,000 square feet of open space. Seating should be
more than 12 inches and less than 30 inches in height and not less than 16
inches in depth. Seating more than 28 inches in depth and accessible from two
sides should count double. Moveable chairs are encouraged and each count as 2
1/2 linear feet of suggested seating.
               [c]   At least half of the open space should be at street level.
               [d]   Playground equipment, statues, and fountains, if provided,
should be located toward the interior of squares and parks.
               [e]   One (1) water tap for each five thousand (5,000) square
feet of each landscaped open space.
               [f]   One (1) garbage receptacle for each five thousand (5,000)
square feet of each physically separated open space.
      (8)   Building design and operation standards:
         a.   Lots and buildings:
            1.   Lot frontage: All lots shall front a street, square or common
open space. (Exception: Buildings which are interior to a site that has
buildings that otherwise meet the frontage requirement).
            2.   Corner lots: Buildings located at street intersections must
place the main building, or part of the building, at the corner.
            3.   Setbacks: A building may be set back to create an “outdoor
room” or patio/café seating.
            4.   Adjacent lots: For similarly used properties, the grade of
adjacent lots should match where the properties meet. If there is a significant
grade difference, development should create an attractive transition using
creative grading and landscaping or a decorative retaining wall, incorporating
vehicular and pedestrian cross-access. Avoid using a blank or unscreened
concrete retaining wall or rock covered slope.
            5.   Termination of Vistas: Important street vistas (such as along
gateways and primary pedestrian streets) should terminate in a focal point,
such as a building or other architectural or landscape feature.
            6.   General building design standards:
               [a]   Entryway: The main entrance of all principal structures
shall open to a road, square, or common open space of at least twenty (20)
square feet in area.
               [b]   Architectural style: The building design standards of this
Chapter intentionally do not mandate a particular style and permit a wide
variety of architectural expressions. However, when a design exhibits a known
architectural style (i.e., Colonial, Victorian, Classical Revival) the details
shall be consistent with that style unless the local architectural vernacular
of Richland County provides an alternate precedent for a detail or element.
      (9)   Streets: Streets in the CRD Overlay District should permit the
comfortable use of the street by motorists, cyclists, and pedestrians. Pavement
widths, design speeds, and the number of vehicle lanes should be minimized
without compromising safety. The specific design of any given street must
consider the buildings which front on the street and the relationship of the
street to the area’s street network.
         a.   Connectivity: Streets shall interconnect within a development and
with adjoining development. Street stubs should be provided with development
adjacent to open land to provide for future connections.
         b.   Streetscape design: All new development or expansions to existing
development shall be required to build or upgrade their street frontage in
accordance with the following standards or standards established in an adopted
Redevelopment Plan:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b8ca58bf1d09401f12aa24500886bd119d34fc76/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6497.jpg]
 
            1.   On-street parking: All on-street parking should be parallel.
Angle parking is permitted in front of high traffic retail locations and where
the posted speed is 25 mph or less.
            2.   Access management: Developments should minimize or eliminate
curb cuts (driveways) along arterials. In general, curb cuts should be spaced
no closer than 600 feet apart.
               [a]   Where possible, vehicular access should be shared with the
adjacent properties and/or alleys should be utilized for access. Developments
that share access may reduce their required Vehicle Surface Area Interior
Landscaping requirements by twenty-five (25%) percent.
               [b]   Where a development is sited at a corner location, primary
access shall be from the secondary street.
               [c]   All lots, parcels, or any other division of land adjacent
to an arterial roadway may be allowed driveways or street connections in
accordance with the following table:
 
Parcel Frontage (feet) Number of Driveways Allowed
<600                   1
601-1200               2
>1201                  3
 
            3.   Curb-return radii: Curb radii shall be designed to reduce
pedestrian crossing times along all streets requiring sidewalks. In general,
curb radii should not exceed twenty (20) feet.
            4.   Curbs and drainage: Standard curbing is required along all
streets with on-street parking. All drainage grates, if provided, must be safe
for bicyclists (grating must be perpendicular or diagonal to the street
centerline).
            5.   Street trees/planting strips: Street trees shall be planted
between the street and the sidewalk for all new development. Trees shall be
planted in planting strips or in tree wells with tree grates located between
the curb and the sidewalk. Street trees shall substitute for required Street
Protective Yard requirements (Section
26-176(e)), except where buildings are set back more than forty (40) feet from
the right-of-way, in which case street trees and Street Protective Yards shall
be required.
               [a]   Shade trees shall be installed at a minimum average
distance of forty (40) feet on-center. Where overhead utilities exist prior to
development, ornamental trees shall be substituted.
               [b]   Planting strips shall have minimum width of six (6) feet
where ornamental trees are to be used and eight (8) feet where shade trees are
required.
               [c]   Trees shall be planted in tree wells with tree grates in
areas of mixed-use development where street frontages contain ground floor
retail uses and on-street parking.
               [d]   A consistent variety and species of street trees shall be
maintained by street, but adjacent streets shall use different species for
variety and as a precaution against blight.
            6.   Outdoor seating. Where uses such as outdoor seating for cafes
and restaurants use the public sidewalk, there shall be a minimum of four (4)
feet of clearance for adequate passing distance by pedestrians.
            7.   Street lighting: Street furnishings in residential and retail
areas shall include decorative, pedestrian-scale street lights no taller than
twelve (12) to eighteen (18) feet.
            8.   Roadway design: The road standards for the CRD Overlay
District may be different from those set forth in Sec. 26-181 of this chapter,
but must be approved by the county engineer during the CRD Overlay District
review process. Reduced roadway widths are encouraged for traffic calming and
due to a pedestrian-oriented approach to travel in a CRD Overlay District.
            9.   Alleys: Alleys are encouraged at the rear of building lots
within the CRD District, except when topography or physical features makes such
alleyways impractical. Dead end alleys are prohibited.
            10.   Street furnishings: Street furnishings shall be included in
the CRD District streetscapes. Such furnishings shall include, but not be
limited to: pedestrian scale decorative street lights, benches, trash cans, and
bicycle parking racks.
            11.   Traffic impact plan: A traffic impact assessment, conducted
by a registered engineer, must accompany a submission for all CRD Overlay
District developments with an estimated trip generation of 3,000 vehicles per
day or greater during an average weekday based on a five day national average
as defined in the ITE Trip Generation Manual. The plan shall analyze the multi-
modal transportation impacts of the proposed development and include proposals
for handling all impacts noted. (Typically, the following developments meet or
exceed the 3,000 vehicles per day threshold: 300 residential units; 55,000
square feet of retail; 250,000 square feet of office space; 350 room hotel.)
            12.   Utilities: To the extent possible, utilities (and associated
pedestals, cabinets, junction boxes, and transformers), including electric,
cable, telephone, and natural gas service, shall be located within alley right-
of-ways, or behind buildings. Domestic water service and sanitary sewer must be
located in such a way to cause the least impact to the streetscape planting
strip and required street trees Unless otherwise approved by the Planning
Commission and the County Council, all utilities shall be placed underground.
   (e)    Site Plan. The CRD site plan shall include all aspects of the spatial
relationships proposed for the development, including:
      (1)   Layout and dimensions of lots, setbacks, roadways, alleys, open
spaces and all information required to define the relationships within the
streetscapes;
      (2)   Street Sections; and
      (3)   Building elevations.
   (f)   Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan. The proposed Redevelopment
Plan Area must be consistent with and compliment the Richland County
Comprehensive Plan, the land use plan, and the capital improvement plan for the
planning area in which it is located. In addition, it is recommended that the
Redevelopment Plan be more clearly defined in the Comprehensive Plan update.
(Ord. No. 019-08HR, § IV, 3-18-08; Ord. No. 038-09HR, § II, 7-21-09; No. 054-
09HR, §§ XXV, XXVI, 11-3-09; Ord. No. 003-12HR, § II, 1-17-12)
Sec. 26-110. DBWP Decker Boulevard/Woodfield Park Neighborhood Redevelopment
Overlay District.
   (a)   Purpose. The DBWP Neighborhood Overlay District is intended to promote
the revitalization of the existing vacant, neglected or abandoned residential
property in this area. This is sought through encouraging the reinvestment in
and reuse of these locations in a manner that promotes the infill for housing,
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan for Richland County. This infill
revitalization initiates many housing and economic opportunities and promotes
more socially active and environmentally responsible communities in conjunction
with public, private and community organizations.
   (b)   Applicability/establishment.
      (1)   The DBWP Neighborhood Overlay District may be approved and
designated by County Council for any area within the county that has already
had a Master Plan approved and adopted by the County Council; provided,
however, the standards of such district shall remain optional, as described in
subparagraph (2), below.
      (2)   Once a DBWP Neighborhood Overlay District is applied to a
designated area of the county, the development standards of the underlying
district shall remain in place until such time as a property owner applies to
the Planning and Development Services Department to have the standards of the
DBWP Neighborhood Overlay District apply to his/her property. Only one set of
standards shall apply to any one parcel of land, and a property owner is not
allowed to simultaneously use the development standards of both districts.
   (c)   Permitted uses. In addition to uses permitted in the underlying zone,
the following uses are permitted in the DBWP Neighborhood Overlay District:
      (1)   Residential.
         a.   One single-family detached dwelling and one accessory structure
(which may contain a dwelling unit) per lot is allowed.
         b.   Duets, triplexes, attached single family dwellings, townhomes and
other single and multi-family dwelling units (up to four) that meet required
overlay setback standards [see subsection (e)(1) below].
         c.   Home occupations are allowed if the use is clearly secondary to
the use of the dwelling for residential purposes, and does not change the
residential character of the dwelling.
      (2)   Commercial/employment. Small-scale commercial and mixed use
development is allowed, subject to special standards. Commercial/employment
uses may be mixed vertically or horizontally with residential uses. First floor
space of a multi-floor building (live/work units) shall be restricted to non-
residential use, if such building is located on a corner lot or is on a lot
that is contiguous to a commercial use, in areas of predominately commercial
uses, along Decker Boulevard and where the following roads run northeast to
their intersections with Dupont Drive: Foxcroft Road, Omega Drive, Quiet Lane,
Robin Nest Road, Castle Pinckney Road, Coral Vine Lane, and Cermack Street,
Percival Road, and East Boundary Road.
   All sites shall have frontage onto a collector or arterial street. Hours of
operation shall be limited from 6:00 am to 10:00 pm. The uses displayed below
and individually listed in Table 26-V-0 are permitted, with the exception that
an individual use shall not exceed one thousand to five thousand (1,000 -
5,000) square feet in gross floor area:
         a.   Daytime child care facilities
         b.   Food establishments
         c.   Business, professional and personal services (including specific
repair services)
         d.   Light retail
         e.   Other uses similar to those listed in a.- d., above (subject to
approval by the Planning Staff and Planning Commission).
      (3)   Civic/institutional. Civic or institutional uses listed in table
26-V-0 shall be integrated vertically or horizontally with residential.
Locations are restricted to parcels that exist along streets detailed for
commercial/employment use.
   (d)   Minimum lot area: 5,400 square feet, or as determined by DHEC, but in
no case shall it be less than 5,400 square feet.
   (e)   Design standards. Design standards are adopted to ensure the physical
character of projects within the DBWP and to allow the optional development and
redevelopment of land consistent with current neighborhood character, along
with a traditional neighborhood design approach, to guide this district under
smart growth principles.
      (1)   Compact design. In order to create a compact design that encourages
the Traditional Neighborhood Design (TND) approach, the following standards of
density and dimensions will be included in any DBWP proposal. The setbacks for
residential dwelling units and mixed residential development (excluding open
spaces) shall be determined as follows:
         a.   Building setback, front.
            1.   Single-family detached residences shall have a building
setback with a minimum of ten (10) feet and a maximum of fifteen (15) feet.
            2.   Single-family attached residences, multi-family residences,
and mixed use buildings shall have a building setback with a minimum of five
(5) feet and a maximum of ten (10) feet; provided, however, if the building is
on a major arterial road, a ten (10) foot setback is required.
         b.   Building setback, rear - residential. The principal building on
lots devoted to any residential use, including mixed-use, shall be setback no
less than five (5) feet from the rear lot line.
         c.   Side setbacks.
            1.   Provisions (through plan review) for zero lot-line single-
family and multi-family dwellings shall be made, provided that a reciprocal
access easement is recorded for both lots and townhouses or other attached
dwellings, and provided that all dwellings have pedestrian access to the rear
yard through means other than the principal structure.
            2.   Mixed uses require a side setback at a minimum of five (5)
feet between parcels.
         d.   Green space.
            1.   Green space shall be required regardless if the residential
use is located in an existing, expanded, or new structure.
            2.   The amount of green space must encompass at least ten percent
(10%) of the effective lot area.
      (2)   Architectural standards for new structures. A variety of
architectural features and building materials is encouraged to give each
building or group of buildings a distinct character that is consistent with the
maintained existing DBWP housing stock and blends TND techniques.
         a.    Guidelines for new structures.
            1.   Height. New structures within the DBWP district shall be no
more than three (3) stories for single-family residential, or five (5) stories
for multi-family residential, or mixed use.
         Exceptions: If the multi-family or mixed-use development is located
adjacent to residentially designated parcels and the maximum building height
allowed for the commercial district exceeds that allowed for the adjacent
residential district, the maximum building height shall be fifty-two (52) feet.
For those areas of parcels within fifty (50) feet of any property with a
general plan density designation of ten units per acre or less, the building
massing shall step down to thirty (30) feet to address the scale of the
adjacent development.
            2.   Entries and facades.
               [a]   The architectural features, materials, and the
articulation of a facade of a building shall be continued on all sides visible
from a public street or courtyard.
               [b]   The front facade of the principal building on any lot in
the DBWP district shall face onto a public street.
               [c]   The front facade shall not be oriented to face directly
toward a parking lot.
               [d]   Porches, pent roofs, roof overhangs, hooded front doors,
or other similar architectural elements shall define the front entrance to all
residences.
               [e]   Porches: usable porches and stoops should form a
predominate motif of the building design for single residential buildings and
be located on the front and/or side of the building. Usable front porches are
at least six (6) feet deep and twelve (12) feet in width.
               [f]    Raised entries are required to provide privacy, all
residential entrances within fifteen (15) feet of the sidewalk shall be raised
from the finished grade (at the building line) a minimum of 1 1/2 feet.
               [g]   For multi-family and multi-use buildings, a minimum of
fifteen percent (15%) of the front facade on the ground floor shall be
transparent, consisting of window or door openings allowing views into and out
of the interior.
            3.   Design requirements. In order to encourage the compatibility
of new infill duplex and attached single-family development with the
surrounding neighborhood, all new infill shall utilize at least (4) of the
following design features:
               [a]   Dormers.
               [b]   Recessed entries.
               [c]   Cupolas.
               [d]   Bay or bow windows.
               [e]   Garages.
               [f]   Window shutters.
               [g]   Roof with pitch greater than nominal eight (8) to twelve
(12).
               [h]   Off-sets on building face or roof (minimum 12 inches).
               [i]   Gables.
               [j]   Covered porch or entry with pillars or posts.
               [k]   Eaves (minimum 6 inches).
               [l]   Garage set at least ten (10) feet behind the front face of
the primary dwelling unit.
               [m]   Exterior window trim that is a minimum of four (4) inches
in width.
         b.   Garages and accessory dwelling units. One (1) detached garage
(that may or may not include a dwelling unit) or one (1) detached accessory
dwelling unit may be placed on a single-family detached residential lot,
provided that the accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed eight hundred (800)
square feet and is set off to the side or back of the principal building.
         c.   Exterior signage. A comprehensive sign program is required for
the entire DBWP Neighborhood Overlay District to establish a uniform theme.
Signs shall share a common style (e.g., size, shape, material). In the mixed-
use area, signs shall be wall signs or cantilever signs. Cantilever signs shall
be mounted perpendicular to the building face and shall not exceed two (2)
square feet. Wall signs shall be sized and placed to fit within the character
of the architectural elements.
         d.   Parking requirements. On-street parking shall count toward any
minimum parking requirements.
            1.   In residential areas, parking may be provided on-site. One (1)
off-street parking space with unrestricted ingress and egress shall be provided
for each dwelling unit.
            2.   Multi-family residential development must provide one (1)
parking space for every dwelling unit and an additional one (1) parking space
for every third bedroom.
            3.   In any designated mixed-use area, all parking lots shall be
located at the rear or side of a building. The parking lot shall not exceed a
maximum depth of sixty-two (62) feet, (two-way aisle with parking on both
sides), not including required landscaping. If located at the side, screening
shall be provided as specified in Landscaping and Screening Standards.
            4.   Access for service vehicles should provide a direct route to
service and loading dock areas, while avoiding movement through parking areas
and roads throughout the district.
            5.   All parking over the minimum requirements shall be paved with
pervious paving material. The reduction of impervious surfaces through the use
of interlocking pavers is required for parking areas of periodic uses.
            6.    Joint use parking. Where at least two (2) uses either within
a mixed use development or on adjacent parcels that each require parking, have
different peak parking demands during different times of the day, shared
parking is required. Where this is applied, the landscaping requirements may be
reduced by five percent (5%). Shared parking shall meet the requirements of
Section
26-173(e)(2).
      (3)   Bicycle parking. Bicycle parking for all non-residential uses and
for residential uses of more than four (4) units per building is required. A
minimum of five (5) bicycle spaces per fifty (50) parking/auto spaces (or
percentage thereof), with a maximum of ten (10), is required.
      (4)   Outdoor lighting.
         a.   Street lighting shall be provided along street frontage for
projects greater than one (1) acre. Smaller, column street-lights should be
used. Street-lights shall be installed on both sides of the street at intervals
of no greater than seventy-five (75) feet. A pole or pedestal mounted
luminaire, ten to twelve (10-12) feet in height with a full spectrum bulb, not
more than one hundred seventy-five (175) watts. Street lighting design shall
meet the minimum standards developed by the Illumination Engineering Society.
         b.   Exterior lighting shall be directed downward in order to reduce
glare onto adjacent properties.
      (5)   Landscaping and screening standards. Overall composition and
location of landscaping shall complement the scale of the development and its
surroundings. In general, larger, well-placed contiguous planting areas shall
be preferred to smaller, disconnected areas.
         a.   General screening. Where screening is required by section 26-176
of this chapter, it shall be at least three (3) feet in height, unless
otherwise specified. Required screening shall be at least fifty percent (50%)
opaque throughout the year.
         b.   Street trees. A minimum of one (1) deciduous tree, with full
maturity between twenty to forty (20-40) feet in height, per thirty (30) feet
of street frontage, or fraction thereof, shall be required. Trees should
preferably be located between the sidewalk and the curb, within the landscaped
area of a boulevard, or in tree wells installed in pavement or concrete. If
placement of street trees within the right-of-way will interfere with utility
lines, trees may be planted within the front yard setback adjacent to the
sidewalk. Species of trees as well as the planting standards are located in the
Richland County Development Design Manual.
         c.   Landscaping. All areas of a site not occupied by buildings,
required parking, driveways, walkways or service areas shall be landscaped
according to an approved landscape plan in accordance with section 26-176 of
this chapter.
         d.   Installation and maintenance of landscaping materials.
            1.   All landscaping is to consist of natural (native) landscaping
material to be installed to current international society of arboriculture
standards (ISA) landscaping planting standards.
            2.   Maintenance and replacement of landscape materials shall be
the responsibility of the property owner. Landscape maintenance should
incorporate environmentally sound management practices, including the use of
water and energy-efficient irrigation systems such as drip irrigation, and
pruning primarily for plant health and public safety, replacing dead materials
annually.
         e.   Parking area landscaping and screening.
            1.   All parking and loading areas fronting public streets or
sidewalks, and all parking and loading areas abutting residential districts or
uses, shall provide:
               [a]   A landscaped area at least five (5) feet wide along the
public street or sidewalk.
               [b]   Screening at least three (3) feet in height and not less
than fifty percent (50%) opaque.
               [c]    One tree for each twenty-five (25) linear feet of parking
lot frontage.
            2.   The corners of parking lots, “islands,” and all other areas
not used for parking or vehicular circulation shall be landscaped. Vegetation
can include turf grass, native grasses or other perennial flowering plants,
vines, shrubs or trees. Such spaces may include architectural features such as
benches, kiosks or bicycle parking.
(Ord. No. 005-09HR, § III, 2-17-08; Ord. No. 054-09HR, § XXVII, 11-3-09)
Sec. 26-111. CC Crane Creek Neighborhood District.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of the Crane Creek Neighborhood District (CC) is
to implement the policies and goals of the adopted Crane Creek Master Plan, and
to:
      (1)   Improve the image of the Crane Creek community;
      (2)   Preserve existing single-family neighborhoods;
      (3)   Develop local retail services and limit industrial zone expansion;
      (4)   Create a walkable community with viable pedestrian and bike trails;
      (5)   Increase community recreational facilities; and
      (6)   Preserve existing wetlands and create a community open space
network.
   (b)   Applicability/Establishment. The CC Crane Creek Neighborhood District,
through the use of CC Neighborhood District sub-districts, may be approved and
designated by County Council for that area of the county that is within the
Crane Creek Neighborhood Master Plan, such plan having been adopted by the
County Council. The provisions of this Section shall apply to all parcels of
land and rights of way, or portions thereof, within the boundaries of the CC
Neighborhood District. No change in the boundary of the CC Neighborhood
District shall be authorized, except by the County Council, pursuant to
procedures in Section
26-52.
   (c)   CC districts. The CC Neighborhood District contains four (4)
additional sub-district classifications designed to meet the development goals
for unique zones within the district. These sub-districts are categorized by
the mixture and intensity of uses allowed. Each of these sub-districts is
subject to unique form-based design standards.
      (1)   Requirements. Development in the CC sub-districts shall conform to
the standards in the subsections that follow. Each sub-district has detailed
provisions for uses, building type and design, density, height, the design of
public spaces, the mix of uses, and other aspects of the built environment.
      (2)   Sub-district classification.
         a.   CC-I, Residential: The CC-1 sub-district permits the development
of residential communities that conserve the natural and environmentally
sensitive features within the Crane Creek Master Plan area.
         b.   CC-2, Neighborhood Mixed Use: The CC-2 sub-district permits a
mixture of uses that create a land use transition between existing residential
neighborhoods and potential commercial areas that abut this area. The zone
allows a variety of building types, including civic/institutional, townhouses,
detached single-family housing, loft dwelling units, and commercial/office with
encouragement of mixed-use buildings that meet a variety of daily needs of
residents in surrounding neighborhoods.
         c.   CC-3, Activity Center Mixed Use: The CC-3 sub-district permits
higher density mixed-use buildings than CC-2. The zone allows a variety of
building types, including civic/institutional, loft dwelling units, townhouses,
and detached single-family housing, and commercial/office, with encouragement
of mixed-use buildings that serve the larger community and are appropriate for
an activity center.
         d.   CC-4, Industrial: The CC-4 sub-district minimizes the potential
negative impacts of existing and future industrial uses on adjacent land uses
by encouraging additions or enhancements to site buffers, landscaping, open
space, and other site elements. This sub-district is intended to accommodate
wholesaling, distribution, storage, processing, and light manufacturing which
are controlled operations that are relatively clean, quiet, and free of
objectionable or hazardous elements, such as smoke, noise, odor or dust. In
addition, such uses operate and/or have storage within open or enclosed
structures, and generate no nuisances.
         e.   Site Plan Review. All site development plan applications shall be
accompanied with materials required by the Zoning Administrator in Section
26-53 for major land development, as well as these additional items:
            1.   A Shared Parking Analysis for use of shared parking, if
applicable. See Section
26-111(d)(9)b.1. of this document for requirements.
            2.   A Signage Master Plan. For all multi-tenant or multi-owner
commercial or mixed use developments greater than twenty-five thousand (25,000)
gross square feet, a signage master plan shall be submitted, reviewed and
approved at the time of review of the site development plan. See Section
26-111(d)(10) a. of this document for specific standards. The signage master
plan shall include the following information:
               [a]   The location of each proposed sign and existing sign that
is to remain, and a table indicating the location, type, height, and sign area
of each sign.
               [b]   A computation of the maximum permitted number of signs,
maximum permitted total sign area, and maximum permitted area for individual
signs permitted under this Section.
               [c]   A computation, excluding window signs and incidental
signs, of the total proposed number of signs and the total sign area of such
signs.
         f.   Site Plan Review. Review of the site plan shall be consistent
with the procedures for major land development review as provided in Section
26-53.
         g.   Appeals and Variances. Appeals of decisions by the Development
Review Team and requests for variances shall follow the procedures identified
in Sections 26-57 and 26-58.
   (d)   Property Development Standards.
      (1)   Mixed-use developments. The CC-2 and CC-3 sub-districts authorize
and encourage mixing of complementary uses. Mixed-use developments shall
consist of two or more types of uses as permitted in this Section.
         a.   Uses in a mixed-use development shall be combined either
vertically within the same building, or placed side by side on the same parcel.
         b.   Examples of a mixture of complementary uses include, but are not
limited to, the following specifically permitted uses:
            1.   Loft dwelling units located over office, retail, and service
uses.
            2.   Live-work unit.
            3.   Office uses located over or beside compatible retail and
service uses.
      (2)   Supplemental Use Standards. The following supplemental use
standards apply to all uses listed below when developed within any of the CC
sub-districts:
         a.   Parking structures.
            1.   At a minimum, the primary facade of the first floor of above-
ground parking structures shall be occupied by retail/office space or designed
with similar design elements of upper floors of neighboring buildings.
            2.   All levels of a parking structure shall be designed to
minimize visibility of parked cars from surrounding streets.
            3.   Pedestrian entries and exits shall be clearly visible from the
street and interior of the parking deck.
         b.   Multi-use trails. Multi-use trails that meet these standards
shall be eligible for a density bonus provided in Section
26-111(d)(12).
            1.   The location of multi-use trails shall be compatible with the
Proposed Circulation Plan of the Crane Creek Master Plan and shall be approved
by the Zoning Administrator and Development Review Team.
            2.   The multi-use trail shall not be gated or otherwise restricted
for access by the public.
      (3)   Crane Creek Standards Summary Table.
             CC-1—       CC-2—      CC-3—Activity Center Mixed CC-4—
             Residential   Neighborhood Use                          Industrial
                           Mixed Use
             Single-Family, Detached Dwelling
             Civic/Institutional
Building                   Loft Dwelling Units
Type                       Live-Work Units
                           Commercial/Office   
                           Mixed-use, nonresidential
             As required
             in Section
Minimum Open 26-186. The   10% of development acreage. The requirements of
Space        requirements  Section
             of Section    26-111(d)(11) apply.
             26-111(d)(11)
             do not apply.
Sidewalk        5 feet
Drainage     Open Swale or Closed and LID
             Closed
Minimum      None          30 feet for mixed use buildings.          None
Height
                                        75 feet (only applies to
Maximum      45 feet       45 feet      Loft Dwelling, Commercial/   75 feet
Height                                  Office, and Mixed Use, non-
                                        residential)
LID—Low Impact Development Techniques
 
      (4)   General Building Design Standards.
         a.   All lots shall face or be oriented towards streets, square, or
open spaces.
         b.   Principal building entrances shall be oriented to public streets.
      (5)   Development Standards for Building Types. The following building
types shall provide the principal form for new development. These requirements
do not mandate particular architectural or design features. Such building types
shall maintain consistency with the purpose of the CC District identified in
Section
26-111(a). In this paragraph (5), maximum base density is the maximum density
allowed when no bonus density incentives are pursued. Bonus density refers to
the maximum density allowed when bonus density incentive(s) are pursued.
         a.   Single-family, detached residential.
            1.   Maximum density:
               [a]   Base: 3 du/acre.
               [b]   Bonus: 4.5 du/acre.
            2.   Minimum setbacks:
               [a]   Front: 25 feet.
               [b]   Rear: 20 feet (from principal structure).
               [c]   Side: 6.5 feet.
   Minimum setback requirements may be reduced provided that the proposed
setbacks are no less than the setbacks of adjacent single-family dwellings on
the same block face. Where zero lot line developments are permitted, the side
setback shall meet the special requirements for such developments as set forth
in Section
26-151.
            3.   Maximum building height shall be 45 feet.
            4.   Maximum impervious surface ratio: 40% for single-family
residential, mid-size lot.
            5.   Landscaping of lots for single-family, detached dwellings
shall be consistent with Section
26-176, except as stated below:
               [a]   Tree preservation and replacement shall result in at least
six (6) hardwood trees per acre (minimum 2-inch caliper dbh).
               [b]   All landscape materials required by this ordinance shall
be maintained by the property owner or property owners' association.
         b.   Townhouse.
            1.   Maximum density:
               [a]   Base: 6 du/ acre.
               [b]   Bonus: 9 du/ acre.
            2.   Minimum Setbacks:
               [a]   Front: 15 feet.
               [b]   Rear: 5 feet.
               [c]   Side: 0 feet.
            3.   Minimum spacing between buildings is 15 feet.
            4.   Maximum building height shall be 45 feet.
            5.   Maximum impervious surface ratio: 65% of the parcel.
            6.   Dwellings shall have vehicular access from the rear along a
common alley.
         c.   Live-Work Units.
            1.   Maximum density:
               [a]   Base: 6 du/acre.
               [b]   Bonus: 9 du/acre.
            2.   Minimum Setbacks.
               [a]   Front yard setback: 15 feet.
               [b]   Rear: 20 feet.
               [c]   Detached side: 6.5 feet.
               [d]   Attached side: 0 feet.
            3.   Minimum spacing between buildings: 15 feet.
            4.   The minimum building height shall be 30 feet and the maximum
45 feet.
            5.   Maximum impervious surface ratio: 75% of the parcel.
            6.   Dwellings shall have vehicular access from the rear along a
common alley.
         d.   Loft Dwelling Units, on upper stories of mixed-use residential
buildings.
            1.   Maximum density:
               [a]   Base: 8 du/acre.
               [b]   Bonus: 12 du/acre.
            2.   Minimum setback:
               [a]   Front yard: 15 feet
               [b]   Side: 0 feet.
               [c]   Rear: 50 feet.
            3.   Minimum building spacing: 15 feet.
            4.   The minimum building height minimum shall be 30 feet.
            5.   The maximum building height shall be 45 feet in CC-2 and 75
feet in CC-3.
            6.   Maximum building size: 25,000 square feet.
            7.   Maximum impervious surface ratio: 80% of the parcel.
            8.   Minimum number of dwelling units in a building is two (2).
            9.   Residential units must be accessed from entrances that are
separated from the entrance for commercial space.
            10.   Open space requirements as listed in Section
26-111(d)(11).
            11.   Landscaping of the site shall be consistent with the
requirements of Section
26-176, with the following additions:
               [a]   Front yards shall consist of landscaped areas or sod.
               [b]   Parking areas shall be screened from view from public
streets by buildings, evergreen hedge, fence or wall not less than four (4)
feet in height.
            12.   Streets and circulation:
               [a]   Private streets must meet the standards of public streets.
               [b]   Streets shall include safe, lighted pedestrian ingress and
egress facilities.
            13.   Parking shall be as required in Section
26-111(d)(9)
         e.   Commercial and Office Uses.
            1.   Minimum setbacks:
               [a]   Front yard: 25 feet.
               [b]   Rear: 20 feet.
               [c]   Side: 0 feet for structures attached at side lot lines;
otherwise, a minimum spacing of 15 feet between structures.
            2.   Land Use Transition: Commercial buildings that are more than
45 feet in height shall not be closer than the building height from a single-
family detached residence, and shall provide a 20-foot transitional buffer
adjacent to single-family residential that is designed pursuant to a buffer
plan approved by the Zoning Administrator that meets the standards of a planted
buffer in Section
26-176.
            3.   The maximum building height shall be 45 feet in CC-2 and 75
feet in CC-3.
            4.   Minimum commercial building size: 1,500 square feet.
            5.   Maximum commercial building size:
               [a]   CC-3: 25,000 square feet on a ground floor.
               [b]   CC-2: 5,000 square feet on a ground floor; 15,000 square
feet total.
            6.   Maximum impervious surface ratio:
               [a]   Eighty-five percent (85%) in CC-3.
               [b]   Seventy-five percent (75%) in CC-2.
            7.   Minimum open space per Section
26-111(d)(11).
            8.   Commercial density:
               [a]   CC-2: 5,000 square feet per acre.
               [b]   CC-3, as follows:
 
                    Base density Bonus
                    (square feet/gross acre)
Retail uses         15,000       20,000
Office/service uses 20,000       25,000
 
            9.   Parking as required in Section
26-111 (d) (9).
         f.   Mixed-use Buildings, Non Residential. Mixed-use buildings shall
contain a combination of commercial retail, commercial services, civic, or
office uses. No residential uses shall be included.
            1.   Minimum setbacks:
               [a]   Front yard: 25 feet.
               [b]   Rear: 50 feet.
               [c]   Side: 0 feet for structures attached at side lot lines;
otherwise a minimum spacing of 5 feet between structures that share a side
property line.
            2.   Land Use Transition. Mixed-use buildings that are more than 45
feet in height shall not be closer than the building height from a single-
family, detached residence and shall provide a 20-foot transitional buffer
adjacent to single-family residential that is designed pursuant to a buffer
plan approved by the Zoning Administrator that meets the standards of a planted
buffer in Section
26-176.
            3.   Maximum building size: 25,000 square feet on ground floor.
            4.   The maximum building height shall be 45 feet in CC-2 and 75
feet in CC-3.
            5.   Maximum building length: 250 feet.
            6.   Maximum impervious surface ratio: 75% of the parcel.
            7.   Minimum open space: 10% of the development or phase.
            8.   Parking as required in Section
26-111 (d) (9).
         g.   Civic/Institutional Uses:
            1.   Minimum setbacks:
               [a]   Front yard: 25 feet.
               [b]   Rear: 15 feet.
               [c]   Side: 15 feet.
            2.   Minimum spacing between buildings: 15 feet.
            3.   Maximum building size: 25,000 square feet on ground floor.
            4.   Maximum impervious surface ratio: 75% of the parcel.
            5.   The maximum building height shall be 45 feet in CC-2 and 75
feet in CC-3.
            6.   Land Use Transition. Civic uses that are more than 45 feet in
height shall not be closer than the building height from a single-family,
detached residence and shall provide a 25-foot transitional buffer adjacent to
single family residential that is designed pursuant to a buffer plan approved
by the Zoning Administrator that meets the standards of a planted buffer in
Section
26-176.
            7.   Open Space shall meet the requirements of Section
26-111(d)(H).
            8.   Signs. Signs for civic/institutional uses shall follow the
standards for commercial signs found in Section
26-180 and other requirements as stipulated in Section
26-111(d)(10).
            9.   Parking as required in Section
26-111(d)(9).
         h.   Industrial Uses:
            1.   Minimum setbacks:
               [a]   Front yard: 15 feet.
               [b]   Rear: 15 feet.
               [c]   Side: 15 feet.
            2.   Minimum spacing between buildings: 15 feet.
            3.   Maximum building size: 100,000 square feet with maximum 50,000
square feet on ground floor.
            4.   Maximum impervious surface ratio: 75% of the parcel.
            5.   Land Use Transition. No building shall be constructed closer
than the building height from a single-family, detached residence. Parcels that
abut single-family residential uses shall provide a 25-foot transitional buffer
that is designed pursuant to a buffer plan approved by the Zoning Administrator
that meets the standards of a planted buffer in Section
26-176.
            6.   Open Space shall meet the requirements of Section
26-111(d)(11).
            7.   Signs. Signs for civic/institutional uses shall follow the
standards for commercial signs found in Section
26-180 and other requirements as stipulated in Section
26-111(d)(10).
            8.   All uses shall be completely screened from adjacent roads and
residentially zoned or used properties.
            9.   Parking as required in Section
26-111(d)(9).
      (6)   Access Management Standards. It is the intent of this paragraph (6)
to improve traffic flow and help create a walkable community with viable
pedestrian and bike trails. To achieve these goals, developments shall provide
inter-parcel access, joint driveways, cross-access drives and access easements,
and minimize curb cuts (driveways), all as stipulated below:
         a.   Driveways. Establishments of driveways shall be consistent the
regulations of Section
26-175, unless otherwise stated below.
            1.   Intersection Access Control. Driveways are not permitted in
the controlled access zones of intersections. See Figure 7, below, for greater
clarification.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b8ca58bf1d09401f12aa24500886bd119d34fc76/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6499.jpg]
 
            2.   Abutting non-residential developments on collectors and
arterials shall provide a cross-access drive and sidewalk access to allow
circulation between sites.
         b.   Driveways that enter a collector or arterial road must have a
single entrance and two (2) exit lanes.
         c.   Driveways on collector streets or local streets should align with
driveways (if any) on the opposite side of the street.
      (7)   Interparcel Easements and Inter-parcel Access.
         a.   Abutting non-residential developments within CC-2 and CC-3 sub-
districts shall provide a cross-access drive and sidewalk access to facilitate
the How of pedestrian and other traffic.
         b.   Joint driveways and cross-access easements shall be established
for multi-parcel, non-residential development wherever feasible along
boulevards. The building site shall incorporate the following:
            1.   A continuous cross-access drive connecting adjacent parcels
along the thoroughfare.
            2.   Joint driveways and cross-access easements shall be
constructed in accordance with the 2003, or later, version of the Manual of
Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD).
      (8)   Transition Yards. Land use transitions are required as outlined
previously in this Section and shall be in conformity with Section
26-176. The following additional requirements shall apply:
         a.   Each CC-1 development that abuts property zoned for single-family
residential use shall provide a thirty (30) foot evergreen vegetative
transitional buffer adjacent to residentially zoned property.
         b.   Property within the CC-4 sub-district shall meet the following
additional requirements:
            1.   Buildings abutting a residentially zoned parcel shall have a
minimum setback of one (1) foot for each foot of building height, as measured
from the base of the building; provided however, the minimum required setback
shall be twenty-five (25) feet and the maximum required setback shall be fifty
(50) feet. In addition, parcels that abut single-family residential districts
shall provide a 25-foot transitional buffer that is designed pursuant to a
buffer plan approved by the Zoning Administrator that meets the standards of a
planted buffer in Section
26-176.
            2.   Mechanical and utility equipment shall be screened.
            3.   Open space requirements shall be designed so as to provide
additional separation between the buildings and abutting property.
      (9)   Parking Standards. Standards for parking shall be consistent with
Section
26-173, except as otherwise stipulated in this paragraph (9). Shared parking,
off-street parking, and bicycle facilities are encouraged to support the
development of a built environment that accommodates motorized vehicles as well
as pedestrian and bicycle traffic.
         a.   Off-Street Parking. The minimum number of parking spaces required
for each use in each of the CC sub-districts shall be as follows, except where
modified by on-street parking [see Section
26-111(d)(9)d.] or shared parking standards as stipulated in subparagraph b.,
below.
         b.   Shared Parking. Shared parking is allowed; and if used, shall
meet the following requirements:
            1.   A shared parking analysis, which shall be determined as
follows:
               [a]   Determine the minimum amount of parking required for each
separate use described in the below “Table of Parking Standards”.
               [b]   Multiply the parking requirement for each use by the
corresponding percentage for each of the time periods described in the below
“Table of Parking Ratios by Use and Time of Day for Shared Parking
Arrangements”.
               [c]   Sum the total parking requirements for all uses for each
of the five (5) time periods described in the below “Table of Parking Ratios by
Use and Time of Day for Shared Parking Arrangements”.
               [d]   The parking requirement for the time period having the
largest required total number of parking spaces based on the use as described
in the below “Table of Parking Ratios by Use and Time of Day for Shared Parking
Arrangements” shall be the minimum required number of parking spaces for the
mixed-use development.
Table of Parking Standards
Use Minimum Spaces Required Maximum Spaces Allowed
Table of Parking Standards
                                                                         Minimum  Maximum
Use                                                                      Spaces   Spaces
                                                                         Required Allowed
Residential—single family detached and attached (townhouses) and mixed 1.0 per
use                                                                      dwelling N/A
                                                                         unit
                                                                                  4.0 per
                                                                         2.0 per  1,000
Live-Work Unit                                                           dwelling gross
                                                                         unit     square
                                                                                  feet
                                                                         1.0 per
Lodging                                                                  room or  N/A
                                                                         suite
                                                                         1.0 per  4.0 per
                                                                         1,000    1,000
Office/Service Uses                                                      gross    gross
                                                                         square   square
                                                                         feet     feet
                                                                         2.0 per  4.0 per
                                                                         1,000    1,000
Retail Uses                                                              gross    gross
                                                                         square   square
                                                                         feet     feet
Industrial
Restaurants                                                              1.0 per  1.0 per
                                                                         4 seats  2 seats
                                                                         1.5 per  3.0 per
                                                                         1,000    1,000
Mixed-Use Development                                                    gross    gross
                                                                         square   square
                                                                         feet     feet
                                                                         As required in
Entertainment/Recreation Uses                                            Section
                                                                         26-173
Theaters                                                                 1.0 per
                                                                         4 seats
                                                                         As required in
Civic/Institutional (Schools)                                            Section
                                                                         26-173
                                                                         1.0 per  1 per
                                                                         350      250
Civic/Institutional (non-assembly Uses)                                  gross    gross
                                                                         floor    floor
                                                                         area     area
Civic/Institutional Uses (assembly uses only)                            1.0 per  1.0 per
                                                                         4 seats  3 seats
 
Table of Parking Ratios by Use and by Time of Day for Shared Parking
Arrangements
     Weekdays                Weekends                          Night Time
Uses 6 a.m. to 5 5 p.m. to 1 6 a.m. to 5 p.m. 5 p.m. to 1 a.m. 1 a.m. to 6 a.m.
     p.m.        a.m.
Table of Parking Ratios by Use and by Time of Day for Shared Parking
Arrangements
               Weekdays                Weekends                Night Time
Uses           6 a.m. to 5 5 p.m. to 1 6 a.m. to 5 5 p.m. to 1 1 a.m. to 6 a.m.
               p.m.        a.m.        p.m.        a.m.
Office         100%        10%         10%         5%          5%
Retail/
Commercial/    60%         90%         100%        70%         5%
Mixed-Use
Hotel/Motel    75%         100%        75%         100%        75%
Restaurant     50%         100%        100%        100%        10%
Entertainment/ 40%         100%        80%         100%        10%
Recreational
Place of       50%         50%         100%        100%        10%
Worship
 
 
   Examples of Shared Parking Calculations:
A                             Weekdays            Weekends            Night
building                                                              Time
with
2,500 sq.
ft. of
retail
space and
a
building
with
5,000 sq. Minimum Number of
ft. of    Spaces Required by
office    Each Use Separately 6 a.m. to 5 p.m. to 6 a.m. to 5 p.m. to 1 a.m. to
space/or                      5 p.m.    1 a.m.    5 p.m.    1 a.m.    6 a.m.
with
2,500 of
retail on
the
ground
floor
with 2
floor of
office
above
5,000 sq. 3 per
ft. of    1,000 sq. 15        15        2         2         1         1
office    ft of GFA
2,500 sq. 4.5 per
ft. of    1,000 sq. 11        7         10        11        8         1
retail    ft. of
          GFA
Total               26        22        12        13        9         1
Required
Shared    22
Parking
 
   Any subsequent change in land uses within the participating developments
shall require proof that adequate parking will be available. Prior l:o any
change in use, the owner must apply to the Zoning Administrator for an
evaluation and confirmation of the reduction. If the Zoning Administrator finds
that the parking reduction is no longer justified, the Zoning Administrator
shall notify the owner to construct the number of parking spaces necessary to
meet the required level.
         c.   Vehicular surface area landscaping. Interior parking lot
landscaping and screening shall meet the guidelines established in Section
26-176(g), except as directed below:
            1.   Where a parking lot of five (5) or more spaces is adjacent to
a street or a parcel developed with single-family residences, the perimeter of
the parking lot shall be screened by a minimum four (4) foot high, dense
evergreen hedge in a ten (10) foot wide landscape strip lined with trees, or
screened by a wall or fence not less than four (4) feet high. Such buffer shall
provide adequate space for pedestrian crossing, meeting the requirements of
Section
26-176.
            2.   Parking lots shall incorporate landscaped areas covering a
minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the surface area in compliance with Section
26-176.
            3.   Landscaped areas in parking lots shall be depressed below
paved surfaces and designed with flush curbs or curb inlets to absorb
stormwater runoff. Each parking space shall provide a wheel stop and depressed
areas shall be surrounded by painted lines or flush curbing to separate
landscaping from driving aisles.
         d.   On-Street Parking. On Street Parking is encouraged where
appropriate in the CC-2 and CC-3 sub-districts. Provisions for on-street
parking within the CC district shall be coordinated with SCDOT and appropriate
County agencies and may require alterations to existing curb line at cost to
the property owner or developer. On-street parking may count towards minimum
parking requirements of a parcel when it is located along the street frontage
of that parcel.
         e.   Bicycle Parking. Bicycle parking shall be provided for all multi-
family residential buildings with more than four (4) units as well as all non-
residential and mixed-use buildings.
            1.   Required Spaces. Uses that require up to fifty (50) off-street
parking spaces for motorized vehicles shall provide at least two (2) bicycle
spaces, plus a minimum of one (1) additional bicycle space for each additional
fifty (50) parking spaces required for motorized vehicles. A maximum of ten
(10) bicycle spaces shall be provided per building.
            2.   Bicycle racks shall be installed along a major building
approach line and be clearly visible from the street at least fifty (50) feet
prior to the building entrance.
            3.   Bicycle racks installed on sidewalks shall be installed
parallel to the curb and allow for a ten (10) foot clearance for pedestrians
utilizing the sidewalk.
            4.   The design of bicycle parking fixtures shall be approved by
the Zoning Administrator.
         f.   Environmental Controls - BMPs. Stormwater management design shall
incorporate BMPs designed to protect water quality as provided in Section
26-64.
      (10)   Signage. Signs in all CC sub-districts shall be authorized in
accordance with Section
26-180.
         a.   Multi-tenant developments shall prepare a Master Signage Plan
that identifies the signage allocation among the tenants in accordance with the
following standards.
            1.   The maximum aggregate sign area allowed for a multi-tenant
development shall be consistent with the limitations provided as follows:
 
Gross square feet of tenant space Total sign area, not including window signs
0 -10,000                         150 square feet
10,001 - 50,000                   250 square feet
50,001 - 100,000                  400 square feet
100,001 - 200,000                 600 square feet
Over 200,000                      1,000 square feet
 
            2.   Each use or tenant in a CC-2 or CC-3 sub-district shall be
permitted one (1) wall sign per street frontage, not to exceed one (1) square
foot in area for each linear foot of street frontage. Wall signs may not be
located on a building wall that has no public entrance, except for corner
buildings facing roadways.
            3.   Each use or tenant in a CC-2 or CC-3 sub-district shall be
permitted marquee signs, canopy signs, or hanging canopy signs not to exceed
twelve (12) square feet in area per sign. The lowest point of a marquee sign,
canopy sign, or hanging sign must be a minimum of eight (8) feet above the
adjacent ground or sidewalk elevation.
         b.   Ground-mounted signs.
            1.   Ground-mounted signs in all CC sub-districts shall consist of
no more than two (2) sign faces, limited to thirty-two (32) square feet per
side and six (6) feet in height.
            2.   Supporting structures for ground-mounted signs shall be
constructed of material compatible with the primary building material used on
the facade of the principal building.
            3.   No more than one (1) ground-mounted sign is permitted for each
principal driveway entrance. Such ground-mounted sign shall be placed within
twenty-five (25) feet from the edge of the principal driveway entrance, but not
within the sight visibility triangle formed by the intersection for the
driveway and the public street.
            4.   Each freestanding commercial, mixed-use, or civic development
is permitted one (1) ground-mounted sign per frontage abutting on a public
street.
         c.   Illuminated signs shall be consistent with the regulations as
stated in Section
26-177 and the following:
            1.   Digital signs are prohibited.
            2.   Externally illuminated signs are permitted, provided that
their light source shall be directed downward so as not to cast glare upwards
or towards adjacent properties.
      (11)   Open Space Standards.
         a.   Categories of open space. Open space is required in all CC sub-
districts and shall consist of any of the following categories of land:
            1.   Primary Conservation Areas. Primary Conservation Areas include
streams, required stream buffers, wetlands designated by the National Wetlands
Inventory, 100-year floodplain, slopes exceeding twenty-five percent (25%),
areas of exposed rock, and private cemeteries and burial grounds. These areas
shall be left in a natural and undisturbed state, except for the fewest
perpendicular crossings of essential access roads, pedestrian pathways, multi-
use trails, and utility lines.
            2.   Secondary Conservation Areas. Secondary Conservation Areas
include land in water supply watersheds, aquifer recharge areas identified in
the Richland County Comprehensive Plan, riparian and wetland buffers exceeding
the minimum required width, slopes exceeding fifteen percent (15%), significant
habitat areas as identified in the Richland County Comprehensive Plan, soils
unsuitable for septic tanks, prime agricultural soils, mature hardwood forest,
meadows, farm fields, pastures, and other areas of scenic value.
            3.   Active Recreation Area. Active recreation areas include
greenways, trails, bikeways, paths, tennis, volleyball, handball, squash, bocce
and basketball courts, ball fields, tracks, golf courses, swimming pools,
clubhouses, equestrian facilities, beaches, docks, amphitheaters, stages, band
shells, walkways, public squares, public lawns, picnic shelters and areas, open
landscaped areas, and other land containing outdoor recreation features and
facilities as determined by the Zoning Administrator. Lakes and ponds are
allowed in outdoor recreation areas, but shall not be counted as open space.
         b.   Open space design standards.
            1.   All primary conservation areas of a site shall be set aside as
open space and shall meet the requirements of the Richland County Conservation
Overlay District (Section
26-105).
            2.   A density bonus shall be provided for multi-use trail
development as provided in Section
26-111(d)(12).
            3.   Secondary conservation areas shall be set aside as open space
to the maximum degree possible.
            4.   No more than fifty percent (50%) of required open space may
consist of primary conservation areas.
            5.   A minimum of twenty-five percent (25%) of required open space
shall be used for passive parks, greenways, trails, squares, or greens, and
shall be open to the general public.
            6.   No more than ten percent (10%) of required open space may be
areas of impervious surface.
            7.   At least fifty percent (50%) of required open space within a
single development shall be located in a contiguous tract.
            8.   Interconnected Open Space Network. It is the intent of this
subparagraph b. that the protected conservation areas, open spaces, greenways,
bikeways, trails, sidewalks and outdoor recreation areas within a development
that provide open space be continuous with compatible areas containing similar
features on abutting property. The design of developments shall provide for
maximum connections, providing pedestrian and bike access to off-site and on-
site attractions, such as public trails, paths, parks, wildlife refuges, public
facilities (such as community centers, schools, libraries, fire and police
stations, senior centers, and utility easements), and institutions (such as
churches, museums, and other cultural facilities).
            9.   Each open space area must comprise an area of at least five
hundred (500) square feet with a minimum dimension of twenty (20) feet of width
or depth.
            10.   Best Management Practices (BMPs). Active recreation areas,
such as golf courses, playing fields, swimming pools and tennis courts, shall
employ applicable BMPs and shall not be permitted in primary conservation
areas.
         c.   Public seating. It is the intent of this Subsection (11) to
provide open space areas that promote a walkable environment and interaction
among community members. The provision of both formal and informal public
seating amenities is encouraged. Park benches, movable chairs and tables, and
seating in the form of garden walls and monumental stairs are encouraged in
open spaces, subject to approval by the Zoning Administrator.
         d.   Ownership, Maintenance and Control of Open Space. Open space
within a development shall be held in unitary ownership or control and be
perpetually administered and maintained by one (1) or a combination of the
methods below:
            1.   Fee simple dedication. Open space within developments may be
offered for dedication to the public at the time of application. The county
may, but shall not be required to, accept undivided open space.
            2.   Property owners’ association. The undivided open space and
associated facilities may be held in common ownership by an association of
property owners. Membership in the association shall be mandatory for all
purchasers of property and their successors. The association shall be
responsible for administration of common facilities and property and shall
permanently maintain the undivided open space.
            3.   Private conservation organization. The owner of open space may
transfer easements to a land trust or other conservation-oriented, nonprofit
organization with legal authority to accept such easements, subject to approval
of the Zoning Administrator.
         e.   Maintenance of Open Space. Open space areas shall be maintained
in a manner that prevents them from being nuisances to health or safety.
            1.   Open spaces shall be kept free from the accumulation of litter
and debris.
            2.   Landscaped areas shall be kept free from dead or diseased
trees and other vegetation.
            3.   Hardscaped areas and appliances, such as recreational
equipment and fountains, shall be maintained deeming them suitable for their
intended uses and so as to be free of hazards.
         f.   Liens by Richland County. In the event that the party responsible
for maintenance of the open space fails to maintain all or any portion of such
area as enumerated, upon ninety (90) days notice served to the owner, Richland
County may assume responsibility for the maintenance and may enter the premises
and take corrective action, including the provision of extended maintenance.
The costs of said corrective action and maintenance by Richland County may be
charged to the owner, property owners’ association, or to the individual
property owners that make up the property owners’ association and may included
administrative costs and penalties. Such costs shall become a lien on the
owners’ properties until paid in full.
      (12)   Bonus Density Incentives. It is the intention of this subsection
to promote superior performance in the conservation of open space and natural
resources, creation of mixed use development, and the provision of public
services, including but not limited to, the dedication of public land and
construction of multi-use trails consistent with the Crane Creek Master Plan.
As such, the developer shall be entitled to additional density of use, in
addition to that otherwise allowed, as provided in the table that follows:
 
Site Feature*                           Authorized Bonus Density**
a. Multi-use trail is provided that is  One dwelling unit or 1,000 square feet
consistent with the Proposed            of commercial space per 100 yards of
Circulation Plan in the Crane Creek     trail.
Master Plan.
                                        One dwelling unit for each acre of
b. Preservation of Open Space above and dedicated open space that exceeds 10
beyond that which is required.          percent of gross acreage of tract that
                                        is not in a primary conservation area.
c. Dedication of land for public
facilities other than roads and         Additional four dwelling units or 5,000
required open spaces, such as a school, square feet of commercial space per
fire station, library, senior center,   acre of dedicated land.
park, or other use approved by the
Planning Commission.
* Developments qualifying for a multi-use trail density bonus under both a. and
b. shall only be awarded a bonus for trail space under either a. or b., but not
both.
** Maximum densities listed in Section
26-111(d)(5) shall apply.
 
   (e)   Permitted Uses and Permitted Uses with Special Requirements for the CC
Neighborhood District.
      (1)   General. The Table of Permitted Uses and Permitted Uses with
Special Requirements for the CC Neighborhood District that follows, contains a
listing of uses that may be permitted in one or more of the various sub-
districts. Uses are listed in ten (10) functional categories. The categories in
order of their listing are: residential uses; accessory uses and structures;
recreational uses; institutional, educational and civic uses; business,
professional and personal services; retail trade and food services; wholesale
trade; transportation, information, warehousing, waste management, and
utilities; manufacturing, mining, and industrial uses; and other uses. If a use
is not listed, then the use is NOT permitted.
      (2)   Symbols used. The districts in which a particular use is permitted
(with or without special requirements), are indicated by a “P” or “SR” in the
sub-district column(s) opposite the listed use.
      (3)   Meaning of symbols. The meaning of the symbols in the Table of
Permitted Uses, Permitted Uses with Special Requirements, and Special
Exceptions for the CC Neighborhood District are as follows:
         a.   P. Means the indicated use is permitted in the indicated sub-
district.
         b.   SR. Means the indicated use is permitted provided special
additional standards set forth in this Section are met. These standards are
contained in Section
26-111(e)(7).
      (4)   North American Industry Classification System (NAICS). The North
American Industry Classification System. United States Manual - 2002 Edition
(NAICS) was utilized in the preparation of the Table of Permitted Uses,
Permitted Uses with Special Requirements, and Special Exceptions for the CC
Neighborhood District. The listing of the numerical references (in the NAICS)
utilized is found in Appendix I. This listing and the 2002 NAICS manual shall
be consulted as a guide for the purpose of interpretation by the Zoning
Administrator when necessary. The NAICS number in the appendix refers to the
corresponding NAICS classification for that particular use. Listings with a
“000000” in the NAICS column do not correspond to any classification manual,
but rather are identified uses of local significance.
      (5)   Relationship to other laws. The listing of a use in the Table of
Permitted Uses and Permitted Uses with Special Requirements for the CC
Neighborhood District in no way relieves that use of having to meet all local,
state, and federal laws pertaining to the establishment and operation of that
use.
      (6)   Table of Permitted Uses and Permitted Uses with Special
Requirements for the CC Neighborhood District. See Table below:
TABLE OF PERMITTED USES AND PERMITTED USES WITH SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR THE CC
NEIGHBORHOOD DISTRICT
USE TYPES CC-1 CC-2 CC-3 CC-4
USE TYPES                                     CC-1 CC-2 CC-3 CC-4
Residential Uses
Accessory Dwellings                           P    P    P
Common Area Recreation and Service Facilities P    P    P
Continued Care Retirement Communities         P    P    P
Dwellings, Conventional or Modular
   Multi-Family, Not Otherwise Listed           P    P
   Single-Family, Detached                 P    P    P
   Single-Family, Zero Lot Line, Common    P    P    P
   Single-Family, Zero Lot Line, Parallel  P    P    P
   Two-Family                                   P    P
Group Homes (9 or Less)                       SR   SR   SR
Group Homes (10 or More)                                P
Rooming and Boarding Houses                        P    P
Accessory Uses and Structures
Accessory Uses and Structures (Customary)—  P    P    P
See Also Sec. 26-185
Home Occupations                              P    P    P
Swimming Pools                                P    P    P
Yard Sales                                    P    P    P
Recreational Uses
Athletic Fields                                    P    P
Batting Cages                                           P
Billiard Parlors                                        P
Bowling Centers                                         P
Clubs or Lodges                                         P
Country Clubs with Golf Courses               P    P    P
Dance Studios and Schools                          P    P
Golf Courses                                       SR   SR   SR
 
USE TYPES CC-1 CC-2 CC-3 CC-4
USE TYPES                                               CC-1 CC-2 CC-3 CC-4
Recreational Uses
Golf Courses, Miniature                                           P
Golf Driving Ranges (Freestanding)                                SR   SR
Martial Arts Instructional Schools                           P    P
Physical Fitness Centers                                     P    P
Public or Private Parks                                 SR   SR   SR   SR
Public Recreation Facilities                            SR   SR   SR   SR
Riding Stables                                                         P
Shooting Ranges, Indoor                                                P
Skating Rinks                                                P    P
Swim and Tennis Clubs                                        P    P
Swimming Pools                                               P    P
Institutional, Educational and Civic Uses
Ambulance Services, Emergency                                     P
Animal Shelters                                                        P
Auditoriums, Coliseums, Stadiums                                  P    P
Bus Shelters                                            SR   SR   SR   SR
Cemeteries, Mausoleums                                                 SR
Colleges and Universities                                         P
Community Food Services                                      P    P    P
Day Care, Adult, Home Occupation (5 or fewer)           SR   SR   SR
Day Care Centers, Adult                                      P    P
Day Care, Child, Family Day Care, Home Occupation (5 or SR   SR   SR
Fewer)
Day Care, Child, Licensed Center                             P    P
Fire Stations                                           P    P    P    P
Government Offices                                           P    P    P
Hospitals                                                         P    P
Individual and Family Services, Not Otherwise Listed              P
Libraries                                               P    P    P
Museums and Galleries                                             P
 
USE TYPES CC-1 CC-2 CC-3 CC-4
USE TYPES                                                 CC-1 CC-2 CC-3 CC-4
Institutional, Educational and Civic Uses
Nursing and Convalescent Homes                                 P    P
Places of Worship                                         SR   P    P
Police Stations, Neighborhood                             P    P    P    P
Post Offices                                                   P    P
Postal Service Processing & Distribution                                 P
Schools, Administrative Facilities                             P    P
Schools, Business, Computer and Management Training            P    P
Schools, Fine Arts Instruction                                 P    P
Schools, Junior Colleges                                            P
School, Including Public and Private, Having a Curriculum SR   P    P
Similar to Those Given in Public Schools)
Schools, Technical and Trade (Except Truck Driving)                 P
Schools, Truck Driving                                                   P
Zoos and Botanical Gardens                                SR   SR   SR   P
Business, Professional and Personal Services
Accounting, Tax Preparation, Bookkeeping, and Payroll          P    P
Services
Advertising, Public Relations, and Related Agencies            P    P
Automatic Teller Machines                                           P
Automobile Parking (Commercial)                                     P
Automobile Rental or Leasing                                        P
Automobile Towing, Not Including Storage                                 P
Automobile Towing, Including Storage Services                            P
Banks, Finance, and Insurance Offices                          P    P
Barber Shops, Beauty Salons, and Related Services              P    P
Bed and Breakfast Homes/Inns                                   P    P
Building Maintenance Services, Not Otherwise Listed                 P    P
Car and Light Truck Washes (See also Truck Washes)                  P    P
Carpet and Upholstery Cleaning Services                             P    P
Computer Systems Design and Related Services                   P    P    P
 
USE TYPES CC-1 CC-2 CC-3 CC-4
USE TYPES                                                 CC-1 CC-2 CC-3 CC-4
Business, Professional and Personal Services
Clothing Alterations/Repairs/ Footwear Repairs                 P    P
Construction, Building, General Contracting, with Outside                P
Storage
Construction, Building, General Contracting, without
Outside                                                                  P
Storage
Construction, Special Trades, with Outside Storage                       SR
Construction, Special Trades, without Outside Storage          P    P    P
Engineering, Architectural, and Related Services               P    P    P
Exterminating and Pest Control Services                                  P
Funeral Homes and Services                                     P    P
Furniture Repair Shops and Upholstery                          P    P    P
Hotels and Motels                                                   P
Janitorial Services                                                      P
Kennels                                                                  SR
Landscape and Horticultural Services                                     P
Laundromats, Coin Operated                                     P    P
Laundry and Dry Cleaning Services, Non-Coin Operated           P    P
Legal Services (Law Offices, Etc.)                             P    P
Linen and Uniform Supply                                            P    P
Locksmith Shops                                                P    P
Management, Scientific, and Technical Consulting Services      P    P
Massage Therapists                                                  P
Medical/Health Care Offices                                    P    P
Medical, Dental, or Related Laboratories                            P    P
Motion Picture Production/Sound Recording                                P
Office Administrative and Support Services, Not Otherwise      P    P    P
Listed
Packaging and Labeling Services                                P    P    P
Pet Care Services (Excluding Veterinary Offices and            SR   P
Kennels)
Photocopying and Duplicating Services                          P    P
Photofinishing Laboratories                                    P    P
Photography Studios                                            P    P
 
USE TYPES CC-1 CC-2 CC-3 CC-4
USE TYPES                                                  CC-1 CC-2 CC-3 CC-4
Business, Professional and Personal Services
Picture Framing Shops                                           P    P
Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services, Not
Otherwise                                                       P    P
Listed
Publishing Industries                                                     P
Real Estate and Leasing Offices                                 P    P
Rental Centers, with Outside Storage                                      P
Rental Centers, without Outside Storage                              P    P
Repair and Maintenance Services, Appliance and Electronics           SR   P
Repair and Maintenance Services, Automobile, Major                        P
Repair and Maintenance Services, Automobile, Minor                   P    P
Repair and Maintenance Services, Boat and Commercial                      P
Trucks, Large
Repair and Maintenance Services, Boat and Commercial                      P
Trucks, Small
Repair and Maintenance Services, Commercial and Industrial                P
Equipment
Repair and Maintenance Services, Home and Garden                     P    P
Equipment
Repair and Maintenance Services, Personal and Household              P    P
Goods
Repair and Maintenance Services, Television, Radio, or
Other                                                                P    P
Consumer Electronics
Research and Development Services                                    P    P
Security and Related Services                                             P
Septic Tank Services                                                      P
Tanning Salons                                                       P
Tattoo Facilities                                                    P
Taxidermists                                                              P
Theaters, Live Performances                                          P
Theaters, Motion Picture, Other Than Drive-Ins                       P
Tire Recapping                                                            P
Travel Agencies (without Tour Buses or Other Vehicles)          P    P
Truck (Medium and Heavy) Washes                                           P
 
USE TYPES CC-1 CC-2 CC-3 CC-4
USE TYPES                                                CC-1 CC-2 CC-3 CC-4
Business, Professional and Personal Services
Vending Machine Operators                                               P
Veterinary Services (Non-Livestock, May Include Totally
Enclosed Kennels Operated in Connection with Veterinary       SR   SR
Services)
Watch and Jewelry Repair Shops                                P    P
Weight Reducing Centers                                       P    P
Retail Trade and Food Services
Antique Stores (See Also Used Merchandise Shops and Pawn      P    P
Shops)
Appliance Stores                                                   P
Art Dealers                                                   P    P
Arts and Crafts Supply Stores                                 P    P
Auction Houses                                                     P    P
Automotive Parts and Accessories Stores                            P
Bakeries, Retail                                                   P
Bars and Other Drinking Places                                SR   SR
Bicycle Sales and Repair                                      P    P
Book, Periodical, and Music Stores                            P    P
Building Supply Sales with Outside Storage                              P
Building Supply Sales without Outside Storage                      P    P
Camera and Photographic Sales and Service                     P    P
Candle Shops                                                  P    P
Candy Stores (Confectionery, Nuts, Etc.)                      P    P
Caterers, No On-Site Consumption                              P    P
Clothing, Shoe, and Accessories Stores                        P    P
Coin, Stamp, or Similar Collectibles Shops                    P    P
Computer and Software Stores                                  P    P
Convenience Stores (with Gasoline Pumps)                           P    P
Convenience Stores (without Gasoline Pumps)                   P    P
Cosmetics, Beauty Supplies, and Perfume Stores                P    P
Department, Variety or General Merchandise Stores             P    P
 
USE TYPES CC-1 CC-2 CC-3 CC-4
USE TYPES                                                                    CC- CC- CC- CC-
                                                                             1   2   3   4
Retail Trade and Food Services
Direct Selling Establishments, Not Otherwise Listed                                  P   P
Drugstores, Pharmacies, with Drive-Thru                                              P
Drugstores, Pharmacies, without Drive-Thru                                       P   P
Electronic Shopping and Mail Order Houses                                                P
Fabric and Piece Goods Stores                                                    P   P
Flea Markets, Indoor                                                                     P
Floor Covering Stores                                                                P
Florists                                                                         P   P
Food Stores, Specialty, Not Otherwise Listed                                     P   P
Formal Wear and Costume Rental                                                   P   P
Fruit and Vegetable Markets                                                      P   P
Furniture and Home Furnishings                                                   P   P
Garden Centers, Farm Supplies, or Retail Nurseries                               P   P   P
Gift, Novelty, Souvenir, or Card Shops                                           P   P
Grocery/Food Stores (Not Including Convenience Stores)                           P   P
Hardware Stores                                                                  P   P
Health and Personal Care Stores, Not Otherwise Listed                            P   P
Hobby, Toy, and Game Stores                                                      P   P
Home Centers                                                                     P   P
Home Furnishing Stores, Not Otherwise Listed                                         P
Jewelry, Luggage, and Leather Goods (May Include Repair)                         P   P
Liquor Stores                                                                        P
Meat Markets                                                                     P   P
Miscellaneous Retail Sales—Where Not Listed Elsewhere, and Where All Sales         P
and Services are Conducted within an Enclosed Building
Musical Instrument and Supplies Stores (May Include Instrument Repair)           P   P
News Dealers and Newsstands                                                      P   P
Office Supplies and Stationery Stores                                            P   P
Optical Good Stores                                                              P   P
Outdoor Power Equipment Stores                                                           P
 
USE TYPES CC-1 CC-2 CC-3 CC-4
USE TYPES                                           CC-1 CC-2 CC-3 CC-4
Retail Trade and Food Services
Paint, Wallpaper, and Window Treatment Sales                  P
Pet and Pet Supplies Stores                              P    P
Record, Video Tape, and Disc Stores                      P    P
Restaurants, Cafeterias                                  P    P
Restaurants, Full Service (Dine-In Only)                 P    P
Restaurants, Limited Service (Delivery, Carry Out)       P    P
Restaurants, Limited Service (Drive-Thru)                     P
Restaurants, Snack and Nonalcoholic Beverage Stores           P
Service Stations, Gasoline                                    P    P
Sporting Goods Stores                                    P    P
Television, Radio or Electronic Sales                    P    P
Tire Sales                                                    P
Tobacco Stores                                           P    P
Truck Stops                                                        P
Video Tap and Disc Rental                                P    P
Warehouse Clubs and Superstores                               P
Wholesale Trade
Apparel, Piece Goods, and Notions                                  P
Beer/Wine/Distilled Alcoholic Beverages                            P
Books, Periodicals, and Newspapers                                 P
Chemicals and Allied Products                                      P
Drugs and Druggists’ Sundries                                    P
Durable Goods, Not Otherwise Listed                                P
Electrical Goods                                                   P
Farm Products, Raw Materials                                       P
Flowers, Nursery Stock, and Florist Supplies                       P
Furniture and Home Furnishings                                     P
Groceries and Related Products                                     P
Hardware                                                           P
Jewelry, Watches, Precious Stones                                  P
 
USE TYPES CC-1 CC-2 CC-3 CC-4
USE TYPES                                                   CC-1 CC-2 CC-3 CC-4
Wholesale Trade
Machinery, Equipment and Supplies                                          P
Market Showrooms (Furniture, Apparel, Etc.)                                P
Metal and Minerals                                                         P
Motor Vehicles                                                             P
Motor Vehicles, New Parts and Supplies                                     P
Motor Vehicles, Tires and Tubes                                            P
Motor Vehicles, Used Parts and Supplies                                    P
Nondurable Goods, Not Otherwise Listed                                     P
Paints and Varnishes                                                       P
Paper and Paper Products                                                   P
Plumbing & Heating Equipment and Supplies                                  P
Professional and Commercial Equipment and Supplies                         P
Sporting and Recreational Goods and Supplies (Except                  P    P
Sporting Firearms and Ammunition)
Sporting Firearms and Ammunition                                      P    P
Timber and Timber Products                                                 P
Tobacco and Tobacco Products                                               P
Toys and Hobby Goods and Supplies                                          P
Transportation, Information, Warehousing, Waste Management,
and Utilities
Antennas                                                    SR   SR   SR   SR
Bus Facilities, Urban                                                      P
Charter Bus Industry                                                       P
Courier Services, Central Facility                                         P
Courier Services, Substations                                              P
Limousine Services                                                         P
Power Generation, Natural Gas Plants, and Similar                          P
Production Facilities
Radio and Television Broadcasting Facilities (Except                       P
Towers)
Radio, Television, and Other Similar Transmitting Towers                   P
Remediation Services                                                       P
 
USE TYPES CC-1 CC-2 CC-3 CC-4
USE TYPES                                                 CC-1 CC-2 CC-3 CC-4
Wholesale Trade
Taxi Service Terminals                                                   P
Truck Transportation Facilities                                          P
Utility Company Offices                                                  P
Utility Lines and Related Appurtenances                   P    P    P    P
Utility Service Facilities (No Outside Storage)                          P
Utility Substations                                       SR   SR   SR   SR
Warehouses (General Storage, Enclosed, Not Including
Storage of Any Hazardous Materials or Waste as Determined                P
by Any Agency of the Federal, State or Local Government)
Warehouses, Self-Storage                                                 P
Waste Treatment and Disposal, Non-Hazardous                              P
Water Treatment Plants, Non-Governmental, Public                         P
Manufacturing, Mining, and Industrial Uses
Apparel                                                                  P
Bakeries, Manufacturing                                                  P
Beverage, Other Than Soft Drink and Water, and Tobacco                   P
Beverage, Soft Drink and Water                                           P
Cement and Concrete Products                                             P
Chemicals, Basic                                                         P
Chemical Products, Not Otherwise Listed                                  P
Clay Products                                                            P
Computer, Appliance, and Electronic Products                             P
Dairy Products                                                           P
Dolls, Toys, and Games                                                   P
Fabricated Metal Products                                                P
Food Manufacturing, Not Otherwise Listed                                 P
Furniture and Related Products                                           P
Glass and Glass Products                                                 P
Jewelry and Silverware                                                   P
Leather and Allied Products (No Tanning)                                 P
Leather and Hide Tanning and Finishing                                   P
 
USE TYPES CC-1 CC-2 CC-3 CC-4
USE TYPES                                         CC-1 CC-2 CC-3 CC-4
Manufacturing, Mining, and Industrial Uses
Lime and Gypsum Products                                         P
Machinery                                                        P
Manufacturing, Not Otherwise Listed                              P
Medical Equipment and Supplies                                   P
Office Supplies (Not Paper)                                      P
Painting, Coating, and Adhesives                                 P
Paper Products (Coating and Laminating)                          P
Paper Products (No Coating and Laminating)                       P
Petroleum and Coal Products Manufacturing                        P
Primary Metal Manufacturing                                      P
Printing and Publishing                                          P
Pulp, Paper, and Paperboard Mills                                P
Rubber and Plastic Products                                      P
Seafood Product Preparation and Packaging                        P
Signs                                                            P
Soap, Cleaning Compounds, and Toilet Preparations                P
Sporting and Athletic Goods                                      P
Textile Mills                                                    P
Textile Product Mills                                            P
Transportation Equipment                                         P
Other Uses
Buildings, High Rise, 4 or 5 Stories                        P    P
Buildings, High Rise, 6 or More Stories                          P
 
      (7)   Permitted sues with special requirements listed by zoning district.
         a.   Antennas - (All Districts)
         b.   Automobile Towing, including Storage Services - (CC-4)
         c.   Barber shops, beauty salons, and related services - (CC-1)
         d.   Bars and Other Drinking Places - (CC-2, CC-3)
         e.   Bus Shelters - (All Districts)
         f.   Cemeteries and Mausoleums - (CC-4)
         g.   Construction, Special Trades with Outside Storage - (CC-4)
         h.   Daycare, Adult, Home Occupation (5 or fewer) - (CC-1, CC-2, CC-3)
         i.   Daycare, Child, Family Daycare, Home Occupation (5 or fewer) -
(CC-1, CC-2, CC-3)
         j.   Golf Courses - (CC-2, CC-3, CC-4)
         k.   Golf Driving Ranges (Freestanding) - (CC-3, CC-4)
         l.   Group homes (nine persons or less) - (CC-1, CC-2, CC-3)
         m.   Kennels - (CC-4)
         n.   Pet Care Services (excluding veterinary office and kennels) -
(CC-2)
         o.   Places of Worship - (CC-1)
         p.   Public or Private Parks - (All Districts)
         q.   Public Recreation Facilities - (All Districts)
         r.   Repair and Maintenance Services, Appliance and Electronics - (CC-
3)
         s.   Schools, including Public and Private, having a curriculum
similar to those given in public schools) - (CC-1)
         t.   Utility Substations - (All Districts)
         u.   Veterinary Services (non-livestock, may include totally enclosed
kennels operated in connection with veterinary services) - (CC-2, CC-3)
         v.   Zoos and Botanical Gardens - (CC-1, CC-2, CC-3)
      (8)   Standards. The development standards listed herein are additional
to other requirements of this chapter. These development standards are use-
specific and apply to those uses designated with an “SR” in the Table of
Permitted Uses and Permitted Uses with Special Requirements for the CC
Neighborhood District [see Section
26-111(e)(6), above].
         a.   Antennas.
            1.   Use districts: All Districts.
            2.   In residential districts, no antenna shall be permitted
between the front of a principal structure and any adjacent public road. In the
case of corner lots, no antenna shall be permitted between the side of a
principal structure and the road. No dish type antenna more than eighteen (18)
inches in diameter shall be placed on the roof or other portion of a building
so as to be visible from any adjacent property.
            3.   In nonresidential districts, antennas may be placed at any
location that is not visible from any adjacent public road. Antennas may be
placed on top of a principal structure less than thirty (30) feet in height,
provided that screening is provided with materials compatible with the
principal structure at least equal in height to the antenna. Antennas may be
placed on top of a flat roofed structure that exceeds thirty (30) feet in
height. Antennas erected on any pitched roof structure, regardless of height of
the structure, must be screened with materials compatible with the principal
structure. The screening shall not be less than the height of the antenna. In
these districts, dish type antennas measuring less than three (3) feet in
diameter may be placed at any location on a principal structure, except for the
building facade or any road oriented side wall.
         b.   Automobile Towing, including Storage Services.
            1.   Use district: Crane Creek-4.
            2.   All outside storage shall be completely screened from adjacent
roads and residentially zoned or used properties.
         c.   Barber shops, beauty salons, and related services.
            1.   Use districts: Crane Creek-1.
            2.   No more than four (4) workstations are permitted.
            3.   Signage shall be limited to a single sign, not to exceed three
(3) square feet and not containing internal lighting. Such signage shall be
attached to the building.
         d.   Bars and Other Drinking Places.
            1.   Use districts: Crane Creek-2; Crane Creek-3.
            2.   Lots used for drinking places shall be located no closer than
four hundred (400) feet from any other lot used as a drinking place, and shall
be no closer than six hundred (600) feet to any lot which contains a school
(public or private) or a place of worship.
            3.   Bars and other drinking places shall provide adequate off-
street parking at a rate of twelve (12) spaces for each one thousand (1,000)
square feet of gross floor area.
            4.   Parking areas related to the establishment of a bar or other
drinking place shall be located no closer than thirty (30) feet to the property
line of residentially zoned or used property.
            5.   A minimum six (6) foot high opaque fence shall be erected
adjacent to the property line of abutting residentially zoned or used property.
         e.   Bus shelters.
            1.   Use districts: All Districts.
            2.   Any person wishing to erect and maintain a bus shelter shall
obtain a permit for each shelter from the Planning Department. Each permit
shall cost fifty ($50.00) dollars and shall be valid for one (1) year. The
permit may be renewed upon payment of the fifty ($50.00) dollar renewal fee.
            3.   A shelters may only be located at a designated bus stop that
is presently being served by a public transit authority, and only one (1) bus
shelter shall be allowed per bus stop location.
            4.   If the shelter is proposed to be located within a SCDOT right-
of-way, the location of the shelter must be approved by SCDOT prior to
obtaining a permit from the Richland County Planning Department.
            5.   Design plans for the bus shelter shall be submitted for review
and a building permit obtained. The bus shelter must be built to the current
and future editions of the International Building Code for commercial
structures, except that plumbing and mechanical elements are not required, and
the bus shelter must be able to withstand sustained three (3) second wind gusts
of up to 95 MPH. All normal review and permit fees apply, along with normal
inspections.
            6.   The shelter shall be designed so that it will present an
attractive appearance and not detract from the adjacent surroundings. It shall
be illuminated and provide protection from weather elements. The shelter design
shall include the following:
               [a]   Each shelter shall consist of an aluminum or steel
framework suitable for supporting transparent wall panels and opaque roof
panels. The shelter must have a rear wall section, two (2) side panels, and a
roof. The transparent wall section must be of tempered glass.
               [b]   At a minimum, each shelter must have a six (6) foot bench,
a bus route and schedule holder, a trash receptacle, and be illuminated during
hours of darkness. The shelter must be installed on and attached to a concrete
foundation.
               [c]   Each bus shelter must be erected in accordance with ADA
specifications and requirements. The permittee is responsible to meet the ADA
standards and any complaints of nonconformance must be rectified by permittee
at his/her expense within thirty (30) days of notification by the Planning
department. Under this subsection, ADA compliance includes, but is not limited
to, sidewalk on ramps, tactile warnings, and signage or directional arrows
indicating handicap accessibility.
               [d]   Advertising on the shelter shall be limited to the outward
side of the side wall panels, and may provide a lighting source contained
within the panel cabinet. Only two (2) advertisements will be allowed per
shelter, and each advertisement will be limited to a maximum poster dimension
of 4' wide by 6' high.
               [e]   The general dimensions of a typical shelter will be at a
minimum 9' long by 6' wide by 8' high.
            7.   The route number shall be displayed prominently on the bus
shelter.
            8.   Each bus shelter shall make available printed bus schedules,
and shall display a large regional map that includes the bus route.
            9.   Bus shelters shall be maintained in good repair and the person
whose name is on the permit application shall be responsible for the cleaning,
repairing or replacement of any part thereof, including advertising materials,
sidewalks, walkways, curbs or foundations encompassed by the bus shelter. Such
work as is necessary to relocate, alter or maintain the bus shelter will be
done in such a manner that it will not in any way interfere with or endanger
the safety of the general public in their use of the roads.
         f.   Cemeteries and Mausoleums.
            1.   Use districts: Crane Creek-4.
            2.   A minimum of three (3) contiguous acres shall be required to
establish a cemetery or a mausoleum not located on the same tract of land as a
place of worship.
            3.   Primary access to the facility shall be from a collector or
thoroughfare road.
         g.   Construction, building, general contracting, without outside
storage.
            1.   Use districts: Crane Creek-4.
            2.   All outside storage shall be completely screened from adjacent
roads and residentially zoned or used properties.
         h.   Daycare, Adult, Home Occupations (5 or fewer).
            1.   Use districts: Crane Creek-1; Crane Creek-2; Crane Creek-3.
            2.   An adult day care, home occupation, with five (5) or fewer
attendees must be operated in an occupied residence.
            3.   Client pick-up and drop-off shall not obstruct traffic flow on
adjacent public roads.
            4.   All other state and federal regulations shall be met.
         i.   Daycare, Child, Family Daycare, Home Occupations (5 or fewer).
            1.   Use districts: Crane Creek-1; Crane Creek-2; Crane Creek-3.
            2.   A child family day care home occupation must be operated in an
occupied residence.
            3.   Any outdoor play area shall be fenced or otherwise enclosed on
all sides and shall not include driveways, parking areas, or land otherwise
unsuited for children’s play space.
            4.   Client pick-up and drop-off shall not obstruct traffic flow on
adjacent public roads.
            5.   All other state and federal regulations shall be met.
         j.   Golf Courses.
            1.   Use districts: Crane Creek-2; Crane Creek-3; Crane Creek-4.
            2.   There shall be a minimum fifty (50) foot setback between
clubhouses or other non-course facilities and adjacent residentially zoned or
used property.
         k.   Golf Driving Ranges (Freestanding).
            1.   Use districts: Crane Creek-2; Crane Creek-3.
            2.   Fencing, netting, or other control measures shall be provided
around the perimeter of the driving area to prevent balls from leaving the
property.
            3.   No equipment, machinery, or mechanical device of any kind
shall be operated within two hundred (200) feet of any residentially zoned or
used property.
            4.   Operations shall not begin before 9:00 a.m. nor continue after
10:00 p.m.
         l.   Group homes (nine persons or less).
            1.   Use districts: Crane Creek-1; Crane Creek-2; Crane Creek-3.
            2.   Location approval is subject to Section
6-29-770 of the South Carolina Code of Laws, as amended.
         m.   Kennels.
            1.   Use district: Crane Creek-4.
            2.   Any building (which is part of a kennel) housing animals shall
be located a minimum of one hundred and fifty (150) feet from any residentially
zoned or used property.
            3.   Fenced outdoor runs are allowed for use only during the hours
of 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.; however, no animal may be kept in the run for
boarding purposes, and pens for the animals must be located indoors. Feeding of
animals must be conducted indoors and is prohibited in the runs.
            4.   All animal refuse and food must be kept in airtight containers
and disposed of on a regular basis. Animal wastes shall not be stored any
closer than fifty (50) feet from any property line or surface waters.
         n.   Pet Care Sen-ices (excluding veterinary office and kennels).
            1.   Use districts: Crane Creek-2.
            2.   All pet care services shall be conducted inside an enclosed
structure.
         o.   Places of Worship.
            1.   Use district: Crane Creek-1.
            2.   Facilities for a place of worship located on a site of three
(3) acres or more shall have primary access to the facility from a collector of
thoroughfare road.
            3.   No parking space or drive shall be located closer than twenty
(20) feet to a residence not associated with the place of worship. No parking
area may be located in the front setback.
            4.   The front setback shall be the same as permitted in the
respective district, but shall not be less than the lesser setback of any
existing homes on adjacent lots. The side and rear setbacks shall be thirty
(30) feet.
         p.   Public or private parks.
            1.   Use districts: All Districts.
            2.   Overflow parking shall be designated on the site plan and
shall be kept available to handle all traffic from special events.
            3.   All parks greater than ten (10) acres shall have primary
access to a collector or thoroughfare road.
         q.   Public recreation facilities.
            1.   Use districts: All Districts.
            2.   Overflow parking shall be designated on the site plan and
shall be kept available to handle all traffic from special events.
            3.   All recreation facilities greater than ten (10) acres shall
have primary access to a collector or thoroughfare road.
            4.   Lights shall be positioned and shielded so as not to shine
onto adjacent properties.
            5.   Loud speaker systems shall not be operated before 8:00 a.m. or
after 10:00 p.m.
         r.   Repair and maintenance service, appliance and electronics.
            1.   Use districts: Crane Creek-3.
            2.   No outside storage of appliances, equipment, or parts shall be
permitted.
         s.   Schools, including public and private schools, having a
curriculum similar to those given in public schools.
            1.   Use districts: Crane Creek-1.
            2.   The minimum lot size for a school shall be two (2) acres.
            3.   Parking and active recreation areas shall not be located
within any required setback.
            4.   Primary access shall be provided from a collector or a
thoroughfare road.
         t.   Utility substations.
            1.   Use districts: All Districts.
            2.   All buildings shall observe accessory building setbacks.
Transformer stations shall observe the principal building setback regulations.
            3.   Equipment that produces noise or sound in excess of seventy
(70) decibels shall be located no closer than one hundred (100) feet to the
nearest residence.
            4.   Transformer stations shall be screened from adjacent
properties and from roads with a vegetative screen that, at a minimum, meets
the standards listed in Section
26-176(h).
         u.   Veterinary services (non-livestock, may include a totally
enclosed kennel operated in connection with veterinary services).
            1.   Use districts: Crane Creek-2; Crane Creek-3.
            2.   Veterinary services shall not include provisions for kennels
or boarding of animals not undergoing treatment.
            3.   All buildings used in the operation shall be soundproofed and
air-conditioned.
            4.   Outside activity shall be limited to six (6) hours per day or
fewer.
            5.   Where the lot is adjacent to a residential zoning district or
residential use, a side yard of not less than ten (10) feet shall be
maintained.
            6.   All animal refuse and food must be kept in airtight containers
and disposed of on a regular basis.
         v.   Zoos and Botanical Gardens.
            1.   Use districts: Crane Creek-1; Crane Creek-2; Crane Creek-3.
            2.   There shall be a minimum one hundred (100) foot setback
between all activities associated with the use and any adjacent residential
property.
            3.   All zoos and botanical gardens shall have primary access to
collector or thoroughfare roads.
(Ord. No. 018-10HR, § III, 5-4-10)
Secs. 26-112 - 26-130. Reserved.
Sec. 26-131. Table of Area, Yard, and Height Requirements.
   (a)   General. The Table of Area, Yard, and Height Requirements, found in
this section contains a listing of the principal development standards for the
general use zoning districts. Standards are listed for minimum lot area,
minimum lot width, structure size, setback, and height. Reference should be
made to the specific use district regulations found in Sections
26-84 through
26-101 of this chapter for the complete listings of applicable development
standards for each district. Standards for the PDD, TC, RD, CRD, DBWP, and CC
districts are not listed in this table since developments in these districts
are regulated primarily through the development review
process. Development within overlay districts, unless otherwise specified,
generally adheres to the requirements for the underlying general use zoning
district.
   (b)   Table of area, yard, and height requirements. The table (Table 26-V-1)
below lists the general dimensional and area requirements for the zoning
districts set forth in this article. See also the subsections for each district
for additional detailed dimensional and area requirements.
TABLE 26-V-1
TABLE OF AREA, YARD, AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS
         MINIMUM LOT                                    PRINCIPAL  MAXIMUM
DISTRICT AREA (Square MAXIMUM MINIMUM LOT  MAXIMUM LOT  SETBACK    HEIGHT
         Feet Each)   DENSITY WIDTH (Feet) COVERAGE/GFA STANDARDS  (Feet)
                                                        (Feet)
         MINIMUM LOT            MINIMUM  MAXIMUM                       MAXIMUM
DISTRICT AREA (Square  MAXIMUM  LOT      LOT       PRINCIPAL SETBACK   HEIGHT
         Feet Each)    DENSITY  WIDTH    COVERAGE/ STANDARDS (Feet)    (Feet)
                                (Feet)   GFA
         First   Add .                             Front Side     Rear
         Unit    Unit
TROS     None    Non e None     None     None      25    20       20   45
RU       33,00 0 NA    1/Lot    120      None      40    20       50   45
RR       33,00 0 NA    1/Lot    120      None      40    20       50   45
RS-E     20,00 0 NA    1/Lot    100      None      35    10       30   45
RS-LD    12,00 0 NA    1/Lot    75       None      25    See Sec. 20   45
                                                         26-89
RS-MD    8,500   NA    1/Lot    60       None      25    See Sec. 20   45
                                                         26-90
RS-HD    5,000   NA    1/Lot    50       None      25    See Sec. 20   45
                                                         26-91
MH       7,260   NA    6 Units/ 60       None      25    8        20   35
                       Acr e
RM-MD    NA      NA    8 Units/ 50       None      25    7        20   45
                       Acr e
                       16                                              See Sec.
RM-HD    NA      NA    Units/   50       None      25    7        20   26-94
                       Acr e
                       16       See Sec.                               See Sec.
OI       NA      NA    Units/   26-95    None      25    7        20   26-95
                       Acr e
NC       NA      NA    8 Units/ None     See Sec.  25    None     10   See Sec.
                       Acr e             26-96                         26-96
RC       22,00 0 NA    NA       50       See Sec.  25    None     20   45
                                         26-97
 
 
         MINIMUM LOT            MINIMUM    MAXIMUM                     MAXIMUM
DISTRICT AREA (Square MAXIMUM   LOT WIDTH  LOT       PRINCIPAL SETBACK HEIGHT
         Feet Each)   DENSITY   (Feet)     COVERAGE/ STANDARDS (Feet)  (Feet)
                                           GFA
         First Add .                                 Fro nt Side  Rear
         Unit  Unit
GC       NA    NA     16 Units/ None       None      25     Non e 10   See Sec.
                      Acr e                                            26-98
M-1      None  Non e  None      None       None      25     Non e 10   None
LI       None  Non e  None      None       None      25     Non e 10   None
HI       None  Non e  None      None       None      25     Non e 10   None
 
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 043-07HR, § XXX, 5-1-07; Ord. No.
009-12HR, § I, 2-21-12)
Secs. 26-132 - 26-140. Reserved.
Sec. 26-141. Table of Permitted Uses, Permitted Uses with Special Requirements,
and Special Exceptions.
   (a)   General. The Table of Permitted Uses, Permitted Uses with Special
Requirements, and Special Exceptions that follows, contains a listing of uses
that may be permitted in one or more of the various zoning districts
established by this article. Uses are listed in alphabetical order in eleven
functional categories. The categories in order of their listing are:
agricultural uses; residential uses; accessory uses and structures;
recreational uses; institutional, educational and civic uses; business,
professional and personal services; retail trade and food services; wholesale
trade; transportation, information, warehousing, waste management, and
utilities; manufacturing, mining, and industrial uses; and, other uses.
   (b)   Symbols used. The districts in which a particular use is permitted
(with or without special requirements), are indicated by a "P", "SR", or "SE"
in the district column(s) opposite the listed use. Blank spaces in the district
column under any proposed use indicates that the use is NOT permitted in that
particular zoning district.
   (c)   Meaning of symbols. The meaning of the symbols in the Table of
Permitted Uses, Permitted Uses with Special Requirements, and Special
Exceptions are as follows:
      (1)   P. Means the indicated use is permitted in the indicated district.
      (2)   SR. Means the indicated use is permitted provided special
additional standards set forth in this chapter are met. These standards are
contained in Article VI., Supplemental Use Standards.
      (3)   SE. Means the indicated use is permitted in the indicated district,
subject to approval of a special exception by the board of zoning appeals
(Section
26-56 of this chapter). Minimum conditions that must be met in order for the
board to grant a special exception are listed in Article VI., Supplemental Use
Standards.
   (d)   North American Industry Classification System (NAICS). The North
American Industry Classification System, United States Manual - 2002 Edition
(NAICS) was utilized in the preparation of the Table of Permitted Uses,
Permitted Uses with Special Requirements, and Special Exceptions. The listing
of the numerical references (in the NAICS) utilized is  found in Appendix I.
This listing and the 2002 NAICS manual shall be consulted as a guide for the
purpose of interpretation by the zoning administrator when necessary. The NAICS
number in the appendix refers to the corresponding NAICS classification for
that particular use. Listings with a "000000" in the NAICS column do not
correspond to any classification manual, but rather are identified uses of
local significance.
   (e)   Relationship to other laws. The listing of a use in the Table of
Permitted Uses, Permitted Uses with Special Requirements, and Special
Exceptions in no way relieves that use of having to meet all local, state, and
federal laws pertaining to the establishment and operation of that use.
   (f)   Table of Permitted Uses, Permitted Uses with Special Requirements, and
Special Exceptions. See Table 26-V-2.
To view this table in a printer-friendly, PDF layout, please click HERE
TABLE 26-V-2
TABLE OF PERMITTED USES, PERMITTED USES WITH SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS, AND SPECIAL
EXCEPTIONS
 
USE   TROS RU RR RS-E RS- RS- MD RS- HD MH RM- MD RM- HD OI NC RC GC M- 1 LI HI
TYPES                 LD
USE TYPES                           TROS RU RR RS- RS- RS- RS- MH RM- RM- OI NC RC GC M- LI HI
                                               E   LD  MD  HD     MD  HD              1
Agricultural Uses
Animal Production                        P                                            P
Animal Production Support Services       P                                            P
Crop Production                          P                                            P
Crop Production Support Services         P                                            P  P  P
Fish Hatcheries                          P                                            P
Forestry                                 P                                            P
Forestry Support Services                P                                            P  P  P
Poultry Farms                            SR                                           P
Produce Stands                           SR                                           P
Swine Farms                                                                           P
Veterinary Services (Livestock)          P                                            P
 
Residential Uses
Accessory Dwellings                      SR SR SR  SR  SR  SR     P   P               SR
Common Area Recreation and Service       P  P  P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P  P  P  P
Facilities
Continued Care Retirement                SE SE                    SR  SR  SR    SR SR
Communities
Dormitories                                                           P   SE       SE
Dwellings, Conventional or Modular
   Duets                                                       SR  SR
   Multi-Family, Not Otherwise                                 P   P   P        P
Listed
   Single-Family, Detached            P  P  P   P   P   P   P  P   P
   Single-Family, Zero Lot Line,                    SE  SE     SR  SR  SR       SR
Common
   Single-Family, Zero Lot Line,            SR  SR  SR  SR     SR  SR  SR
Parallel
   Townhouses                                                  SR  SR
   Two-Family                                                  P   P
Dwellings, Manufactured Homes on         SR SR SR              SR                     SE
Individual Lots
Fraternity and Sorority Houses                                    P   P   P        P
Group Homes (9 or Less)                  SR SR SR  SR  SR  SR  SR SR  SR
Group Homes (10 to 15)                   SR                           SE  SE SE SE SE
Manufactured Home Parks                                        SR
Rooming and Boarding Houses                                           SE  SE SE SE P
Special Congregate Facilities                                             SE       SE
 
Accessory Uses and Structures
Accessory Uses and Structures
(Customary) - See Also Sec.              P  P  P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P
26-185
Home Occupations                         SR SR SR  SR  SR  SR  SR SR  SR  SR SR SR SR
Swimming Pools                           SR SR SR  SR  SR  SR  SR SR  SR  SR SR SR SR
Yard Sales                               SR SR SR  SR  SR  SR  SR SR  SR  SR SR SR SR
 
Recreational Uses
Amusement or Water Parks,                                                          SR SR SR
Fairgrounds
Amusement Arcades                                                            P  P  P  P
Athletic Fields                     SR   SE SE SE  SE  SE  SE  SE SE  SE  P  SR SR P  P
Batting Cages                                                                      SR SR SR
Billiard Parlors                                                                   P  P
Bowling Centers                                                                    P  P
Clubs or Lodges                          SE                               P  P  P  P  P
Country Clubs with Golf Courses     SR   SR SE SE  SE  SE  SE  SE SE  SE           SR SR SR
Dance Studios and Schools                                                 P  P  P  P  P
Go-Cart, Motorcycle and Similar                                                    SR P     P
Small Vehicle Tracks
Golf Courses                        SR   SR SE SE  SE  SE  SE  SE SE  SE           SR SR SR
Golf Courses, Miniature                                                         P  P  P  P
Golf Driving Ranges (Freestanding)  SR                                          SR SR SR SR
Hunt Clubs                               P
Marinas and Boat Ramps                                                             P  P
Martial Arts Instructional Schools                                        P  P  P  P  P
Physical Fitness Centers                                                  P  P  P  P  P  P
Public or Private Parks             SR   SR SR SR  SR  SR  SR  SR SR  SR  SR SR SR SR SR SR SR
Public Recreation Facilities        SR   SR SR SR  SR  SR  SR  SR SR  SR  SR SR SR SR SR SR SR
Racetracks and Drag Strips                                                                  SE
Riding Stables                      P    P                                            P
Shooting Ranges, Indoor                                                            P  P  P  P
Shooting Ranges, Outdoor                 SE                                                 SE
Skating Rinks                                                                      P  P
Swim and Tennis Clubs               SR   SE SE SE  SE  SE  SE  SE SE  SE  SE SE SE P  P  SE
Swimming Pools                      SR   SR SR SR  SR  SR  SR  SR SR  SR  SR SR SR SR
 
Institutional, Educational and
Civic Uses
Ambulance Services, Emergency            P  P  P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P
Ambulance Services, Transport                                             P     P  P  P  P
Animal Shelters                                                                    SR SR SR
Auditoriums, Coliseums, Stadiums                                          P        P  P  P
Bus Shelters/Bus Benches            SR   SR SR SR  SR  SR  SR  SR SR  SR  SR SR SR SR SR SR SR
Cemeteries, Mausoleums                   SR                               SR SR SR SR SR SR SR
Colleges and Universities                                                 P     P  P
Community Food Services                                                   P  P  P  P  P  P
Correctional Institutions                SE                                           P  SE SE
Courts                                                                    P  P  P  P
Day Care, Adult, Home Occupation (5      SR SR SR  SR  SR  SR  SR SR  SR  SR       SR
or Fewer)
Day Care Centers, Adult                  SR                               SR SR SR SR SR
Day Care, Child, Family Day Care,        SR SR SR  SR  SR  SR  SR SR  SR  SR       SR
Home Occupation (5 or Fewer)
Day Care Centers, Child, Licensed        SR                               SR SR SR SR SR
Center
Fire Stations                            P  P  P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P
Government Offices                                                        P  P  P  P  P  P
Hospitals                                                                 P     P  P
Individual and Family Services, Not                                       P  P  P  P  P
Otherwise Listed
Libraries                                SR SR SR  SR  SR  SR  SR SR  SR  P  P  P  P  P
Museums and Galleries                                                     P  P  P  P  P
Nursing and Convalescent Homes           SE SE                    P   P   P  P  P  P
Orphanages                               SE SE                    SE  SE  P  P  P
Places of Worship                        SR SR SE  SE  SE  SE  SE SR  SR  P  P  SR P  P  P  P
Police Stations, Neighborhood            P  P  P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P
Post Offices                                                              P  P  P  P  P  P  P
Postal Service Processing &                                                        P  P  P
Distribution
Schools, Administrative Facilities                                        P  P  P  P  P  P
Schools, Business, Computer and                                           P  P  P  P  P  P
Management Training
Schools, Fine Arts Instruction                                            P  P  P  P  P  P
Schools, Junior Colleges                                                  P  P  P  P  P  P
Schools, Including Public and
Private, Having a Curriculum             SR SR SR  SR  SR  SR  SR SR  SR  P  P  P  P
Similar to Those Given in Public
Schools)
Schools, Technical and Trade                                              P  P  P  P  P  P
(Except Truck Driving)
Schools, Truck Driving                                                             P  P  P  P
Zoos and Botanical Gardens               SE                               SE    SE SR SR
 
Business, Professional and Personal
Services
Accounting, Tax Preparation,                                              P  P  P  P  P  P
Bookkeeping, and Payroll Services
Advertising, Public Relations, and                                        P  P  P  P  P
Related Agencies
Automatic Teller Machines                                                 P  P  P  P  P  P  P
Automobile Parking (Commercial)                                           P  P  P  P  P  P  P
Automobile Rental or Leasing                                                       P  P  P  P
Automobile Towing, Not Including                                                P  P  P  P  P
Storage
Automobile Towing, Including                                                          P  P  P
Storage Services
Banks, Finance, and Insurance                                             P  SR SR P  P  P
Offices
Barber Shops, Beauty Salons, and         SR                       SR  SR  P  P  P  P  P  P
Related Services
Bed and Breakfast Homes/Inns             SR SR                    SR  SR  SR SR SR SR
Building Maintenance Services, Not                                                 P  P  P  P
Otherwise Listed
Car and Light Truck Washes (See                                                 SR P  P  P  P
also Truck Washes)
Carpet and Upholstery Cleaning                                                     P  P  P  P
Services
Clothing Alterations/Repairs;                                             P  P  P  P  P
Footwear Repairs
Computer Systems Design and Related                                       P  P  P  P  P  P  P
Services
Construction, Building, General                                                       SR SR P
Contracting, with Outside Storage
Construction, Building, General
Contracting, without Outside                                              P  P  P  P  P  P  P
Storage
Construction, Heavy, with Outside                                                     SR SR P
Storage
Construction, Heavy, without                                                          P  P  P
Outside Storage
Construction, Special Trades, with                                                    SR SR P
Outside Storage
Construction, Special Trades,                                             P  P  P  P  P  P  P
without Outside Storage
Employment Services                                                       P  P  P  P  P  P
Engineering, Architectural, and                                           P  P  P  P  P  P
Related Services
Exterminating and Pest Control                                                  P  P  P  P
Services
Funeral Homes and Services                                                P  P  P  P  P  P
Furniture Repair Shops and                                                      P  P  P  P  P
Upholstery
Hotels and Motels                                                               P  P  P  P
Janitorial Services                                                             P  P  P  P  P
Kennels                                  SR                               SR    SR SR SR SR
Landscape and Horticultural              P                                         P  P  P
Services
Laundromats, Coin Operated                                                   P  P  P  P  P
Laundry and Dry Cleaning Services,                                        P  P  P  P  P  P  P
Non-Coin Operated
Legal Services (Law Offices, Etc.)                                        P  P  P  P  P
Linen and Uniform Supply                                                           P  P  P  P
Locksmith Shops                                                              P  P  P  P
Management, Scientific, and                                               P  P  P  P  P  P
Technical Consulting Services
Massage Therapists                                                        P  P  P  P  P
Medical/Health Care Offices                                               P  P  P  P  P
Medical, Dental, or Related                                               P  P  P  P  P  P
Laboratories
Motion Picture Production/Sound                                                    P  P  P
Recording
Office Administrative and Support                                         P  P  P  P  P  P
Services, Not Otherwise Listed
Packaging and Labeling Services                                           P  P  P  P  P  P  P
Pet Care Services (Excluding                                              P  SR SR P  P  P
Veterinary Offices and Kennels)
Photocopying and Duplicating                                              P  P  P  P  P  P  P
Services
Photofinishing Laboratories                                               P  P  P  P  P  P  P
Photography Studios                                                       P  P  P  P  P
Picture Framing Shops                                                     P  P  P  P  P
Professional, Scientific, and
Technical Services, Not Otherwise                                         P  P  P  P  P  P
Listed
Publishing Industries                                                              P  P  P  P
Real Estate and Leasing Offices                                           P  P  P  P  P
Recreational Vehicle Parks and           SR
Recreation Camps
Rental Centers, with Outside                                                       SR P  P  P
Storage
Rental Centers, without Outside                                                 P  P  P  P  P
Storage
Repair and Maintenance Services,                                                SR SR SR SR P
Appliance and Electronics
Repair and Maintenance Services,                                                      P  P  P
Automobile, Major
Repair and Maintenance Services,                                                P  P  P  P  P
Automobile, Minor
Repair and Maintenance Services,                                                      P     P
Boat and Commercial Trucks, Large
Repair and Maintenance Services,                                                      P  P  P
Boat and Commercial Trucks, Small
Repair and Maintenance Services,                                                      P  P  P
Commercial and Industrial Equipment
Repair and Maintenance Services,                                                   P  P  P
Home and Garden Equipment
Repair and Maintenance Services,                                             P  P  P  P  P
Personal and Household Goods
Repair and Maintenance Services,
Television, Radio, or Other                                                  P  P  P  P  P
Consumer Electronics
Research and Development Services                                         SR       P  P  P  P
Security and Related Services                                                      P  P  P
Septic Tank Services                                                            P     P     P
Tanning Salons                                                               P  P  P  P
Tattoo Facilities                                                                  P
Taxidermists                                                                    P  P  P  P
Theaters, Live Performances                                                        P  P
Theaters, Motion Picture, Drive-Ins                                             SE SE P  SE
Theaters, Motion Picture, Other                                              SE P  P  P  P
Than Drive-Ins
Tire Recapping                                                                        P     P
Travel Agencies (without Tour Buses                                       P  P  P  P  P
or Other Vehicles)
Traveler Accommodations, Not                                                    P  P  P
Otherwise Listed
Truck (Medium and Heavy) Washes                                                    P  P  P  P
Vending Machine Operators                                                             P  P  P
Veterinary Services (Non-Livestock,
May Include Totally Enclosed                                              SR SR P  P  P  P
Kennels Operated in Connection with
Veterinary Services)
Watch and Jewelry Repair Shops                                            P  P  P  P  P
Weight Reducing Centers                                                   P  P  P  P  P
 
Retail Trade and Food Services
Antique Stores (See Also Used                                             P  P  P  P  P
Merchandise Shops and Pawn Shops)
Appliance Stores                                                                   P  P
Art Dealers                                                               P  P  P  P  P
Arts and Crafts Supply Stores                                                P  P  P  P
Auction Houses                                                                  P  P  P  P
Automotive Parts and Accessories                                                P  P  P  P
Stores
Bakeries, Retail                                                             P  P  P  P  P
Bars and Other Drinking Places                                            SE SE SR SR SR SR
Bicycle Sales and Repair                                                     P  P  P  P  P
Boat and RV Dealers, New and Used                                                  P  P  P
Book, Periodical, and Music Stores                                        P  P  P  P  P
Building Supply Sales with Outside                                              P  P  P  P  P
Storage
Building Supply Sales without                                                   P  P  P  P  P
Outside Storage
Camera and Photographic Sales and                                            P  P  P  P
Service
Candle Shops                                                                 P  P  P  P
Candy Stores (Confectionery, Nuts,                                           P  P  P  P
Etc.)
Caterers, No On Site Consumption                                          P  P  P  P  P  P
Cigar Bars                                                                   SR    SR SR SR
Clothing, Shoe, and Accessories                                              P  P  P  P
Stores
Coin, Stamp, or Similar                                                      P  P  P  P
Collectibles Shops
Computer and Software Stores                                                 P  P  P  P
Convenience Stores (with Gasoline                                            P  P  P  P  P  P
Pumps)
Convenience Stores (without                                                  P  P  P  P  P  P
Gasoline Pumps)
Cosmetics, Beauty Supplies, and                                              P  P  P  P
Perfume Stores
Department, Variety or General                                               P  P  P  P
Merchandise Stores
Direct Selling Establishments, Not                                                 P  P  P
Otherwise Listed
Drugstores, Pharmacies, with Drive-                                       P     P  P  P  P
Thru
Drugstores, Pharmacies, without                                           P  P  P  P  P  P
Drive-Thru
Electronic Shopping and Mail Order                                                 P  P  P  P
Houses
Fabric and Piece Goods Stores                                                P  P  P  P
Flea Markets, Indoor                                                            P  P  P  P
Flea Markets, Outdoor                                                           P  P  P  P
Floor Covering Stores                                                           P  P  P
Florists                                                                     P  P  P  P
Food Service Contractors                                                     P  P  P  P
Food Stores, Specialty, Not                                                  P  P  P  P
Otherwise Listed
Formal Wear and Costume Rental                                               P  P  P  P
Fruit and Vegetable Markets                                                  P  P  P  P  P
Fuel Sales (Non-Automotive)                                                           SR    SR
Furniture and Home Furnishings                                                  P  P  P
Garden Centers, Farm Supplies, or                                            P  P  P  P
Retail Nurseries
Gift, Novelty, Souvenir, or Card                                             P  P  P  P
Shops
Grocery/Food Stores (Not Including                                           P  P  P  P
Convenience Stores)
Hardware Stores                                                              P  P  P  P
Health and Personal Care Stores,                                             P  P  P  P
Not Otherwise Listed
Hobby, Toy, and Game Stores                                                  P  P  P  P
Home Centers                                                                       P  P
Home Furnishing Stores, Not                                                  P  P  P  P
Otherwise Listed
Jewelry, Luggage, and Leather Goods                                          P  P  P  P
(May Include Repair)
Liquor Stores                                                                P  P  P  P
Manufactured Home Sales                                                            SR SR SR
Meat Markets                                                                 P  P  P  P
Miscellaneous Retail Sales - Where
Not Listed Elsewhere, and Where All                                          P  P  P  P
Sales and Services are Conducted
within an Enclosed Building
Motor Vehicle Sales - Car and Truck                                             P  P  P  P
- New and Used
Motorcycle Dealers, New and Used                                                P  P  P  P
Musical Instrument and Supplies
Stores (May Include Instrument                                               P  P  P  P
Repair)
News Dealers and Newsstands                                                  P  P  P  P
Office Supplies and Stationery                                            P  P  P  P  P
Stores
Optical Goods Stores                                                      P  P  P  P  P
Outdoor Power Equipment Stores                                                  P  P  P
Paint, Wallpaper, and Window                                                 P  P  P  P
Treatment Sales
Pawnshops                                                                          P  P
Pet and Pet Supplies Stores                                                  P  P  P  P
Record, Video Tape, and Disc Stores                                          P  P  P  P
Restaurants, Cafeterias                                                   SR SR SR SR SR SR
Restaurants, Full Service (Dine-In                                        SR SR SR SR SR SR
Only)
Restaurants, Limited Service (Dine-                                       SR SR SR SR SR SR
in)
Restaurants, Limited Service                                              P  P  P  P  P  P
(Delivery, Carry Out Only)
Restaurants, Limited Service                                                    P  P  P  P
(Drive-Thru)
Restaurants, Snack and Nonalcoholic                                       P  P  P  P  P  P
Beverage Stores
Service Stations, Gasoline                                                      P  P  P  P
Sporting Goods Stores                                                        P  P  P  P
Television, Radio or Electronic                                                 P  P  P
Sales
Tire Sales                                                                      P  P  P
Tobacco Stores                                                               P  P  P  P
Truck Stops                                                                        P  P  P  P
Used Merchandise Stores                                                      P  P  P  P
Video Tape and Disc Rental                                                   P  P  P  P
Warehouse Clubs and Superstores                                                    P  P
 
Wholesale Trade
Apparel, Piece Goods, and Notions                                                  P  P  P  P
Beer/Wine/Distilled Alcoholic                                                      SR P  P  P
Beverages
Books, Periodicals, and Newspapers                                                 P  P  P  P
Chemicals and Allied Products                                                         P  P  P
Drugs and Druggists' Sundries                                                      SR P  P  P
Durable Goods, Not Otherwise Listed                                                SR P  P  P
Electrical Goods                                                                   SR P  P  P
Farm Products, Raw Materials                                                          P  P  P
Farm Supplies                                                                         P  P  P
Flowers, Nursery Stock, and Florist                                             P  P  P  P  P
Supplies
Furniture and Home Furnishings                                                     SR P  P  P
Groceries and Related Products                                                     P  P  P  P
Hardware                                                                           P  P  P  P
Jewelry, Watches, Precious Stones                                                  P  P  P  P
Lumber and Other Construction                                                      SR P     P
Materials
Machinery, Equipment and Supplies                                                  SR P  P  P
Market Showrooms (Furniture,                                                       SR P  P  P
Apparel, Etc.)
Metal and Minerals                                                                    P  P  P
Motor Vehicles                                                                        P  P  P
Motor Vehicles, New Parts and                                                      SR P  P  P
Supplies
Motor Vehicles, Tires and Tubes                                                    SR P  P  P
Motor Vehicles, Used Parts and                                                        P  P  P
Supplies
Nondurable Goods, Not Otherwise                                                    SR P  P  P
Listed
Paints and Varnishes                                                               SR P  P  P
Paper and Paper Products                                                           P  P  P  P
Petroleum and Petroleum Products                                                      SR    SR
Plumbing and Heating Equipment and                                                 SR P  P  P
Supplies
Professional and Commercial                                                        P  P  P  P
Equipment and Supplies
Scrap and Recyclable Materials                                                        SE SE SE
Sporting and Recreational Goods and
Supplies (Except Sporting Firearms                                                 P  P  P  P
and Ammunition)
Sporting Firearms and Ammunition                                                   SR P  P  P
Timber and Timber Products                                                            P  P  P
Tobacco and Tobacco Products                                                       SR P  P  P
Toys and Hobby Goods and Supplies                                                  P  P  P  P
 
Transportation, Information,
Warehousing, Waste Management, and
Utilities
Airports or Air Transportation                                                        P  P  P
Facilities and Support Facilities
Antennas                                 SR SR SR  SR  SR  SR  SR SR  SR  SR SR SR SR SR SR SR
Bus Facilities, Interurban                                                      P  P  P  P  P
Bus Facilities, Urban                                                           P  P  P  P  P
Charter Bus Industry                                                               P  P  P  P
Courier Services, Central Facility                                                    P  P  P
Courier Services, Substations                                             P     P  P  P  P  P
Landfills and Structural Fill Sites      SE                                                 SE
Limousine Services                                                                 P  P  P  P
Materials Recovery Facilities                                                         P  P  P
(Recycling)
Power Generation, Natural Gas
Plants, and Similar Production                                                              P
Facilities
Radio and Television Broadcasting                                         P     P  P  P  P
Facilities (Except Towers)
Radio, Television, and Other             P                                SE SE SE SE SR P  P
Similar Transmitting Towers
Rail Transportation and Support                                                             P
Facilities
Recycling Collection Stations                                                               P
Remediation Services                                                                  P     P
Scenic and Sightseeing                                                          P  P  P  P  P
Transportation
Sewage Treatment Facilities,                                                                P
Private
Sludge, Non–hazardous                                                                     SR
Taxi Service Terminals                                                          P  P  P  P  P
Truck Transportation Facilities                                                       P  P  P
Utility Company Offices                                                   P  P  P  P  P  P
Utility Lines and Related           P    P  P  P   P   P   P   P  P   P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P
Appurtenances
Utility Service Facilities (No                                                     P  P  P  P
Outside Storage)
Utility Substations                 SR   SR SR SR  SR  SR  SR  SR SR  SR  SR SR SR SR SR SR SR
Warehouses (General Storage,
Enclosed, Not Including Storage of
Any Hazardous Materials or Waste as                                       SR SR SR SR P  P  P
Determined by Any Agency of the
Federal, State or Local Government)
Warehouses, Self-Storage                                                        SR SR SR SR P
Waste Collection, Hazardous                                                                 SE
Waste Collection, Other                                                                     P
Waste Collection, Solid, Non-                                                               P
Hazardous
Waste Treatment and Disposal,                                                               SE
Hazardous
Waste Treatment and Disposal, Non-                                                          P
Hazardous
Water Treatment Plants, Non-                                                          P  P  P
Governmental, Public
 
Manufacturing, Mining, and
Industrial Uses
Animal Food                                                                                 P
Animal Slaughtering and Processing                                                          P
Apparel                                                                               P  P  P
Bakeries, Manufacturing                                                            P  P  P  P
Beverage, Other Than Soft Drink and                                                         P
Water, and Tobacco
Beverage, Soft Drink and Water                                                        P  P  P
Borrow Pits                              SE SE                                        SE SE P
Cement and Concrete Products                                                                P
Chemicals, Basic                                                                            P
Chemical Products, Not Otherwise                                                            P
Listed
Clay Products                                                                               P
Computer, Appliance, and Electronic                                                P  P  P  P
Products
Dairy Products                                                                        P  P  P
Dolls, Toys, and Games                                                                P  P  P
Fabricated Metal Products                                                             P  SE P
Food Manufacturing, Not Otherwise                                                     P  P  P
Listed
Furniture and Related Products                                                        P  P  P
Glass and Glass Products                                                              P  SE P
Jewelry and Silverware                                                                P  P  P
Leather and Allied Products (No                                                       P  P  P
Tanning)
Leather and Hide Tanning and                                                                P
Finishing
Lime and Gypsum Products                                                                    P
Machinery                                                                             P  SE P
Manufacturing, Not Otherwise Listed                                                   P  SE P
Medical Equipment and Supplies                                                     P  P  P  P
Mining/Extraction Industries                                                                P
Office Supplies (Not Paper)                                                           P  P  P
Paint, Coating, and Adhesives                                                               P
Paper Products (Coating and                                                                 P
Laminating)
Paper Products (No Coating and                                                        P  P  P
Laminating)
Petroleum and Coal Products                                                                 SR
Manufacturing
Primary Metal Manufacturing                                                                 P
Printing and Publishing                                                            P  P  P  P
Pulp, Paper, and Paperboard Mills                                                           P
Rubber and Plastic Products                                                                 P
Seafood Product Preparation and                                                             P
Packaging
Signs                                                                              P  P  P  P
Soap, Cleaning Compounds, and                                                         P  P  P
Toilet Preparations
Sporting and Athletic Goods                                                           P  P  P
Textile Mills                                                                               P
Textile Product Mills                                                                 P  SE P
Transportation Equipment                                                              P  SE P
Wood Products, Chip Mills                                                                   P
Wood Products, Excluding Chip Mills                                                   P  P  P
 
Other Uses
Buildings, High Rise, 4 or 5                                          SR  SR       SR
Stories
Buildings, High Rise, 6 or More                                       SE  SE       SE
Stories
Sexually Oriented Businesses                                                       SR       SR
Shipping Containers used as an           SR                                        P  P  P  P
Accessory Structure
 
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 106-05HR, § I, 12-20-05; Ord. 010-
07HR, §I, 2-20-07; Ord. 033-07HR, §I, 4-3-07; Ord. No. 043-07HR, §XXX, 5-1-07;
Ord. No. 043-08HR, § I, 7-15-08; Ord. No. 054-08HR, §§ I, II, V, 9-16-08; Ord.
No. 089-08HR, § II, 12-16-08; Ord. No. 008-09, § XI, 2-17-09; Ord. No. 053-
09HR, § III, 11-3-09; Ord. No. 020-10HR, § I, 5-4-10; Ord. No. 025-10HR, §I, 5-
18-10; Ord. No. 069-10HR, §I, 11-16-10; Ord. No. 038-12HR, § I, 6-19-12; Ord.
No. 044-12HR, § I, 9-11-12; Ord. No. 029-13HR, § I, 6-18-13; Ord. No. 025-14HR,
§ II, 5-20-14; Ord. No. 071-14HR, § II, 12-9-14; Ord. No. 024-15HR, §I, 6-16-
15; Ord. No. 036-15HR, §II, 7-28-15; Ord. No. 016-16HR, §II, 4-19-16; Ord. No.
047-16HR, §I, 10-18-16; Ord. No. 051-16HR, §I, 11-15-16; Ord. No. 063-18HR, §
I, 12-11-18)
Secs. 26-142 - 26-150. Reserved
ARTICLE VI. SUPPLEMENTAL USE STANDARDS
Sec. 26-151. Permitted uses with special requirements.
   (a)   Purpose. Permitted uses with special requirements are uses permitted
by right in a certain zoning district, provided that the specific standards set
forth in this article are met. The specified standards are intended to ensure
that these uses fit the intent of the districts within which they are
permitted, and that these uses are compatible with other development within the
district. All permitted uses with special requirements shall comply with the
following:
      (1)   All properties and structures containing permitted uses with
special requirements shall conform to all applicable development standards.
      (2)   Permitted uses with special requirements shall comply with all
applicable local, state, and federal regulations and standards, and shall be
properly licensed and permitted.
    (b)   Permitted uses with special requirements listed by zoning district.
      (1)   Accessory Dwellings - (RU, RR, RS-E, RS-LD, RS-MD, RS-HD, M-1)
      (2)   Amusement or Water Parks, Fairgrounds - (GC, M-1, LI)
      (3)   Animal Shelters - (GC, M-1, LI)
      (4)   Antennas - (All Districts)
      (5)   Athletic Fields - (TROS, NC, RC)
      (6)   Banks, Finance, and Insurance Offices - (NC, RC)
      (7)   Barber Shops, Beauty Salons, and Related Services - (RU, RM-MD, RM-
HD)
      (8)   Bars and other Drinking Places - (RC, GC, M-1, LI)
      (9)   Batting Cages - (GC, M-1, LI)
      (10)   Bed and Breakfast Homes/Inns - (RR, RR, RM-MD, RM-HD, OI, NC, RC,
GC)
      (11)   Beer/Wine/Distilled Alcoholic Beverages - (GC)
      (12)   Body Piercing Facilities - (GC)
      (13)   Buildings, High-Rise, Four (4) or Five (5) Stories - (RM-HD, OI,
GC)
      (14)   Bus Shelters/Bus Benches - (All Districts)
      (15)   Car and Light Truck Washes- (RC)
      (16)   Cemeteries and Mausoleums - (RU, OI, NC, RC, GC, M-1, LI, HI)
      (17)   Cigar Bars - NC, GC, M-1, LI
      (18)   Continued Care Retirement Communities - (RM-MD, RM-HD, OI, RC, GC)
      (19)   Construction, Building, General Contracting, with Outside Storage
- (M-1, LI)
      (20)   Construction, Building, Heavy, with Outside Storage - (M-1, LI)
      (21)   Construction, Special Trades, with Outside Storage - (M-1, LI)
      (22)   Country Clubs with Golf Courses - (TROS, RU, GC, M-1, LI)
      (23)   Day Care, Adult, Home Occupation (5 or fewer) - (RU, RR, RS-E, RS-
LD, RS-MD, RS-HD, MH, RM-MD, RM-HD, OI, GC)
      (24)   Day Care Centers, Adult - (RU, OI, NC, RC, GC, M-1)
      (25)   Day Care, Child, Family Day Care, Home Occupation (5 or fewer) -
(RU, RR, RS-E, RS-LD, RS-MD, RS-HD, MH, RM-MD, RM-HD, OI, GC)
      (26)   Day Care Centers, Child, Licensed Centers - (RU, OI, NC, RC, GC,
M-1)
      (27)   Drugs and Druggists’ Sundries - (GC)
      (28)   Duets - RM-MD, RM-HD
      (29)   Durable Goods, Not Otherwise Listed - (GC)
      (30)   Dwellings, Manufactured Homes on Individual Lots - (RU, MH)
      (31)   Dwellings, Manufactured Homes on Individual Lots - (RR, RS-E)
      (32)   Dwellings, Single Family, Zero Lot Line, Common and Parallel -
(Common: RM-MD, RM-HD, GC; Parallel: RS-E, RS-LD, RS-MD, RS-HD, RM-MD, RM-HD)
      (33)   Electrical Goods - (GC)
      (34)   Fuel Oil Sales (Non-Automotive) - (M-1, HI)
      (35)   Furniture and Home Furnishings - (GC)
      (36)   Golf Courses - (TROS, GC, M-1, LI)
      (37)   Golf Driving Ranges (Freestanding) - (TROS, RC, GC, M-1, LI)
      (38)   Go-Cart, Motorcycle, and Similar Small Vehicle Tracks - (GC)
      (39)   Group Homes (9 or Less) - (RU, RR, RS-E, RS-LD, RS-MD, RS-HD, MH,
RM-MD, RM-HD)
      (40)   Group Homes (10 to 15) - (RU)
      (41)   Home Occupations - (RU, RR, RS-E, RS-LD, RS-MD, RS-HD, MH, RM-MD,
RM-HD, OI, NC, RC, GC)
      (42)   Kennels - (RU, OI, RC, GC, M-1, LI)
      (43)   Libraries - (RU, RR, RS-E, RS-LD, RS-MD, RS-HD, MH, RM-MD, RM-HD)
      (44)   Lumber and Other Construction Materials - (GC)
      (45)   Machinery, Equipment and Supplies - (GC)
      (46)   Manufactured Home Sales - (GC, M-1, LI)
      (47)   Manufactured Home Parks - (MH)
      (48)   Market Showrooms - (GC)
      (49)   Motor Vehicles, New Parts and Supplies - (GC)
      (50)   Motor Vehicles, Tires and Tubes - (GC)
      (51)   Nondurable Goods, Not Otherwise Listed - (GC)
      (52)   Paints and Varnishes - (GC)
      (53)   Pet Care Services - (NC, RC)
      (54)   Petroleum and Coal Products Manufacturing - (HI)
      (55)   Petroleum and Petroleum Products - (M-1, HI)
      (56)   Places of Worship - (RU, RR, RM-MD, RM-HD, RC)
      (57)   Plumbing and Heating Equipment and Supplies - (GC)
      (58)   Poultry Farms - (RU)
      (59)   Produce Stands - (RU)
      (60)   Public or Private Parks - (All Districts)
      (61)   Public Recreation Facilities - (All Districts)
      (62)   Radio, television and telecommunications and other transmitting
towers.
         a.   Use districts: Rural; LI Light Industrial; Heavy Industrial.
         b.   Communication towers shall have a maximum height of three hundred
(300) feet. For towers on buildings, the maximum height shall be twenty (20)
feet above the roofline of buildings forty (40) feet or four stories in height
or less. For buildings greater than four stories or forty-one (41) feet in
height, the maximum height of communication towers shall be forty feet above
the roofline.
         c.   The minimum setbacks for communication towers from abutting
districts shall be as follows:
            1.   Communication towers abutting a residentially zoned parcel
shall have a minimum setback of one (1) foot for each foot of height of the
tower as measured from the base of the tower. The maximum required setback
shall be two hundred and fifty (250) feet shall have a minimum setback of one
(1) foot for every one (1) foot of tower height or one hundred (100) percent of
the tower's fall zone, plus a safety factor of ten (10) percent; whichever is
less. Fall zones shall be certified in the form of a letter from an engineer,
licensed by the State of South Carolina, that includes the engineer's original
signature and seal. The fall zone shall not encroach onto structures on any
property; nor shall the fall zone encroach onto adjacent properties, unless the
owner of the adjacent property signs a waiver. The waiver shall be in a
recordable waiver document and shall indemnify and hold the county harmless. In
no case shall the fall zone encroach into a public right-of-way. Additionally,
the owner of the tower shall agree in writing to indemnify and hold Richland
County harmless from and against any liability arising out of damage to real or
personal property or injury to any person or in any way connected with the
construction of, erection of, maintenance of, and/or collapse of the
communication tower and antenna, including the removal of said communication
tower and antenna.
            2.   Communication towers abutting a non-residentially zoned parcel
with a habitable residential dwelling shall have a minimum setback of fifty
(50) feet.
            3.   Communication towers abutting a non-residentially zoned parcel
without a habitable residential dwelling shall observe the setbacks of the
district in which it is located.
         d.   The proposed user must show proof of an attempt to collocate on
existing communication towers, and must be willing to allow other users to
collocate on the proposed tower in the future subject to engineering
capabilities of the structure. Evidence of an attempt to collocate must show
that alternative towers, buildings, or other structures are not available for
use within the applicant's tower site search area that are structurally capable
of supporting the intended antenna or meeting the applicant's necessary height
criteria, or provide a location free of interference from other communication
towers.
         e.   Towers shall be illuminated as required by the Federal
Communications Commission, Federal Aviation Administration, or other regulatory
agencies. However, no nighttime strobe lighting shall be incorporated unless
required by the Federal Communications Commission, the Federal Aviation
Administration, or other regulatory agency.
         f.   Each communication tower and associated buildings shall be
enclosed within a fence at least seven (7) feet in height.
         g.   Each communication tower site shall be landscaped in accordance
with the requirements of Section
26-176 of this chapter.
         h.   No signage may be attached to any portion of a communications
tower. Signs for the purpose of identification, warning, emergency function or
contact or other as required by applicable state or federal rule, law, or
regulation may be placed as required by standard industry practice.
         i.   A communications tower which is no longer used for communications
purposes must be dismantled and removed within one hundred twenty (120) days of
the date the tower is taken out of service.
      (63)   Radio, Television, and Other Similar Transmitting Towers - (RU,
LI, HI)
      (64)   Recreational Vehicle Parks and Recreation Camps - (RU)
      (65)   Rental Centers, With Outside Storage - (GC)
      (66)   Repair and Maintenance Service, Appliance and Electronics - (RC,
GC, M-1, LI)
      (67)   Research and Development Services - (OI)
      (68)   Restaurants, Cafeterias; Restaurants, Full Service (Dine-in Only);
Restaurants, Limited Service (Dine-in) - OI, NC, RC, GC, M-1, LI
      (69)   Schools, Including Public and Private Schools, Having a Curriculum
Similar to Those Given in Public Schools - (RU, RR, RS-E, RS-LD, RS-MD, RS-HD,
MH, RM-MD, RM-HD)
      (70)   Sexually Oriented Businesses - (GC, HI)
      (71)   Shipping Containers - (RU)
      (72)   Sludge, Non-Hazardous - (H)
      (73)   Sporting Firearms and Ammunition - (GC)
      (74)   Swim and Tennis Clubs - (TROS)
      (75)   Swimming Pools - (TROS, RU, RR, RS- E, RS-LD, RS-MD, RS-HD, MH,
RM-MD, RM-HD, OI, NC, RC, GC)
      (76)   Tobacco and Tobacco Products - (GC)
      (77)   Townhouse - RS-MD, RS-HD
      (78)   Utility Substations - (All Districts)
      (79)   Veterinary Services (Non-Livestock, May Include Totally Enclosed
Kennels Operated in Connection with Veterinary Services) - (OI, NC)
      (80)   Warehouses (General Storage, Enclosed, Not Including Storage of
Any Hazardous Materials or Waste as Determined by Any Agency of the Federal,
State, or Local Government) - (OI, NC, RC, GC)
      (81)   Warehouses (Self Storage) - (RC, GC, M-1, LI)
      (82)   Yard Sales - (RU, RR, RS-E, RS-LD, RS-MD, RS-HD, MH, RM-MD, RM-HD,
OI, NC, RC, GC)
      (83)   Zoos and Botanical Gardens - (GC, M-1)
   (c)   Standards. The development standards listed herein are additional to
other requirements of this chapter. These development standards are use-
specific and apply to those uses designated with an "SR" in the Table of
Permitted Uses, Permitted Uses with Special Requirements, and Special
Exceptions (Table 26-V-2. Section
26-141).
       (1)   Accessory dwellings.
         a.   Use districts: Rural; Rural Residential; Residential, Single-
Family, Estate; Residential, Single-Family, Low Density; Residential, Single-
Family, Medium Density; Residential, Single- Family, High Density, M-1 Light
Industrial.
         b.   Accessory dwellings shall be located only on lots containing one
single-family detached structure. (However, other conforming accessory
structures may also be located on the lot).
         c.   Only one accessory dwelling shall be permitted per single-family
dwelling.
         d.   If the accessory dwelling is located within the same structure as
the principal dwelling, the principal dwelling shall not be altered in any way
so as to appear from a public or private road to be multi- family housing.
         e.   A manufactured home may not be used as an accessory dwelling.
         f.   The gross floor area of the accessory dwelling shall not exceed
five hundred (500) square feet or contain more than one-fourth of the heated
floor area of the principal single-family dwelling, whichever is greater.
      (2)   Amusement or waterparks, fairgrounds.
         a.   Use districts: General Commercial; M-1 and LI Light Industrial.
         b.   The minimum lot size for an amusement park, waterpark, or
fairground shall be five (5) acres.
         c.   No principal building or structure shall be located within fifty
(50) feet of any property line.
         d.   Security fencing, a minimum of six (6) feet in height, shall be
provided along the entire boundary of the park activities.
         e.   No amusement equipment, machinery, or mechanical device of any
kind may be operated within two hundred (200) feet of any residentially zoned
property.
      (3)   Animal shelters.
         a.   Use districts: General Commercial; M-1 and LI Light Industrial.
         b.   Any building (which is part of an animal shelter) housing animals
shall be located a minimum of one hundred and fifty (150) feet from any
residentially zoned or developed property.
         c.   Fenced outdoor runs are allowed for use during the hours of 6:00
a.m. to 10:00 p.m.; however, no animal may be kept in the run for boarding
purposes, and pens for the animals must be located indoors. Feeding of animals
must be conducted indoors and is prohibited in the runs.
         d.   All animal refuse and food must be kept in airtight containers
and disposed of on a regular basis. Animal wastes shall not be stored any
closer than fifty (50) feet from any property line or surface water.
      (4)   Antennas.
         a.   Use districts: All Districts.
         b.   In residential districts, no antenna shall be permitted between
the front of a principal structure and any adjacent public road. In the case of
corner lots, no antenna shall be permitted between the side of a principal
structure and the road. No dish type antenna more than eighteen (18) inches in
diameter shall be placed on the roof or other portion of a building so as to be
visible from any adjacent property.
         c.   In nonresidential districts, antennas may be placed at any
location that is not visible from any adjacent public road. Antennas may be
placed on top of a principal structure less than thirty (30) feet in height,
provided that screening is provided with materials compatible with the
principal structure at least equal in height to the antenna. Antennas may be
placed on top of a flat roofed structure that exceeds thirty (30) feet in
height.
   Antennas erected on any pitched roof structure, regardless of height of the
structure, must be screened with materials compatible with the principal
structure. The screening shall not be less than the height of the antenna. In
these districts, dish type antennas measuring less than three (3) feet in
diameter may be placed at any location on a principal structure, except for the
building façade or any road oriented side wall.
      (5)   Athletic fields.
         a.   Use districts: Traditional Recreation Open Space; Neighborhood
Commercial; Rural Commercial.
         b.   All athletic fields shall have primary access to collector or
thoroughfare roads.
         c.   Lights shall be positioned and shielded so as not to shine onto
adjacent properties.
         d.   Loud speaker systems shall not be operated before 8:00 a.m. or
after 10:00 p.m.
      (6)   Banks, finance, and insurance offices.
         a.   Use districts: Neighborhood Commercial; Rural Commercial.
         b.   No drive-thru service permitted.
      (7)   Barber shops, beauty salons, and related services.
         a.   Use districts: Rural; Residential, Multi- Family, Medium Density;
Residential, Multi-Family, High Density.
         b.   No more than four (4) workstations are permitted.
         c.   Signage shall be limited to a single sign, not to exceed three
(3) square feet and not containing internal lighting. Such signage shall be
attached to the building.
      (8)   Bars and other drinking places.
         a.   Use districts: Rural Commercial; General Commercial; M-l and LI
Light Industrial.
         b.   Lots used for drinking places shall be no closer than six hundred
(600) feet to any lot which contains a school (public or private), and shall be
no closer than six hundred (600) feet to any lot which contains a place of
worship. However, if the place of worship is Located in a GC, M-l, or LI zoning
district and is located in a mixed-use shopping center, a mall, or an
industrial park, the setback does not apply, unless the place of worship was
established at that location prior to March 18, 2014.
         c.   The distance shall be measured from the nearest entrance of the
place of business by following the shortest route of ordinary pedestrian or
vehicular travel along the public thoroughfare to the nearest point of entrance
to the grounds of the church or school, or any building in which religious
services or school classes are held, whichever is the closer. The grounds in
use as part of the church or school is restricted to the grounds immediately
surrounding the building or buildings which provide ingress or egress to such
building or buildings and does not extend to the grounds surrounding the church
which may be used for beautification, cemeteries, or any purpose other than
such part of the land as is necessary to leave the public thoroughfare and to
enter or leave such building or buildings. Only one entrance to the grounds of
a church or school shall be considered, to wit: the entrance to the grounds
nearest an entrance to the church or school building. Where no fence is
involved, the nearest entrance to the grounds shall be in a straight line from
the public thoroughfare to the nearest door. The nearest point of the grounds
in use as part of a playground shall be limited to the grounds actually in use
as a playground and the grounds necessary for ingress or egress to such grounds
from the public thoroughfare.
         d.   Bars and other drinking places shall provide adequate off-street
parking at a rate of twelve (12) spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square
feet of gross floor area.
         e.   Parking areas related to the establishment of a bar or other
drinking place shall be located no closer than thirty (30) feet to the property
line of residentially zoned or used property.
         f.   A minimum six (6) foot high opaque fence shall be erected
adjacent to the property line of abutting residentially zoned or used property.
         g.   Dance poles within the establishment are prohibited.
         h.   A full floor plan of the establishment must be provided to the
Richland County Zoning Administrator.
      (9)   Batting cages.
         a.   Use districts. General Commercial; M-1 and LI Light Industrial.
         b.   No equipment, machinery, or mechanical device of any kind shall
be operated within two hundred (200) feet of any residentially zoned property.
         c.   Fencing, netting or other control measures shall be provided
around the perimeter of the batting area to prevent balls from leaving the
designated area.
         d.   Lights shall be positioned and shielded so as not to shine onto
adjacent properties.
         e.   Loud speaker systems shall not be operated before 8:00 a.m. or
after 10:00 p.m.
      (10)   Bed and breakfast homes/inns.
         a.   Use districts: Rural; Rural Residential; Residential, Multi-
Family, Medium Density; Residential, Multi-Family, High Density; Office and
Institutional; Neighborhood Commercial; Rural Commercial; General Commercial.
         b.   Bed and breakfast homes/inns shall be located a minimum of one
thousand five hundred (1,500) feet from any other bed and breakfast home/inn.
         c.   The owner or manager of the home/inn shall reside on the
property.
         d.   The maximum number of guest rooms provided by the bed and
breakfast home/inn shall be nine (9).
         e.   Activities and functions designed to accommodate the guests shall
take place within the principal structure.
         f.   Off-street parking for bed and breakfast homes/inns shall be
provided as required in Section
26-173 of this chapter. Parking shall be provided on the same lot on which the
bed and breakfast inn is located, at the rear of the lot, and screened (with
vegetation) from adjacent properties and from the road.
         g.   In the residential districts, signage shall be limited to a
single sign, not to exceed three (3) square feet and not containing internal
lighting. Such signage shall be attached to the building.
         h.   Exterior lighting shall be residential in nature and shall not be
directed toward adjacent properties.
         i.   No meals may be served to anyone other than staff and guests
registered at the inn.
         j.   No exterior alterations, other than those necessary to ensure the
safety and accessibility of the structure, shall be made to any building for
the purpose of providing a bed and breakfast home/inn.
      (11)   Beer/Wine/Distilled Alcoholic Beverages.
         a.   Use districts: General Commercial.
         b.   The aggregate gross floor area shall be limited to no more than
12,000 square feet per parcel or per building, whichever is more restrictive.
         c.   Materials and/or products shall not be displayed outside the
building.
         d.   Materials, products, and/or equipment shall not be stored outside
the building.
         e.   Materials and/or products shall not be processed outside the
building.
         f.   Lighting shall comply with the requirements of Section
26-177 infra.
         g.   Landscaping buffers shall comply with the requirements of Section
26-176 infra.
      (12)   Body Piercing Facilities.
         a.   Use districts: General Commercial.
         b.   The applicant must receive a license from the South Carolina
Department of Health and Environmental Control (SCDHEC) to operate the
facility.
      (13)   Buildings, high-rise, four (4) or five (5) stories.
         a.   Use districts: Residential, Multi-Family, High Density; Office
and Institutional; General Commercial.
         b.   The minimum lot size to establish a high- rise building shall be
one (1) acre.
         c.   The minimum lot width to establish a high-rise building shall be
one hundred and fifty (150) feet.
         d.   A high-rise structure shall be set back a minimum of twenty-five
(25) feet from all property lines.
         e.   In the RM-HD District, the maximum lot coverage for a high-rise
building shall be thirty-five percent (35%). In the GC and OI Districts, the
maximum lot coverage for a high-rise building shall be forty- five percent
(45%).
         f.   Increase of allowable lot coverage:
            1.   Additional lot coverage may be allowed on a foot for foot
basis equal to the number of square feet provided on the structure above the
first level in the form of landscaped roof gardens, solariums, recreational
spaces and the like made available generally to tenants. In no case shall such
an increase in coverage exceed an amount equal to ten percent (10%) of the
total lot area upon which the high-rise structure is located.
            2.   Parking lots or structures to accommodate required parking may
be erected to cover not more than thirty percent (30%) of the total lot area in
addition to the coverage listed in paragraph e. of this subsection.
         g.   No portion of any high-rise building shall project through
imaginary planes leaning inward over the lot from the exterior lot lines of the
parcel at angles representing two (2) feet in height for each one (1) foot of
horizontal distance from such lot line.
         h.   Parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by
Section
26-173 and Section
26-174 of this chapter. No parking lots shall be permitted within any required
setback.
      (14)   Bus shelters/bus benches.
         a.   Use districts: All Districts.
         b.   Any person wishing to erect and maintain a bus shelter or bus
bench shall obtain a permit for each shelter from the Planning Department. Each
permit for a bus shelter shall cost fifty ($50.00) dollars and shall be valid
for one (1) year. Each permit for a bus bench shall cost twenty-five ($25.00)
dollars and shall be valid for one (1) year. These permits may be renewed upon
payment of the fifty ($50.00) dollar renewal fee for a bus shelter or upon
payment of the twenty-five ($25.00) dollar renewal fee for a bus bench.
         c.   A shelter or bench may only be located at a designated bus stop
that is presently being served by a public transit authority, and only one (1)
bus shelter shall be allowed per bus stop location.
         d.   If the shelter or bench is proposed to be located within a SCDOT
right-of-way, the location of the shelter must be approved by SCDOT prior to
obtaining a permit from the Richland County Planning Department.
         e.   Bus shelters must meet the following additional requirements:
            1.   Design plans for the bus shelter shall be submitted for review
and a building permit obtained. The bus shelter must be built to the current
and future editions of the International Building Code for commercial
structures, except that plumbing and mechanical elements are not required, and
the bus shelter must be able to withstand sustained three (3) second wind gusts
of up to 95 MPH. All normal review and permit fees apply, along with normal
inspections.
            2.   The shelter shall be designed so that it will present an
attractive appearance and not detract from the adjacent surroundings. It shall
be illuminated and provide protection from weather elements. The shelter design
shall include the following:
               [a]   Each shelter shall consist of an aluminum or steel
framework suitable for supporting transparent wall panels and opaque roof
panels. The shelter must have a rear wall section, two (2) side panels, and a
roof. The transparent wall section must be of tempered glass.
               [b]   At a minimum, each shelter must have a six (6) foot bench,
a bus route and schedule holder, a trash receptacle, and be illuminated during
hours of darkness. The shelter must be installed on and attached to a concrete
foundation.
               [c]   Each bus shelter must be erected in accordance with ADA
specifications and requirements. The permittee is responsible to meet the ADA
standards and any complaints of nonconformance must be rectified by permittee
at his/her expense within thirty (30) days of notification by the Planning
department. Under this subsection, ADA compliance includes, but is not limited
to, sidewalk on ramps, tactile warnings, and signage or directional arrows
indicating handicap accessibility.
               [d]   Advertising on the shelter shall be limited to the outward
side of the side wall panels, and may provide a lighting source contained
within the panel cabinet. Only two (2) advertisements will be allowed per
shelter, and each advertisement will be limited to a maximum poster dimension
of 4' wide by 6' high.
               [e]   The general dimensions of a typical shelter will be at a
minimum 9' feet long by 6' wide by 8' high.
            3.   The route number shall be displayed prominently on the bus
shelter.
            4.   Each bus shelter shall make available printed bus schedules,
and shall display a large regional map that includes the bus route.
            5.   Bus shelters shall be maintained in good repair and the person
whose name is on the permit application shall be responsible for the cleaning,
repairing or replacement of any part thereof, including advertising materials,
sidewalks, walkways, curbs or foundations encompassed by the bus shelter. Such
work as is necessary to relocate, alter or maintain the bus shelter will be
done in such a manner that it will not in any way interfere with or endanger
the safety of the general public in their use of the roads.
         f.   Bus benches must meet the following additional requirements;
            1.   The bench shall be designed so that it will present an
attractive appearance and not detract from the adjacent surroundings.
            2.   Benches shall be constructed of durable material and shall be
securely fastened to the ground.
            3.   Advertising on the bench shall be limited to the forward
facing side fo the back rest and shall not extend beyond the perimeters of the
back rest.
      (15)   Car and light truck washes.
         a.   Use districts: Rural Commercial.
         b.   Buildings shall not be less than seventy- five (75) feet from any
interior side or rear property line that adjoins a residentially zoned or used
property.
         c.   The hours of operation shall be limited to the hours between 7:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
         d.   Adequate provisions shall be made for the safe and efficient
disposal of waste products.
      (16)   Cemeteries and mausoleums.
         a.   Use districts: Rural, Office and Institutional; Neighborhood
Commercial; Rural Commercial; General Commercial; M-1 and LI Light Industrial;
Heavy Industrial.
         b.   A minimum of three (3) contiguous acres shall be required to
establish a cemetery or a mausoleum not located on the same tract of land as a
place of worship.
         c.   Primary access to the facility shall be from a local, collector
or thoroughfare road.
      (17)   Cigar bars.
         a.   Use districts: Neighborhood Commercial; General Commercial; M-
l Light Industrial; LI Light Industrial.
         b.   The smoking of cigarettes is prohibited.
         c.   A walk-in humidor must be located within the premises.
         d.   Limited food services or alcoholic beverages that are not sold
directly by the businesses are prohibited.
         e.   At least fifty-one (51) percent of the bar’s revenue must be from
the on-site sale of tobacco products.
         f.   The bar area shall not cover more than twenty-five (25) percent
of floor area, excluding the humidor, kitchen, storage area(s), and offices.
         g.   A full floor plan of the cigar bar must be provided to the
Richland County Zoning Administrator.
      (18)   Continued care retirement communities.
         a.   Use districts: Residential, Multi-Family, Medium Density;
Residential, Multi-Family, High Density; Office and Institutional; Rural
Commercial; General Commercial.
         b.   The minimum lot size to establish a continued care retirement
community shall be one (1) acre.
         c.   No parking space or driveway shall be located closer than twenty
(20) feet to any other residence not a part of the community.
         d.   The front setback shall be the same as permitted in the
respective district, but shall not be less than the lesser setback of any
existing homes on adjacent lots. The side and rear setbacks shall be twenty
(25) feet.
         e.   All facilities shall be solely for the use of the residents and
their guests.
      (19)   Construction, building, general contracting, with outside storage.
         a.   Use districts: M-1 and LI Light Industrial.
         b.   All outside storage shall be completely screened from adjacent
roads and residentially zoned or used properties.
      (20)   Construction, building, heavy, with outside storage.
         a.   Use districts: M-1 and LI Light Industrial.
         b.   All outside storage shall be completely screened from adjacent
roads and residentially zoned or used properties.
      (21)   Construction, special trades, with outside storage.
         a.   Use districts: M-1 and LI Light Industrial.
         b.   All outside storage shall be completely screened from adjacent
roads and residentially zoned or used properties.
      (22)   Country clubs with golf courses.
         a.   Use districts: TROS; Rural; General Commercial; M-1 and LI Light
Industrial.
         b.   There shall be a minimum fifty (50) foot setback between
clubhouses, swimming pools, lighted tennis courts, or athletic fields and
adjacent residentially zoned or used property.
         c.   In the Rural District, club facilities may not be used between
12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m., Sunday through Thursday and between 1:00 a.m. and
7:00 a.m. on Friday and Saturday nights.
      (23)   Day care, adult, home occupation (five or fewer).
         a.   Use districts: Rural; Rural Residential; Residential,
Single–Family - Estate; Residential, Single-Family - Low Density; Residential,
Single-Family - Medium Density; Residential, Single- Family - High Density;
Manufactured Home; Residential, Multi-Family - Medium Density; Residential,
Multi-Family - High Density; Office and Institutional; General Commercial.
         b.   An adult day care, home occupation, with five (5) or fewer
attendees must be operated in an occupied residence.
         c.   Client pick-up and drop-off shall not obstruct traffic flow on
adjacent public roads.
         d.   All other state and federal regulations shall be met.
      (24)   Day care centers, adult.
         a.   Use districts: Office and Institutional; Neighborhood Commercial;
Rural Commercial; General Commercial; M-1 Light Industrial.
         b.   Client pick-up and drop-off shall not obstruct traffic flow on
adjacent public roads.
      (25)   Day care, child, family day care, home occupation (five or fewer).
         a.   Use districts: Rural; Rural Residential; Residential, Single-
Family - Estate; Residential, Single-Family - Low Density; Residential, Single-
Family - Medium Density; Residential, Single- Family - High Density;
Manufactured Home; Residential, Multi-Family - Medium Density; Residential,
Multi- Family - High Density; Office and Institutional; General Commercial.
         b.   A child family day care home occupation, must be operated in an
occupied residence.
         c.   Any outdoor play area shall be fenced or otherwise enclosed on
all sides and shall not include driveways, parking areas, or land otherwise
unsuited for children's play space.
         d.   Client pick-up and drop-off shall not obstruct traffic flow on
adjacent public roads.
         e.   All other state and federal regulations shall be met.
      (26)   Day care centers, child, licensed centers.
         a.   Use districts: Rural; Office and Institutional; Neighborhood
Commercial; Rural Commercial; General Commercial; M-1, LI Light Industrial.
         b.   Any outdoor play area shall be fenced or otherwise enclosed on
all sides and shall not include driveways, parking areas, or land otherwise
unsuited for children's play space.
         c.   Client pick-up and drop-off shall not obstruct traffic flow on
adjacent public roads.
         d.   All other state and federal regulations shall be met.
      (27)   Drugs and Druggists' Sundries.
         a.   Use districts: General Commercial.
         b.   The aggregate gross floor area shall be limited to no more than
12,000 square feet per parcel or per building, whichever is more restrictive.
         c.   Materials and/or products shall not be displayed outside the
building.
         d.   Materials, products, and/or equipment shall not be stored outside
the building.
         e.   Materials and/or products shall not be processed outside the
building.
         f.   Lighting shall comply with the requirements of Section
26-177 infra.
         g.   Landscaping buffers shall comply with the requirements of Section
26-176 infra.
      (28)   Duets.
         a.   Use districts: Residential, Multi-Family, Medium Density;
Residential, Multi-Family, High Density.
         b.   The off-street parking requirements for duets are as follows:
            Minimum:   Two and one-half (2.5) spaces for every dwelling unit
            Mid-range:    Three (3) spaces for every dwelling unit.
            Maximum:   Four (4) spaces for every dwelling unit.
         c.   Mid-range - to - maximum parking is subject to the water quality
treatment requirements of section
26-173.
         d.   Off-street parking which exceeds the maximum is subject to the
pervious materials requirements of section
26-173.
      (29)   Durable Goods, Not Otherwise Listed.
         a.   Use districts: General Commercial.
         b.   The aggregate gross floor area shall be limited to no more than
12,000 square feet per parcel or per building, whichever is more restrictive.
         c.   Materials and/or products shall not be displayed outside the
building.
         d.   Materials, products, and/or equipment shall not be stored outside
the building.
         e.   Materials and/or products shall not be processed outside the
building.
         f.   Lighting shall comply with the requirements of Section
26-177 infra.
         g.   Landscaping buffers shall comply with the requirements of Section
26-176 infra.
      (30)   Dwellings, manufactured homes on individual lots.
         a.   Use districts: Rural, Manufactured Home Park.
         b.   Manufactured homes must meet the standards set by the Federal
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (which
became effective June 15, 1976), as revised and in effect on the date the
application is made for a land development permit.
         c.   The tongue, axles, transporting lights, and removable towing
apparatus must be removed subsequent to final placement.
         d.   Manufactured home skirting or a continuous, permanent masonry
foundation, unpierced except for openings required by the building code for
ventilation, utilities and access, shall be installed under the manufactured
home.
      (31)   Dwellings, manufactured homes on individual lots.
         a.   Use districts: Rural Residential; Residential, Single-Family,
Estate.
         b.   Manufactured homes must meet the standards set by the Federal
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (which
became effective June 15, 1976), as revised and in effect on the date the
application is made for a land development permit.
         c.   The tongue, axles, transporting lights, and removable towing
apparatus must be removed subsequent to final placement.
         d.   The manufactured home shall be oriented so that the side
containing the front entrance door shall be no more than twenty (20) degrees
from parallel to the front property line, except on corner lots. The front of
the manufactured home is that side which has an entrance door leading to a
living room, foyer, or hall.
         e.   The exterior siding shall consist predominately of vinyl or
aluminum horizontal lap siding (that does not exceed the reflectivity of gloss
white paint), wood, or hardboard, comparable in composition, appearance, and
durability to the exterior siding commonly used in standard residential
construction.
         f.   A continuous, permanent masonry foundation, unpierced except for
openings required by the building code for ventilation, utilities and access,
shall be installed under the manufactured home. The foundation shall be
excavated and shall be exposed no more than twelve (12) inches above grade.
         g.   The pitch of the manufactured home's roof shall have a minimum
vertical rise of three feet for each twelve feet of horizontal run (3:12) and
the roof shall be finished with a type of roof that is commonly used in
standard residential construction.
         h.   The manufactured home shall have a length not exceeding four (4)
times its width, excluding additions.
         i.   There shall be a porch, at the main entrance to the manufactured
home, which is a minimum of six (6) feet by six (6) feet in size.
      (32)   Dwellings, single family, zero lot line, common and parallel.
         a.   Use districts: Common: Residential, Multi-Family, Medium Density;
Residential, Multi-Family, High Density; General Commercial.
         Use districts: Parallel: Residential, Single-Family, Estate;
Residential, Single- Family, Low Density; Residential, Single-Family, Medium
Density; Residential, Single-Family, High Density.
         b.   The lot proposed for zero lot line development must be under the
same ownership as the adjacent lot at the time of initial construction, or the
owner of adjacent properties must record an agreement or deed restriction, in
writing, consenting to the development of zero setback. The maintenance and
drainage easement required in subsection e. below must be provided as part of
this agreement and deed restriction.
         c.   For common lot line dwellings, the dwelling unit shall be placed
on one interior side property line with a zero setback, and the dwelling unit
setback on the other interior side property line shall be a minimum of twelve
(12) feet. Patios, pools, garden features, and other similar elements shall be
permitted within the twelve (12) foot setback area; provided, however, no
structure shall be placed within easements required by subsection e. below.
         d.   The wall of a dwelling located on the lot line shall have no
windows, doors, air conditioning units, or any other type of openings. An
atrium or court shall be permitted on the zero lot line side when such court or
atrium is enclosed by two (2) walls of the dwelling unit, and a solid wall of
at least six (6) feet in height is provided on the zero lot line extending to
the front and/or rear of the dwelling unit. Said wall shall be constructed of
the same materials as exterior walls of the unit.
         e.   A perpetual five (5) foot maintenance easement shall be provided
on the lot adjacent to the zero lot line property, which shall be kept clear of
structures. This easement shall be shown on the plat and incorporated into each
deed transferring title to the property. Roof overhangs and footings may
penetrate the easement on the adjacent lot a maximum of twenty-four (24)
inches, but the roof shall be so designed that water runoff from the dwelling
placed on the lot line is controlled by gutters or other approved methods.
      (33)   Electrical Goods.
         a.   Use districts: General Commercial.
         b.   The aggregate gross floor area shall be limited to no more than
12,000 square feet per parcel or per building, whichever is more restrictive.
         c.   Materials and/or products shall not be displayed outside the
building.
         d.   Materials, products, and/or equipment shall not be stored outside
the building.
         e.   Materials and/or products shall not be processed outside the
building.
         f.   Lighting shall comply with the requirements of Section
26-177 infra.
         g.   Landscaping buffers shall comply with the requirements of Section
26-176 infra.
      (34)   Fuel oil sales, non-automotive.
         a.   Use districts: M-1 Light Industrial; Heavy Industrial.
         b.   Gravel or paved roadways shall be provided to all storage tanks.
         c.   Security fencing, a minimum of six (6) feet in height, shall be
provided along the entire boundary of such facilities.
         d.   Storage tanks protected by either an attached extinguishing
system approved by the fire marshal, or an approved floating roof, shall not be
located closer to an exterior property line than a distance of either the
diameter or the height of the tank, whichever is greater. However, regardless
of the diameter or height of the tank, in no event shall the required distance
be greater than one hundred twenty (120) feet. Storage tanks not equipped as
indicated above shall not be located closer to an exterior property line than a
distance equal to one and one half (1½) times of either the diameter or the
height of the tank, whichever is greater. However, regardless of the diameter
or height of the tank, in no event shall the required distance be greater than
one hundred seventy-five (175) feet. Storage tanks and loading facilities shall
be located a minimum of five hundred (500) feet from any existing residence or
residentially zoned property.
         e.   All storage facilities shall comply with the latest regulations
of the National Fire Protection Association.
         f.   All other federal, state, and local laws shall be met.
      (35)   Furniture and Home Furnishings.
         a.   Use districts: General Commercial.
         b.   The aggregate gross floor area shall be limited to no more than
12,000 square feet per parcel or per building, whichever is more restrictive.
         c.   Materials and/or products shall not be displayed outside the
building.
         d.   Materials, products, and/or equipment shall not be stored outside
the building.
         e.   Materials and/or products shall not be processed outside the
building.
         f.   Lighting shall comply with the requirements of Section
26-177 infra.
         g.   Landscaping buffers shall comply with the requirements of Section
26-176 infra.
      (36)   Golf courses.
         a.   Use districts: Traditional Recreation Open Space; General
Commercial; M-1 and LI Light Industrial.
         b.   There shall be a minimum fifty (50) foot setback between
clubhouses or other non-course facilities and adjacent residentially zoned or
used property.
      (37)   Golf driving ranges (freestanding).
         a.   Use districts: Traditional Recreation Open Space; Rural
Commercial; General Commercial; M-1 and LI Light Industrial.
         b.   Fencing, netting, or other control measures shall be provided
around the
perimeter of the driving area to prevent balls from leaving the property.
         c.   No equipment, machinery, or mechanical device of any kind shall
be operated within two hundred (200) feet of any residentially zoned or used
property.
         d.   Operations shall not begin before 9:00 a.m. nor continue after
10:00 p.m.
      (38)   Go-cart, motorcycle, and similar small vehicle tracks.
         a.   Use districts: General Commercial.
         b.   Security fencing, a minimum of six (6) feet in height, shall be
provided along the entire boundary of the track activities.
         c.   No equipment, machinery, or mechanical device of any kind shall
be operated within two hundred (200) feet of any residentially zoned or used
property.
         d.   Hours of operation shall be limited to 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
      (39)   Group homes (nine persons or less).
         a.   Use districts: Rural; Rural Residential; Residential, Single-
Family, Estate; Residential, Single-Family, Low Density; Residential, Single-
Family, Medium Density; Residential, Single- Family, High Density; Manufactured
Home Park; Residential, Multi-Family, Medium Density; Residential, Multi-
Family, High Density.
         b.   Location approval is subject to Section 6-29-770 of the South
Carolina Code of Laws, as amended.
      (40)   Group homes (10 to 15).
         a.   Use districts: Rural District.
         b.   Minimum lot size to establish a group home shall be five (5)
acres.
         c.   The gross floor area of the group home shall not exceed seven
thousand (7,000) square feet.
         d.   Parking shall not be located in the required front yard.
         e.   No parking space or drive shall be located closer than twenty
(20) feet from any road line or property line.
      (41)   Home occupations.
         a.   Use districts: Rural; Rural Residential; Residential, Single-
Family, Estate; Residential, Single-Family, Low Density; Residential, Single-
Family, Medium Density; Residential, Single- Family, High Density; Manufactured
Home Park; Residential, Multi-Family, Medium Density; Residential, Multi-
Family, High Density; Office and Institutional; Neighborhood Commercial; Rural
Commercial; General Commercial.
         b.   Home occupations shall be conducted entirely within the principal
dwelling or an accessory structure, if such accessory structure meets all
setback requirements for a principal structure in the district in which it is
located. Home occupations shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use
of the dwelling unit for residential purposes, and shall not change the outward
appearance of the structure.
         c.   An area equal to not more than twenty- five percent (25%) of the
floor area of the principal dwelling may be utilized for the home occupation.
If the home occupation is housed in an accessory structure, the accessory
structure can be no larger than twenty-five percent (25%) the gross floor area
of the principal dwelling.
         d.   Only persons residing on the premises may be employed by the home
occupation.
         e.   The home occupation shall not involve the retail sale of
merchandise manufactured off the premises. No display of goods, products,
services, merchandise, or any form of advertising shall be visible from outside
the dwelling.
         f.   No outside storage shall be allowed in connection with any home
occupation.
         g.   Instruction in music, dance, art or similar subjects shall be
limited to four (4) students at a time.
         h.   No traffic shall be generated by the home occupation in greater
volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any
parking need generated by the home occupation shall be provided for off street
and other than in the front yard.
         i.   Signage for the home occupation shall be regulated in accordance
with Section
26-180 of this chapter.
      (42)   Kennels.
         a.   Use districts: Rural; Office and Institutional; Rural Commercial;
General Commercial, M-1 and LI Light Industrial.
         b.   Any building (which is part of a kennel) housing animals shall be
located a minimum of one hundred and fifty (150) feet from any residentially
zoned or used property.
         c.   Fenced outdoor runs are allowed for use only during the hours of
6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.; however, no animal may be kept in the run for boarding
purposes, and pens for the animals must be located indoors. Feeding of animals
must be conducted indoors and is prohibited in the runs.
         d.   All animal refuse and food must be kept in airtight containers
and disposed of on a regular basis. Animal wastes shall not be stored any
closer than fifty (50) feet from any property line or surface waters.
      (43)   Libraries.
         a.   Use districts: Rural; Rural Residential; Residential, Single-
Family, Estate; Residential, Single-Family, Low Density; Residential, Single-
Family, Medium Density; Residential, Single- Family, High Density; Manufactured
Home Park; Residential, Multi-Family, Medium Density; Residential, Multi-
Family, High Density.
         b.   No parking shall be allowed in the required front yard.
      (44)   Lumber and Other Construction Materials.
         a.   Use districts: General Commercial.
         b.   The aggregate gross floor area shall be limited to no more than
12,000 square feet per parcel or per building, whichever is more restrictive.
         c.   Materials and/or products shall not be displayed outside the
building.
         d.   Materials, products, and/or equipment shall not be stored outside
the building.
         e.   Materials and/or products shall not be processed outside the
building.
         f.   Lighting shall comply with the requirements of Section
26-177 infra.
         g.   Landscaping buffers shall comply with the requirements of Section
26-176 infra.
      (45)   Machinery, Equipment and Supplies.
         a.   Use districts: General Commercial.
         b.   The aggregate gross floor area shall be limited to no more than
12,000 square feet per parcel or per building, whichever is more restrictive.
         c.   Materials and/or products shall not be displayed outside the
building.
         d.   Materials, products, and/or equipment shall not be stored outside
the building.
         e.   Materials and/or products shall not be processed outside the
building.
         f.   Lighting shall comply with the requirements of Section
26-177 infra.
         g.   Landscaping buffers shall comply with the requirements of Section
26-176 infra.
      (46)   Manufactured home sales.
         a.   Use districts: General Commercial; M-1 Light Industrial, LI Light
Industrial.
         b.   Sales and storage areas shall be screened from adjacent
residentially zoned properties.
      (47)   Manufactured home parks.
         a.   Use districts: Manufactured Home.
         b.   All manufactured home park development plans must be approved by
DHEC.
         c.   Uses permitted within any manufactured home park shall be
regulated in accordance with the underlying zoning district. See Article V. of
this chapter. Unless otherwise, specified, all minimum development standards
for the underlying zoning district apply.
         d.   All manufactured home parks must provide water and sanitary sewer
to each manufactured home site, subject to DHEC requirements. All manufactured
homes within the site are required to connect to water, sanitary sewers, and
electricity.
         e.   The minimum area required for the development of a manufactured
home park shall be five (5) acres.
         f.   The maximum density of a manufactured home park shall not exceed
six (6) units per acre.
         g.   A minimum of seven thousand two hundred sixty (7,260) square feet
is required for each manufactured home site within the manufactured home park
development.
         h.   A minimum width of sixty (60) feet is required for each
manufactured home site within the manufactured home park development.
         i.   All manufactured homes shall be set back from exterior road
rights-of-way a minimum of thirty-five (35) feet, and shall be set back a
minimum of fifteen (15) feet from all other exterior property lines.
   If the landscape and buffer yard standards require additional setbacks, the
most restrictive shall apply. See Section
26-176 of this chapter.
         j.   All manufactured homes shall be set back from interior road
rights-of-way a minimum of fifteen (15) feet. Additionally, the following
minimum spacing between manufactured home structures shall apply:
            1.   Front to front: 35 feet.
            2.   Front to side: 25 feet.
            3.   Front to rear: 35 feet.
            4.   Rear to rear: 25 feet.
            5.   Rear to side: 25 feet.
            6.   Side to side: 25 feet.
         k.   A minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the total development area
shall be reserved for open space. However, in no event shall the required open
space within a manufactured home development be less than three hundred (300)
square feet. In order to expand an existing manufactured home park development,
the minimum open space requirements must be met.
      (48)   Market showrooms.
         a.   Use districts: General Commercial.
         b.   Display areas shall exist within permanent buildings only.
      (49)   Motor vehicles, new parts and supplies.
         a.   Use districts: General Commercial.
         b.   The aggregate gross floor area shall be limited to no more than
12,000 square feet per parcel or per building, whichever is more restrictive.
         c.   Materials and/or products shall not be displayed outside the
building.
         d.   Materials, products, and/or equipment shall not be stored outside
the building.
         e.   Materials and/or products shall not be processed outside the
building.
         f.   Lighting shall comply with the requirements of Section
26-177 infra.
         g.   Landscaping buffers shall comply with the requirements of Section
26-176 infra.
      (50)   Motor vehicles, tires and tubes.
         a.   Use districts: General Commercial.
         b.   The aggregate gross floor area shall be limited to no more than
12,000 square feet per parcel or per building, whichever is more restrictive.
         c.   Materials and/or products shall not be displayed outside the
building.
         d.   Materials, products, and/or equipment shall not be stored outside
the building.
         e.   Materials and/or products shall not be processed outside the
building.
         f.   Lighting shall comply with the requirements of Section
26-177 infra.
         g.   Landscaping buffers shall comply with the requirements of Section
26-176 infra.
      (51)   Nondurable goods, not otherwise listed.
         a.   Use districts: General Commercial.
         b.   The aggregate gross floor area shall be limited to no more than
12,000 square feet per parcel or per building, whichever is more restrictive.
         c.   Materials and/or products shall not be displayed outside the
building.
         d.   Materials, products, and/or equipment shall not be stored outside
the building.
         e.   Materials and/or products shall not be processed outside the
building.
         f.   Lighting shall comply with the requirements of Section
26-177 infra.
         g.   Landscaping buffers shall comply with the requirements of Section
26-176 infra.
      (52)   Paints and Varnishes.
         a.   Use districts: General Commercial.
         b.   The aggregate gross floor area shall be limited to no more than
12,000 square feet per parcel or per building, whichever is more restrictive.
         c.   Materials and/or products shall not be displayed outside the
building.
         d.   Materials, products, and/or equipment shall not be stored outside
the building.
         e.   Materials and/or products shall not be processed outside the
building.
         f.   Lighting shall comply with the requirements of Section
26-177 infra.
         g.   Landscaping buffers shall comply with the requirements of Section
26-176 infra.
      (53)   Pet Care Services.
         a.   Use districts: Neighborhood Commercial, Rural Commercial.
         b.   All pet care services shall be conducted inside an enclosed
structure.
      (54)   Petroleum and coal products manufacturing.
         a.   Use districts: Heavy Industrial.
         b.   Gravel or paved roadways shall be provided to all storage tanks.
         c.   Security fencing, a minimum of six (6) feet in height, shall be
provided along the entire boundary of such facilities.
         d.   Storage tanks protected by either an attached extinguishing
system approved by the fire marshal, or an approved floating roof, shall not be
located closer to an exterior property line than a distance of either the
diameter or the height of the tank, whichever is greater. However, regardless
of the diameter or height of the tank, in no event shall the required distance
be greater than one hundred twenty (120) feet. Storage tanks not equipped as
indicated above shall not be located closer to an exterior property line than a
distance equal to one and one half (1½) times the greater dimension of either
the diameter or the height of the tank. However, regardless of the diameter or
height of the tank, in no event shall the required distance be greater than one
hundred seventy-five (175) feet. Storage tanks and loading facilities shall be
located a minimum of five hundred (500) feet from any existing residence or
residentially zoned property.
         e.   All storage facilities shall comply with the latest regulations
of the National Fire Protection Association.
         f.   All other federal, state, and local laws shall be met.
      (55)   Petroleum and petroleum products.
         a.   Use districts: Heavy Industrial; M-1 Light Industrial.
         b.   Gravel or paved roadways shall be provided to all storage tanks.
         c.   Security fencing, a minimum of six (6) feet in height, shall be
provided along the entire boundary of such facilities.
         d.   Storage tanks protected by either an attached extinguishing
system approved by the fire marshal, or an approved floating roof, shall not be
located closer to an exterior property line than a distance of either the
diameter or the height of the tank, whichever is greater. However, regardless
of the diameter or height of the tank, in no event shall the required distance
be greater than one hundred twenty (120) feet. Storage tanks not equipped as
indicated above shall not be located closer to an exterior property line than a
distance equal to one and one half (1½) times the greater dimension of either
the diameter or the height of the tank. However, regardless of the diameter or
height of the tank, in no event shall the required distance be greater than one
hundred seventy-five (175) feet. Storage tanks and loading facilities shall be
located a minimum of five hundred (500) feet from any existing residence or
residentially zoned property.
         e.   All storage facilities shall comply with the latest regulations
of the National Fire Protection Association.
         f.   All other federal, state, and local laws shall be met.
      (56)   Places of worship.
         a.   Use districts: Rural; Rural Residential; Residential, Multi-
Family, Medium Density; Residential, Multi-Family, High Density; Rural
Commercial.
         b.   Facilities for a place of worship located on a site of three (3)
acres or more shall have primary access to the facility from a collector of
thoroughfare road.
         c.   No parking space or drive shall be located closer than twenty
(20) feet to a residence not associated with the place of worship. No parking
area may be located in the front setback.
         d.   The front setback shall be the same as permitted in the
respective district, but shall not be less than the lesser setback of any
existing homes on adjacent lots. The side and rear setbacks shall be thirty
(30) feet.
      (57)   Plumbing and Heating Equipment and Supplies.
         a.   Use districts: General Commercial.
         b.   The aggregate gross floor area shall be limited to no more than
12,000 square feet per parcel or per building, whichever is more restrictive.
         c.   Materials and/or products shall not be displayed outside the
building.
         d.   Materials, products, and/or equipment shall not be stored outside
the building.
         e.   Materials and/or products shall not be processed outside the
building.
         f.   Lighting shall comply with the requirements of Section
26-177 infra.
         g.   Landscaping buffers shall comply with the requirements of Section
26-176 infra.
      (58)   Poultry farms.
         a.   Use districts: Rural.
         b.   Not more than one (1) animal unit shall be kept per six thousand
(6,000) square feet of land.
         c.   All areas containing poultry shall be located no closer than one
hundred and fifty (150) feet from any abutting residentially zoned or used
property.
      (59)   Produce stands.
         a.   Use districts: Rural.
         b.   Produce stands operating year-round must be located on the
property on which the crops for sale are produced.
         c.   Produce stands operating seasonally (i.e. for no more than six
(6) months in any one calendar year) shall be located no closer than five (5)
feet from a road right-of-way. Adequate off-street parking shall be provided.
      (60)   Public or private parks.
         a.   Use districts: All Districts.
         b.   Overflow parking shall be designated on the site plan and shall
be kept available to handle all traffic from special events.
         c.   All parks greater than ten (10) acres shall have primary access
to a collector or thoroughfare road.
      (61)   Public recreation facilities.
         a.   Use districts: All Districts.
         b.   Overflow parking shall be designated on the site plan and shall
be kept available to handle all traffic from special events.
         c.   All recreation facilities greater than ten (10) acres shall have
primary access to a collector or thoroughfare road.
         d.   Lights shall be positioned and shielded so as not to shine onto
adjacent properties.
         e.   Loud speaker systems shall not be operated before 8:00 a.m. or
after 10:00 p.m.
      (62)   Recreational vehicle parks and recreation camps.
         a.   Use districts: Rural.
         b.   Uses permitted within a recreational vehicle park and recreation
camp shall include: recreational vehicle sites, camp sites, recreation
facilities, common buildings and facilities (laundry, dining, etc.), and
management offices (which may include living quarters for the operator or
manager of the park/camp).
         c.   A minimum of five (5) acres is required for a recreational
vehicle park or recreation camp.
         d.   For recreational vehicle parks, there shall be a minimum net
space of six hundred ninety (690) square feet for each RV space. A distance of
at least ten (10) feet shall be maintained between trailers and/or structures.
Any accessory structures or attachments shall, for the purpose of this
requirement, be considered a part of the trailer or recreational vehicle.
         e.   For recreational vehicle parks, each travel trailer or
recreational vehicle area shall be connected to an approved water supply system
that provides an accessible, adequate, safe, and potable supply of water. An
adequate and safe sewer system, approved by DHEC, shall be provided in all
travel trailer/ recreational vehicle parking areas.
         f.   In recreational vehicle parks, neither any person nor any travel
trailer/recreational vehicle shall occupy a trailer space or travel trailer
parking space for a period in excess of thirty (30) days. A registry of all
occupants, the space occupied, the time of arrival, and time of departure shall
be maintained by the owner or operator of the travel trailer/recreational
vehicle parking facility.
         g.   Adequate off-street parking and maneuvering space shall be
provided on site. The use of any public road, sidewalk, or right-of-way for the
purpose of parking or maneuvering vehicles is prohibited.
      (63)   Rental centers, with outside storage.
         a.   Use districts: General Commercial.
         b.   All storage areas shall be screened from adjacent residentially
zoned or used properties.
         c.   Lighting shall be directed and shielded so as not to shine across
to adjacent properties.
      (64)   Repair and maintenance service, appliance and electronics.
         a.   Use districts: Rural Commercial; General Commercial; M-1 and LI
Light Industrial.
         b.   No outside storage of appliances, equipment, or parts shall be
permitted.
      (65)   Research and development services.
         a.   Use districts: Office and Institutional.
         b.   Research using dangerous hazardous materials is prohibited.
         c.   All research and development operations must be conducted
indoors.
      (66)   Restaurants, Cafeterias; Restaurants, Full Service (Dine-In Only);
Restaurants, Limited Service (Dine-In).
         a.   Use districts: Office and Institutional; Neighborhood Commercial;
Rural Commercial; General Commercial; M-l Light Industrial; LI Light
Industrial.
         b.   As a regular and substantial source of business to the licensed
establishment meals shall be served upon the demand of guests and patrons
during the normal “mealtimes” which occur when the licensed business
establishment is open to the public and that an adequate supply of food is
present on the licensed premises to meet such demand.
         c.   Seating for Full Service (Dine-In Only) Restaurants must be
provided for at least twenty (20) patrons.
         d.   Seating for Limited Service (Dine-In) Restaurants must be
provided for at least twelve (12) patrons.
         e.   Tables and booths must be of adequate height and size to
accommodate full food service in accordance with the number of chairs found at
the table/booth.
         f.   The bar area shall not cover more than twenty-five (25) percent
of floor area, excluding the kitchen, storage area(s), serving areas and
offices.
         g.   A full floor plan of the restaurant s hall be provided to the
Zoning Administrator.
         h.   Alcoholic beverages shall not be sold or dispensed unless the
kitchen is open and prepared food items from the menu are available to patrons.
         i.   The stage area for entertainment shall not exceed one-hundred
(100) square feet or ten (10) percent of the total floor area (excluding the
kitchen, storage area(s), serving areas and offices), whichever is greater.
         j.   The area devoted to dancing shall not exceed 250 square feet or
ten percent of total floor area (excluding the kitchen, storage area(s),
serving areas and offices), whichever is greater.
         k.   Admission/cover charges prior to entrance are prohibited.
         l.   The restaurant must be equipped with a kitchen that is primarily
utilized for the cooking, preparation and serving of meals.
         m.   The restaurant must have readily available to its guests and
patrons either “menus” with the listings of the various meals offered for
service or a listing of available meals and foods, posted in a conspicuous
place readily discernible by the guest or patrons.
         n.   The restaurant must prepare for service to customers meals at
least once each day the business establishment chooses to be open.
         o.   Any advertisement for the establishment must be in conjunction
with the primary business activity.
         p.   Dancing poles within the establishment are prohibited.
         q.   The following definitions shall be used in conjunction with this
paragraph:
            1.   “Meal” mans an assortment of various prepared foods which
shall be available to guests on the licensed premises during the normal
“mealtimes’‘ which occur when the licensed business establishment is open to
the public. Sandwiches, boiled eggs, sausages and other snacks prepared off the
licensed premises but sold thereon, shall not constitute a meal.
            2.   “Kitchen” means a separate and distinct area of the business
establishment that is used solely for the preparation, serving and disposal of
solid foods that make up meals. Such area must be adequately quipped for the
cooking and serving of solid foods, and the storage of same, and must include
at least twenty-one cubic feet of refrigerated space for food and a stove/oven.
      (67)   Schools, including public and private schools, having a curriculum
similar to those given in public schools.
         a.   Use districts: Rural; Rural Residential; Residential, Single-
Family, Estate; Residential, Single-Family, Low Density; Residential, Single-
Family, Medium Density; Residential, Single- Family, High Density; Manufactured
Home Park; Residential, Multi-Family, Medium Density; Residential, Multi-
Family, High Density.
         b.   The minimum lot size for a school shall be two (2) acres.
         c.   Parking and active recreation areas shall not be located within
any required setback.
         d.   Primary access shall be provided from a collector or a
thoroughfare road.
      (68)   Sexually oriented businesses.
         a.   Use districts: General Commercial, Heavy Industrial.
         b.   Purpose and findings:
            1.   The purpose of this subsection is to regulate sexually
oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general
welfare of the citizens of Richland County, and to establish reasonable and
uniform regulations to prevent or reduce to any extent the secondary effects of
sexually oriented businesses within the County. The provisions of this
subsection have neither the purpose nor the effect of imposing a limitation or
restriction on the content of or reasonable access to any communicative
materials or expression. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of
these regulations to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented
materials or expression protected by the First Amendment of the United States
Constitution, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually
oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor
effect of this subsection to condone or legitimize the distribution or
exhibition of obscenity.
            2.   Based on evidence of the adverse secondary effects of sexually
oriented businesses presented in hearings and reports made available to the
Richland County Council, and on the findings, interpretations, and narrowing
constructions incorporated in the cases of City of Littleton v. Z.J. Gifts D-4,
LLC, 124 S. Ct. 2219 (2003); City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc., 535
U.S. 425 (2002); Pap's A.M. v. City of Erie, 529 U.S. 277 (2000); City of
Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini
Theatres, 427 U.S. 50 (1976); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560
(1991); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); Chesapeake B&M, Inc. v.
Harford County, 58 F.3d 1005 (4th Cir. 1995); Giovani Carandola, Ltd. v. Fox,
470 F.3d 1074 (4th Cir. 2006); Centaur v. Richland County, 392 S.E.2d 165 (S.C.
1990); and other cases; and on reports of secondary effects occurring in and
around sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, Phoenix,
Arizona (1979); Minneapolis, Minnesota (1980); Houston, Texas (1987);
Indianapolis, Indiana (1984); Amarillo, Texas (1977); Garden Grove, California
(1991); Los Angeles, California (1977); Whittier, California (1978); Austin,
Texas (1986); Seattle, Washington (1989); Oklahoma City, Oklahoma (1986); El
Paso, Texas (1986); New York City, New York (1994); Dallas, Texas (1997);
Newport News, Virginia (1996); New York Times Square Study (1994); Phoenix,
Arizona (1995-1998); Greensboro, North Carolina (2003); Toledo, Ohio (2002);
Centralia, Washington (2004); and also from the reports of Sexually Oriented
Businesses: An Insider's View, by David Sherman, presented to the Michigan
House Committee on Ethics and Constitutional Law, January 12, 2000; Survey of
Appraisers Fort Worth & Dallas, Effects of Land Uses on Surrounding Property
Values, by Duncan Associates, September 2004; and the Report of the Attorney
General's Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses,
(June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), the Richland County Council finds:
            (a)   Sexually oriented businesses, as a category of commercial
uses, are associated with a wide variety of adverse secondary effects
including, but not limited to, personal and property crimes, public safety
risks, prostitution, potential spread of disease, lewdness, public indecency,
illicit sexual activity, illicit drug use and drug trafficking, negative
impacts on surrounding properties, litter, and sexual assault and exploitation.
            (b)   Each of the foregoing negative secondary effects constitutes
a harm which the County has a substantial government interest in preventing
and/or abating in the future. This substantial government interest in
preventing secondary effects, which is the County's rationale for this
ordinance, exists independent of any comparative analysis between sexually
oriented and non-sexually oriented businesses. Additionally, the County's
interest in regulating sexually oriented businesses extends to future secondary
effects that could occur in the County related to current sexually oriented
businesses in the future as well as sexually oriented businesses that may
locate in the County in the future. The County Council finds that the cases and
secondary effects documentation relied on in this ordinance are reasonably
believed to be relevant to said secondary effects.
         c.   Classification. Sexually oriented businesses are classified as
follows:
            1.   Adult arcades;
            2.   Adult bookstores or adult video stores;
            3.   Adult cabarets;
            4.   Adult motels;
            5.   Adult motion picture theaters;
            6.   Sexual device shops; and
            7.   Sexual encounter centers.
         d.   Location of sexually oriented businesses:
            1.   A sexually oriented business currently in operation or
established subsequent to the enactment of this section shall comply with the
provisions herein.
            2.   All sexually oriented businesses shall be located within a
General Commercial or Heavy Industrial District.
            3.   A sexually oriented business shall not be located within one
thousand (1,000) feet of any place of worship, a public or private elementary
or secondary school, a child care facility or kindergarten, orphanage, a
boundary of any residential district, a boundary of a parcel designated and
assessed as residential use by the Richland County Assessor's Office; or a
public park.
            4.   A sexually oriented business shall not be located within one
thousand (1,000) feet of another sexually oriented business.
            5.   The operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one
(1) sexually oriented business is prohibited in the same building, structure,
or portion thereof, or the increase of floor areas of any sexually oriented
business in any building, structure, or portion thereof containing another
sexually oriented business.
            6.   For the purpose of this subparagraph d. 3., above, measurement
shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or
objects, the nearest property line of the premises where a sexually oriented
business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a place
of worship, or public or private elementary or secondary school, daycare
facility, kindergarten, orphanage, a boundary of any residential district, a
boundary of a parcel designated and assessed as residential use by the Richland
County Assessor's Office, or a public park. Presence of a city or other
political subdivision boundary shall be irrelevant for purposes of calculating
and applying the distance requirements of this section.
            7.   For the purpose of subparagraph d. 4. above, the distance
between any two (2) sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the
nearest property line of the premises where a sexually oriented business is
conducted to the nearest property line of another premises where a sexually
oriented business is conducted.
         e.   Regulations pertaining to sexually oriented businesses that offer
viewing room(s).
      A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a
viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space,
adult media, or live entertainment characterized by emphasis on exposure or
display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall
comply with the following requirements:
            (1)   A diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying
the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead
lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons
will not be permitted must be provided to the Zoning Administrator. A manager's
station may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area. A
professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's
blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to
the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a
designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various
internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy
of plus or minus six (6) inches.
            (2)   The diagram shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
            (3)   No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's
station may be made without the prior approval of the zoning administrator.
            (4)   It is the duty of the owner(s) and operators) of the premises
to ensure that at least one (1) employee is on duty and situated in each
manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
            (5)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a
manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every
area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose,
excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If
the premises has two (2) or more manager's stations designated, then the
interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an
unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted
access for any purpose from at least one (1) of the manager's stations. The
view required in this subparagraph must be by direct line of sight from the
manager's station.
            (6)   It shall be the duty of the owner(s) and operator(s), and it
shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to
ensure that the view area specified in subparagraph (5) above remains
unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other
materials at all times and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any
area of the premises that has been designated as an area in which patrons will
not be permitted in the diagram submitted pursuant to subparagraph (1) above.
            (7)   No viewing room may be occupied by more than one (1) patron
or customer at any time.
            (8)   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting
fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are
permitted access at an illumination of not less than one (1) foot-candle as
measured at the floor level.
            (9)   It shall be the duty of the owner(s) and operators), and it
shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to
ensure that the illuminations described above, is maintained at all times that
any patron is present in the premises.
            (10)   No owner or operator shall allow openings of any kind to
exist between viewing rooms.
            (11)   The operator or owner shall, during each business day,
regularly inspect the walls between the viewing booths to determine if any
openings or holes exist.
            (12)   The owner or operator shall cause all floor coverings in
viewing booths to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces with no rugs or
carpets.
            (13)   The owner or operator shall cause all wall surfaces and
ceiling surfaces in viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered
by, nonporous, easily cleanable material.
         f.   Regulations pertaining to adult cabarets and sexual encounter
centers. It shall be a violation of this chapter for an employee, independent
contractor, or person under a similar arrangement with any owner, operator,
manager, agent, shareholder of an adult cabaret or sexual encounter center,
while located within an adult cabaret or sexual encounter center, to appear in
a manner that does not conform to the definition of semi-nude.
         g.   Exemptions. The following activities or businesses are exempt
from the requirements of section
26-151(c)(69):
            1.   A business or organization in which a person serves as a model
for a drawing, painting, sketching, sculpture or other similar art studio class
operated:
               (a).   By a university or college or other institution of higher
education; or
               (b).   By a non-profit arts organization, such as a museum,
gallery, artist association or arts cooperative.
            2.   A professional or community theater, or a theater affiliated
with an institution of higher education, that produces works of dramatic arts
in which actors or actresses occasionally appear on stage in a state of semi-
nudity, nudity, or in any state of undress as part of his or her dramatic role.
         h.   Administrative decision-making process; appeals.
            (1)   Under no circumstances shall staff review and decision-making
of an application of a sexually oriented business for a permitted use with
special requirements, including determination of completeness, extend beyond
fifteen business (15) days from the date of receipt of an application. In the
event that a County official is required to take an act or do a thing pursuant
to section
26-55 of the Richland County Code of Ordinances and any other section
referenced therein, and fails to take such an act or do such a thing within the
time prescribed, such failure shall not prevent the exercise of constitutional
rights of an applicant. If the County fails to inform an applicant, by any
reasonable means, of a decision by the County by the close of business on the
fifteenth (15) business day from receipt of application, the application shall
be deemed granted and the applicant allowed to commence or continue operation
the day after the deadline for action has passed.
            (2)   Under no circumstances shall an appeal of an administrative
decision pursuant to section
26-58 of the Richland County Code of Ordinances concerning an application by a
sexually oriented business for a permitted use with special requirements exceed
a time period of seventy-five business (75) days from the date of receipt of an
appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals. In the event that a County official,
including the Board of Zoning Appeals, is required to take an act or do a thing
pursuant to section
26-58 of the Richland County Code of Ordinances and any other section
referenced therein, and fails to take such an act or do such a thing within the
time prescribed, such failure shall not prevent the exercise of constitutional
rights of an applicant. If the County fails to inform an applicant, by any
reasonable means, of a decision by the Board of Zoning Appeals by the close of
business on the sixtieth (60) business day from receipt of an appeal, the
application shall be deemed granted and the applicant allowed to commence or
continue operation the day after the deadline for action has passed.
         i.   Amortization; conforming use.
            (1)   Any sexually oriented business in operation before the
effective date of this ordinance that does not comply with the location
restrictions found in subsection (d) above is permitted to continue its
operation for a period not to exceed three years from the effective date of
this ordinance. During this period of non-compliance, such continued operation
shall not be increased, enlarged, extended, or altered.
            (2)   A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a
conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the subsequent location,
of a place of worship, a public or private elementary or secondary school, a
child care facility or kindergarten, orphanage, a boundary of any residential
district, a boundary of a parcel designated and assessed as residential use by
the Richland County Assessor's Office, or a public park within one thousand
(1,000) feet of the sexually oriented business.
      (69)   Shipping containers.
         a.   Use districts: Rural District.
         b.   Shipping containers shall be exempt from the screening
requirements of Section
26-176(h).
      (70)   Sludge, non-hazardous.
         a.   Use districts: Heavy Industrial.
         b.   All federal and state regulations must be met and a permit
obtained from DHEC.
      (71)   Sporting Firearms and Ammunition.
         a.   Use districts: General Commercial.
         b.   The aggregate gross floor area shall be limited to no more than
12,000 square feet per parcel or per building, whichever is more restrictive.
         c.   Materials and/or products shall not be displayed outside the
building.
         d.   Materials, products, and/or equipment shall not be stored outside
the building.
         e.   Materials and/or products shall not be processed outside the
building.
         f.   Lighting shall comply with the requirements of Section
26-177 infra.
         g.   Landscaping buffers shall comply with the requirements of Section
26-176 infra.
      (72)   Swim and Tennis Clubs.
         a.   Use Districts. Traditional Recreation Open Space.
         b.   There shall be a minimum fifty (50) foot setback between
clubhouses, swimming pools, lighted tennis courts, or athletic field and
adjacent residentially zoned or used property.
         c.   Lights shall be positioned so as not to shine onto adjacent
properties.
      (73)   Swimming pools.
         a.   Use districts: Traditional Recreation Open Space; Neighborhood
Mixed Use; Rural; Rural Residential; Residential, Single-Family, Estate;
Residential, Single-Family, Low Density; Residential, Single-Family, Medium
Density; Residential, Single-Family, High Density; Manufactured Home Park;
Residential, Multi-Family, Medium Density; Residential, Multi- Family, High
Density; Office and Institutional; Neighborhood Commercial; Rural Commercial;
General Commercial.
         b.   No private residential swimming pool that is located in a
residential district shall be operated as, or in conjunction with, a business,
day care operation, bed and breakfast, or a home occupation.
         c.   Pools shall be located so as to comply with the minimum setback
requirements for accessory buildings.
      (74)   Tobacco and Tobacco Products.
         a.   Use districts: General Commercial.
         b.   The aggregate gross floor area shall be limited to no more than
12,000 square feet per parcel or per building, whichever is more restrictive.
         c.   Materials and/or products shall not be displayed outside the
building.
         d.   Materials, products, and/or equipment shall not be stored outside
the building.
         e.   Materials and/or products shall not be processed outside the
building.
         f.   Lighting shall comply with the requirements of Section
26-177 infra.
         g.   Landscaping buffers shall comply with the requirements of Section
26-176 infra.
      (75)   Townhouses.
         a.   Use districts: Residential, Multi-Family, Medium Density;
Residential, Multi-Family, High Density.
         b.   The minimum lot area shall be 1,500 square feet.
         c.   The minimum lot width shall be twenty (20) feet.
         d.   If parking is provided underneath the structure or in the front
yard, the minimum front yard setback shall be twenty (20) feet. The minimum
front yard setback shall be ten (10) feet if parking is provided in the rear
yard.
         e.   The maximum height of structures shall be three (3) stories or
forty-five (45) feet.
         f.   A side yard setback of at least five (5) feet shall be provided
between the end units of a row and a side lot line; however, when the side lot
line is a street line or driveway, the side yard setback adjacent to such
street shall be at least ten (10) feet.
         g.   The rear yard setback shall be twenty (20) feet; however, when
required vehicular parking space is provided in the rear yard, minimum rear
yard depth shall be twenty-five (25) feet, provided that no rear yard shall be
required for simultaneously constructed units abutting at the rear and sharing
for their full width a common nonbearing wall which complies with the building
code.
         h.   The building foot print of the principle structure shall not
cover more than fifty (50%) percent of the lot area.
         i.   All common driveways, parking areas, open spaces or other
amenities shall have provisions for perpetual maintenance by the property
owners association or property owner(s)
         j.   No more than seven (7) dwellings shall be constructed or attached
together in a continuous row, and no such row shall exceed two hundred (200)
feet in length.
         k.   An accessory building, excluding carports or garages, shall be
permitted in the rear yard provided it does not exceed one hundred (100) square
feet in gross floor area and meets the required side yard setback.
      (76)   Utility substations.
         a.   Use districts: All Districts.
         b.   All buildings shall observe accessory building setbacks.
Transformer stations shall observe the principal building setback regulations.
         c.   Equipment that produces noise or sound in excess of seventy (70)
decibels shall be located no closer than one hundred (100) feet to the nearest
residence.
         d.   Transformer stations shall be screened from adjacent properties
and from roads with a vegetative screen that, at a minimum, meets the standards
listed in Section
26-176(h).
      (77)   Veterinary services (non-livestock, may include a totally enclosed
kennel operated in connection with veterinary services).
         a.   Use districts: Office and Institutional; Neighborhood Commercial.
         b.   Veterinary services shall not include provisions for kennels or
boarding of animals not undergoing treatment.
         c.   All buildings used in the operation shall be soundproofed and
air-conditioned.
         d.   Outside activity shall be limited to six (6) hours per day or
fewer.
         e.   Where the lot is adjacent to a residential zoning district or
residential use, a side yard of not less than ten (10) feet shall be
maintained.
         f.   All animal refuse and food must be kept in airtight containers
and disposed of on a regular basis.
      (78)   Warehouses (general storage, enclosed, not including storage of
any hazardous materials or waste as determined by any agency of the federal,
state, or local government). 
         a.   Use districts: Office and Institutional; Neighborhood Commercial;
Rural Commercial; General Commercial.
         b.   Warehouses (enclosed, general storage, non-hazardous) are allowed
in the various districts listed above as follows:
            1.   In the Office and Institutional and the Neighborhood
Commercial districts, warehousing is permitted as an accessory use not
involving over two thousand (2,000) square feet of floor area.
            2.   In the Rural Commercial and the General Commercial districts,
warehousing is permitted as an accessory use not involving over twelve thousand
(12,000) square feet of gross floor area.
      (79)   Warehouses (self-storage.)
         a.   Use districts: Rural Commercial, General Commercial, M-1 and LI
Light Industrial.
         b.   Fencing or walls shall be required around the perimeter of the
development. The fence or wall shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height.
         c.   Any side of the building providing doorways to storage areas
shall be set back from the property line not less than an additional twenty-
five (25) feet of the required setback.
         d.   Off-street parking shall be as follows:
            1.   One space for each ten (10) storage cubicles. This parking
requirement may be satisfied with parking lanes as established below.
            2.   Two parking spaces for any manager's quarters.
            3.   In addition to subsection 1. above, one (1) space for every
fifty (50) storage cubicles, to be located adjacent to the project office for
the use of prospective clients.
         e.   On-site driveway widths shall be required as follows:
            1.   All one-way driveways shall provide for one ten (10) feet
parking lane and one fifteen (15) feet travel lane. Traffic direction and
parking shall be designated by signage or painting.
            2.   All two-way driveways shall provide for one ten (10) feet
parking lane and two twelve (12) feet travel lanes.
            3.   The parking lanes may be eliminated when the driveway does not
directly serve any storage cubicles.
         f.   Retail and wholesale uses, and the storage of hazardous
materials, shall be prohibited in self storage warehouses. Notice of such
prohibition shall be given to customers by a conspicuous sign posted at the
entrance to the property, or by provisions in the lease agreement, or both.
         g.   Any outside storage area for vehicles, trailers, campers, boats,
or the like shall be separate from any structures and located to one side or to
the rear of the development. Spaces shall be located a minimum of twenty-five
(25) feet from any adjacent property line, and in no case shall these spaces be
counted towards meeting the parking requirements of this subsection d. above.
         h.   All lights shall be shielded so as to direct light onto the uses
established, and away from adjacent property; but lighting may be of sufficient
intensity to discourage vandalism and theft.
      (80)   Yard Sales.
         a.   Use districts: Rural; Rural Residential; Residential, Single-
Family, Estate; Residential, Single-Family, Low Density; Residential, Single-
Family, Medium Density; Residential, Single- Family, High Density; Manufactured
Home Park; Residential, Multi-Family, Medium Density; Residential, Multi-
Family, High Density; Office and Institutional; Neighborhood Commercial; Rural
Commercial; General Commercial.
         b.   Yard sales shall be limited to two (2) occurrences within a
twelve (12) month period.
         c.   Each occurrence shall be no longer than two (2) days and only
during the daylight hours.
      (81)   Zoos and Botanical Gardens.
         a.   Use districts: General Commercial; M-1 Light Industrial.
         b.   There shall be a minimum one hundred (100) foot setback between
all activities associated with the use and any adjacent residential property.
         c.   All zoos and botanical gardens shall have primary access to
collector or thoroughfare roads.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 106-05HR, §§ II, III, 12-20-05; Ord.
No. 033-07HR,
§§ II, III, 4-3-07; Ord. No. 043-07HR, §§ XXXI, XXXIII, 5-1-07; Ord. No. 045-
08HR, § II, 7-15-08; Ord. No. 053-08HR, § I, 9-16-08; Ord. No. 054-08HR, §§
III, IV, VI, 9-16-08; Ord. No. 089-08HR, § I, 12-16-08; Ord. No. 008-09HR, §§
I-VIII, 2-17-09; Ord. 053-09HR, §§ II, III, 11-3-09; Ord. No. 020-10HR, §§ II-
IV, 5-4-10; Ord. No. 069-10HR, §§ II, III, 11-16-10; Ord. No. 003-12HR, § III,
1-17-12; Ord. No. 031-HR, § I, 5-15-12; Ord. No. 038- 12HR, §§ II, III, 6-19-
12; Ord. No. 044-12HR, §§ II, III, 9- 11-12; Ord. No. 029-13HR, §§ II, III, 6-
18-13; Ord. No. 065-13HR, §§ I, II, 11-19-13; Ord. No. 010-14HR, § I, 3- 18-14;
Ord. No. 025-14HR, §§ III, IV, 5-20-14; Ord. No. 071-14HR, §§ III, IV, 12-9-14;
Ord. No. 024-15HR, §§ II, III, 6-16-15; Ord. No. 036-15HR, § IV, 7-28-15; Ord.
No. 016-16HR, §§ III, IV, 4-19-16; Ord. No. 027-16HR, § I, 6-21-16; Ord. No.
047-16HR, §§ II, III, 10-18-16; Ord. No. 051-16HR, § III, 11-15-16; Ord. No.
063-18HR, §§ II, III, 12-11-18)
Sec. 26-152. Special exceptions.
   (a)   Purpose. Special exceptions are uses that are generally compatible
with the land uses permitted in a particular zoning district. However, because
of their unique characteristics or their potential impacts on the surrounding
neighborhood and/or the county as a whole, they require individual
consideration of their location, design, configuration, and/or operation at the
particular location being proposed. Such individual consideration may also call
for the imposition of individualized conditions in order to ensure that the use
is appropriate at a particular location and to ensure protection of the public
health, safety, and welfare.
   (b)   Conditions. All special exceptions shall, at a minimum, meet the
conditions set forth in this section. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall approve
or deny an application for a special exception (see also Section
26-56 of this chapter) based on the following:
      (1)   A determination that all standards for the particular use, as
defined in this article and in other relevant sections of this chapter, have
been met.
      (2)   A finding that the special exception is in harmony with the intent
and purpose of this chapter. In making this determination, the board shall
consider the following:
         a.   Traffic impacts.
         b.   Vehicle and pedestrian safety.
         c.   Potential impact of noise, lights, fumes, or obstruction of
airflow on adjoining properties.
         d.   Adverse impact of the proposed use on the aesthetic character of
the environs, to include the possible need for screening from view.
         e.   Orientation and spacing of improvements or buildings.
   In granting a special exception, the board may impose such additional
restrictions and requirements as it may deem necessary in order that the
purpose and intent of this chapter are served.
   (c)   Special exceptions listed by zoning district.
      (1)   Athletic Fields - (RU, RR, RS-E, RS-LD, RS-MD, RS-HD, MH, RM-MD,
RM-HD)
      (2)   Bars and Other Drinking Places - (OI, NC)
      (3)   Borrow Pits - (RU, RR, M-1, LI)
      (4)   Buildings, High-Rise, Six (6) or More Stories - (RM-HD, GC)
      (5)   Clubs or lodges - (RU)
      (6)   Continued Care Retirement Communities - (RU, RR)
      (7)   Correctional Institutions - (RU, LI, HI)
      (8)   Country Clubs with Golf Courses - (RR, RS-E, RS-LD, RS-MD, RS-HD,
MH, RM-MD, RM-HD)
      (9)   Dormitories- (OI, GC)
      (10)   Dwellings, Single-Family, Zero Lot Line, Common - (RS-MD, RS-HD)
      (11)   Dwellings, Manufactured Homes on Individual Lots - (M-1)
      (12)   Fabricated Metal Products - (LI)
      (13)   Glass and Glass Products - (LI)
      (14)   Group Homes (10 or more) - (RM-HD, OI, NC, RC, GC)
      (15)   Landfill and Structural Dump Sites - (RU, HI)
      (16)   Machinery - (LI)
      (17)   Manufacturing, Not Otherwise Listed - (LI)
      (18)   Nursing and Convalescent Homes - (RU, RR)
      (19)   Orphanages - (RU, RR, RM-MD, RM-HD)
      (20)   Places of Worship - (RS-E, RS-LD, RS-MD, RS-HD, MH)
      (21)   Race Tracks and Drag Strips- (HI)
      (22)   Radio, Television, and Other Similar Transmitting Towers - (OI,
NC, RC, GC, M-1)
      (23)   Rooming and Boarding Houses - (RM-HD, OI, NC, RC)
      (24)   Scrap and Recyclable Materials - (M-1, LI, HI)
      (25)   Shooting Ranges, Outdoor - (RU, HI)
      (26)   Special Congregate Facilities - (OI, GC)
      (27)   Swim and Tennis Clubs - (RU, RR, RS-E, RS-LD, RS-MD, RS-HD, MH,
RM-MD, RM-HD, OI, NC, RC, LI)
      (28)   Textile Product Mills - (LI)
      (29)   Theaters, Motion Picture, Drive-Ins - (RC, GC, LI)
      (30)   Theaters, Motion Picture, Other Than Drive- Ins - (NC)
      (31)   Transportation Equipment - (LI)
      (32)   Waste Collection, Hazardous - (HI)
      (33)   Waste Treatment and Disposal, Hazardous - (HI)
      (34)   Zoos and Botanical Gardens - (RU, OI, RC)
   (d)   Standards.
      (1)   Athletic fields.
         a.   Use districts: Rural; Rural Residential; Residential, Single-
Family, Estate; Residential, Single-Family, Low Density; Residential, Single-
Family, Medium Density; Residential, Single-Family, High Density; Manufactured
Home Park; Residential, Multi-Family, Medium Density; Residential, Multi-
Family, High Density.
         b.   Parking lots for athletic fields shall have primary access to
collector or thoroughfare roads.
         c.   Lights shall be positioned so as not to shine onto adjacent
properties.
         d.   Loud speaker systems shall not be operated before 8:00 a.m. or
after 10:00 p.m.
      (2)   Bars and other drinking places.
         a.   Use districts: Office Institutional; Neighborhood Commercial.
         b.   Lots used for bars or drinking places shall be located no closer
than four hundred (400) feet from any other lot used as a bar or drinking
place, and shall be no closer than six hundred (600) feet to any lot which
contains a school (public or private) or a place of worship.
         c.   A minimum six (6) foot high opaque fence or wall shall be erected
adjacent to the property line of any abutting residences.
         d.   Parking areas related to the establishment shall be located no
closer than thirty (30) feet to the property lines of any abutting residences.
      (3)   Borrow pits.
         a.   Use districts: Rural; Rural Residential; M-1 and LI Light
Industrial.
         b.   Proposals for borrow pits will only be permitted where:
            1.   There are overriding environmental or other planning benefits
compared to obtaining materials from alternative sources;
            2.   Alternative materials of the required specification are
unavailable in sufficient quantities;
            3.   They are contiguous with or close to the projects they are
intended to serve;
            4.   They are time-limited to the life of the project and material
is to be used only for the specified project;
            5.   Proposals include appropriate reclamation measures that make
full use of surplus spoil from the project;
            6.   The site can be restored to its original levels or an
alternative acceptable landform only utilizing materials from the construction
project;
            7.   Any impacts on the environment or local communities can be
controlled to acceptable levels; and
            8.   The project area is less than ten (10) acres.
         c.   All borrow pits subject to this subsection shall comply with the
following requirements:
            1.   The average slope of any cut bank measured from a point
located ten (10) feet from the boundary of any abutting property to the bottom
of the cut bank in the pit shall not exceed a horizontal to vertical ratio of
2:1. The owner of the borrow pit is responsible for maintaining this condition;
            2.   The top of the cut bank of the borrow pit shall, at no time,
be closer than ten (10) feet from the property boundary of any abutting
landowner;
            3.   The depth of the borrow pit is limited to a maximum of twelve
feet below the average seasonal high water table or three feet above a
confining or semi-confining unit, whichever is shallower;
            4.   No excavation shall occur within two hundred (200) feet of a
wetland or other surface water;
            5.   Best management practices shall be used to control erosion and
sediment transport during and after the excavation activities;
            6.   The borrow pit slopes shall be stabilized with native
vegetation within six months following completion of the excavation;
            7.   Upon completion of the excavation area, side slopes shall be
no steeper than 4 (horizontal):1 (vertical) out to a depth of two feet below
the average water elevation;
            8.   No on-site grading or sorting of materials shall occur; and
            9.   The active excavation, processing, and transportation of fill
material shall only occur between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
      (4)   Buildings, high-rise, six (6) or more stories.
         a.   Use districts: Residential, Multi-Family, High-Density; Office
and Institutional; General Commercial.
         b.   The minimum lot size to establish a high- rise building shall be
one (1) acre.
         c.   The minimum lot width to establish a high-rise building shall be
one hundred and fifty (150) feet.
         d.   A high-rise structure shall be set back a minimum of twenty-five
(25) feet from all property lines.
         e.   In the RM-HD District, the maximum lot coverage for a high-rise
building shall be thirty-five percent (35%). In the GC and OI Districts, the
maximum lot coverage for a high-rise building shall be forty- five percent
(45%).
         f.   Increase of allowable lot coverage:
            1.   Additional lot coverage may be allowed on a foot for foot
basis equal to the number of square feet provided on the structure above the
first level in the form of landscaped roof gardens, solariums, recreational
spaces, and the like made available generally to tenants. In no case shall such
an increase in coverage exceed an amount equal to ten percent (10%) of the
total lot area upon which the high-rise structure is located.
            2.   Parking lots or structures to accommodate required parking may
be erected to cover not more than thirty percent (30%) of the total lot area in
addition to the coverage listed in subsections e. and f.1. above.
         g.   No portion of any high-rise building shall project through
imaginary planes leaning inward over the lot from the exterior lot lines of the
parcel at angles representing two (2) feet in height for each one (1) foot of
horizontal distance from such lot line.
         h.   Parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by
Section
26-173 of this chapter. No parking lots shall be permitted within any required
setback.
         i.   High-rise buildings over fifteen (15) stories in height are only
permitted on lots located at the intersection of major thoroughfares or
interstate highway interchanges.
         j.   In the Office and Institutional District the maximum height for a
high rise shall be seventy-five (75) feet.
      (5)   Clubs and lodges.
         a.   Use districts; Rural.
         b.   A club or lodge may not be used after 12:00 midnight, Sunday
through Thursday, and after 1:00 a.m. on Fridays and Saturdays.
         c.   Sexually oriented businesses are not permitted in a club or
lodge.
      (6)   Continued care retirement communities.
         a.   Use districts: Rural; Rural Residential.
         b.   The minimum lot size to establish a continued care retirement
community shall be one (1) acre.
         c.   No parking space or drive aisle shall be located closer than
twenty (20) feet to any other residence not a part of the community.
         d.   The front setback shall be the same as permitted in the
respective district, but shall not be less than the lesser setback of any
existing homes on adjacent lots. The side and rear setbacks shall be as set
forth for the district.
         e.   All facilities shall be solely for the use of the residents and
their guests.
      (7)   Correctional institutions.
         a.   Use districts: Rural; LI Light Industrial; Heavy Industrial.
         b.   Off-street parking requirements shall be as listed in Section
26-173 of this chapter.
      (8)   Country clubs with golf courses.
         a.   Use districts: Rural Residential; Residential, Single-Family,
Estate; Residential, Single-Family, Low Density; Residential, Single-Family,
Medium Density; Residential, Single- Family, High Density; Manufactured Home
Park; Residential, Multi-Family, Medium Density; Residential, Multi- Family,
High Density.
         b.   There shall be a minimum fifty (50) foot setback between
clubhouses, swimming pools, lighted tennis courts, or athletic fields and
adjacent residentially zoned or used properties.
      (9)   Dormitories.
         a.   Use districts: Office and Institutional; General Commercial.
         b.   The property on which the use is located shall be within a one-
half (½) mile radius of property developed as the primary campus of the
representing college or university.
      (10)   Dwellings, single-family, zero lot line, common.  
         a.   Use districts: Residential, Single-Family, Medium Density;
Residential, Single- Family, High Density.
         b.   The lot proposed for zero lot line development must be under the
same ownership at the time of initial construction or the owner of adjacent
properties must record an agreement or deed restriction in writing to the
development of zero setback. The maintenance and drainage easement required in
e. below must be provided as part of this agreement and deed restriction.
         c.   One (1) dwelling unit shall be placed on one interior side
property line with a zero (0) setback and the dwelling unit setback on the
other interior side property line shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet.
Patios, pools, garden features, and other similar elements shall be permitted
within the twelve (12) foot setback area, provided, however, no structure shall
be placed within easements required by e. below.
         d.   The wall of a dwelling located on the lot line shall have no
windows, doors, air conditioning units, or any other types of openings. An
atrium or court shall be permitted on the zero lot line side when such court or
atrium is enclosed by two (2) walls of the dwelling unit and a solid wall of at
least six (6) feet in height is provided on the zero lot line extending to the
front and/or rear of the dwelling unit. Said wall shall be constructed of the
same materials as exterior walls of the unit.
         e.   A perpetual five (5) foot maintenance easement shall be provided
on the lot adjacent to the zero lot line property which shall be kept clear of
structures. This easement shall be shown on the plat and incorporated into each
deed transferring title to the property. Roof overhangs and footings may
penetrate the easement on the adjacent lot a maximum of twenty-four (24)
inches, but the roof shall be so designed that water runoff from the dwelling
placed on the lot line is controlled by gutters or other approved methods.
      (11)   Dwellings, Manufactured Homes on Individual Lots.
         a.   Use districts: M-1 Light Industrial.
         b.   Manufactured homes must meet the standards set by the Federal
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (which
became effective June 15, 1976), as revised and in effect on the date the
application is made for a land development permit.
         c.   The tongue, axles, transporting lights, and removable towing
apparatus must be removed subsequent to final placement.
         d.   Manufactured home skirting or a continuous, permanent masonry
foundation, unpierced except for openings required by the building code for
ventilation, utilities and access, shall be installed under the manufactured
home.
      (12)   Fabricated metal products.
         a.   Use districts: LI Light Industrial.
         b.   Any building used for the manufacture of fabricated metal
products shall be no greater than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet in gross
floor area.
         c.   Operations standards set forth in Section
26-178 of this chapter shall be examined in detail during the special exception
review process.
      (13)   Glass and glass products.
         a.   Use districts: LI Light Industrial.
         b.   Any building used for the manufacture of glass and glass products
shall be no greater than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet in gross floor
area.
         c.   Operations standards set forth in Section
26-178 of this chapter shall be examined in detail during the special exception
review process.
      (14)   Group homes (10 or more).
         a.   Use districts: Residential, Multi-Family, High Density; Office
and Institutional; Neighborhood Commercial; Rural Commercial; General
Commercial.
         b.   Parking shall not be located in the required front yard, except
in the General Commercial District.
      (15)   Landfill and structural dump sites.
         a.   Use districts: Rural; Heavy Industrial.
         b.   All required local, state, and federal permits must be obtained.
         c.   Ingress and egress to the site must be from a thoroughfare or
collector road.
      (16)   Machinery.
         a.   Use districts: LI Light Industrial.
         b.   Any building used for the manufacture of machinery shall be no
greater than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet in gross floor area.
         c.   Operations standards set forth in Section
26-178 of this chapter shall be examined in detail during the special exception
review process.
      (17)   Manufacturing, not otherwise listed.
         a.   Use districts: LI Light Industrial.
         b.   Any building used for manufacturing processes fitting in this
classification shall be no greater than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet in
gross floor area.
         c.   Operations standards set forth in Section
26-178 of this chapter shall be examined in detail during the special exception
review process.
      (18)   Nursing and convalescent homes.
         a.   Use districts: Rural; Rural Residential.
         b.   Minimum lot size to establish a nursing and/or a convalescent
home shall be one (1) acre.
         c.   The front setback shall be the same as permitted in the
applicable zoning district. Side and rear setbacks shall be twenty-five (25)
feet from property lines.
         d.   No parking space or drive shall be located closer than twenty
(20) feet from any road line or property line. No parking shall be permitted in
the front yard.
      (19)   Orphanages.
         a.   Use districts: Rural; Rural Residential; Residential, Multi-
Family, Medium Density; Residential, Multi-Family, High Density.
         b.   Minimum lot size to establish an orphanage shall be one (1) acre.
         c.   The front setback shall be the same as permitted in the
applicable zoning district. Side and rear setbacks shall be twenty-five (25)
feet from property lines.
         d.   No parking space or drive shall be located closer than twenty
(20) feet from any road line or property line. No parking shall be permitted in
the front yard.
      (20)   Places of worship.
         a.   Use districts: Residential, Single-Family, Estate; Residential,
Single-Family, Low Density; Residential, Single-Family, Medium Density;
Residential, Single- Family, High Density; Manufactured Home Park.
         b.   Facilities for a place of worship located on a site of three (3)
acres or more shall have primary access to the facility from a collector of
thoroughfare road.
         c.   No parking space or drive shall be located closer than twenty
(20) feet to a residence not associated with the place of worship. No parking
area may be located in the front setback.
         d.   The front setback shall be the same as permitted in the
respective district, but shall not be less than the lesser setback of any
existing homes on adjacent lots. The side and rear setbacks shall be thirty
(30) feet.
      (21)   Racetracks and drag strips.
         a.   Use districts: Heavy Industrial.
         b.   All racetracks and drag strips shall be fully secured by fencing.
         c.   All outside edges of any racing surface or principal building
that is part of the operation of a racetrack or drag strip shall be at least
one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet from any part of the property line. No
development, including (but not limited to) parking areas, accessory buildings,
or drives, may be located in the buffer, except for permissible entryways and
exits.
         d.   No racing event may be conducted during the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and 9:00 a.m. Racing events may be conducted for a maximum of three consecutive
days, a maximum of five (5) days in a calendar week, and a maximum of six (6)
hours per day.
         e.   A traffic plan, noise mitigation plan, fire protection plan, and
lighting plan shall be provided and reviewed as part of the special exception
process. Adequate outdoor lighting shall be provided, however, all outdoor
lighting fixtures shall be installed and operated in such a manner as to
protect the roads and neighboring properties from direct glare or hazardous
interference of any kind.
      (22)   Radio, television and telecommunications and other transmitting
towers.
         a.   Use districts: Office and Institutional; Neighborhood Commercial;
Rural Commercial; General Commercial; M-1 Light Industrial.
         b.   Communication towers shall have a maximum height of three hundred
(300) feet. For towers on buildings, the maximum height shall be twenty (20)
feet above the roofline of buildings forty (40) feet or four stories in height
or less. For buildings greater than four stories or forty-one (41) feet in
height, the maximum height of communication towers shall be forty feet above
the roofline. The minimum setbacks for communication towers from abutting
districts shall be as follows:
            1.   Communication towers abutting a residentially zoned parcel
shall have a minimum setback of one (1) foot for each foot of height of the
tower as measured from the base of the tower. The maximum required setback
shall be two hundred and fifty (250) feet shall have a minimum setback of one
(1) foot for every one (1) foot of tower height or one hundred (100) percent of
the tower's fall zone, plus a safety factor of ten (10) percent; whichever is
less. Fall zones shall be certified in the form of a letter from an engineer,
licensed by the State of South Carolina, that includes the engineer's original
signature and seal. The fall zone shall not encroach onto structures on any
property; nor shall the fall zone encroach onto adjacent properties, unless the
owner of the adjacent property signs a waiver. The waiver shall be in a
recordable waiver document and shall indemnify and hold the county harmless. In
no case shall the fall zone encroach into a public right-of-way. Additionally,
the owner of the tower shall agree in writing to indemnify and hold Richland
County harmless from and against any liability arising out of damage to real or
personal property or injury to any person or in any way connected with the
construction of, erection of, maintenance of, and/or collapse of the
communication tower and antenna, including the removal of said communication
tower and antenna.
            2.   Communication towers abutting a non-residentially zoned parcel
with a habitable residential dwelling shall have a minimum setback of fifty
(50) feet.
            3.   Communication towers abutting a non-residentially zoned parcel
without a habitable residential dwelling shall observe the setbacks of the
district in which it is located.
         d.   The proposed user must show proof of an attempt to collocate on
existing communication towers, and must be willing to allow other users to
collocate on the proposed tower in the future subject to engineering
capabilities of the structure. Evidence of an attempt to collocate must show
that alternative towers, buildings, or other structures are not available for
use within the applicant's tower site search area that are structurally capable
of supporting the intended antenna or meeting the applicant's necessary height
criteria, or provide a location free of interference from other communication
towers.
      e.   Towers shall be illuminated as required by the Federal
Communications Commission, Federal Aviation Administration, or other regulatory
agencies. However, no nighttime strobe lighting shall be incorporated unless
required by the Federal Communications Commission, the Federal Aviation
Administration, or other regulatory agency.
      f.   Each communication tower and associated buildings shall be enclosed
within a fence at least seven (7) feet in height.
      g.   Each communication tower site shall be landscaped in accordance with
the requirements of Section 26-176 of this chapter.
      h.   No signage may be attached to any portion of a communications tower.
Signs for the purpose of identification, warning, emergency function or contact
or other as required by applicable state or federal rule, law, or regulation
may be placed as required by standard industry practice.
      i.   A communications tower which is no longer used for communications
purposes must be dismantled and removed within one hundred twenty (120) days of
the date the tower is taken out of service.
      (23)   Rooming and boarding houses.
         a.   Use districts: Residential, Multi-Family, High Density; Office
Institutional; Neighborhood Commercial; Rural Commercial.
         b.   The owner or the manager of the boarding house shall reside on
the premises.
         c.   Not over fifty percent (50%) of the heated floor area of the
rooming or boarding house shall be used for sleeping quarters.
         d.   Parking shall be provided as required in Section
26-173 of this chapter. Parking shall be located on the same lot on which the
boardinghouse is located, at the rear of the lot and screened from the adjacent
properties with vegetation.
      (24)   Scrap and recyclable materials.
         a.   Use district: M-1 and LI Light Industrial; Heavy Industrial.
         b.   Stocks and supplies shall be either stored inside enclosed
structures or screened by solid walls, opaque fences, dense evergreen shrubbery
or the like so that they are not visible from any public road or from the
ground level of adjacent property used for residential or office purposes.
         c.   Any required front or secondary front yard shall not be used for
storage.
         d.   The side yard setback for storage areas and buildings adjacent to
residential or office uses shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet.
         e.   The wholesale business shall be conducted in such a manner as to
prevent tracking and spillage of debris onto adjacent properties or roads.
      (25)   Shooting ranges, outdoor.
         a.   Use districts: Rural; Heavy Industrial.
         b.   Adequate provision shall be made for the safety of surrounding
property owners.
         c.   Setback requirements shall be at least 200 yards from adjacent
property lines.
         d.   Hours of operation shall be limited to 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
      (26)   Special congregate facilities.
         a.   Use districts: Office and Institutional; General Commercial.
         b.   The facility shall be operated and contained within the building
of and operated by a governmental agency or a nonprofit organization.
         c.   The facility operator(s) shall provide continuous on-site
supervision by an employee(s) and/or a volunteer(s) during the hours of
operations.
         d.   No such facility shall be located within one quarter (1/4) mile
of an existing congregate facility. The Board of Zoning Appeals may, however,
in reviewing a special exception application, permit the clustering of special
congregate facilities if it is determined that the location of such uses will
not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public
welfare.
         e.   For the purpose of noise abatement, organized outdoor activities
may only be conducted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
         f.   The provider shall have a written management plan including, as
applicable, provisions for staff training, neighborhood outreach, security,
screening of residents to insure compatibility with services provided at the
facility, and for training, counseling, and treatment programs for residents.
         g.   The facility shall be located within one-half (1/2) mile of an
existing bus route or a public transit transfer station.
         h.   Facilities shall establish and maintain set hours for client
intake/discharge. These hours shall be posted at the site. There shall be no
loitering at the facility or in the surrounding area when the facility is
closed. It is the responsibility of the facility to enforce this requirement.
         i.   Unless provided at the facility, the facility shall be located
within one-half (1/2) mile of the following:
            1.   Professional services, such as doctor's offices and legal
services;
            2.   Grocery stores;
            3.   Job development centers; and
            4.   Providers of services often utilized by the cliental, (i.e.,
medical clinics, food banks, public transportation).
         j.   No facility shall be located within:
            1.   Three hundred (300) feet of any residential district;
            2.   One thousand (1,000) feet of a public or private daycare,
elementary or secondary school; and/or
            3.   One thousand (1,000) feet of a public park or public library.
      (27)   Swim and tennis clubs.
         a.   Use districts: Rural; Rural Residential; Residential, Single-
Family, Estate; Residential, Single-Family, Low Density; Residential, Single-
Family, Medium Density; Residential, Single- Family, High Density; Manufactured
Home Park; Residential, Multi-Family, Medium Density; Residential, Multi-
Family, High Density; Office and Institutional; Neighborhood Commercial; Rural
Commercial, L-I Light Industrial.
         b.   There shall be a minimum fifty (50) foot setback between
clubhouses, swimming pools, lighted tennis courts, or athletic fields and
adjacent residentially zoned or used property.
         c.   Lights shall be positioned so as not to shine onto adjacent
properties.
         d.   Swimming pools shall be protected by a fence or equal enclosure,
a minimum of four (4) feet in height and equipped with a self-closing gate
provided with hardware for permanent locking.
      (28)   Textile product mills.
         a.   Use districts: LI Light Industrial.
         b.   Any building used for the manufacture of textile products shall
be no greater than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet in gross floor area.
         c.   Operations standards set forth in Section
26-178 of this chapter shall be examined in detail during the special exception
review process.
      (29)   Theaters, motion picture, drive-ins.
         a.   Use districts: Rural Commercial; General Commercial; LI Light
Industrial.
         b.   Drive-in theaters shall be located a minimum of one hundred (100)
feet from any property zoned or utilized for residential purposes.
         c.   Access shall be provided from thoroughfare or collector roads.
      (30)   Theaters, motion picture, other than drive- ins.
         a.   Use districts: Neighborhood Commercial.
         b.   Buildings shall have a maximum seating capacity of three hundred
(300) seats.
      (31)   Transportation equipment.
         a.   Use districts: LI Light Industrial.
         b.   Any building used for the manufacture of transportation equipment
shall be no greater than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet in gross floor
area.
         c.   Operations standards set forth in Section
26-178 of this chapter shall be examined in detail during the special exception
review process.
      (32)   Waste collection, hazardous.
         a.   Use districts: Heavy Industrial.
         b.   Compliance with state and federal regulations is required.
         c.   Access shall be provided only onto thoroughfare and collector
roads.
         d.   Operations shall be located no closer than one hundred (100) feet
to any adjacent property line.
      (33)   Waste treatment and disposal, hazardous.
         a.   Use districts: Heavy Industrial.
         b.   Compliance with state and federal regulations is required.
         c.   Access shall be provided only onto thoroughfare and collector
roads.
         d.   Operations shall be located no closer than one hundred (100) feet
to any adjacent property line.
      (34)   Zoos and Botanical Gardens.
         a.   Use districts: Rural District; Office and Institutional; Rural
Commercial.
         b.   There shall be a minimum one hundred (100) foot setback between
all activities associated with the use and any adjacent residential property.
         c.   All zoos and botanical gardens shall have primary access to
collector or thoroughfare roads.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 021-06HR, § I, 3-21-06; Ord. No.
010-07HR, §§ II, III, 2-20-07; Ord. No. 042-08HR, § I, 7-15-08; Ord. No. 054-
08HR, §§ VII, VIII, 9-16-08; Ord. No. 008-09HR, §§ IX, X, 2-17-09; Ord. No.
040-09HR, § I, 7-21-09; Ord. No. 038-12HR, §§ IV, V, 6-19-12; Ord. No. 066-
13HR, § I, 11-19-13; Ord. No. 071-14HR, §§ V, VI, 12-9-14; Ord. No. 020-16HR, §
I, 6-7-16; Ord. No. 063-18HR, §§ IV, V, 12-11-18)
Secs. 26-153 - 26-170. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. GENERAL DEVELOPMENT, SITE, AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Sec. 26-171. General.
   (a)   Purpose. This article sets forth standards for land development in the
unincorporated areas of Richland County, South Carolina, concerning a variety
of different development issues. These standards are designed to ensure the
compatibility of development within the county and to implement the policies
found in the county’s comprehensive plan. The applicability of the standards
set forth in this article may vary based on the use, location, and zoning
district (as set forth in this chapter). The criteria set forth in this
article, as with all other requirements, must be satisfied before an
application for development will be approved.
   (b)   Buffers. All required and/or approved buffers, provided from existing
vegetation and/or an approved landscape plan, for a project, shall not be
disturbed, and trees and shrubs shall be preserved by the owner.
   (c)   Common areas and open space. All required and/or approved common
areas, open space, recreation areas, and planted and/or vegetative areas shall
be preserved as such and shall not change to another use unless plans are
submitted to and approved by the Development Review Team.
   (d)   Utilities. Prior to the installation of utility lines and related
appurtenances, unless within the approved limits of clearing and noted on
approved plans, the utility provider shall submit plans to the planning
department and a land disturbance permit and land development permit issued
pursuant to the requirements of Sections
26-53,
26-54 and
26-64(a).
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 019-09HR, § I, 3-17-09)
Sec. 26-172. Density and dimensional standards.
   (a)   Number of principal buildings per lot.
      (1)   General. The number of principal buildings allowed on an individual
lot is limited as set forth in Article V. of this chapter.
      (2)   Single-family dwellings. There shall be no more than one single-
family dwelling on an individual lot in a single-family residential zoning
district except for permitted accessory dwellings.
   (b)   Required setbacks; allowable encroachment into required setbacks.
      (1)   General. No building, structure, or land shall be used or occupied
and no building structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, moved, or altered unless it meets the minimum setback
requirements established in Article V. for the use or overlay district in which
it is located, except as otherwise established in this chapter.
      (2)   Method of calculation.
         a.   Minimum setback. Minimum setback is the space defined by
measuring perpendicularly from and along the entire boundary of the lot
(property line) to the building line. A setback may be a front, side, or rear
setback.
         b.   Overlap of setbacks. When more than one setback depth applies,
the greatest setback dimension requirement must be met.
      (3)   Setbacks for lots with more than one road frontage. Structures
shall meet the front yard requirements for all sides of the structure abutting
public roads. Where one (1) of the front yards that would normally be required
on a through lot is not in keeping with the prevailing yard pattern, the zoning
administrator may waive the requirement for the normal front yard. In its
place, a special yard requirement shall be determined as specified in
subsection (4) below.
      (4)   Adjusting building lines. Where there are lots that comprise fifty
percent (50%) or more of the lots on the same side of the block as the lot in
question which are developed with less than the required road setbacks, the
average setback of the two (2) principal buildings nearest the lot in question
shall be observed as the minimum front yard setback.
      (5)   Projections into required yards. The general definition of yards is
set forth in Section
26-22 of this chapter. However, the general definition will be construed
subject to the following exceptions and interpretations:
         a.   Objects specifically excluded. Those objects that are
specifically excluded from the definition of a structure under Section
26-22 shall not be subject to regulation as an interpretation of the definition
of yard.
         b.   Steps and open porches. Steps and open porches without roofs
shall be allowed in any required yard to within five (5) feet of an adjoining
property line. Decks, whether covered or uncovered, do not fall within this
exemption and must meet all applicable yard requirements.
         c.   Screening or retaining walls and fences.  Screening or retaining
walls and fences may be permitted in a required yard upon the determination of
the planning department that the fence or wall:
            1.   Does not impede site vision clearance for driveways or roads.
            2.   Does not include gates that swing outward into sidewalks or
public rights-of-way.
            3.   Front yard fences may not exceed four (4) feet in height.
            4.   Fences and walls shall not exceed seven (7) feet in height
when located in the required side and rear yards; provided, however, retaining
walls are excluded from this limitation.
         d.   Architectural features. Eaves, cornices, gutters, or other minor
architectural features projecting less than twenty-four (24) inches from the
main portion of a building shall be allowed to project into any yard.
         e.   Canopy/awning projections. Canopies or awnings covering windows,
doors, or other openings of commercial or industrial uses shall be allowed to
project forty-eight (48) inches into required front yards provided they do not
constitute a substantial impediment to visibility across such yards which would
contribute to the creation of a traffic hazard, and further that such
projection would not interfere with public use of any adjacent sidewalk and/or
public road.
         f.   Service station and convenience store canopy projections. Service
station and convenience store gasoline island canopies may be located in the
front yard setback, provided that no equipment or part of the canopy is located
closer than fifteen (15) feet to a road right-of-way line.
         g.   At-grade impervious surfaces. At-grade impervious surfaces, such
as patios, shall be allowed to encroach into the side or rear yards. In no
case, shall such surfaces be located closer than five (5) feet to a side or
rear property line. Driveways are not included in this category and may
encroach upon front side or rear yards.
   (c)   Height restrictions.
      (1)   General. For the purpose of this chapter, the height of a building
shall be measured from the average finished ground elevation at the base of the
structure to the highest point of the roof of the structure.
      (2)   Exceptions. Spires, belfries, cupolas, chimneys, water tanks,
ventilators, elevator housings, mechanical equipment, or other structures
placed above the roof level and not intended for human occupancy shall not be
subject to height limitations. Antennas on buildings are subject to height
requirements.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 012-16HR, § I, 3-15-16)
Sec. 26-173. Off-street parking standards.
   (a)   General requirements. Permanent off-street parking is required in all
districts unless otherwise specified. Such parking shall be provided in the
amount required by this section at the time of erection, alteration,
enlargement, establishment, or change in any building or land use. Any permit
application submitted to the planning department shall include information as
to the location and dimensions of off- street parking and the means of ingress
and egress to such space.
   (b)   Parking requirements for a change in use. If a change in use causes an
increase in the required number of off-street parking, stacking, or loading
spaces, such additional spaces shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of this section. However, if a change in use would require an
increase of less than five percent (5%) of the required number of parking
spaces, or less than five (5) spaces, no additional off-street parking shall be
required.
   (c)   Number of spaces required. The requirements for off-street parking are
set forth in the table below. The number of spaces required will be rounded to
the nearest whole number. For uses not covered in this table, the parking
requirements shall be those of the most similar use as determined by the zoning
administrator.
TABLE 26-VII-1
OFF-STREET PARKING STANDARDS
                 PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
TYPE OF LAND USE         *(Mid-range to Maximum must enhance water quality
                 Minimum treatment)
                            Mid-ran   Maximum**
TYPE OF LAND   PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
USE            Minimum     *(Mid-range to Maximum must enhance water quality treatment)
                              Mid-range                                                                  Maximum**
Agricultural                                                                                            
Uses
Animal and     No                                                                                        No
Crop           Requirement    N/A                                                                     Requirement
Production
               One (1)                                                                                   One (1)
               Space for                                                                                 Space for
Animal and/or  Every Two                                                                                 Every
Crop           (2)                                                                                       Employee on
Production     Employees                                                                                 Shift of
Support        on Shift of Two (2) Spaces for Every Three (3) Employees on Shift of Greatest Employment  Greatest
Services and   Greatest    Plus One (1) for Every 250 GFA in the Operation                               Employment
Forestry       Employment                                                                                Plus One (1)
Support        Plus One                                                                                  for Every
Services       (1) for                                                                                   200 GFA in
               Every 300                                                                                 the
               GFA in the                                                                                Operation
               Operation
Forest         One (1) for                                                                               One (1) for
Nurseries      Every Five  One (1) for Every Three and One-Half (3½) Acres                              Every Two
               (5) Acres                                                                                 (2) Acres
Veterinary     One (1) for                                                                               One (1) for
Services       Every 250   One (1) for Every 225 GFA                                                     Every 200
(Livestock)    GFA                                                                                       GFA
                                                                                                       
Residential                                                                                             
Uses
Accessory      One (1) Per    N/A                                                                     One (1) Per
Dwellings      Dwelling                                                                                  Dwelling
               One (1) for
               Every Two                                                                                 One Per Room
               (2) Rooms                                                                                 Plus One (1)
Boardinghouses Plus One    Two (2) for Every Three (3) Rooms Plus One (1) for the Resident Manager       for the
               (1) for the                                                                               Resident
               Resident                                                                                  Manager
               Manager
               As for                                                                                    As for
               Single-                                                                                   Single-
Child and      Family                                                                                    Family
Adult Day Care Dwellings,     N/A                                                                     Dwellings,
Homes, Family  Plus One                                                                                  Plus Two (2)
               (1)                                                                                       Additional
               Additional                                                                                Spaces
               Space
               One (1) for                                                                               Two (2) for
               Every                                                                                     Every
               Dwelling                                                                                  Dwelling
               Unit Plus                                                                                 Unit Plus
Continued Care One (1) for One and One-Half (1½) for Every Dwelling Unit Plus One (1) for Every Two (2) One (1) for
Retirement     Every Two   Employees on Shift of Greatest Employment                                     Every
Communities    (2)                                                                                       Employee on
               Employees                                                                                 the Shift of
               on Shift of                                                                               Greatest
               Greatest                                                                                  Employment
               Employment
*   Mid-range to Maximum must incorporate water quality treatment. If the number of spaces exceeds the Mid-range, the
parking spaces over Mid-range shall incorporate a water quality feature, such as bioretention or other low impact
development practices (see "Richland County Best Management Practices Manual"); or alternatively, if the number of
spaces exceeds the Mid-range, five percent (5%) of the entire parking lot area shall incorporate a water quality
feature, such as bioretention or other low impact development practices (see "Richland County Best Management
Practices Manual"). Retention/detention ponds shall not be considered as meeting this water quality feature
requirement.
**   Maximum ratios indicate the maximum amount of impervious parking allowed. Parking may exceed the maximum amount
provided that such additional area must be constructed of pervious material capable of supporting traffic flow, as
approved by the County Engineer. The applicant has to provide a pervious material maintenance plan if using a
convention other than reinforced turf.
 
                 PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
TYPE OF LAND USE         *(Mid-range to Maximum must enhance water quality
                 Minimum treatment)
                            Mid-ran   Maximum**
TYPE OF LAND  PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
USE           Minimum      *(Mid-range to Maximum must enhance water quality treatment)
                              Mid-range                                     Maximum**
Residential                                                                
Uses (Cont'd)
Dwellings,
Two-Family or
Single-       Two (2)                                                       Three (3)
Family,       Spaces for                                                    Spaces for
Townhouses,   Every           N/A                                        Every
or            Dwelling                                                      Dwelling
Manufactured  Unit                                                          Unit
Homes on
Individual
Lots
              Two (2)                                                       Three (3)
Dwellings,    Spaces for   Two and One-Half (2½) Spaces for Every Dwelling Spaces for
Multi-Family  Every        Unit                                             Every
              Dwelling                                                      Dwelling
              Unit                                                          Unit
Manufactured  Two (2) Per                                                   Three (3)
Home Parks    Manufactured Two and One-Half (2½)Per Manufactured Home      Per Home
              Home
              One (1) Per
              Resident                                                      One (1) Per
              Staff Plus                                                    Resident
              Two (2) for                                                   Staff Plus
              Every Three                                                   One (1) for
Special       (3) Staff/                                                    Every Staff/
Congregate    Volunteers                                                    Volunteer on
Facilities    on Shift of     N/A                                        Shift of
             Greatest                                                      Greatest
              Employment                                                    Employment
              Plus One (1)                                                  Plus One (1)
              for Each                                                      for Each
              Vehicle Used                                                  Vehicle Used
              in the                                                        in Operation
              Operation
                                                                          
Institutional
and Civic                                                                  
Uses
              One (1) Per                                                   One (1) Per
              Six (6)                                                       Three (3)
Auditoriums,  Seats or One One (1) Per Four (4) Seats or One (1) per Forty  Seats or One
Public        (1) per      (40) GFA (If No Seats)                           (1) Per
Assembly      Fifty (50)                                                    Thirty (30)
              GFA (If No                                                    GFA (If No
              Seats)                                                        Seats)
              One (1) Per                                                   One (1) Per
              Every Two                                                     Every
              (2)                                                           Employee on
              Employees on                                                  Shift of
Child and     Shift of                                                      Greatest
Adult Day     Greatest        N/A                                        Employment
Care Centers  Employment                                                    Plus One (1)
              Plus One (1)                                                  Space for
              Space for                                                     Every Ten
              Every Ten                                                     (10)
              (10)                                                          Children
              Children
Civic, Social One (1) Per                                                   One (1) Per
and Fraternal 350 GFA      One (1) Per 300 GFA                              250 GFA
Organizations
*   Mid-range to Maximum must incorporate water quality treatment. If the number of
spaces exceeds the Mid-range, the parking spaces over Mid-range shall incorporate a
water quality feature, such as bioretention or other low impact development practices
(see "Richland County Best Management Practices Manual"); or alternatively, if the
number of spaces exceeds the Mid-range, five percent (5%) of the entire parking lot area
shall incorporate a water quality feature, such as bioretention or other low impact
development practices (see "Richland County Best Management Practices Manual").
Retention/detention ponds shall not be considered as meeting this water quality feature
requirement.
**   Maximum ratios indicate the maximum amount of impervious parking allowed. Parking
may exceed the maximum amount provided that such additional area must be constructed of
pervious material capable of supporting traffic flow, as approved by the County
Engineer. The applicant has to provide a pervious material maintenance plan if using a
convention other than reinforced turf.
 
                 PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
TYPE OF LAND USE         *(Mid-range to Maximum must enhance water quality
                 Minimum treatment)
                            Mid-ran   Maximum**
                    PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
TYPE OF LAND USE                        *(Mid-range to Maximum must enhance
                    Minimum             water quality treatment)
                                           Mid-range        Maximum**
Institutional and
Civic
Uses (Cont'd)
                    Two (2) for Every                       One (1) for Every
                    Three (3) Employees                     Employee on Shift
                    on Shift of                             of Greatest
Correctional        Greatest Employment                     Employment Plus One
Institutions        Plus One (1) Per       N/A        (1) Per Five (5)
                    Six (6) Inmates                         Inmates Plus One
                    Plus One (1) for                        (1) for Each
                    Each Vehicle Used                       Vehicle Used in
                    in the Operation                        Operation
                    One (1) Per 350 GFA                     One (1) Per 250 GFA
                    Plus Two (2) for                        Plus One (1) for
                    Every Three (3)                         Every Employee on
Country Clubs       Employees on Shift     N/A           Shift of Greatest
                    of Greatest                             Employment Plus Six
                    Employment Plus                         (6) for Each Golf
                    Four (4) for Each                       Course Hole
                    Golf Course Hole
                    One (1) Per
                    Employee/ Volunteer
Emergency Service   on Shift of            N/A           No Requirement
Facilities          Greatest Employment
                    Plus One (1) Per
                    Vehicle
Government
Buildings/          One (1) Per 300 GFA One (1) Per 225 GFA One (1) Per 150 GFA
Facilities
                    One (1) Per Four    One (1) Per Three   One (1) Per Two (2)
                    (4) Beds Plus One   (3) Beds Plus One   Beds Plus One (1)
Hospitals           (1) Per Employee/   (l)Per Employee/    Per Employee/
                    Volunteer on Shift  Volunteer on Shift  Volunteer on Shift
                    of Greatest         of Greatest         of Greatest
                    Employment          Employment          Employment
                    One (1) Per 500 GFA                     One (1) Per 300 GFA
                    for Public Use Plus                     for Public Use Plus
Museums, Galleries, Two (2) Per Three                       One (1) Per
Libraries           (3) Employees/         N/A           Employee/Volunteer
                    Volunteers on Shift                     on Shift of
                    of Greatest                             Greatest Employment
                    Employment
Religious           One (1) Per Four    One (1) Per Three   One (1) Per Two (2)
Institutions        (4) Seats in Main   (3) Seats in Main   Seats in Main
                    Worship Space       Worship Space       Worship Space
*   Mid-range to Maximum must incorporate water quality treatment. If the
number of spaces exceeds the Mid-range, the parking spaces over Mid-range shall
incorporate a water quality feature, such as bioretention or other low impact
development practices (see "Richland County Best Management Practices Manual");
or alternatively, if the number of spaces exceeds the Mid-range, five percent
(5%) of the entire parking lot area shall incorporate a water quality feature,
such as bioretention or other low impact development practices (see "Richland
County Best Management Practices Manual"). Retention/detention ponds shall not
be considered as meeting this water quality feature requirement.
**   Maximum ratios indicate the maximum amount of impervious parking allowed.
Parking may exceed the maximum amount provided that such additional area must
be constructed of pervious material capable of supporting traffic flow, as
approved by the County Engineer. The applicant has to provide a pervious
material maintenance plan if using a convention other than reinforced turf.
 
                 PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
TYPE OF LAND USE         *(Mid-range to Maximum must enhance water quality
                 Minimum treatment)
                            Mid-ran   Maximum**
                    PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
TYPE OF LAND USE                        *(Mid-range to Maximum must enhance
                    Minimum             water quality treatment)
                                           Mid-range        Maximum**
Institutional and
Civic
Uses (Cont'd)
                    One (1) Per Three   One (1) Per Two (2) One (1) Per Room
Residential Care    (3) Rooms Plus One  Rooms Plus One(l)   Plus One (1) Per
Facilities, Halfway (1) Per Employee/   Per Employee/       Employee/Volunteer
Houses              Volunteer on Shift  Volunteer on Shift  on Shift of
                    of Greatest         of Greatest         Greatest Employment
                    Employment          Employment
Schools - Business, One (1) Per 200 GFA One (1) Per 175     One (1) Per 150 GFA
Trade, Etc.                             GFA   
                    One (1) Per Five                        One (1) Per Two (2)
Schools - Colleges  (5) Students Plus      N/A           Students Plus One
and Universities    One (1) Per                             (1) Per Employee
                    Employee
Schools -           Ten (10) Spaces     Twenty (20) Spaces  Thirty (30) Spaces
Elementary, Middle  Plus One (1) Per    Plus One (1) Per    Plus One (1) Per
                    Teacher/Staff       Teacher/Staff       Teacher/Staff
                    One (1) Per Five                        One (1) Per Two (2)
Schools - High      (5) Students Plus      N/A           Students Plus One
Schools             One (1) Per                             (1) Per Employee
                    Employee
Theaters            One (1) Per Four    One (1) Per Three   One (1) Per Two (2)
                    Seats               (3) Seats           Seats
   Recreational
Uses
                    One (1) Per 200 Sq. One (1) Per 150 Sq. One (1) Per 100 Sq.
Amusement Park      Ft. of Activity     Ft. of Activity     Ft. of Activity
                    Area                Area                Area
Athletic Fields     Twenty-five (25)    Thirty-two (32) Per Forty (40) Per
                    Per Field           Field               Field
Botanical Gardens/  No Requirement         N/A           One (1) Per 300 Sq.
Nature Preserves                                            Ft.
Golf Courses        Four (4) Per Hole   Five (5) Per Hole   Six (6) Per Hole
Public Parks and    By Function or One  By Function or One  By Function or One
Recreation          (1) Per 200 Sq. Ft. (l) Per l50 Sq. Ft  (1) Per 100 Sq. Ft.
Facilities          of Activity Area    of Activity Area    of Activity Area
*   Mid-range to Maximum must incorporate water quality treatment. If the
number of spaces exceeds the Mid-range, the parking spaces over Mid-range shall
incorporate a water quality feature, such as bioretention or other low impact
development practices (see "Richland County Best Management Practices Manual");
or alternatively, if the number of spaces exceeds the Mid-range, five percent
(5%) of the entire parking lot area shall incorporate a water quality feature,
such as bioretention or other low impact development practices (see "Richland
County Best Management Practices Manual"). Retention/detention ponds shall not
be considered as meeting this water quality feature requirement.
**   Maximum ratios indicate the maximum amount of impervious parking allowed.
Parking may exceed the maximum amount provided that such additional area must
be constructed of pervious material capable of supporting traffic flow, as
approved by the County Engineer. The applicant has to provide a pervious
material maintenance plan if using a convention other than reinforced turf.
 
                 PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
TYPE OF LAND USE         *(Mid-range to Maximum must enhance water quality
                 Minimum treatment)
                            Mid-ran   Maximum**
                         PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
TYPE OF LAND USE                           *(Mid-range to Maximum must enhance
                         Minimum           water quality treatment)
                                              Mid-range      Maximum**
   Recreational Uses
(Cont'd)
Recreation Uses, Indoor  One (1) Per 200   One (1) Per 150   One (1) Per 100
                         GFA               GFA               GFA
Riding Stables           One (1) Per Two      N/A         One (1) Per One
                         (2) Stalls                          (1) Stall
                         One (1) Per 100   One (1) Per 75    One (1) Per 50 Sq.
Swimming Pools           Sq. Ft. of Water  Sq. Ft. of Water  Ft. of Water and
                         and Deck Space    and Deck Space    Deck Space
Business, Professional
and Personal Services
                         Three (3) Per                       Four (4) Per
                         Service Bay Plus                    Service Bay Plus
                         One (1) Per                         One (1) Per
                         Service Vehicle                     Service Vehicle
Automobile Repair        Plus Two (2) for     N/A         Plus One (1) Per
                         Every Three (3)                     Employee on Shift
                         Employees on                        of Greatest
                         Shift of Greatest                   Employment
                         Employment
                         One (1) Per 250   One (1) Per 187   One (1) Per 125
Banks and Financial      GFA Plus Stacking GFA Plus Stacking GFA Plus Stacking
Institutions             for Four (4)      for Four (4)      for Four (4)
                         Vehicles at Each  Vehicles at Each  Vehicles at Each
                         Drive-Thru Bay    Drive-Thru Bay    Drive-Thru Bay
                         One (1) Per Guest    N/A         One (1) Per Guest
Bed and Breakfast Homes  Room Plus One (1)                  Room Plus Two (2)
                         for Owner/Manager                   for Owner/Manager
                         One (1) Vehicle   One (1) Vehicle   One (1) Vehicle
                         Space Per 500 GFA Space Per 450 GFA Space Per 400 GFA
Car Washes               Including all     Including all     Including all
                         Service Areas,    Service Areas,    Service Areas,
                         Plus One (1) Per  Plus One (1) Per  Plus One (1) Per
                         Employee          Employee          Employee
Construction Services    One (1) Per 600   One (1) Per 400   One (1) Per 200
                         GFA               GFA               GFA
*   Mid-range to Maximum must incorporate water quality treatment. If the
number of spaces exceeds the Mid-range, the parking spaces over Mid-range shall
incorporate a water quality feature, such as bioretention or other low impact
development practices (see "Richland County Best Management Practices Manual");
or alternatively, if the number of spaces exceeds the Mid-range, five percent
(5%) of the entire parking lot area shall incorporate a water quality feature,
such as bioretention or other low impact development practices (see "Richland
County Best Management Practices Manual"). Retention/detention ponds shall not
be considered as meeting this water quality feature requirement.
**   Maximum ratios indicate the maximum amount of impervious parking allowed.
Parking may exceed the maximum amount provided that such additional area must
be constructed of pervious material capable of supporting traffic flow, as
approved by the County Engineer. The applicant has to provide a pervious
material maintenance plan if using a convention other than reinforced turf.
 
                 PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
TYPE OF LAND USE         *(Mid-range to Maximum must enhance water quality
                 Minimum treatment)
                            Mid-ran   Maximum**
                    PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
TYPE OF LAND USE                        *(Mid-range to Maximum must enhance
                    Minimum             water quality treatment)
                                           Mid-range        Maximum**
Business,
Professional and
Personal Services
(Cont'd)
                    One (1) for Every   Two (2) for Every   One (1) Per
                    Two Employees on    Three (3) Employees Employee on Shift
                    Shift of Greatest   on Shift of         of Greatest
Delivery Services   Employment Plus One Greatest Employment Employment Plus One
                    (1) Per Vehicle     Plus One (1) Per    (1) Per Vehicle
                    Used in Operation   Vehicle Used in     Used in Operation
                                        Operation
                    Three (3) Spaces                        Five (5) Spaces
                    Plus Two (2) for                        Plus One (1) Per
                    Every Three (3)                         Employee on Shift
Dry Cleaning and    Employees on Shift     N/A           of Greatest
Laundry Services    of Greatest                             Employment Plus One
                    Employment Plus One                     (1) Per Vehicle
                    (1) Per Vehicle                         Used in Operation
                    Used in Operation
Funeral Homes       One (1) Per Four    One (1) Per Three   One (1) Per Two (2)
                    (4) Seats           (3) Seats           Seats
                    Two (2) Spaces Per                      Three (3) Spaces
                    Operator Station                        Per Operator
Hair, Skin and Nail Plus One (1) Per       N/A           Station Plus One
Services            Two Employees on                        (1) Per Employee on
                    Shift of Greatest                       Shift of Greatest
                    Employment                              Employment
                    One (1) Per Room    One (1) Per Room    One (1) Per Room
Hotels and Motels,  Plus One (1) Per    Plus One (1) Per    Plus One (1) Per
Inns                800 Sq. Ft. of      6O0 Sq. Ft. of      400 Sq. Ft. of
                    Public Meeting and  Public Meeting and  Public Meeting and
                    Restaurant Space    Restaurant Space    Restaurant Space
                    One (1) Per 300 GFA                     One (1) Per 200 GFA
                    Plus Two (2) for                        Plus One (1) Per
Kennels or Pet      Every Three (3)        N/A           Employee on Shift
Grooming            Employees on Shift                      of Greatest
                    of Greatest                             Employment
                    Employment
Medical and Dental  One (1) Per 375 GFA One (1) Per 312.5   One (1) Per 250 GFA
Offices                                 GFA
                    Two (2) for Every                       One (1) for Every
Medical             Three (3) Employees    N/A           Employee on Shift
Laboratories        on Shift of                             of Greatest
                    Greatest Employment                     Employment
*   Mid-range to Maximum must incorporate water quality treatment. If the
number of spaces exceeds the Mid-range, the parking spaces over Mid-range shall
incorporate a water quality feature, such as bioretention or other low impact
development practices (see "Richland County Best Management Practices Manual");
or alternatively, if the number of spaces exceeds the Mid-range, five percent
(5%) of the entire parking lot area shall incorporate a water quality feature,
such as bioretention or other low impact development practices (see "Richland
County Best Management Practices Manual"). Retention/detention ponds shall not
be considered as meeting this water quality feature requirement.
**   Maximum ratios indicate the maximum amount of impervious parking allowed.
Parking may exceed the maximum amount provided that such additional area must
be constructed of pervious material capable of supporting traffic flow, as
approved by the County Engineer. The applicant has to provide a pervious
material maintenance plan if using a convention other than reinforced turf.
 
                 PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
TYPE OF LAND USE         *(Mid-range to Maximum must enhance water quality
                 Minimum treatment)
                            Mid-ran   Maximum**
                    PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
TYPE OF LAND USE                        *(Mid-range to Maximum must enhance
                    Minimum             water quality treatment)
                                           Mid-range        Maximum**
Business,
Professional and
Personal Services
(Cont'd)
Motion Picture      Three (3) Per 1000     N/A           One (1) Per 1000
Production          GFA                                  GFA
Offices, Not Listed One (1) Per 450 GFA One (1) Per 375 GFA One (1) Per 300 GFA
Elsewhere
Services and
Repairs, Not Listed One (1) Per 300 GFA One (1) Per 250 GFA One (1) Per 200 GFA
Elsewhere
Theaters, Drive-In  No Requirement         N/A           No Requirement
Theaters, Indoor    One (1) Per Four    One (1) Per three   One (1) Per Two (2)
                    (4) Seats           (3) Seats           Seats
Truck Washes        Three (3) Stacking     N/A           Two (2) Stacking
                    Spaces Per Stall                        Spaces Per Stall
                    Four (4) Spaces Per Five (5) Spaces Per Six (6) Spaces Per
Veterinary Services Doctor Plus One (1) Doctor Plus One (1) Doctor Plus One (1)
                    Per Employee        Per Employee        Per Employee
                    Including Doctors   Including Doctors   Including Doctors
Retail Trade and
Food Services
Drive Thru Services Stacking for Four   Stacking for Six    Stacking for Eight
Associated with     (4) Vehicles at     (6) Vehicles at     (8) Vehicles at
Food Service        Each Bay, Window or Each Bay, Window or Each Bay, Window or
Operations          Lane                Lane                Lane
                    Two (2) Per Three                       One (1) Per
                    (3) Employees on                        Employee on Shift
Fuel Oil Sales      Shift of Greatest      N/A           of Greatest
                    Employment Plus One                     Employment Plus One
                    (1) Per Vehicle                         (1) Per Vehicle
                    Used in Operation                       Used in Operation
*   Mid-range to Maximum must incorporate water quality treatment. If the
number of spaces exceeds the Mid-range, the parking spaces over Mid-range shall
incorporate a water quality feature, such as bioretention or other low impact
development practices (see "Richland County Best Management Practices Manual");
or alternatively, if the number of spaces exceeds the Mid-range, five percent
(5%) of the entire parking lot area shall incorporate a water quality feature,
such as bioretention or other low impact development practices (see "Richland
County Best Management Practices Manual"). Retention/detention ponds shall not
be considered as meeting this water quality feature requirement.
**   Maximum ratios indicate the maximum amount of impervious parking allowed.
Parking may exceed the maximum amount provided that such additional area must
be constructed of pervious material capable of supporting traffic flow, as
approved by the County Engineer. The applicant has to provide a pervious
material maintenance plan if using a convention other than reinforced turf.
 
                 PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
TYPE OF LAND USE         *(Mid-range to Maximum must enhance water quality
                 Minimum treatment)
                            Mid-ran   Maximum**
                    PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
TYPE OF LAND USE                        *(Mid-range to Maximum must enhance
                    Minimum             water quality treatment)
                                           Mid-range        Maximum**
Retail Trade and
Food Services
(Cont'd)
                    Five (5) Plus One                       Ten (10) Plus One
Motor Vehicle,      (1) Per 10,000 GFA                      (1) Per 10,000 GFA
Motorcycle,         of Display Area                         of Display Area
Recreational        Plus Two (2) Per       N/A           Plus One (1) Per
Vehicle and Similar Three (3) Employees                     Employee on Shift
Sales and Rentals   on Shift of                             of Greatest
                    Greatest Employment                     Employment
                    One (1) Per Four    One (1) Per Three   One (1) Per Two (2)
                    (4) Seats Plus Two  (3) Seats Plus Four Seats Plus One (1)
Restaurants         (2) Per Three (3)   (4) Per Six (6)     Per Employee on
                    Employees on Shift  Employees on Shift  Shift of Greatest
                    of Greatest         of Greatest         Employment
                    Employment          Employment
Retail Sales,
Except Those Listed One (1) Per 250 GFA One (1) Per 200 GFA One (1) Per 150 GFA
Below
Retail Sales of
Bulk Items Which
Require Large
Amounts of Floor
Space for the       One (1) Per 600 GFA One (1) Per 500 GFA One (1) Per 400 GFA
Number of Items
Offered for Sale
(i.e., Appliances,
Furniture, etc.)
                    Three (3) Per                           Four (4) Per
                    Service Bay Plus                        Service Bay Plus
                    One (1) Per Service                     One (1) Per Service
Service Stations,   Vehicle Plus Two       N/A           Vehicle Plus One
Gasoline            (2) Per Three (3)                       (1) Per Employee on
                    Employees on Shift                      Shift of Greatest
                    of Greatest                             Employment
                    Employment
Shopping Centers -  One (1) Per 375 GFA One (1) Per 312.5   One (1) Per 250 GFA
Mixed Use                               GFA
   Wholesale Trade
Market Showrooms    One (1) Per 2000    One (1) per 1500    One (1) Per 1000
                    GFA                 GFA                 GFA
*   Mid-range to Maximum must incorporate water quality treatment. If the
number of spaces exceeds the Mid-range, the parking spaces over Mid-range shall
incorporate a water quality feature, such as bioretention or other low impact
development practices (see "Richland County Best Management Practices Manual");
or alternatively, if the number of spaces exceeds the Mid-range, five percent
(5%) of the entire parking lot area shall incorporate a water quality feature,
such as bioretention or other low impact development practices (see "Richland
County Best Management Practices Manual"). Retention/detention ponds shall not
be considered as meeting this water quality feature requirement.
**   Maximum ratios indicate the maximum amount of impervious parking allowed.
Parking may exceed the maximum amount provided that such additional area must
be constructed of pervious material capable of supporting traffic flow, as
approved by the County Engineer. The applicant has to provide a pervious
material maintenance plan if using a convention other than reinforced turf.
 
                 PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
TYPE OF LAND USE         *(Mid-range to Maximum must enhance water quality
                 Minimum treatment)
                            Mid-ran   Maximum**
                     PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
TYPE OF LAND USE                            *(Mid-range to Maximum must enhance
                     Minimum                water quality treatment)
                                               Mid-ran   Maximum**
Wholesale Trade
(Cont'd)
                     Two (2) Per Three (3)               One (1) Per Employee
                     Employees on Shift of               on Shift of Greatest
                     Greatest Employment                 Employment Plus
                     Plus Additional Spaces              Additional Spaces Per
Wholesale Uses       Per GFA for Area          N/A    GFA for Area Devoted
                     Devoted to Retail                   to Retail Space
                     Space According to                  According to Retail
                     Retail Trade Schedule               Trade Schedule Above
                     Above
Transportation,
Information,
Warehousing, Waste
Management and
Utilities
Broadcasting         Two (2) Per Three (3)               One (1) Per Employee
Facilities           Employees on Shift of     N/A    on Shift of Greatest
                     Greatest Employment                 Employment
Transmitting Towers, No Requirement            N/A    No Requirement
Utility Lines, Etc.
                     One (1) Per Employee
Transportation       Plus Spaces Required      N/A    No Requirement
Terminals            to Satisfy Projected
                     Peak Parking Demand
                     Two (2) Per Three (3)               One (1) Per Employee
                     Employees on Shift of               on Shift of Greatest
Utility Offices      Greatest Employment       N/A    Employment Plus One
                     Plus One (1) Per                    (1) Per Company
                     Company Vehicle                     Vehicle
                     Two (2) Per Three (3)               One (1) Per Employee
                     Employees on Shift of               on Shift of Greatest
Warehouses           Greatest Employment       N/A    Employment Plus One
                     Plus One (1) Per 350                (1) Per 300 GFA Open
                     GFA Open to the Public              to the Public
*   Mid-range to Maximum must incorporate water quality treatment. If the
number of spaces exceeds the Mid-range, the parking spaces over Mid-range shall
incorporate a water quality feature, such as bioretention or other low impact
development practices (see "Richland County Best Management Practices Manual");
or alternatively, if the number of spaces exceeds the Mid-range, five percent
(5%) of the entire parking lot area shall incorporate a water quality feature,
such as bioretention or other low impact development practices (see "Richland
County Best Management Practices Manual"). Retention/detention ponds shall not
be considered as meeting this water quality feature requirement.
**   Maximum ratios indicate the maximum amount of impervious parking allowed.
Parking may exceed the maximum amount provided that such additional area must
be constructed of pervious material capable of supporting traffic flow, as
approved by the County Engineer. The applicant has to provide a pervious
material maintenance plan if using a convention other than reinforced turf.
 
                 PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
TYPE OF LAND USE         *(Mid-range to Maximum must enhance water quality
                 Minimum treatment)
                            Mid-ran   Maximum**
                   PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
TYPE OF LAND USE                         *(Mid-range to Maximum must enhance
                   Minimum               water quality treatment)
                                            Mid-range     Maximum**
Transportation,
Information,
Warehousing, Waste
Management and
Utilities
   (Cont'd)
Warehouses, Self-  Five (5) Spaces       Seven (7) Spaces Ten (10) Spaces
Storage
Manufacturing and
Industrial Uses
                   Two (2) Per Three (3)                  One (1) Per Employee
Manufacturing/     Employees on Shift of                  on Shift of Greatest
Industrial Uses    Greatest Employment      N/A        Employment Plus One
                   Plus One (1) Per                       (1) Per Company
                   Company Vehicle                        Vehicle
*   Mid-range to Maximum must incorporate water quality treatment. If the
number of spaces exceeds the Mid-range, the parking spaces over Mid-range
shall incorporate a water quality feature, such as bioretention or other low
impact development practices (see "Richland County Best Management Practices
Manual"); or alternatively, if the number of spaces exceeds the Mid-range,
five percent (5%) of the entire parking lot area shall incorporate a water
quality feature, such as bioretention or other low impact development
practices (see "Richland County Best Management Practices Manual"). Retention/
detention ponds shall not be considered as meeting this water quality feature
requirement.
**   Maximum ratios indicate the maximum amount of impervious parking allowed.
Parking may exceed the maximum amount provided that such additional area must
be constructed of pervious material capable of supporting traffic flow, as
approved by the County Engineer. The applicant has to provide a pervious
material maintenance plan if using a convention other than reinforced turf.
 
   (d)   Design of parking areas. See also Section
26-176(g) of this chapter concerning vehicular surface area landscaping.
      (1)   Paving and general design.
         a.   General. Off-street parking areas developed to meet the minimum
requirements of this chapter shall be properly graded, marked, and improved
lots or within parking structures.
         b.   Paving material. Parking areas for all projects, except single-
family detached and two-family dwellings, shall be improved and maintained with
such material of sufficient thickness and consistency to support anticipated
volume and weights. Porous paving blocks and pervious paving materials are
permitted and encouraged as material for parking lots. The use of grass as a
parking lot surface is permitted for overflow parking.
         c.   Border barricades. Except in a single- family detached dwelling,
a rail, fence, curb, or other continuous barricade sufficient to retain the
parked vehicles completely within the property shall be provided, except at the
entrance and exit drives.
         d.   Entrances and exits. The location and design of all entrances and
exits shall be designed in accordance with the county regulations on traffic
engineering. No entrance or exit point for a nonresidential use that is not
permitted in an adjacent residential district shall be located within fifteen
(15) feet of a lot within the adjacent residential zoning district.
      (2)   Maneuvering space.
         a.   General. All off-street parking areas, with the exception of
parking areas for single-family detached, two-family dwellings, and townhouses,
shall be so designed that vehicles will not be required to back onto a public
road when leaving the premises. All parking areas shall be designed so that
there is sufficient area for access to all parking spaces and safe maneuvering
within the parking area.
         b.   Aisle widths. The minimum aisle widths between parking areas are:
            1.   Ninety (90)-degree parking - Twenty-five (25 feet)
            2.   Sixty (60)-degree parking - Twenty (20) feet
            3.   Forty-five (45)-degree parking - Fifteen (15) feet
   (3)   Size of spaces. The minimum size of one parking space shall be nine
(9) feet in width and eighteen (18) feet in depth; provided, however, up to
twenty-five percent (25%) of the total parking provided may consist of compact
parking spaces, which shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet in width and sixteen
(16) feet in depth. All parallel parking spaces shall be nine (9) feet in width
by twenty-six (26) feet in depth. See subsection (4) below for standards for
accessible parking spaces.
      (4)   Accessible spaces. Where parking is provided, accessible parking
spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements set forth in this
subsection.
         a.   Number of spaces. The required number of accessible parking
spaces shall be provided in accordance with the following table:
TABLE VII-2
                   (Column A)
Total Number of    Total Minimum Number Van-Accessible      Accessible Parking
Parking Spaces     of Accessible        Parking Spaces with Spaces with minimum
Provided (per lot) Parking Spaces       minimum 96"-wide    60"-wide access
                   (60 " and 90"        access aisle        aisle
                   aisles)
TABLE VII-2
                   (Column A)
Total Number of    Total Minimum Number Van-Accessible      Accessible Parking
Parking Spaces     of Accessible        Parking Spaces with Spaces with minimum
Provided (per lot) Parking Spaces       minimum 96"-wide    60"-wide access
                   (60 " and 90"        access aisle        aisle
                   aisles)
1 - 25             1                    1                   0
26 - 50            2                    1                   1
51 - 75            3                    1                   2
76 - 100           4                    1                   3
101 - 150          5                    1                   4
151 - 200          6                    1                   5
201 - 300          7                    1                   6
301 - 400          8                    1                   7
401 - 500          9                    2                   7
                   2% of total parking
501 - 1,000        provided for each    1/8 of Column A*    7/8 of Column A**
                   lot
1,001 and over     20, plus 1 for each  1/8 of Column A*    7/8 of Column A**
                   100 over 1,000
*   1 out of every 8 accessible spaces
**   7 out of every 8 accessible spaces
 
         b.   Location. Accessible parking spaces shall be located on the
shortest accessible route of travel from adjacent parking to an accessible
building entrance. In parking facilities that do not serve a particular
building, accessible parking spaces shall be located on the shortest route to
an accessible pedestrian entrance to the parking facility. Where buildings have
multiple accessible entrances with adjacent parking, accessible parking spaces
shall be dispersed and located near the accessible entrances.
         c.   Size of accessible spaces. Accessible parking spaces shall be
ninety-six (96) inches wide minimum and shall have an adjacent access aisle
complying with subsection d. below.
         d.   Access aisle. Parking access aisles shall be part of the
accessible route to the building and shall be provided for all accessible
spaces provided in a parking area. Two (2) parking spaces shall be permitted to
share a common access aisle. Access aisles shall be marked so as to discourage
parking in them.
            1.   Width. Van-accessible spaces require a minimum ninety-six
(96)-inch wide access aisle. All other accessible spaces shall require a
minimum sixty (60)-inch wide access aisle.
            2.   Length. Access aisles shall extend the full length of the
parking spaces they serve.
         e.   Floor or ground surfaces and clearance.  Parking spaces and
access aisles shall have surface slopes not steeper than 1:50. Access aisles
shall be at the same level of the parking spaces they serve.
         f.   Signage. Accessible parking spaces shall be identified by signs
including the International Symbol of Accessibility. Van-accessible spaces
shall have a sign designating them as van-accessible.
   (e)   Location of off-street parking. Required off- street parking shall be
provided on the same parcel as the principal structure or use, unless otherwise
set forth in this chapter or unless shared or remote parking is provided as set
forth below:
      (1)   Remote parking. If the off-street parking spaces required by this
section cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on which the principal
use is located, such space may be provided on any land within four hundred
(400) feet of the principal use. Where such remote parking is utilized to
fulfill parking requirements, the owner or authorized agent for the land upon
which such remote parking is located shall restrict the use of such parking
area for parking only in connection with the use or structure for which such
remote parking is provided. Such restriction shall be recorded by a declaration
of restrictions properly filed with the Register of Deeds for Richland County,
which may be released only with written consent of the county. Remote parking
for a use shall not be established in any district that does not allow that
use.
      (2)   Shared parking. Shared parking is encouraged for mixed use
developments where there are at least two (2) uses that customarily have
different peak parking demand characteristics. The planning department may
approve the joint use of the required parking spaces for two (2) or more uses
located on the same parcel or adjacent parcels, provided that the developer can
demonstrate that the uses will not overlap hours of operations or demand for
the same shared spaces. Any sharing of required spaces by uses located on
different parcels shall be guaranteed by written agreement between the owner of
the parking area and the owner of any use located on a different parcel and
served by the parking area. Should the uses change such that the new uses
overlap in hours of operation or demand for the shared spaces, the shared
parking approval shall become void. Parking spaces meeting the requirements of
this section shall then be required. Shared parking for a use shall not be
established in any district that does not allow that use.
   (f)   Parking of recreational vehicles, boats, and travel trailers.
      (1)   Travel or camping vehicles: Not more than one (1) travel or camping
vehicle, per family living on the premises, shall be permitted to be parked on
a lot in any residential zone. The vehicle shall not be parked in the required
front or side yard nor shall any such vehicle be parked or stored in front of
the principal structure on a residentially zoned lot. The vehicle shall not be
occupied temporarily or permanently while it is parked or stored, except in an
authorized recreational vehicle park.
      (2)   Boats or travel trailers: No boat or travel trailer shall be stored
in any required front or side yard of any residentially zoned property nor
shall any boat or travel trailer be stored or parked in front of a principal
structure on a residentially zoned lot.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 058-11HR, § I, 10-18-11; Ord. No.
055-12HR, §§ VIII, IX, 10-16-12; Ord. No. 036-15HR, §§ V, VI, 7-28-15)
Sec. 26-174. Off-street loading requirements.
   (a)   General. Every building or structure hereafter erected and used for
business, trade, or industry shall provide space as indicated herein for the
loading and unloading of vehicles, with access to a public road or alley. Such
space shall be so arranged and marked to provide for orderly and safe loading
and unloading and designed so vehicles shall maneuver for loading and unloading
entirely within the property lines of the parcel or parcel containing the
structure or use.
   (b)   Minimum number of loading spaces required.
      (1)   Retail and service businesses. One (1) space measuring ten (10)
feet by twenty-five (25) feet for each twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of
gross floor area or fraction thereof.
      (2)   Wholesale and industrial uses. Berths measuring ten (10) feet by
fifty (50) feet, as listed in Table 26-VII-3 below:
TABLE 26-VII-3
LOADING AND UNLOADING BERTH REQUIREMENTS
Square Feet of Gross Floor Area in Structure Number of Berths
Square Feet of Gross Floor Area in Structure Number of Berths
   0 - 24,999                             1
25,000 - 39,999                              2
40,000 - 99,999                              3
100,000 - 159,999                            4
160,000 - 239,999                            5
240,000 - 319,999                            6
320,000 - 399,999                            7
Each 90,000 above 399,999                    1 additional
 
   (c)   Bus and truck terminals: Sufficient spaces to accommodate the maximum
number of buses or trucks to be loaded, unloaded, or stored at the terminal at
any one time.
   (d)   Overhead clearance. All spaces developed to meet the requirements set
forth in this section shall have a minimum overhead clearance of fourteen (14)
feet.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04)
Sec. 26-175. Access.
   (a)   General. The standards contained in this section are designed to
ensure that access to development in the unincorporated parts of Richland
County does not impair the public safety and are the minimum necessary to
provide safe access to the adjacent property for both pedestrians and vehicles.
All proposed vehicle access points connecting to a public road shall conform to
the provisions of this section. Pervious materials, and two-track and shared
driveway designs, are allowed and encouraged for driveways.
   (b)   Driveway standards. All driveways shall be constructed in conformance
with the standards described below, and with the applicable portions of Section
26-181(c), regarding visibility at intersections. The term “Land Use Example”
is only illustrative of the relative size of proposed projects and is not
intended to be an exclusive list.
   TABLE 26-VII-4
   DRIVEWAY INSTALLATION STANDARDS
 
Land Use Example Driveway       Projected Trips  Min. Width (ft.) Min. Radius
                 Classification                                   Return (ft.)
1 or 2 Family                   1-20 AADTs or 1-
Residence        Low Volume     5 peak hour      10 - 24          15
                                trips
Subdivisions,                   6 - 100 peak
Apartments, or   Medium Volume  hour trips       24 - 40*         30 - 40
small commercial
Convenience
stores, gas      High Volume    101+ peak hour   Determined by    Determined by
stations or                     trips            TIA              TIA
shopping centers
* A 40-ft. driveway is usually marked with two 12-ft. wide right and left exit
lanes and one 16-ft. wide entrance lane. If a median divider is used at the
entrance, the driveway width must be increased by the width of the median.
 
   (c)   Access Point Separation Standards.
      (1)   The access separation standards provided below apply to all public
roads, except those
inside a subdivision or other development project.
   TABLE 26-VII-5
   ACCESS PONT SEPARATION STANDARDS
 
                         Minimum Access Point
                         Spacing (ft.)* on Roadways  Minimum Access Point
Posted Speed Limit (mph) > 2,000 AADTs or Access     Spacing (ft.)* on Roadways
                         Points Generating > 50 peak with AADTs < 2,000
                         hour trips
30                       160                         75
35                       220                         125
40                       275                         175
45                       325                         225
50 >                     400                         275
* Measured from the near edge of driveways.
 
In addition to the requirements described above, the Fire Marshal may require a
secondary access point to any development project.
      (2)   Major land development and major subdivisions. All proposed
parcels, including outparcels, shall be depicted int eh preliminary development
plan documents and access to such parcels shall be limited to internal points
within the project. Access may be limited to a “Right-In, Right-Out”
configuration, as may be deemed necessary.
      (3)   Shared access. The Planning department, with the consent of the
Public Works department, may require shared access agreements among adjacent
parcels, and/or installation of marginal access roads, as well as consolidation
of existing access points, as may be deemed necessary.
      (4)   Medians. The Planning department, with the consent of the Public
Works department, may require installation of raised medians by the applicant
as may be necessary to protect safe vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent
property.
      (5)   Change of land use. When there is a proposed land use change on a
developed site that affects the amount, type, or intensity of traffic activity,
the Planning department, with the consent of the Public Works department, shall
require written documentation from SCDOT regarding the adequacy of the existing
access point to safely accommodate the traffic generated by the project prior
to issuing a development permit.
   (e)   Exceptions. The Planning department, with the consent of the Public
Works department, may reduce the requirements described above, provided the
applicant can demonstrate that all physically possible alterative development
plans have been considered in an attempt to conform to the requirements and
that any hardship to compliance is not the result of self- imposed actions,
including, but not limited to, the purchase of the subject parcel, the
topography of the site, and/or the geometry of the roadway.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 038-09HR, § IX, 7-21-09; Ord. No.
027-12HR, § I, 4- 17-12; Ord. No. 055-12HR, §§ X, XI, 10-16-12)
Sec. 26-176. Landscaping standards.
   (a)   Purpose and applicability.
      (1)   Purpose. Recognizing that trees and landscaping contribute to the
public health, safety, and welfare, Richland County has set standards for
landscaping throughout the unincorporated areas of the county. Among the
benefits of trees, shrubs, and other plants are: improved air quality;
beneficial climate modification; reduction of glare, noise, odors and dust;
reduction of storm water runoff and flooding; screening of undesirable views;
provision of buffers between incompatible land uses; shelter and food for birds
and other wildlife; and the aesthetic enjoyment provided by the diversity and
dynamism of the planted landscape. All of these benefits contribute to a higher
quality of life, enhancing the appeal and economic value of both residential
and business properties in the county. It is the intent of the requirements set
forth in this section to provide for landscaping along public rights-of-way
(road protective yards), between dissimilar uses (buffer transition yards); and
in and around parking lots (vehicular surface area landscaping). Screening for
loading, trash collection, display, and utility areas is required and tree
protection standards must be met for all developments to which this section
applies. To ensure that landscaping continues to thrive and enhance the quality
of life in Richland County, requirements for maintenance are also included.
      (2)   Applicability.
         a.   Any new development must fully comply with the pertinent
requirements of this section unless specifically exempted elsewhere in this
chapter.
         Exemptions: These requirements shall not apply to:
            1.   Single-family detached and two- family dwellings. Individual
single- family detached and two-family dwellings that are located on separate
lots recorded with the Richland County Register of Deeds office, and any
existing lots zoned for single-family or two-family dwellings shown by a
recorded plat on or before July 1, 2005, shall not be subject to the
requirements set forth in this section. However, the construction in a
subdivision of single-family or two-family homes shall be subject to buffer
transition yards (Section
26-176(f)); tree protection (Section
26-176(j)), excluding street protective yards; and completion and maintenance
(Section
26-176(k)).
            2.   Public and private utilities. Public and private utilities are
not subject to the requirements of this section, except when a land development
permit or subdivision approval is required. Such utilities may include, but are
not limited to, storm drainage installation, road construction, water and sewer
construction, and electric, gas, communications, and other similar service
installations.
            3.    Existing structures and vehicular surface areas. Existing
buildings, structures, and vehicular surface areas are exempt from the
requirements of this section, unless they are involved in new construction or
expansion as explained in Section
26-176(a)(2)b. below.
         b.   Extent of compliance required. Any new development, other than
those exempted above, must fully comply with the requirements set forth in this
section:
            1.   Vehicular surface area expansions.  Any new, additional or
expanded portions of vehicular parking areas must fully comply with the
requirements for vehicular surface area landscaping (Section
26-176(g)).
            2.   Expansions. Any structure for which there is an expansion
that, singularly or collectively, equals twenty-five percent (25%) or more of
the gross floor area of an existing building and/or twenty-five percent (25%)
or more of the existing vehicular parking area, must comply with the
regulations of this section as follows:
               [a]   Vehicular surface area requirements (Section
26-176 (g)). Full compliance with vehicular surface area requirements in the
area of expansion of said vehicular surface area and fifty percent (50%)
compliance with the interior vehicular surface area planting requirements for
the existing portions of the vehicular surface area.
               [b]   Buffer transition and street protective yards requirements
(Section
26-176(f) and Section
26-176(e)). Full compliance is required.
               [c]   Screening (Section
26-176(h)).  Full compliance with the screening standards is required for all
trash collection, loading, or display areas.
            3.   Parking reductions to facilitate compliance in existing
developments. In order to facilitate compliance in situations involving
expansion, the planning department may allow up to a ten percent (10%)
reduction in the number of off-street parking spaces. (Section
26-173 (TABLE 26-VII-1))
            4.   Any existing vehicular surface that is used to satisfy the
parking requirements for a new building must fully comply with buffer
transition and street protective yard requirements (Section
26-176(f) and Section
26-176(e)).
   (b)   Alternative compliance.
      (1)   Generally. Alternative landscaping plans or plant materials may be
used where unreasonable or impractical situations would result from application
of the landscaping requirements. Such situations may result from streams,
natural rock formations, topography, or other physical conditions; or from lot
configuration, utility easements, or other unusual site conditions.
      (2)   Approval of alternative compliance. The planning department may
approve an alternate plan that proposes different plant materials or plans
provided that the quality, effectiveness, durability, and performance are
equivalent to that required by this section. In assessing equivalent
performance of landscaping, the planning department shall take into account the
number of plantings, species, arrangement and coverage, location of plantings
on the lot, and the level of screening, height, spread, and canopy of the
plantings at maturity.
      (3)   Appeal. Decisions of the planning department regarding alternate
methods of compliance may be appealed to the board of zoning appeals.
   (c)   Landscape plan required. Prior to obtaining a land development permit
or grading permit, an applicant must receive approval of a landscape plan. A
landscape plan is to be submitted with the site plan and shall include all
information specified in the Development Design Manual. The plan shall be
prepared by a landscape architect or other qualified landscape designer.
   (d)   Planting specifications.
      (1)   Species. Trees, shrubs, and other vegetative material shall be
selected from those listed in the "Development Design Manual" or shall be
approved by the planning department. Plants shall be adapted to the site
conditions where they will be planted and native plantings shall be planted
where possible. Trees to be planted shall meet or exceed minimum industry
standards as described in ANSI Z60.1 (current version) - American Standards for
Nursery Stock. Planting shall be done according to specifications developed
from the most recent edition of the "Best Management Practices for Tree
Planting", published by the International Society of Arboriculture (www.isa-
arbor.com).
      (2)   Trees.
         a.   Size. All large and medium-maturing trees planted in accordance
with the requirements of this section, unless otherwise listed, shall be a
minimum of ten (10) feet in height, and small- maturing trees shall be a
minimum of eight (8) feet in height, when planted. All trees must be at least
two (2) inches in caliper (measured one-half foot above ground level) when
planted. However, any new trees above four (4) inches in caliper shall be
measured twelve (12) inches above the ground.
         b.   Multi-trunk trees. All multi-trunk trees must be in "tree form"
with a maximum of five (5) stems or trunks and a minimum height of eight (8)
feet at planting.
         c.   Spread relationship. The height-to-trunk caliper ratio, root ball
sizes, or spread relationship for any tree to be planted shall meet the current
"American Standards for Nursery Stock" as set forth by the American Association
of Nurserymen.
      (3)   Shrubs. All shrubs planted to meet the requirements of this
section, unless required to be larger as set forth elsewhere, shall be a
minimum of three (3) gallon container size, eighteen (18) inches in height, or
fifteen (15) inches in spread (depending on whether the growth habit is upright
or spreading) measured from the top of the root zone. Shrubs with fifteen (15)
to twenty-three (23) inches of spread shall be planted on three (3) foot
centers. Shrubs with greater than twenty- three (23) inches of spread shall be
planted on five (5) foot centers. In no event shall spacing exceed five (5)
feet on center nor shall plants be closer than two (2) feet to the edge of any
pavement.
      (4)   Mulch. All planted materials are to be mulched with an approved
material in the amount (depth and area) specified in the "Development Design
Manual".
      (5)   Design. All required landscape areas shall conform to the design
principles and standards set forth in the county's "Development Design Manual".
      (6)   Diversity. To curtail the spread of disease or insect infestation
in a tree species, required plantings shall comply with the following
standards:
         a.   When fewer than twenty (20) trees are required on a site, at
least two (2) different species shall be utilized, in roughly equal
proportions.
         b.   When more than twenty (20), but fewer than forty (40), trees are
required to be planted on site, at least three (3) different species shall be
utilized, in roughly equal proportions.
         c.   When forty (40) or more trees are required on a site, at least
four (4) different species shall be utilized, in roughly equal proportions.
         d.   Nothing in this paragraph (6) shall be construed so as to prevent
the utilization of a larger number of different species than specified above.
   (e)   Street protective yards.
      (1)   Location. Street protective yards shall be located within twenty
(20) feet of all existing or proposed road rights-of-way that are adjacent to
the property to which this section is applicable. Such street protective yards
must be located on private property and not within any road right-of-way.
Portions of the property needed for driveways are exempt from street protective
yard requirements. No vehicular surface, storage, utility surface, display,
loading, or service area shall be permitted in a required street protective
yard.
      (2)   Width/square footage. The width of a required street protective
yard may vary on the property, but the minimum width cannot be less than seven
(7) feet and the minimum square footage of the street protective yard shall
equal the length in linear feet of the property adjacent to the right-of-way
times ten (10) feet.
      (3)   Plantings.
         a.   Required trees for residential subdivisions and commercial
developments. Each street protective yard shall contain at least one (1) large-
maturing tree, unless overhead utility lines are present. Any tree planted
within the right-of-way of an overhead utility line shall be a small-maturing
tree. If a large maturing tree is planted, a spacing of thirty-five (35) feet
must be used. If a small or medium maturing shade tree is planted, a spacing of
twenty- five (25) feet must be used. No street protective yard shall contain
less than one (1) tree. Existing trees 2-inch caliper or greater within the
street protective yard and right-of-way will be counted towards meeting this
requirement. Existing pine trees will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis.
          b.   Ground cover. The entire street protective area must be covered
with living material so that no soil is exposed, including ground cover and/or
shrubs, except for mulched areas directly around the trees.
   (f)   Buffer transition yards. The buffer transition yard is a landscaped
area designed to provide separation and screening between land uses of
different impacts.
      (1)   Determination of buffer transition yard requirements: To determine
the buffer transition yard required between two (2) adjacent land uses, the
following procedure shall be followed:
         a.   Identify the proposed new or expanding land use and each existing
adjacent land use. Identify the land use impact of each of these identified
uses as set forth in Table 26-VII-6 below. A land use is considered existing on
an adjacent property when a plan has been approved by the planning department
for the use. If adjacent property is vacant, and no plan has been approved by
the planning department for its use, its use shall be determined by assigning
it the highest level of impact in its zoning classification.
         b.   Determine the type of buffer transition yard required on each
boundary (or segment thereof) of the subject parcel by referring to Table 26-
VII-7 below. The letter designations in the table refer to the type of buffer
yard required.
         c.   Identify the buffer transition yard width and planting
requirements for the required yard type as set forth in Table 26-VII-8 below.
   This process must be applied to each property line, except where the
requirements of Section
26-176(e) concerning street protective yards apply.
      (2)   Location.
         a.   General. Buffer transition yards shall be located on the property
of the proposed or changing land use that is to be screened. Such transition
yards shall be located between the property line and any vehicular use areas,
buildings, storage, service areas, or other areas of activity on the property
to be screened and shall extend along the entire property line abutting the
less intensive land use. Ornamental entry columns and gates, flagpoles, lamp or
address posts, mailboxes, approved driveway openings, public utility wires and
poles, fences, retaining walls, or similar structures are permitted in required
buffer transition yards, provided that the general separation of land uses is
achieved and that the total number of required plantings is still met.
Plantings shall not obstruct the view of motorists using any road, driveway, or
parking aisle.
         b.   Planting/screening in easements. No vegetative screening or
fencing that is required by this section shall be planted inside utility and/or
drainage easements, excluding overhead easements, without the consent of the
planning department and the easement holder. If plantings or fences inside
utility and/or drainage easement areas are allowed, these plantings and fences
shall be maintained in accordance with the terms of consent and any applicable
maintenance provisions. Any tree planted within the right-of-way of overhead
utility lines shall be a small-maturing tree.
         c.   Buffer transition yards and required yards (setbacks). Where
front, side, or rear yards (setbacks) are required by this chapter, buffer
transition yards may be established within such setbacks. If the setback
requirement is less than the buffer transition yard requirement, the buffer
transition yard width requirement shall prevail.
      (3)   Land use impact table.
TABLE 26-VII-6
a.   Residential uses.
                                                                           Low
         Single family detached and duplexes                      Impact
                                                                           Use
                                                                           Low
         Single family low density                                Impact
                                                                           Use
                                                                           Low
         Single family medium density                             Impact
                                                                           Use
                                                                           Medium
         Single family high density                               Impact
                                                                           Use*
                                                                           Medium
         Manufactured home parks                                  Impact
                                                                           Use*
                                                                           Medium
         Multifamily, single family attached - three (3) to ten (1Impactts
                                                                           Use
                                                                           High
         Multifamily, more than ten (10) units or high- rise      Impact
                                                                           Use
b.   Institutional uses (public and semi-public). 25,000 square feet or Medium Impact
less                                                                       Use
         Over 25,000 square feet                                  High Impact
                                                                           Use
      c.   Office/commercial uses. 25,000 square feet or less     Medium Impact
                                                                           Use
         Over 25,000 square feet                                  High Impact
                                                                           Use
      d.   Industrial uses. All industrial uses                   High Impact
                                                                           Use
      e.   Recreational uses. Passive recreational uses           Low Impact Use
         Active recreational uses                                 High Impact
                                                                           Use
                                                                           For land uses
                                                                           not listed,
                                                                           the zoning
                                                                           administrator
                                                                           shall
      f.   Other uses.                                            determine the
                                                                           land use
                                                                           impact based
                                                                           on the
                                                                           classification
                                                                           of similar
                                                                           uses.
*   Denotes required buffer for the outer perimeter of the entire contiguous site
abutting any public right- of-way.
 
      (4)   Buffer transition yard types.
TABLE 26-VII-7
BUFFER TRANSITION YARD TYPES
PROPOSED USE EXISTING ADJACENT LAND USE
                        MEDIUM IMPACT MEDIUM IMPACT HIGH IMPACT HIGH IMPACT
             LOW IMPACT RESIDENTIAL   NON-          RESIDENTIAL NON-
                                      RESIDENTIAL               RESIDENTIAL
PROPOSED USE    EXISTING ADJACENT LAND USE
                           MEDIUM IMPACT MEDIUM IMPACT HIGH IMPACT HIGH IMPACT
                LOW IMPACT RESIDENTIAL   NON-          RESIDENTIAL NON-
                                         RESIDENTIAL               RESIDENTIAL
LOW IMPACT      None       B             C             C           D
MEDIUM IMPACT   B          None          C             B           D
RESIDENTIAL*
MEDIUM IMPACT   C          C             None          B           A
NON-RESIDENTIAL
HIGH IMPACT     C          B             B             A           C
RESIDENTIAL
HIGH-IMPACT
NON-            D          D             A             C           None
RESIDENTIAL
* Denotes required buffer for the outer perimeter of the entire contiguous
site abutting any public right-of-way.
 
      (5)   Buffer transition yard description table. All proposed material
planted to meet the descriptions set forth in the table below may be equally
spaced in a staggered formation along the length of the required landscape
buffer or placed so as to create one hundred percent (100%) opacity at plant
material maturity.
TABLE 26-VII-8
BUFFER TRANSITION YARD STANDARDS
TYPE "A" BUFFER
Buffer Width 1 Large-maturing Tree 1 Medium or Small-maturing 1 Shrub Per
             Per:                  Tree Per:
10 - 15 Feet 300 Square Feet       400 Square Feet            50 Square Feet
16 - 20 Feet 400 Square Feet       450 Square Feet            50 Square Feet
21 - 30 Feet 500 Square Feet       500 Square Feet            75 Square Feet
31 - 50 Feet 600 Square Feet       550 Square Feet            125 Square Feet
51+ Feet     800 Square Feet       600 Square Feet            200 Square Feet
TYPE "B" BUFFER
Buffer Width 1 Large-maturing Tree 1 Medium or Small-maturing 1 Shrub Per
             Per:                  Tree Per:
10 - 15 Feet 300 Square Feet       250 Square Feet            50 Square Feet
16 - 20 Feet 400 Square Feet       325 Square Feet            75 Square Feet
21 - 30 Feet 500 Square Feet       400 Square Feet            75 Square Feet
31 - 50 Feet 600 Square Feet       450 Square Feet            125 Square Feet
51+ Feet     800 Square Feet       500 Square Feet            200 Square Feet
TYPE "C" BUFFER
Buffer Width 1 Large-maturing Tree 1 Medium or Small-maturing 1 Shrub Per
             Per:                  Tree Per:
10 - 15 Feet 300 Square Feet       200 Square Feet            25 Square Feet
16 - 20 Feet 400 Square Feet       250 Square Feet            50 Square Feet
21 - 30 Feet 500 Square Feet       300 Square Feet            50 Square Feet
31 - 50 Feet 600 Square Feet       350 Square Feet            75 Square Feet
51+ Feet     800 Square Feet       400 Square Feet            125 Square Feet
TYPE "D" BUFFER
Buffer Width  1 Large-maturing Tree 1 Medium or Small-maturing 1 Shrub Per
              Per:                  Tree Per:
*10 - 15 Feet 300 Square Feet       200 Square Feet            50 Square Feet
16 - 20 Feet  400 Square Feet       175 Square Feet            25 Square Feet
21 - 30 Feet  500 Square Feet       275 Square Feet            50 Square Feet
31 - 50 Feet  600 Square Feet       325 Square Feet            75 Square Feet
51+ Feet      800 Square Feet       375 Square Feet            125 Square Feet
   * Note - Eight (8) foot stockade fence required for ten (10) - fifteen (15)
foot Type "D" buffer.
   All existing healthy trees retained in buffer areas, can be credited toward
meeting the bufferyard requirements.
   All buffer widths greater than fifteen (15) feet must be rounded up to the
next whole number.
 
      (6)   Buffer yard reductions. Below are listed mechanisms by which the
width of a required buffer transition yard may be reduced. Notwithstanding any
of the provisions set forth in this section, no property on which a buffer
transition yard is required shall have such a yard that is less than ten (10)
feet in width.
      a.    Fences. The addition of a closed wooden fence in the required
transition yard allows reduction of the required width of the applicable buffer
transition yard by fifty percent (50%) if said fence meets the following
standards:
            1.   Height and arrangement. The fence must be a minimum of eight
(8) feet in height, measured on the side facing away from the property to be
screened. Such fence must also have its finished side facing away from the
property to be screened. The fence shall be solid and opaque, and shall include
provision for access to all landscape materials.
            2.   Materials. Rot-resistant wood is the acceptable material.
Chain link fencing does not meet buffer yard standards. Materials used should
be consistent with materials, other than chain link fencing, commonly used in
surrounding neighborhoods.
            3.   Required plantings. The number of required trees and shrubs is
reduced by fifty percent (50%) in a buffer yard in which a fence is installed.
At least one-half (½) of the required plantings shall be installed and
maintained on the side facing the less intensive use.
            4.   Construction. The buffer fence installation shall be
incorporated as early as possible in the sequence of construction.
         b.   Masonry walls. The addition of a masonry wall along the length of
the required buffer yard allows reduction of the required width of the yard by
fifty percent (50%) and the amount of required plantings by fifty percent
(50%), if said wall meets the following standards:
            1.   Height. The wall must be a minimum of six (6) feet in height
measured on the side of the wall facing away from the property to be screened.
            2.   Materials. Materials shall be brick, stone, stucco, or
textured block. The exterior surface of the wall shall not be of cinder block.
            3.   Required plantings. The number of required trees and shrubs is
reduced by fifty percent (50%) in a buffer yard in which a fence is installed.
At least one-half (½) of the required plantings shall be installed and
maintained on the side facing the less intensive use.
         c.   Grade elevation changes. The existence of a natural or man-made
grade separation in the required buffer transition yard allows reduction of
such yard by twenty-five percent (25%) in width if said elevation change
achieves a screening effect similar to a fence and meets the following
standards:
            1.   Elevation. The grade change must be at least six (6) feet in
elevation.
            2.   Slope. The side slopes of such grade may not be greater than
three to one (3:1).
            3.   Retaining wall. A greater slope is allowable if it is retained
by a structurally sound retaining wall that meets engineering standards for
such a wall.
            4.   Relationship to properties from which developing property is
to be screened.  The developing property must be located at an elevation lower
than the properties from which it is to be screened.
            5.   Location of required plantings. In order to maximize the
effectiveness of the screen, the required plantings shall be located at the top
of the slope in the reduced buffer transition yard.
      (7)   Buffer material specifications. See Section
26-176(d) for general specifications for trees, shrubs, and other vegetation.
         a.   Trees.
            1.   Size. Except as provided above under subsection (6), trees
planted in a buffer transition yard shall be large maturing trees unless within
fifteen (15) feet of an overhead power line, in which case small maturing trees
that will not exceed fifteen to twenty (15-20) feet in height at maturity shall
be used.
            2.   Species. One-half (½) of the required trees shall be locally
adapted evergreen species.
            3.   Distribution. Trees shall be distributed throughout the yard
so as to minimize gaps between them. Trees counted to meet the required number
shall be spaced at least ten (10) feet apart.
         b.   Shrubs. All shrubs are to be evergreen and shall be a minimum of
three (3) feet in height and have a minimum crown width of twenty-four (24)
inches when planted. All shrubs shall be expected to reach a height of eight
(8) feet or greater (to maximize screening potential) within three (3) years of
planting, and shall not be spaced greater than six (6) feet on center.
   (g)   Vehicular surface area landscaping.
      (1)   General. Vehicular surface areas shall comply with the following
landscape standards. There are two (2) vehicular surface area planting
requirements that may apply to a development. One requirement deals with
screening and the other deals with interior parking lot plantings.
      (2)   Vehicular surface area separation/screening.
         a.   Separation. When any vehicular use area is located within twenty
(20) feet of an abutting property and no buffer yard is required, a planting
strip shall be provided to ensure that parking lots are separated from one
another. The planting strip shall be a minimum of five (5) feet wide and shall
be planted between the parking, loading or other vehicular use area and the
abutting property, except along approved driveway openings. Five (5) evergreen
or deciduous shrubs shall be planted for every twenty (20) linear feet of
property line that parallels the vehicular surface area. The remaining ground
area shall be mulched or planted in a variety of evergreen plants, hydro- seed
or sod. Adjacent businesses on separate lots that share parking or driveways
shall be exempt from this requirement.
         b.   Screening from roads, sidewalks, or alleys.  In addition to
requirements for street protective yards (see Section
26-176(e)), vehicular use areas shall be screened from adjacent roads,
sidewalks, or alleys. The space in which this screening is to be located (which
shall be at least the width required for the street protective yard, or where
no street protective yard is required, a minimum of five (5) feet) shall be
planted with a screen that meets the following standards.
         The space shall be planted with a fifty percent (50%) opaque,
continuous screen that must be at least three (3) feet high and can consist of
plant material alone or berms, fences, walls, or grade changes combined with
plant material.
         A vegetative buffer shall consist of at least one (1) evergreen or
deciduous shrub planted for every five (5) feet of vehicular use area screen
required. Such shrubs shall be at least twenty-four (24) inches in height and
shall be maintained at a height of thirty-six (36) inches.
         If a fence or wall is used, at least one (1) shrub must be planted for
every eight (8) linear feet of fence or wall.
         c.   Groundcover. Grass or other ground cover shall be placed on all
areas within all perimeter landscape areas not occupied by other landscape
material or permitted access ways.
         d.   Use of perimeter landscape areas. Vehicle stops or other design
features shall be used in all parking facilities without curbing so that parked
vehicles do not overhang more than two (2) feet into perimeter landscape areas.
The vehicle side of the wheel stop shall be no more than eighteen (18) inches
from the end of the parking space.
      (3)   Vehicular surface area interior landscaping.
         a.   Placement. The required interior landscaped planting areas shall
be placed in any of the following locations: within or adjacent to the parking
lot area as tree islands; at the end(s) of parking bays; inside medians that
are eight (8) feet or greater in width; as part of a continuous street
protective yard; or as a vehicular surface area separation yard.
         b.   Plants. Vehicular parking areas are to be planted with one (1)
large shade tree for every twenty (20) parking spaces. Each planting area shall
contain at least one (1) large maturing tree. Within fifteen (15) feet of
overhead power lines, small maturing trees shall be planted in place of large
shade trees at a rate of two (2) small trees for each required large shade
tree. When planted in groupings, trees must be planted a minimum of twenty-five
(25) feet apart. Planted trees shall be a minimum of two (2) inch caliper to a
maximum of three (3) inch caliper. The tree species used shall be limited to
those that are listed in the current and approved "Tree Listings", which is on
file in the planning department, and can tolerate wet and dry conditions. Trees
and plants that are planted in parking lot islands that function as stormwater
quality treatment BMPs must consist of native trees and plants.
         c.   Distance from parking spaces. No vehicular parking space shall be
located farther than fifty (50) feet from the tree trunk of a shade tree in a
planting area with one (1) tree. Distances between trees and parking spaces
separated by intervening building(s) shall not be considered in meeting this
requirement.
         d.   Size of planting areas. Unless otherwise provided, a minimum of
two hundred (200) square feet of planting area is required for each tree. No
portion of the planting area shall be less than five (5) feet in width or
length.
         e.   Large vehicular surface areas greater than two (two) acres in
size (parking lots and vehicular display areas). In addition to the
requirements set forth in subsection b, above, all new and expanded vehicular
surface areas greater than two (2) acres in size shall meet all of the
following (unless exempt under Section
26-176(a)(2)b.2.):
            1.   Planted Median Strips. Large vehicular surface areas (parking
lots and vehicular display areas) must be broken by continuous planted medians.
Four (4) planted medians, each containing at least one thousand one hundred
thirty four (1,134) square feet of planted area, are required for every two (2)
acres, rounded off to the closest two (2) acre increment. The minimum median
width shall be eight (8) feet. The length of the planted median shall be
uninterrupted except for access ways.
            2.   Industrial and Warehouse (storage, loading, and maneuvering
areas). All existing, new, and expanded storage, loading, and maneuvering areas
are exempt from subsection (3)e. above. All other parking areas (excluding
trailer parking) shall be subject to subsections (3)a., b., c., and d. above.
      (4)   Standards for vehicular display areas. Interior plantings for
vehicular surface display areas shall meet those standards contained in
subsection (3) above. No stored vehicle shall be located farther than forty
(40) feet from the edge of any landscaped planting area. For interior
landscaped planting areas in such display areas, it is acceptable to replace
shade trees with small maturing trees.
   (h)   Screening for loading areas, trash collection areas, outdoor storage
display areas, shipping containers, and utility service areas. All loading
areas, trash collection areas (including dumpsters), outdoor storage display
areas, shipping containers, and utility service areas visible from a public
road or adjacent property line shall be screened from such adjacent road or
property unless already screened by an intervening building or buffer
transition yard. Landscaping shall not interfere with the access and operation
of any such structure or facility. Screen types include:
      (1)   Hedge. A continuous hedge of evergreen and/or densely twigged
deciduous shrubs planted in a five (5) foot strip spaced a maximum of five (5)
feet apart or a row of evergreen trees planted no more than eight (8) feet
apart. The shrubs shall be planted at a minimum height of forty-eight (48)
inches and the hedge shall exceed the height of the receptacle by at least six
(6) inches at the plants' maturity.
      (2)   Fence or wall. A fence or wall that matches the height of the
receptacle and with the finished side of the fence facing the abutting road or
property. Fences longer than twenty- five (25) linear feet shall be landscaped
with trees and/or shrubs planted in a minimum five (5) foot planting area,
except around access areas, spaced no further than eight (8) feet apart in
order to screen at least fifty percent (50%) of the fence or wall.
   (i)   Screening for stormwater management area. Unless designated as an
integral part of a landscape plan or features as an amenity (i.e., water
features in a wet bottom basin or recreation/open space in a dry bottom basin),
all detention ponds, retention ponds, or other similar holding area shall be
screened from view from any existing or future private or public street and
from adjoining developable property.
   (j)   Visual screening for thoroughfares and arterial roadways.
Thoroughfares or arterial roadways, when constructed within areas zoned for
residential use, shall provide a continuous visual screen consisting of
vegetation, berms, embankments, or a combination of such materials, as
appropriate. The use of existing vegetation is encouraged. When the existing
vegetation is inadequate to function as a visual screen, it shall be augmented
by two (2) staggered rows of shrub material, which will provide such a screen
at maturity.
   (k)   Protection of existing trees during development.  No grand tree shall
be removed unless it is determined that there is no alternative due to
unavoidable grading or because of required configuration of essential utilities
or buildings. In addition, where tree protection is required, no grading or
other land-disturbing activity can occur on a site until protective barriers
are installed by the developer. Protective barriers must protect the entire
critical root zone. No grading, trenching or equipment shall occur within the
protective barrier unless an alternative plan has been submitted to and
approved by the planning department. All work performed inside the protective
barrier, including tunneling underneath the critical root zone, must be
approved by the planning department and under the supervision of a certified
arborist. The diameter of the preserved trees and the location of protective
barriers must be shown on the landscape and grading plans, with the dimension
between the tree trunk and barrier indicated. A description of acceptable
protective barriers is set forth in the "Design Manual", which is on file in
the planning department.
      (1)   Trees to be protected: On sites where compliance with this section
is required, the owner/developer shall protect the following trees:
         a.   Grand trees.
         b.   All trees in fair or better condition that are ten (10) inches in
diameter or larger that are located in a protected zone (a portion of the
property required by permit to remain in natural open space or areas required
by permit to be landscaped, or to be used as buffer transition yards and/or
street protective yards).
      (2)   Tree replacement plan. In accordance with subsection (k)(1) above,
a tree replacement plan shall be submitted and approved before any protected
trees are removed. Grand trees that have been approved for removal shall be
replaced at a ratio of 6:1, with trees at a minimum of two (2) inch caliper to
a maximum of three (3) inch caliper. All other protected trees that have been
approved for removal shall be replaced at a ratio of 3:1, with trees at a
minimum of two (2) inch caliper to a maximum of three (3) inch caliper.
      (3)   Exemptions - tree protection. Commercial timber, tree farms,
agricultural operations, or timber clearing on private property are exempt from
tree protection requirements.
      (4)   Tree protection plan. A tree protection plan shall be submitted
prior to any proposed grading or clearing on site. The following information
shall be identified and submitted:
         a.   An infra-red and/or aerial photograph (no more than 5 years old)
may be utilized to assist in the location of the protected trees. A tree
protection plan shall be submitted identifying the footprint or proposed
footprint of any building or structure, areas of clearing, grading, trenching,
and other earth moving activities, protected trees and/or groupings of trees
designated to be saved (including estimated number and average diameter or
circumference), tree protection zones, ponds, creeks, wetlands, and other
important natural features.
         b.   If the information provided in subsection a. above is inadequate
to develop an approved tree protection plan, a site visit or a tree survey or
inventory of the affected area may be required.
      (5)   Tree survey or inventory. A tree survey or inventory is required
for all areas that are intended for development, as well as all undisturbed
areas that contain trees that are being retained to meet the requirements of
this subsection (k). The tree survey shall be prepared by a licensed and/or
certified arborist, engineer, forester, landscape architect, or surveyor that
will determine the size, species, health, condition, and structural integrity
of forest trees and whether or not said trees are in good enough condition and
safe enough to live beyond construction activity.
   (l)   Completion and maintenance. The owner or lessee of the property where
landscaping is required shall be responsible for the maintenance and protection
of all plant and screening material and fencing. Landscaped areas shall be
maintained in good condition. No required landscape area shall be used for
accessory structures, trash collection, parking, or other functional use unless
otherwise specified in this chapter. Deed restrictions may be placed on lots
that require each owner to maintain that portion of screening or landscaping
that is on his/her property. Where a homeowners' association and annual funding
is required by appropriate, enforceable deed restrictions, the screening and
landscaping may be either on a separately described private parcel of land or
on private property in a landscape easement, in common ownership of the
homeowners' association of said subdivision, and shall be maintained by the
homeowners' association. Failure to maintain plant material, or to replace
dead, damaged, or diseased material, or to repair a damaged buffer structure
shall constitute a violation of this chapter. All landscaping shall be
installed in accordance with the approved landscape plan unless revisions are
approved by the planning department and noted in writing on the plan. Neither a
certificate of occupancy nor a business license for any business or use on a
site with such an approved plan shall be issued until the installation of the
required landscaping is approved or a performance guarantee is posted with the
planning department in the minimum amount of one hundred twenty five percent
(125%) of the total cost of the required uncompleted landscaping, including the
labor. A site not requiring a certificate of occupancy shall not be used until
the required landscaping is installed or a guarantee posted. The guarantee
shall be released and returned to the party posting the guarantee upon
installation of all required landscaping and acceptance by the planning
department of such installation. If the landscaping is not complete and in
accordance with approved plans, the guarantee shall be forfeited to and used by
Richland County to complete the required landscaping with any remaining funds
being returned to the party who posted the guarantee.
   (m)   Irrigation. All required planting areas, except stormwater management
areas in residential subdivisions, shall be mechanically irrigated, provided
that plant material in detention ponds, retention ponds, or other similar
holding areas may be manually watered with water bags for at least one (1) year
to ensure that the landscape is established. Bubbler or drip irrigation systems
are required in order to reduce water consumption and overspray onto pedestrian
and vehicle use areas. This shall include all required planting areas except
areas within developments containing less than ten (10) parking spaces.
However, these exempted areas shall have an exterior water source (such as a
hose bib) located within one hundred (100) feet of all required planting areas.
Irrigation systems should first make use of all available surface runoff or
other retained or detained stormwater as the water supply source. If the
project area is required to be irrigated, an irrigation plan must be provided,
or the following statement must be provided on the site and landscaping plan:
"All planting areas shall be mechanically irrigated".
   (n)   Mitigation policy. When protected trees have been removed or damaged
without authorization, a restoration plan, depicting the type, size, and
proposed location of each replacement tree, shall be submitted to the planning
department for approval. The zoning administrator may require tree replacement
at a ratio not to exceed 4:1, with trees at a minimum of 4-inch caliper. No
certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any development until all
applicable restoration conditions have been met.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 055-12HR, § XI, 10-16-12; Ord. No.
071-12HR, § I, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 025014HR, § V, 5-20-14; Ord. No. 034-14HR, §
I, 6-17-14)
Sec. 26-177. Lighting standards.
   (a)   Purpose and applicability.
      (1)   Purpose. It is the intent of this section to achieve several
purposes with respect to lighting in Richland County. Among these purposes are:
to minimize light pollution, glare, and light trespass; to conserve energy and
resources while maintaining night-time safety and utility; and to curtail the
degradation of the night-time visual environment.
      (2)   Applicability. This section shall apply to all new development in
the unincorporated portions of Richland County unless otherwise specified.
Although all new development must comply with the standards set forth in this
section, only major land developments and major subdivisions must submit a
lighting plan with their development application. When a building or structure
is extended, enlarged, or reconstructed after the effective date of this
chapter, the applicable lighting standards shall apply with respect to such
extended, enlarged, or reconstructed portion or portions of such structure.
   (b)   Standards.
      (1)   Requirements for all zoning categories and applications.
         (a)   Luminaire heights are measured from ground level to the top of
the luminaire.
         (b)   All luminaires shall be full-cutoff certified; provided,
however, outdoor athletic/sports fields are exempt from this requirement as
long as the luminaires are shielded to minimize glare.
         (c)   All luminaires shall have internal visors/panels or external
visors that control offsite light spill and glare.
         (d)   Illumination from any luminaire at property lines shall not
exceed .1 horizontal or .1 vertical foot-candles; provided, however, outdoor
retail uses shall not exceed an average of 2.5 horizontal and/or vertical foot-
candles.
         (e)   The orientation of all lighting shall be downward; provided,
however, churches, temples, mosques, and other such places of worship may
orient some lights upward onto specific architectural components of the
structure (such as steeples or domes).
         (f)   Accent lighting for sculptures, trees, landscaping features,
flags, and entrances may orient light upward.
         (g)   To control light spill and glare, luminaires shall be properly
aimed when installed, and proper aiming shall be maintained.
      (2)   Lighting exempt from these standards.
         (a)   Lighting within swimming pools or other water features that are
governed by Department of Health and Environmental Control regulations.
         (b)   Exit signs, stairs, ramps, and other illumination required by
building codes.
         (c)   Emergency room entrances.
      (3)   Non-residential standards (except outdoor retail).
         (a)   Parking lot lighting shall be reduced to security levels within
sixty (60) minutes after the end of business hours. Luminaires near building
entrances and entryways (driveways) may remain illuminated at security lighting
levels.
         (b)   For parking lots and driveways, luminaires may not exceed
twenty-four (24) feet in height.
         (c)   Parking garages:
            [1]   Perimeter poles are not allowed on the top floor.
            [2]   Interior poles may not exceed sixteen (16) feet in height.
            [3]   Luminaires shall be attached to perimeter walls.
         (d)   For pedestrian zones, luminaires on sidewalks, in landscaped
areas, or adjacent to buildings may not exceed twelve (12) feet in height.
         (e)   Building mounted luminaires may not be mounted above the 1st
floor and shall not exceed sixteen (16) feet in height.
         (f)   The maximum lighting per acre is 200,000 lumens per acre for
business hours and 80,000 lumens per acre for security/non-business hours.
         (g)   The distance between luminaires on commercial properties and
residential property lines must be greater than or equal to luminaire height.
Provided, however, in the event of any conflict between this requirement and a
requirement contained in a different provision of this chapter, the more
restrictive provision shall apply.
      (4)   Residential standards (including hotels & motels).
         (a)   For parking lots and driveways, luminaires may not exceed
eighteen (18) feet in height.
         (b)   For pedestrian zones, luminaires on sidewalks, in landscaped
areas, or adjacent to buildings may not exceed twelve (12) feet in height.
         (c)   Building mounted luminaires may not be mounted above the 1st
floor.
         (d)   The maximum lighting per acre is 80,000 lumens per acre.
      (5)   Outdoor retail.
         (a)   The maximum lighting per acre is 1.3 million lumens per acre for
business hours and 150,000 lumens per acre for security/non-business hours;
provided, however, for a business that abuts a residential district, non-
business hours shall mean between the hours of 10 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
         (b)   Luminaries shall not exceed twenty-four (24) feet in height.
         (c)   Full-power lighting shall be reduced within thirty (30) minutes
after the end of business hours. Auto display areas may be illuminated, but at
security levels.
      (6)   Athletic lighting.
         (a)   Athletic lighting is exempt from lumens per acre.
         (b)   Athletic lighting shall have internal visors/panels or external
visors that control offsite spill and glare.
         (c)   Golf driving ranges must use elevated tee boxes with lighting
below.
         (d)   Light trespass requirements apply.
         (e)   Lighting must be turned off by 11:00 p.m.; provided, however,
events sanctioned by the South Carolina High School League or the South
Carolina Association of Independent Schools which are underway at the time the
11:00 hour happens are exempt from this requirement.
         (f)   The distance between luminaires for athletic facilities and
residential property lines must be greater than or equal to luminaire height.
Provided, however, in the event of any conflict between this requirement and a
requirement contained in a different provision of this chapter, the more
restrictive provision shall apply.
      (7)   Prohibited lighting. The following lighting features are
prohibited: search lights, laser source lights, or any similar high-intensity
light, except in emergencies by police and fire personnel or at their
direction.
      (8)   Canopy standards.
         (a)   Shielding: All luminaires mounted on or recessed into the lower
surface of service station and/or entrance canopies shall be fully shielded and
utilize flat lenses.
         (b)   Total Under-Canopy Output: The total light output used for
illuminating service station and/or entrance canopies defined as the sum of all
under-canopy initial bare-lamp outputs in lumens, shall not exceed 430 lumens
per square meter (forty lumens per square foot) of canopy.
         (c)   All lighting mounted under the canopy, including but not limited
to luminaires mounted on the lower surface or recessed into the lower surface
of the canopy and any lighting within signage or illuminated panels over the
pumps, is to be included toward the total at full initial lumen output.
      (9)   Lighting lamps.
         (a)   Approved lighting lamps: incandescent lamps, fluorescent lamps,
metal halide lamps, LED devices, and induction lamps.
         (b)   Prohibited lighting lamps: high pressure sodium lamps, low-
pressure sodium lamps, and mercury vapor lamps (sometimes called high-pressure
mercury, as distinguished from fluorescent).
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 088-08HR, § II, 12-16-08; Ord No.
005-10HR, § I, 1-19-10; Ord. 017-10HR, § I, 4-20-10; Ord. No. 028-10HR, §§ I,
II, 6-1-10; Ord. No. 032-12HR, § I, 5-15-12; Ord. No. 024- 14HR, § I, 5-20-14)
Sec. 26-178. Operation standards.
   (a)   Purpose/applicability.
      (1)   Purpose. The operational performance standards included in this
section are intended to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens
of Richland County by regulating potential nuisance features of certain land
uses.
      (2)   Applicability. All new development shall comply with the standards
set forth in this section. When the use of a building or a structure is
extended, enlarged, or reconstructed after the effective date of this chapter,
the applicable operations standards shall apply with respect to such extended,
enlarged, or reconstructed portion or portions of such use or structure.
Temporary construction, excavation, grading, and demolition are exempt from the
standards set forth in this section.
      (3)   Conflicts. In the case of conflict between the activity type and
the operations standards, the latter shall control.
   (b)   Noise. Noise shall be regulated pursuant to Section
18-3 of this Code of Ordinances.
   (c)   Vibration. All uses shall be operated in such a fashion that ground
vibration inherently and recurrently generated is not perceptible without
instruments at any point along the property line within which the use is
located.
   (d)   Smoke and particulate matter. Any land use or other activity that
involves the emission of smoke, particulate matter, or other air pollutants
shall comply with all applicable standards set forth in state and federal
regulations regarding the emission of air pollutants.
   (e)   Toxic, hazardous, and radioactive matter.  Any land use or activity
that involves the use of toxic, hazardous, or radioactive materials shall
comply with all applicable standards set forth in state and federal regulations
regarding the use, storage, transportation, emission, and disposal of such
materials.
   (f)   Odor. The emissions of noxious gases or particles shall not be
permitted in any district so as to exceed the odor threshold as measured beyond
the lot lines. The odor threshold is defined as the concentration in the air of
a gas or vapor which will just evoke a response in the average human olfactory
system.
   (g)   Fire and explosive hazards. All flammable solid, liquid, and gaseous
substances shall be stored and used in accordance with all applicable state and
federal regulations. Storage tanks for flammable liquids and gasses shall be
located no closer than forty (40) feet to any property line. The storage of
solid materials or products rated as free or active burning to intense burning
is permitted in nonresidential districts provided that such material shall be
stored or used within completely enclosed buildings having no less than two (2)
hour fire resistant exterior walls and protected with an automatic fire
extinguishing system. Or, if stored outdoors, such material shall be not less
than fifty (50) feet from the nearest property line. Free or active burning to
intense burning is a rate of combustion described by material that burns with a
high degree of activity and is consumed rapidly. Examples include sawdust,
powdered magnesium, and other solids deemed by the fire chief to have
equivalent burning characteristics.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04)
Sec. 26-179. Pedestrian, bicycle, and transit amenities.
   (a)   Sidewalks and other pedestrian amenities.
      (1)   Institutional developments and major residential subdivisions. All
new institutional developments and major residential subdivisions are required
to have sidewalks provided along one (1) side of all roads within and abutting
the development, except controlled access facilities. The radius of a cul-de-
sac shall be exempt from the installation of sidewalks. Sidewalks shall have a
minimum width of five (5) feet along external roads abutting the development
and a minimum width of four (4) feet along internal roads. A median at least
three (3) feet wide, consisting of a grassed area or a planting strip, shall be
provided to separate all sidewalks from adjacent curbs or the edge of interior
street pavement. Sidewalks shall match the grade or elevation of adjacent
sidewalks at the property lines. If there is no adjacent sidewalk, then the
sidewalk should be six (6) inches above the adjacent edge of the pavement grade
at the property line. Adjustments of the grades specified shall be at the
judgment of the engineer of record and specifically approved by the County
Engineer. All sidewalks shall be constructed to the specifications of the
public works department and shall meet the minimum requirements of the
Americans with Disabilities Act, which are referenced in the County Engineer's
“Design Guidelines Road Standards”. Sidewalks that will not be dedicated to the
county along private roadways shall have a minimum width of three (3) feet
along internal roads, and shall be exempt from ADA compliance if allowed by
federal law. The engineer of record shall provide a statement on the plans that
certifies that all sidewalks shall be in compliance with ADA standards.
      (2)   Commercial, office, industrial, and PDD districts. All new
development within any commercial, office, industrial, or PDD district is
required to provide sidewalks along all sides of abutting roads, except along
controlled access facilities. Sidewalks shall have a minimum width of five (5)
feet and shall be constructed to the specifications of the public works
department. A median strip at least three (3) feet wide, consisting of a
grassed area or a planting strip, shall be provided to separate all sidewalks
from adjacent curbs or the edge of interior street pavement. The sidewalk shall
be six (6) inches above the adjacent edge of the pavement grade at the property
line. Adjustments of the grades specified shall be at the judgment of the
engineer of record and specifically approved by the County Engineer. The
engineer of record shall provide a statement on the plans that certifies that
all sidewalks shall be in compliance with ADA standards.
      (3)   Access to schools, greenways, parks, and open space areas from
residential developments. In major residential land developments or
subdivisions, accessways shall be provided by the developer to public schools,
greenways, parks, and open space areas abutting the residential development and
to open space or parks provided as part of a development. Such access shall be
provided in conformance with the following:
         a.   Where required.
            1.   Accessways are required when cul-de-sac roads back up to
public schools, greenways, parks, or open space areas.
            2.   Accessways are required where lots within the development back
up to public schools, greenways, parks, and open space areas.
         b.   Standards.
            1.   Access. Access to adjacent public schools, greenways, parks,
or open space areas, may be accomplished by direct access from a road, direct
access from a cul-de-sac, or a designated access between lots.
            2.   Width. Accessways shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet in
width.
            3.   ADA compliant. Walkways located within an access way shall
meet the minimum requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act.
      (4)   Exemptions. If the South Carolina Department of Transportation
(SCDOT) or the Richland County Public Works Department denies sidewalks within
their right-of-way due to the lack of connectivity, a written determination
letter must be received by the Planning Department prior to the approval of
preliminary plans or major land development. Any unusual existing site
conditions that would create a safety hazard should also be identified by the
engineer of record during the preliminary plan submittal. The County Engineer,
in conjunction with the Planning Director, will make a final determination of
exemption from the sidewalk requirement.
      (5)   Alternative to sidewalk. If a trail network is designed to be
functionally superior or equivalent to a standard sidewalk plan, then it may be
used as a viable alternative. Functionality should be assessed based on
connectivity, rather than linear feet.
      (6)   Waiver of sidewalk requirement. Strict sidewalk requirements may be
waived on a case by case basis, particularly if connectivity is improved by
alternative systems.
   (b)   Bicycle facilities. Bicycle parking shall be required for all uses
requiring over fifty (50) automobile parking spaces. A minimum of five (5)
bicycle parking spaces is required. Bicycle parking facilities shall be
standard bicycle racks or other secured lockable facilities.
   (c)   Transit facilities. Any major multi-family land development or major
subdivision, and any major commercial, industrial, or office land development
(when located along a public transportation transit route) must provide for a
transit stop.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 033-11HR, § II, 6-21-11; Ord. No.
029012HR, § I, 5- 15-12; Ord. No. 055-12HR, § XIII, 10-16-12)
Sec. 26-180. Signs.
   (a)   Purpose and scope.
      (1)   Purpose. The purpose of this section and other sign standards
contained in this chapter, is to support and complement the various land uses
allowed in Richland County by the adoption of standards concerning the
placement of signs. These standards are adopted to achieve the following:
         a.   To encourage the effective use of signs as a means of
communication in the county while preserving the rights of free speech under
the First Amendment to the United States Constitution.
         b.   To maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the
county's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth.
         c.   To improve pedestrian and traffic safety.
         d.   To minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public
and private property.
      (2)   Applicability.
         a.   Permits required. Except as provided by this section, it shall be
unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, move, or replace any sign
without first obtaining a sign permit from the planning department. Additional
permits may be required pursuant to regulations in the building code or other
sections of this chapter.
         b.   Alteration of sign face. Repainting of a sign, if in conformance
with the applicable standards of this chapter, shall be considered maintenance
or repair and shall not require a permit. The changing of tenant name panels on
multiple-tenant development signage shall not require a permit.
   (b)   General standards.
      (1)   Measurement of sign.
         a.   Computation of sign face.
            1.   General. The area of a sign face shall be measured on one (1)
side of the sign and shall be deemed to be the entire area within the smallest
square or rectangle that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing,
representation, emblem, or other display on the sign.
            2.   Included in computation. The area shall also include any
material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or
used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it
is placed. Frames or structural members shall not be included in computation of
the area of a sign face.
            3.   Signs attached to walls or fences. Only that portion of a wall
or fence onto which sign face or letters are placed shall be calculated in the
sign area.
         b.   Computation of height. The height of a sign shall be measured
from the highest point of a sign or its support, whichever is greater, to the
base of the sign at grade.
      (2)   Standards applicable to all permitted signs.
         a.   Location. Signs shall be located outside of the road right-of-
way, behind sidewalk areas, outside of the sight visibility triangle, and no
closer than five (5) feet to the front property line; provided, however, off-
premises weekend directional signs may be located in a county road right-of-
way.
         b.   Attached signage. Attached signage may not extend above the
vertical wall to which the sign is attached or extend out into the planting
area or road side of the sidewalk. Attached signs may not project more than
three (3) feet from the façade of the building on which the sign is located.
The bottom of any attached sign, if extended from the façade of a building,
shall be at least eight (8) feet above any pedestrian walkway.
      (3)   Noncommercial messages. Any sign, display, or device allowed under
this chapter may contain, in lieu of any other copy, any otherwise lawful
noncommercial message.
      (4)   Sign illumination.
         a.   External illumination shall be by a steady stationary light
source, shielded and directed solely at the sign.
         b.   Light sources illuminating signs shall not cause glare, hazards
to pedestrians or vehicle drivers, or nuisances to adjacent properties.
         c.   Intensity of the light shall not exceed twenty (20) foot-candles
at any point on the sign face.
         d.   Signs shall not have light reflecting backgrounds, but may use
light reflecting lettering.
   (c)   Signs exempt from regulation. Unless otherwise prohibited or regulated
by this chapter, the following signs are exempt from regulation:
      (1)   Governmental signs. Signs posted by various local, state, and
federal agencies in the performance of their duties, such as regulatory signs,
welcome signs, and traffic signs.
      (2)   Flags, etc. Flags or insignia of any nation, organization of
nations, state, county or municipality, any religious, civic or fraternal
organization, or any educational or cultural facility and/or any one corporate
flag per lot.
      (3)   Temporary holiday decorations. Temporary decorations or displays
when such are clearly incidental to and are customarily and commonly associated
with any national, local, or religious holiday/celebration.
      (4)   Window displays. Merchandise, pictures, or models of products or
services that are incorporated as an integral part of a window display.
      (5)   Building marker signs. A sign cut or etched into masonry, bronze,
or similar material on a building. The area of a building marker sign shall not
exceed four (4) square feet.
      (6)   Legal and warning signs. Signs erected to warn of danger or
hazardous conditions, such as signs erected by public utility companies or
construction companies, and signs required for or specifically authorized for a
public purpose by any law, statute, or ordinance. Such signs that display
information pertinent to the safety or legal responsibilities of the general
public with regard to a particular piece of property must be located on the
premises to which the information pertains. No advertising may be affixed to
such sign.
      (7)   Occupant/road number signs. Signs affixed to structures, mailboxes,
decorative light posts, driveway entrances, etc. that serve to identify the
address of the structure or occupant. All such signs must be placed in such a
manner as to be visible from the road.
      (8)   Vending machine, automatic teller, and gasoline pump signs. Signs
attached to and made an integral part of a vending machine, automatic teller
machine, or gasoline pump if advertising or giving information about the
products or services dispensed or vended by that machine.
   (d)   Signs exempt from permit requirements. The following signs are allowed
in all zoning districts (unless otherwise noted below) and shall not require a
sign permit. Such signs must conform to the standards set forth below, as well
as to other applicable requirements of this chapter.
      (1)   Directional signs. Directional signs must be located on the
premises to which directions are indicated. Such signs may not exceed three (3)
feet in height if freestanding. Directional signs may not exceed four (4)
square feet per face. Such signs may contain no copy other than directional
information. Illumination of such signs shall be as permitted for on-premises
signs in the zoning district in which the sign is located. No more than two (2)
signs per entrance or exit shall be permitted.
      (2)   Incidental signs. Signs containing information necessary or
convenient for persons coming onto a premises must be located on the premises
to which the information pertains. No advertising may be affixed to such a
sign. Such signs must be single-faced only and wholly attached to a building
(may be located on windows or doors).
      (3)   Real estate signs. Only one (1) real estate sign is allowed per
five hundred (500) feet of road frontage and shall not be illuminated. Real
estate signs shall be no greater than four (4) square feet in area and four (4)
feet in height (if freestanding) when located on a residential property. Such
signs shall be no greater than thirty-two (32) square feet in area and eight
(8) feet in height (if freestanding) for nonresidential uses. Real estate signs
shall be removed within seven (7) days after the closing of the sale, rental,
or lease of the property.
      (4)   Political signs. Political signs shall not be located within a
public road right-of-way and shall not be attached to trees, utility poles, or
publicly owned property. Such signs shall not be illuminated and shall not
exceed thirty- two (32) square feet in area, and six (6) feet in height if the
sign is freestanding. Political signs may be displayed during a period
beginning sixty (60) days prior to an election, but must be removed within
seven (7) days after the election or referendum has been decided. It shall be
the responsibility of the candidate to have such signs removed.
      (5)   Construction signs. Construction signs shall be allowed, provided
that such signs do not exceed two (2) signs per road frontage with a maximum of
four (4) signs per construction site. Such signs shall not exceed four (4)
square feet in area and four (4) feet in height for single-family or two-family
residential construction or thirty-two (32) square feet in area and eight (8)
feet in height for other construction. Construction signs shall not be erected
prior to the issuance of a building permit and shall be removed within seven
(7) days after the completion of the work on the project.
      (6)   Yard sale signs. Yard sale signs shall be located on-premises only
and shall not be located within a public right-of-way nor placed on a tree,
road sign, or utility pole. Such signs shall not be illuminated and are limited
to four (4) square feet in size and four (4) feet in height. One (1) yard sale
sign is allowed per road frontage. All yard sale signs shall be removed within
twenty-four (24) hours of completion of the activity being advertised.
      (7)   Subdivision development signs. Signs advertising a subdivision
development shall be erected on-premises only, provided that such signs do not
exceed fifty (50) square feet in area, are set back at least twenty (20) feet
from any property line, are spaced at least five hundred (500) feet apart, and
are removed not more than thirty (30) days from such time as seventy-five (75%)
percent of the subdivision lots are conveyed (unless a permanent sign permit is
obtained).
      (8)   Special event signs. Signs may be erected by public or non-profit
organizations, such as schools or places of worship, for promoting special
events as follows. Signs shall be displayed for a period of no more than thirty
(30) consecutive days and shall be allowed no more than two (2) periods a year
on any property. Such signs shall not be illuminated and shall not be located
within a road right- of-way. Such signs shall be limited to eighteen (18)
square feet in size and six (6) feet in height.
      (9)   Home occupation signs. One non-illuminated sign shall be permitted
for a home occupation. Such sign shall be mounted flat against the wall of the
principal structure in which the home occupation is conducted or, if is in an
RU or RR zoning district, it may be on a freestanding post (up to a height of
four (4) feet, inclusive of the sign) that is located on the property of the
structure in which the home occupation is conducted; provided, however, such
sign shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area. Home occupation signs are
only allowed in those zoning districts in which home occupations are allowed
(see Section
26-141. Table of Permitted Uses, Permitted Uses with Special Requirements, and
Special Exceptions).
   (e)   Prohibited signs. The following signs are prohibited in the
unincorporated areas of Richland County:
      (1)   Off-premises signs. All off-premises signs, unless specifically
allowed elsewhere in this chapter.
      (2)   Roof signs. Roof signs; provided, however, that signs on the
surfaces of a mansard roof or on parapets shall not be prohibited if the signs
do not extend above the mansard roof or parapet to which they are attached.
      (3)   Animated/flashing signs and signs of illusion. Signs displaying
blinking, flashing, or intermittent lights, or animation, moving parts, or
signs giving the illusion of movement.
      (4)   Signs resembling traffic signals. Signs that approximate official
highway signs, warning signs, or regulatory devices.
      (5)   Signs on roadside appurtenances. Signs attached to or painted on
utility poles, trees, parking meters, bridges, overpasses, rocks, other signs,
benches, refuse containers, etc., unless specifically allowed elsewhere in this
chapter.
      (6)   Abandoned signs and sign structures. Signs that advertise an
activity or business that is no longer conducted on the property on which the
sign is located. Such signs or sign structures must be removed by the property
owner within thirty (30) days of becoming an abandoned sign or sign structure.
      (7)   Pennants, streamers, balloons, etc. Signs containing or consisting
of pennants, ribbons, streamers, balloons, or spinners.
      (8)   Signs obstructing access. Signs that obstruct free ingress or
egress from a road, driveway, or a required door, window, fire escape, or other
required exit-way.
      (9)   Signs located in the right-of-way. All signs located in the right-
of-way, unless specifically allowed elsewhere in this chapter.
      (10)   Inflatable signs or balloons.
      (11)   Signs posted on public property. Public property includes rights-
of-way, the tree lawn areas between detached sidewalks and streets, roadway
median strips, parkways, bridges, alleys, utility poles and boxes, as well as
street signs and sign poles.
   (f)   Temporary signs requiring permits. The following signs are allowed in
all zoning districts, but shall require a sign permit. Such signs must conform
to the standards set forth below as well as to other applicable requirements of
this chapter.
      (1)   Portable signs. Portable signs shall be located on-premises only.
Such signs shall be displayed for a period of no more than thirty (30)
consecutive days and shall be allowed no more than two (2) periods per year.
The sign face areas shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet, and shall not
be illuminated. A business shall have no more than one (1) sign per street
frontage.
      (2)   Seasonal signs. Christmas tree lots, pumpkin lots, fireworks
stands, produce or flower stands, or other similar seasonal and temporary
commercial uses may have one (1) sign per street frontage. Such signs shall be
displayed for a period of no more than forty-five (45) consecutive days,
commencing from the corresponding business license's date of issuance or start
of business date, whichever is later. The sign face areas shall not exceed
forty-eight (48) square feet, and shall not be illuminated.
   (g)   On-premises signs permitted in rural and residential districts. Signs
are permitted in the RU, RR, RS-E, RS-LD, RS-MD, RS-HD, RM-LD, RM-HD, and MH
Districts, subject to the following regulations:
      (1)   Permanent subdivision signs. Permanent subdivision signs displaying
no information other than the name of the residential land subdivision in which
they are located shall be permitted. Such signs shall not exceed fifty (50)
square feet in area, shall not encroach upon vision clearances established in
Section
26-181(c) of this chapter, and shall only be located on property that is part
of the subdivision.
      (2)   Signs for multi-family residential uses and nonresidential uses.
Signs relating to permitted multi-family housing developments, manufactured
home parks, or permitted nonresidential uses may be erected, subject to the
following provisions:
         a.   Maximum size. Fifty (50) square feet of total surface area per
side per road frontage.
         b.   Number. One (1) sign per road entrance. Two (2) sides permitted
per road frontage if affixed to masonry, brick, or wood fences. Such signs
shall be limited to twenty (20) square feet each.
         c.   Type. Freestanding or wall.
         d.   Height. Wall signs shall not project above the roofline.
Freestanding signs shall not exceed four (4) feet above the ground level when
located in required front yards, or six (6) feet above ground level when
located elsewhere.
         e.   Location. Vision clearances established in Section
26-181(c) of this chapter shall be observed.
         f.   Additional signs allowed. In addition to those signs permitted
above, one bulletin or notice board displaying information related to
activities or services conducted or offered on the premises may be erected per
lot frontage. The display surface area of such bulletin board or notice board
shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet.
      (3)   Signs for institutional uses. Signs relating to permitted
institutional uses may be erected, subject to the following provisions:
         a.   Maximum size. Fifty (50) square feet of total surface area per
side per road frontage.
         b.   Number. One (1) sign per road entrance. Two (2) sides permitted
per road frontage if affixed to masonry, brick, or wood fences. Such signs
shall be limited to twenty (20) square feet each.
         c.   Type. Freestanding or wall.
         d.   Height. Wall signs shall not project above the roofline.
Freestanding signs shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet above the ground level.
         e.   Location. Vision clearances established in Section
26-181(c) of this chapter shall be observed.
   (h)   On-premises signs permitted in the Rural Commercial, Office and
Institutional and Neighborhood Commercial Districts. Signs are permitted in the
RC, OI, and NC Districts, subject to the following regulations:
      (1)   Number of signs. Freestanding and attached on-premises signs are
allowed in the RC, OI, and NC Districts. Only one (1) freestanding sign is
allowed per road frontage per lot. There is no limit to the number of attached
signs permitted on a lot so long as the allowable area for attached signs is
not exceeded.
      (2)   Allowable area for freestanding signs.
         a.   Total allowable area for freestanding signs. The total allowable
area for a freestanding sign on a lot shall be related to the linear footage of
the road frontage of the lot. Property owners are allowed one (1) square foot
of sign face area per linear foot of road frontage for the first one hundred
(100) feet of road frontage and one-half (½) square foot of sign face area per
linear foot of road frontage in excess of one hundred (100) feet. However, in
no event shall the square footage limitations for freestanding signs, set forth
in subsection (2)b. below, be exceeded.
         b.   Maximum size for all freestanding signs. Regardless of the amount
of road frontage on a lot, the following maximum sizes for freestanding signs
shall not be exceeded. For a lot with one (1) road frontage, the total maximum
sign face area allowed is one hundred (100) square feet. For a lot with two (2)
road frontages, the maximum sign face area allowed is one hundred and fifty
(150) square feet. For a lot with three (3) or more street frontages, the
maximum sign face area allowed is two hundred (200) square feet.
      (3)   Allowable area for attached signs. If there is no freestanding sign
on the premises, one and one-half (1½) square feet of sign face area shall be
permitted for each linear front foot of the principal building for attached
signage. If there is a freestanding sign on the premises, only one (1) square
foot of sign face area shall be permitted for each linear front foot of the
principal building for attached signage.
      (4)   Height. In the RC and NC districts, no part of any freestanding
sign or its supporting structure may exceed fifteen (15) feet in height. In the
OI district, no part of any freestanding sign or its supporting structure may
exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height. No projecting sign shall project more
than twelve (12) feet above the highest point of the roof of the structure to
which it is attached.
      (5)   Location. Freestanding signs may be located anywhere on the
property unless specifically restricted otherwise in this chapter. Vision
clearances established in Section
26-181(c) of this chapter shall be observed. No part of any freestanding sign
permitted in required setbacks shall be located less than five (5) feet from
any property line. Wall signs may be located anywhere on the wall of a
building. No sign shall be erected within ten (10) feet of any residential
district boundary line unless such sign would meet the sign requirements for
nonresidential uses permitted within the residential district to which it is
adjacent.
   (i)   On-premises signs permitted in the General Commercial District. Signs
are permitted in the GC District, subject to the following regulations:
      (1)   Number of signs. Freestanding and attached signs are allowed in the
GC District. Only one (1) freestanding sign is allowed per road frontage per
lot. There is no limit to the number of attached signs permitted on a lot so
long as the allowable area for attached signs is not exceeded.
      (2)   Allowable area for freestanding signs.
         a.   Total allowable area for freestanding signs. The total allowable
area for a freestanding sign on a lot shall be related to the linear footage of
the road frontage of the lot. A property owner is allowed one (1) square foot
of sign face area per linear foot of road frontage for the first one hundred
(100) feet of road frontage and one-half (½) square foot of sign face area per
linear foot of road frontage in excess of one hundred (100) feet. However, in
no event shall the square footage limitations for freestanding signs, set forth
in subsection (2)b. below, be exceeded.
         b.   Maximum size for all freestanding signs. Regardless of the amount
of road frontage on a lot, the following maximum sizes for freestanding signs
shall not be exceeded. For a lot with one (1) road frontage, the total maximum
sign face area allowed is two hundred and fifty (250) square feet. For a lot
with two (2) road frontages, the maximum sign face area allowed is four hundred
(400) square feet. For a lot with three (3) road frontages, the maximum sign
face area is five hundred (500) square feet.
      (3)   Allowable area for attached signs. If there is no freestanding sign
on the premises, one and one-half (1½) square feet of sign face shall be
permitted for each linear front foot of the principal building for attached
signage. If there is a freestanding sign on the premises, only one (1) square
foot of sign face area shall be permitted for each linear foot of the principal
building for attached signage.
      (4)   Height. No part of any freestanding sign or its supporting
structure shall exceed thirty- five (35) feet in height. However, the maximum
height for signs on lots located adjacent to the right-of-way for interstate
interchanges is fifty (50) feet. No projecting sign may project more than
twenty (20) feet above the highest portion of the roof of the structure to
which it is attached.
      (5)   Location. Signs may be located anywhere on the property unless
specifically restricted otherwise in this chapter. Vision clearances
established in Section
26-181(c) of this chapter shall be observed. No part of any freestanding sign
permitted in required setbacks shall be located less than five (5) feet from
any property line. Wall signs may be located anywhere on the wall of a
building. No sign shall be erected within ten (10) feet of any residential
district boundary line unless such sign would meet the sign requirements for
nonresidential uses permitted within the residential district to which it is
adjacent.
   (j)   On-premises signs permitted in the Light Industrial and Heavy
Industrial Districts. Signs are permitted in the M-1, LI, and HI Districts,
subject to the following regulations:
      (1)   Number of signs. Freestanding and attached on-premises signs are
allowed in the M-1, LI, and HI Districts. Only one (1) freestanding sign is
allowed per road frontage per lot. There is no limit to the number of attached
signs permitted on a lot so long as the allowable area for attached signs is
not exceeded.
      (2)   Allowable area for freestanding signs.
         a.   Total allowable area for freestanding signs. The total allowable
area for a freestanding sign on a lot shall be related to the linear footage of
the road frontage of the lot. A property owner is allowed one (1) square foot
of sign face area per linear foot of road frontage for the first one hundred
(100) feet of road frontage and one-half (½) square foot of sign area per
linear foot of road frontage in excess of one hundred (100) feet. However, in
no event shall the square footage limitations for freestanding signs, set forth
in subsection (2)b. below, be exceeded.
         b.   Maximum size for all freestanding signs.  Regardless of the
amount of road frontage on a lot, the following maximum sizes for freestanding
signs shall not be exceeded. For a lot with one (1) road frontage, the total
maximum sign face area allowed is three hundred (300) square feet. For a lot
with two (2) road frontages, the maximum sign face area allowed is four hundred
and fifty (450) square feet. For a lot with three (3) street frontages, the
maximum sign face area is six hundred (600) square feet.
      (3)   Allowable area for attached signs. If there is no freestanding sign
on the premises, one and one-half (1½) square feet of sign face areas shall be
permitted for each linear front foot of the principal building for attached
signage. If there is a freestanding sign on the premises, only one (1) square
foot of sign face area shall be permitted for each linear foot of the principal
building for attached signage.
      (4)   Height. No part of any freestanding sign or its supporting
structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. However, the maximum
height for signs on lots located adjacent to the right-of-way for interstate
interchanges is fifty (50) feet.
      (5)   Location. Signs may be located anywhere on the property unless
specifically restricted otherwise in this chapter. Vision clearances
established in Section
26-181(c) of this chapter shall be observed. No part of any freestanding sign
permitted in required setbacks shall be located less than five (5) feet from
any property line. Wall signs may be located anywhere on the wall of a
building. No sign shall be erected within ten (10) feet of any residential
district boundary line unless such sign would meet the sign requirements for
nonresidential uses permitted within the residential district to which it is
adjacent.
   (k)   Off-premises combined development signs permitted in the Office and
Institutional, General Commercial, Light Industrial, and Heavy Industrial
Districts. Off-premises combined development signs are permitted in the OI, GC,
M-1, LI, and HI Districts, subject to the following regulations:
      (1)   Number. One (1) off-premises freestanding combined development sign
is allowed per development street frontage.
      (2)   Allowable area.
         a.   Maximum size. The maximum sign face area for a permitted combined
development sign is one hundred and fifty (150) square feet if the sign is
located within the required front yard setback for the lot on which it is
located. The maximum sign face area is three hundred (300) square feet if the
sign is not located within the required front yard setback.
         b.   Allowable area for any one business or establishment. Individual
businesses identified on the combined development sign shall be limited to no
more than twenty percent (20%) of the total allowable square footage of the
sign.
      (3)   Height. No part of any off-premises freestanding combined
development sign or its supporting structure may exceed ten (10) feet in height
if located within the required front yard setback for the lot on which it is
located. The sign may not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height if not located
within the required front yard setback.
      (4)   Location. Permitted off-premises freestanding combined development
signs must be located on lots that are adjacent to a principal driveway
entrance to the combined development and that are zoned for the type of
development for which the sign is being erected. Vision clearances established
in Section
26-181(c) of this chapter shall be observed. No part of any freestanding sign
permitted in required setbacks shall be located less than five (5) feet from
the front property line. No sign shall be erected within ten (10) feet of any
residential district boundary line unless such sign would meet the sign
requirements for nonresidential uses permitted within the residential district
to which it is adjacent.
   (l)   Additional regulations in all districts. Where the following uses are
permitted in a district, the standards listed below apply:
      (1)   Places of worship and schools. In addition to signs permitted in
the district in which a place of worship or school is located, such places of
worship or schools shall be permitted one bulletin or notice board displaying
information related to activities or services conducted or offered on the
premises per lot frontage.
      (2)   Signs on marquees and canopies. Signs on marquees or canopies
projecting into a public right-of-way are subject to the provisions concerning
attached signs in subsection (b)(2)b. above. In no case shall the length of the
sign projection exceed the length of projection of the marquee or canopy to
which it is attached. Additionally, such signs may not extend more than twenty-
four (24) inches below or more than four (4) feet above the marquee or canopy
to which they are attached. The sign face area for signs on canopies shall be
limited as part of the allowable area for freestanding, on-premises signs in
the respective zoning district.
      (3)   Service stations. Service stations are permitted, in addition to
the signage permitted in subsection (2) above, one sign not exceeding five (5)
square feet in area and located over the doorway to each service bay of the
service station. Such signs must identify the service provided therein. These
signs shall be subject to inclusion within the limitations upon display surface
area.
   (m)   Signs permitted in the Planned Development and Town and Country
Districts.
      (1)   Signs for residential uses. Within a PDD or TC District, signs for
residential uses shall comply with the sign regulations set forth for
residential uses in residential districts contained in subsection (g) above.
      (2)   Signs for nonresidential uses. Signs for nonresidential uses in a
PDD or TC district shall comply with the sign regulations set forth in
subsection (i) above for the General Commercial (GC) District.
   (n)   Maintenance. To ensure that signs are maintained in a safe and
aesthetically satisfactory manner, the following maintenance requirements shall
apply to all signs:
      (1)   No sign shall have more than twenty percent (20%) of its display
area or structure or reverse side covered with disfigured, chipped, cracked,
ripped, or peeling paint or poster paper for a period of more than thirty (30)
successive days.
      (2)   No sign shall remain with a bent or broken display area, broken
supports, loose appendages or struts or stand more than fifteen (15) degrees
from the perpendicular for a period of more than thirty (30) successive days.
      (3)   No sign shall be allowed to have weeds, vines, or other vegetation
growing upon it for a period of more than thirty (30) successive days.
      (4)   No indirect or internally illuminated sign shall have only partial
illumination for a period of more than sixty (60) successive days.
   (o)   Nonconforming signs. All legal nonconforming signs in existence as of
the effective date of this chapter may be continued and shall be maintained in
good condition.
      (1)   Unless allowed in paragraph (2), below, a nonconforming sign shall
not be:
         a.   Changed to another type or shape of nonconforming sign; provided,
however, the copy, content, or message of the sign may be changed so long as
the shape or size of the sign is not altered.
         b.   Structurally altered so as to prolong the life of the sign.
         c.   Expanded.
         d.   Reestablished after discontinuance for sixty (60) or more
successive days.
         e.   Reestablished after damage or destruction, where the estimated
expense of reconstruction exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the appraised
replacement cost of the sign in its entirety.
      (2)   Changeable copy signs. Legal nonconforming off-premise signs in
Commercial, Manufacturing, and Industrial Zoning Districts may be replaced in
whose or in part by surface area displaying changeable static images controlled
by electronic communications (hereinafter digital) as provided by this
paragraph.
         a.   No more than one-third (1/3) of existing off-premise signs (also
known as outdoor advertising signs, or “billboards”) may be replaced with
digital surface area signs.
         b.   A permit to replace legal nonconforming off-premise sign display
surface area with an equal or less digital surface are shall first be obtained
as provided in Sec.
26-180(a)(2). A digital sign must be erected within one (1) year of the
issuance of a permit or such permit shall become null and void.
         c.   A digital sign as provided by this section shall not be
considered flashing or blinking for the purposes of this paragraph when the
copy shall remain fixed for a period of at least six (6) seconds between
changes. The interval between copy changes shall be no longer than one (1)
second.
         d.   Digital signs shall not include animated, continuous, moving,
rolling, or scrolling messages or video displays.
         e.   Digital signs shall have an automatic dimmer and a photo cell
sensor to adjust the illumination intensity or brilliance of the sign so that
it shall not cause glare or impair the vision of motorists, and shall not
interfere with any driver’s operation of a motor vehicle. In addition, digital
shall not exceed a maximum illumination of 7,500 nits (candelas per square
meter) during daylight hours and a maximum illumination of 500 nits between
dusk to dawn as measured from the sign’s face at maximum brightness. Digital
signs shall not be permitted within three hundred (300) feet of any residential
district towards which the sign is oriented.
         f.   This permissibility does not include the replacement of, or some
other substantial alteration to, the sign support structure, except that
existing metal sign support structures may be replaced with new metal sign
support structures pursuant to a permit to erect a digital sign. However, any
new metal sign support shall not exceed the height of the existing metal sign
support.
         g.   A digital sign may be reestablished after damage or destruction
by an act of God, where the estimated expense of reconstruction does not exceed
fifty percent (50%) of the appraised replacement cost of the sign structure,
exclusive of the value of any digital display device.
         h.   There shall be one thousand (1,000) feet spacing of digital signs
on the same side of the road; there shall also be one thousand (1,000) feet
spacing of digital signs on the opposite side of the road if a digital sign is
facing in the same direction.
         i.   There shall be two thousand (2,000) feet spacing of digital signs
within any existing Neighborhood Master Plan Overlay District.
         j.   Digital signs shall not be erected within three hundred (300)
feet of any Historic District as defined by the National Historic Register, nor
within three hundred (300) feet of any hospital or nursing home.
         k.   Digital signs shall be allowed only on ‘arterial’ streets as
defined in Section
26-22.
   (p)   Enforcement. Notwithstanding the enforcement provisions of Section
26-273, signs found in violation of this Section shall be subject to the
following procedures:
      (1)   Signs on public property subject to removal without notice. County
employees shall have the authority to remove without notice to the owners
thereof, signs placed within any street or highway right-of-way; signs attached
to trees, fence posts, telephones and utility poles, or other natural features;
abandoned signs; signs placed on public property; and signs erected without
permit. Such signs shall be impounded for a period of ten (10) business days,
and if not claimed within that period of time, the sign shall be discarded. The
person(s) responsible for causing the unlawful sign to be on any public
property may be held responsible for the cost of removal. The persons liable
shall include, but are not limited to, any individual or business whose
advertisement, message or information appears on or is contained in any sign or
notice unlawfully placed on public property.
      (2)   Prohibited signs on private property. When an authorized county
official finds a prohibited sign located on private property, the county
employee shall notify the owner of the sign and the record owner of the
property on which the sign is located. Such notice of violation shall be in
writing and sent by certified or registered mail or delivered by personal
service. The notice of violation shall include an opportunity to cure the
violation within a prescribed period of time. If the violator fails to take
prompt corrective action in the prescribed time, then the county may pursue the
penalties and remedies set forth in Section
26-272.
   (q)   Off-premises weekend directional signs.
      (1)   Off-premises weekend directional signs are permitted in all zoning
districts, with the following restrictions:
         a.   A permit and identification sticker must be obtained from the
Planning Department for each sign proposed to be erected; and a permit fee/
sticker fee of five ($5.00) dollars per sign, must be paid. Each permit shall
be valid for one (1) year from the date of issuance.
            1.   The identification sticker must be affixed to the face of the
sign, and will identify the permit number and the date of permit expiration.
            2.   Permits shall only be issued to and held in the name of the:
               [a]   Sign company erecting the sign;
               [b]   Business owner associated with or identified on the sign;
or
               [c]   Real estate broker or agent.
         b.   The sign area shall not exceed twenty-four (24) inches by twenty-
four (24) inches.
         c.   A sign shall include no more than three (3) lines of text and a
business or company logo, and must include a directional arrow symbol.
         d.   Sign height shall not exceed three (3) feet above adjacent grade.
         e.   Signs may be placed along county roads in the right-of-way or on
private property; provided, however, signs shall not obstruct visibility at any
intersection location, nor shall the sign be erected within thirty (30) feet of
an intersection (see example below), nor shall more than two (2) signs per
permit holder be allowed at an intersection.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b8ca58bf1d09401f12aa24500886bd119d34fc76/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6566.jpg]
 
         f.   Prior to placing a sign on private property, written consent must
be obtained from the property owner(s).
         g.   No sign shall be erected on or abutting a road owned and
maintained by the State of South Carolina unless specifically allowed by the
South Carolina Department of Transportation.
         h.   Signs shall be placed at least three (3) feet from the edge of
the road pavement.
         i.   Signs shall be placed no closer than one-quarter (1/4) of a mile
(i.e., 1,320 feet) to another sign giving directions to the same location,
unless the sign is placed near an intersection to show that a left or right
turn is needed.
         j.   No sign permitted in this subsection shall be erected more than
one (1) mile from: 1) the site for which directions are being provided or 2)
the nearest SCDOT classified collector or arterial road.
         k.   Signs shall not be erected before 5:00 p.m. on Friday evening and
shall be completely removed by 11:59 p.m. on Sunday.
         l.   If a sign is damaged or faded, the permit holder may bring in the
damaged sign (with permit) and obtain a replacement sticker at no additional
cost.
      (2)   Violations. Signs found in violation of these provisions shall be
subject to immediate removal and disposal. In addition, a permit holder who
commits an offense may be subject to the penalty provisions of Section
26-272.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 052-08HR, § I, 9-16-08; Ord. No.
025-09HR, §§ I, II, 04-21-09; Ord. No. 046-09HR, § I, 10-6-09; Ord. No. 053-
09HR, § IV, 11-3-09; Ord. No. 008-11HR, § I, 2-1-11; Ord. No. 012-11HR, § I, 2-
15-11; Ord. No. 034-11HR, § II, III, 6-21-11; Ord. No. 041-14HR, § I, 7-15-14)
Sec. 26-181. Road standards.
   (a)   Purpose/general requirements.
      (1)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to prescribe minimum design
standards for new public and/or private roads.
      (2)   General requirements. All required road improvements set forth in
this section shall be installed or constructed by the developer at no cost to
the county, except as may otherwise be specifically provided. The developer
shall be responsible for obtaining all permits. Required improvements under
this section shall not be installed or constructed until required site plans
have been approved by the planning department and an order to proceed has been
issued.
      (3)   Phasing. Development may be designated to be constructed and/or
platted in phases. Provided, however, the planning department may not approve a
phasing plan when in its opinion such phasing will not provide for adequate
roadway facilities to support any such phase or phases independent of the
overall development plan. In approving phases, the planning department may
require that additional roads be constructed as part of the phase or phases in
order to ensure that sufficient public facilities will be in place to support
such phase or phases independent of any future development.
   (b)   Design standards for public or private roads.
      (1)   Paving and curb requirements. All new roads must be paved and
include curbs and enclosed drainage systems unless otherwise provided in this
Section (or unless exempted pursuant to Section
26-224).
      (2)   Right-of-way and pavement widths.
         a.   Minimum standards. Minimum rights-of- way and pavement widths
shall be as follows, unless reduced by the development review team during land
development or subdivision review and approval:
Road Classification  Minimum ROW (ft.) Minimum Pavement Width (ft.)
Park Road (One- way) 41                17
Minor Rural          66                20
Rural                66                22
Minor Residential    50                22
Local Residential    50                24
Local Commercial     66                36
Collector            66                36
Industrial           80                36
Arterial             100               53
Loop Lane            40                16
 
      Pavement width for rural roads shall be measured from pavement edge to
pavement edge. Residential, commercial, collector, and industrial roads shall
measure pavement width from back-of- curb to back-of-curb or from low-point-
of-valley to low-point-of-valley. The mixing of rural and any other road
classification is prohibited. Curb and gutters shall be installed on all paved
roads unless the county engineer determines that another system is acceptable.
Roads without curb and gutter shall have a minimum right-of-way of sixty-six
(66) feet; provided, however, when storm water swales or other stormwater
features are located along the roadside and specifically outside of the right-
of-way, then the right-of-way may be reduced to fifty (50) feet. The stormwater
swales or other stormwater feature must be within a minimum eight (8) foot
drainage easement or conservation easement, with clearly defined maintenance by
a private owner or homeowners' association.
         b.   Additional right-of-way. In the event the development of property
includes or abuts an existing platted county road that does not conform to the
minimum requirements set forth in this chapter, or in the event that the
development will result in an increase in the average daily traffic using the
road to the extent that the classification of the road will change under these
regulations, or the road is shown on the county's thoroughfare plan, the
preliminary land development (land development or subdivision) plan must
provide for sufficient right-of-way to increase the size of the right-of-way to
the width needed under the new classification. In the event that the
development abuts only one (1) side of such a road, the additional right-of-way
reserved shall not exceed one-half (½) of the additional right-of-way required
under the new classification, measured from the centerline of the existing
right- of-way. The plat shall clearly denote that any subject right-of-way
described above is reserved for future road widening. Lot area requirements and
setback requirements shall not use the reserved right-of-way area in their
measurements.
      (3)   Connectivity.
         a.   Extension of existing roads. The arrangement of roads in a
subdivision shall provide for the alignment and continuation or extension of
existing roads in adjoining areas in compliance with the standards set forth in
this section. Greater widths may be required if the existing road is identified
for widening in the county's thoroughfare plan.
         b.   Access to undeveloped property. Where it is deemed necessary to
the development of a logical road pattern and transportation network, roads and
rights-of-way shall be extended to the boundary of adjoining property.
Incompatible characteristics of adjoining property shall be given due
consideration in making a determination of what shall constitute a logical road
pattern. Reserve strips adjoining road rights-of-way for the purpose of
preventing access to adjacent property shall not be permitted.
            1.   Construction of road connections. Where required for a logical
road pattern, road extensions or connections may be built. In the event that
the adjoining property is later developed in such a manner that it is
determined that the connection will not be necessary for a logical road
pattern, the connection may be abandoned and divided proportionally among
adjoining landowners. Temporary dead end roads shall be provided with a
temporary turnaround having a roadway surface diameter of eighty (80) feet, or
other approved type of turnaround.
            2.   Reservation of road connections. In certain situations, the
development review team may permit a platted lot to be "reserved for future
connection" in lieu of construction of the road connection, in which case an
escrow account will be established in favor of the county for a ten (10) year
period in an amount determined by the county engineer to cover the cost of
construction. In the event the connection is constructed, any remaining
property shall be conveyed to adjoining property owners and the balance of the
escrow account refunded to the developer. In the event that the adjoining
property is later developed in such a manner that it is determined that the
connection is not required or desirable, the reservation will be terminated,
ownership of the lot will remain with the developer and the escrow account
refunded to the developer. If the extension has not been constructed within the
ten (10) year period, the development review team will determine the continued
necessity of the extension and either extend the time of the escrow account or
recommend that the reservation be terminated, with ownership of the lot
remaining with the developer and the escrow account being refunded to the
developer.
         c.   Conservation areas. One (1) private access easement shall be
allowed across a conservation area, provided that such access is at least
twenty (20) feet in width and provides access to no more than one (1) parcel.
      (4)   Cul-de-sacs.
         a.   General. Cul-de-sacs shall not be used to avoid connection with
an existing road or to avoid connection to adjoining property. Cul-de-sacs
shall not be used to provide access to development on the boundary of the
development except where a cul-de-sac is necessitated by topography or property
accessibility, or is appropriate for land use separation.
         b.   Cul-de-sac length. Cul-de-sacs shall not exceed one thousand two
hundred (1200) feet in length unless necessitated by topography or property
accessibility, and are approved by the development review team. Measurement
shall be from the point where the centerline of the dead end road intersects
with the centerline of a general circulation road to the center of the
turnaround of the cul-de-sac. Where one cul-de-sac extends from another cul-
de-sac, the end of each cul-de-sac shall be no more than one thousand two
hundred (1200) feet from a general circulation road as measured by the
centerline of the roads.
         c.   Cul-de-sac design. Cul-de-sacs shall terminate in a circular
turnaround having a minimum right-of-way of at least one hundred (100) feet in
diameter and a paved turnaround with a minimum outside diameter of eighty (80)
feet, or other approved type of turn around, including T's, Y's or landscaped
islands with a minimum right-of-way sufficient for county maintenance. In
addition, all cul-de-sacs must have either a landscaped interior island at
least forty (40) feet in diameter or a minimum of 5,024 square feet or the area
of the proposed cul-de-sac of natural land preserved to increase pervious area
within the development. This preserved natural area cannot be wetlands,
streams, buffers, already preserved lands, or other sensitive areas. The
minimum pavement width around a cul-de-sac island shall be sixteen (16) feet,
and this portion of the pavement shall be designated as a one-way for traffic
purposes. A provision for adequate drainage must be designed for the island;
and a provision for maintenance of landscaping on the island must be included
in the recorded restrictive covenants for the subdivision.
      (5)   Temporary dead-end road and half roads.
         a.   Temporary dead-end roads. Temporary dead-end roads shall be
provided with a temporary turnaround having a roadway surface diameter of
eighty (80) feet, or other type of approved turnaround.
         b.   Half roads. Half roads of less than two (2) lanes are prohibited.
Whenever a road is planned adjacent to the proposed development tract boundary,
the entire road right-of-way shall be platted within the proposed development,
or a portion of the road may be platted and reserved with adequate provision
for the concurrent dedication of the remaining portion of the right-of-way by
the adjacent landowner, evidence of which shall be furnished by the developer
through an acquired and recorded easement.
      (6)   Intersections. All road intersections shall be designed in
substantial compliance with the applicable requirements of SCDOT’s "Access &
Roadside Management Standards", published in August 2008.
      (7)   Loop lanes. Loop lanes shall be a minimum of sixteen (16) feet in
width for one-way traffic, and the exterior radius shall be no less than forty
(40) feet.
      (8)   T-roads. See the "Road Design Standards" manual kept in the
Department of Public Works.
      (9)   Main Roads - twenty-four (24) feet pavement width.
      (10)   Park Roads - seventeen (17) feet pavement width. On cul-de-sac
bulbs, the inside radius shall be a mountable curb. The "Park Road" paving
detail (see the "Road Design Standards" manual kept in the Department of Public
Works) may only be used when there is sufficient off street parking to provide
three (3) parking spaces per dwelling unit, and the total future parcels served
by the road do not exceed twenty-five (25). For common areas, a shared parking
space shall be considered as the equivalent of one and one-half (1½) dwelling
parking spaces.
      (11)   Other design standards.
         a.   Reverse curves. On state maintained roads, tangent distances
shall be determined by the use of South Carolina Department of Transportation
standards. On other roads, the Richland County design standards shall apply.
         b.   Road grades. Grades on roads not classified shall be established
by the South Carolina Department of Transportation or by the county engineer.
Grades on collector roads shall not exceed eight percent (8%) unless
topographic conditions make this impractical. Grades on residential roads shall
not exceed fifteen percent (15%), unless topographic conditions make this
impractical. All roads shall have a minimum grade of not less than one-half (½)
of one percent (1%).
         c.   Horizontal curves. Where a deflection angle of more than ten (10)
degrees occurs in the alignment of a road, a curve of reasonable radium shall
be introduced. On roads not classified, the center line radius of curvature
shall be determined by the South Carolina Department of Transportation or by
the county engineer. On collector, industrial, or commercial roads, the center
line radius of curvature shall not be less than three hundred and fifty (350)
feet. On local residential roads, the center line radius of curvature shall not
be less than one hundred and fifty (150) feet unless the topography of the land
to be subdivided makes this impractical.
         d.   Vertical curves. Minimum stopping sight distance on roads not
classified shall be determined by the South Carolina Department of
Transportation or by the county engineer. On collector, industrial, or
commercial service roads, the minimum stopping sight distance shall be two
hundred and seventy-five (275) feet (forty miles per hour) and on minor
residential roads, one hundred sixty (160) feet (twenty-five miles per hour).
Stopping sight distances shall be measured from a height of eye of three (3)
feet, nine (9) inches to an object with a height of six (6) inches, both
distances measured above the centerline of the road or road. Stopping sight
distance shall be determined in accordance with the standards of the American
Association of State Highway Officials.
         e.   Split-level roads. Roads that are constructed so as to have two
(2) traffic ways, each at a different level within the same right-of-way, shall
provide a paved traffic surface of at least twenty (20) feet on each level and
a slope between the two (2) traffic ways of 6:1 or flatter.
         f.   Alleys. Alleys shall only be permitted as approved by the county
engineer.
         g.   Access to parks, schools, etc.  Convenient access to places of
public assembly must be ensured in all development. See also Section
26-179 of this chapter for pedestrian amenity requirements.
         h.    Railroad rights-of-way. Developments adjacent to railroad
rights-of-way shall be required to provide for future railroad crossings.
         i.   Marginal access roads. In order to reduce traffic congestion,
marginal access roads shall be required between arterial roads and the adjacent
development. Additionally, the development review team may require marginal
access roads between collector roads and adjacent development, if the
conditions warrant.
         j.   Grading and paving. All grading and paving work done on new roads
or road improvements must be approved by the county engineer.
         k.   Road signs/traffic control devices.  
            [1]   Road signs, in conformance with the requirements of the
Federal Highway Administration’s Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices 2009
Edition with Revisions 1 and 2 incorporated; provided, however, if a later
edition is published, this latest edition shall be used; and with the
addressing coordinating specialist, shall be located at all intersections in a
manner approved by the county engineer. Any sign within a new development shall
be installed by the developer at his/her own expense. Signs will be aluminum
blanks on metal posts fabricated and mounted in a standard design established
by the director of public works. Such signs shall have white reflective
lettering a minimum of six (6) inches in height on a reflective background.
Signs located on multi-lane roads with a speed limit of 40 mph or greater shall
have lettering a minimum of eight (8) inches in height. A green background
shall denote a public road and a blue background shall denote a private road.
            [2]   All traffic control devices required by the Federal Highway
Administration’s Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices 2009 Edition with
Revisions 1 and 2 incorporated shall be installed by the developer at his/her
own expense. All devices shall conform to the required size and reflectivity
found in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices 2009 Edition with
Revisions 1 and 2 incorporated. Provided, however, if a later edition of the
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices is published, this latest edition
shall be used.
         l.   Alternative to curbed drainage. Minor rural roads and rural roads
may be exempt from the requirement to have curbs, subject to the following
conditions:
            [1]   A minor rural road shall provide access to less than twenty
(20) lots that are each greater than five (5) acres in size, and a rural road
shall provide access to less than fifty (50) lots that are each greater than
five (5) acres in size.
            [2]   For design criteria, see the "Road Design Standards" manual
kept in the Department of Public Works.
   (c)   Visibility at intersections.
      (1)   Sight clearance to be maintained. At each corner of each road or
driveway/road intersection, a sight area shall be maintained. Within the sight
area, no fence, wall, sign, slope, embankment, parked vehicle, hedge, foliage,
planting, object, or structure shall be placed, erected, or maintained that
will obstruct visibility within the sight area.
      (2)   Dimensions of the sight area. The horizontal dimensions of sight
areas are defined as triangular areas formed by the intersecting right-of-way
lines and a straight line joining the right-of-way lines at points that are
measured along the right-of-way lines as follows:
         a.   Fifteen (15) feet distant from the point of the intersection of
the right-of-way lines in commercial and industrial districts.
         b.   Twenty-five (25) feet distant from the point of the intersection
of the right-of- way lines in residential districts.
         Those sight areas shall be established regardless of the angle of
intersection of the right-of-way lines.
         For the intersection of a driveway and a road, the triangular area is
that formed by the right-of-way and the edge of the driveway and a straight
line joining the right-of-way and driveway edge at points that are fifteen (15)
feet distant from the point of intersection.
         The vertical dimensions (cross-visibility) of sight areas are defined
as the vertical space between the heights of two and one- half (2½) feet and
ten (10) feet in elevation above the nearest edge of the road pavement of a
paved road or above the nearest edge of the riding surface of an unpaved road.
Trees having limbs and foliage trimmed so that the cross-visibility within the
triangle is not obscured shall be allowed to overhang the sight triangle,
provided the location of any tree does not create a traffic hazard.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 038-09HR, § X, 7-21-09; Ord. No.
052-09HR, § I, 11-3-09; Ord. No. 026-10HR, § I, 5-18-10; Ord. No. 055-12HR, §
XIV, 10- 16-12; Ord. No. 007-18HR, § I, 2-20-18)
Sec. 26-182. Easements and utilities.
   (a)   Easements.
      (1)   Depiction on plan or plat. All existing and/or proposed easements
shall be depicted on the development plan or subdivision plat.
      (2)   Location and size of utility easements. All above-ground utilities,
to the maximum extent possible, shall be along the rear lot line. Easements for
streams, stormwater facilities, or other watercourses shall follow the contours
of the facility and shall comply with the requirements set forth in Section
26-105 of this chapter. Rear lot line easements shall be a minimum of twelve
(12) feet wide and side lot line easements shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet
wide.
   (b)   Water and sewer.
      (1)   General. The method of providing water and sewer service to any
development shall be shown on the development application. The developer shall
obtain all appropriate construction permits from the county and state health
departments.
      (2)   Water utilities. Water lines, valves, and hydrants shall be
installed and/or dedicated according to the requirements of the provider. When
required by the provider, water lines shall be stubbed out at the abutting
property line or easement line.
      (3)   Sewer systems. When required by the provider, sewer lines shall be
installed and/or dedicated according to the requirements of the provider. In
addition, when required by the provider, sewer lines shall be stubbed out at
the abutting property line or easement line.
      (4)   Natural gas. If supplied, natural gas lines shall be located
outside the pavement to the extent possible but within the right-of-way.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 043-07HR, § XXVII, 5-1-07)
Sec. 26-183. Road naming and addressing.
   (a)   General provisions.
   (1)   Purpose. A uniform system for road naming is essential in expediting
the response time from all emergency services agencies, such as police, fire,
ambulance or other rescue services; in facilitating postal and other service
delivery; and in reducing confusion for the driving public.
   (2)   Guidelines. In addition to the regulations set forth herein, a uniform
system of naming roads and numbering properties and principal buildings, called
"Guidelines for Road Naming and Addressing in Richland County", will be
maintained by the Planning Department.
   (3)   Jurisdiction. The regulations set forth herein and in the "Guidelines
for Road Naming and Addressing in Richland County" shall apply only to those
properties, buildings, streets, and public or private roadways that are located
within the unincorporated area of Richland County, and those incorporated areas
that are included through intergovernmental agreement. It shall be the
responsibility of all municipalities and political subdivisions not included
through intergovernmental agreement to coordinate road naming and property
numbering with the Planning Department.
   (b)   Changing a road name.
   (1)   Existing road names may only be changed pursuant to S.C. Code 1976, §
6-29-1200, as amended, and include the following reasons:
      a.   A road name duplicates or is similar to another, either phonetically
or by spelling, within a 9-1-1 community or an emergency service district. In
accordance with State Law, "Existing duplicated road names must be changed as
necessary by the local government to ensure the efficiency of the emergency
response system"; or
      b.   The 9-1-1 Central Dispatch/ Communications Department submits a
written request to the county that a particular road name is causing confusion
with the dispatch and/or delivery of emergency service delivery; or an
emergency service provider requests in writing that a particular street name is
causing service delivery confusion; or
      c.   The United States Postal Service presents a request in writing
stating that a particular road name is causing service delivery confusion; or
      d.   When road configurations exist or change so that a road is split
into two (2) or more non-continuous sections; or
      e.   When conditions result in confusion for emergency services delivery;
or
      f.   A change may simplify markings or giving directions to persons
looking for an address; or
      g.   Any other good and just reason that may appear to the Planning
Commission.
   (2)   Administrative procedures for changing a road name.
      a.   The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing regarding the
proposed road name change after providing notice of such public hearing in a
newspaper of general circulation at least fifteen (15) days prior to the
hearing. The Planning Department shall mail written notice to the property
owners of record, which are adjacent to or abutting the road, of the time,
date, and location of the public hearing.
      b.   After the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall either
approve, deny, or select an alternative name. The Richland County Planning
Commission is responsible for approving and authorizing street names in its
area of jurisdiction pursuant to S.C. Code 1976, § 6-29-1200, as amended.
      c.   Written notice shall be mailed to the affected property owners of
the Planning Commission's determination.
   (c)   Addressing.
   (1)   Approval agency. The Planning Department shall assign address numbers
in the unincorporated areas of Richland County; and shall coordinate municipal
addresses that are to be added to the E9-1-1 database. The Planning Department
shall also assign and maintain addresses within the jurisdiction of any
municipality with whom there is an intergovernmental agreement.
   (2)   Notification of address. Written notification of the proper address of
each building shall be mailed to the owner, occupant, or agent of each building
in all instances where a new number is assigned.
   (3)   Notification of new address information to proper agencies.
Notification shall be sent to all residents/property owners, the Richland
County 9-1-1 Communications Department, the U.S. Postal Service, the E9-1-
1 database maintenance organization, appropriate state agencies, and public
utility and affected emergency service providers whenever a new address has
been assigned. It shall be the responsibility of the occupant to notify their
respective telephone companies by informing the company of the correct address
at the time telephone service is requested.
   (4)   Placement and posting of numbers.
      a.   When a house or building has been assigned its respective number or
numbers, the owner, occupant, or agent/person in charge shall place or cause to
be placed upon each house or building controlled by him/her the number or
numbers assigned under the uniform system as outlined in this Section and in
the "Guidelines for Road Naming and Addressing in Richland County".
      b.   All numbers shall be made of a durable, clearly visible, and
reflective material that contrasts with the color of the house, building or
structure on which it is being placed.
      c.   The numbers must he posted as numerals and must not be spelled out.
      d.   The address shall be placed on existing buildings within twenty-one
(21) days from the date shown on the written notification that is referenced in
subsection (c) (2), above.
      e.   Residential numerals shall be at least three (3) inches in height,
and numerals for multiple dwelling units and nonresidential buildings shall be
at least six (6) inches in height, and shall be placed on the front of the
building facing the road or on the end of the building nearest the road.
      f.   Numbers shall be conspicuously placed immediately above, on, or at
the side of the door facing the road off which the structure is addressed so
that the number is clearly visible from the road line.
      g.   In the case where the building cannot be seen from the road or is
situated more than fifty (50) feet from the road line, the building number
shall also be placed near the walk, driveway, or common entrance to the
building, or upon the mailbox, gatepost, fence, or other appropriate place so
as to clearly be visible from the street or road.
      h.   The road address number shall be displayed on both sides of the mail
box. If mailboxes are grouped together, the road address number shall be
displayed on the mailbox door, as well as on the side visible towards the road.
      i.   Costs and installation of the numbers shall be paid for by the
property owner or occupant or person in charge of house or building.
   (d)   Enforcement, violations, and penalties.
   (1)   Enforcement of posting numbers. The office of the Richland County Fire
Marshal shall be responsible for enforcing the posting of numbers. Prior to the
issuance of a citation for any structure without properly posted numbers, the
Fire Marshal shall consult with the Planning Department regarding the proper
address of the structure in question. The Planning Department shall issue a
notice of violation giving the violator ten (10) days from the date the letter
is mailed, to correct the violation. Such notice of violation shall be in
writing and sent by certified or registered mail or delivered by personal
service. If the property owner, occupant, or agent has not properly posted the
address after the ten (10) day time period, then the Richland County Fire
Marshal or a local fire officer shall issue a citation. Such person shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined or imprisoned
for a term not to exceed the authority of the Magistrate's Courts. Each day
that such violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
   (2)   Tampering with street signs, posting illegal street signs. Removing or
defacing a street name sign in any manner, placing a street name sign in any
unapproved location, or being found in possession of a stolen street sign shall
constitute a violation; and such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and upon conviction shall be fined or imprisoned for a term not to exceed the
authority of the Magistrate's Courts.
   (3)   Damage to street signs. It shall be unlawful for any person,
corporation, firm, or organization to alter, remove, deface or damage any
street name signs placed by the county pursuant to this Section. Any violation
of this Section shall be deemed a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be
fined or imprisoned for a term not to exceed the authority of the Magistrate's
Courts.
   (4)   Naming of streets not approved by the Planning Commission. Failure to
obtain proper approval of any road name used within the unincorporated areas of
Richland County and the recordation of any plat containing any road name not
approved by the Planning Commission shall constitute a violation; and such
person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be
fined or imprisoned for a term not to exceed the authority of the Magistrate's
Courts.
   (5)   Removing or defacing numbers. Any person who unlawfully removes,
defaces, mars, changes, destroys, or renders an existing number or numbers
unreadable in any manner shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction shall be fined or imprisoned for a term not to exceed the authority
of the Magistrate's Court.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 022-10HR, § II, 5-18-10)
Sec. 26-184. Reserved.
Sec. 26-185. Temporary and accessory uses.
   (a)   Temporary uses.
      (1)   General standards and permit requirement.
         a.   Permit required. All permitted temporary uses listed in this
section require a temporary use permit. Temporary use permits shall be reviewed
and issued by the planning department. A temporary use permit may only be
issued when all applicable criteria set forth in this section have been met.
All additional permits and inspections required by the building code or fire
officials must be received. Special events and activities conducted on public
property, such as school sites and public parks, shall be exempt from the
provisions of this section but must comply with any guidelines, regulations,
and permitting processes required by the authorizing agency.
         b.   Time limitations. Temporary use permits shall be issued for no
more than sixty (60) days within a calendar year on any individual lot.
         c.   General standards.
            1.   The property on which a temporary use is proposed must contain
sufficient space to support the temporary use.
            2.   No temporary use shall be located closer than two hundred
(200) feet to a dwelling unit.
            3.   Parking must be adequate to support the proposed temporary
use.
            4.   Restroom facilities, if needed, must be provided. Plans for
security and safety must be provided.
      (2)   Permitted temporary uses.
         a.   Permitted uses.
            1.   Temporary events. Temporary uses, such as circuses, carnivals,
fairs, and religious events in a temporary structure, and similar types of
events, shall be allowed in all nonresidential zoning districts in accordance
with the other standards set forth in this section.
            2.   Temporary sales. Temporary sales structures or areas (i.e.,
Christmas tree sales) are permitted in all nonresidential zoning districts in
accordance with the other standards set forth in this section.
         b.   Temporary uses with specific requirements.
            1.   Contractor's office and equipment storage sheds. A
contractor's office and/or equipment storage shed(s) may be placed temporarily
on the site of construction of a development for which a land development
permit or preliminary subdivision plat approval has been issued. Such
structures shall be allowed in all zoning districts. Placement of such
temporary use is limited to a period of time determined by an estimated project
completion date, with the option of an extension of up to one (1) year, as and
if approved by the planning department. All temporary construction buildings
and trailers shall be completely removed from the site within thirty (30) days
of issuance of a certificate of zoning compliance or completion of the project,
whichever comes first.
            2.   Real estate office in a construction trailer or temporary
modular unit. One (1) temporary structure, such a construction trailer or
temporary modular unit, may be used as a real estate sales office in any new
construction project. Such structure shall be allowed in all zoning districts.
Temporary real estate offices in construction trailers or temporary modular
units may remain on the site for no more than twelve (12) months or until one-
half (½) of the units for the project are completed, whichever occurs first.
            3.   Real estate offices in model home.  A model dwelling may be
used as a real estate sales office in a new residential development. Such
temporary use shall be allowed in all zoning districts. Temporary real estate
offices in model homes may be permitted until ninety percent (90%) of the homes
in the development have been sold. The number of employees utilizing the office
at any one time may not exceed four (4).
         c.   Similar and compatible uses not specified. If a particular
temporary use is listed in this chapter, the zoning administrator shall have
the authority to grant a temporary use permit for a "similar and compatible"
use. Similar and compatible uses not specified are those uses that are similar
and compatible to those allowed as temporary uses in this section.
Determination of what constitutes similar and compatible shall be made by the
zoning administrator looking at the type of use, the number of employees, the
parking/ circulation needs, the hours of operation, etc.
   (b)   Accessory uses and structures (customary).
      (1)   General standards and limitations.
         a.   General standards. All customary accessory uses and accessory
structures shall conform to the applicable requirements of this chapter. The
provisions of this subsection establish additional requirements and
restrictions for these uses and structures. Except as otherwise provided in
this chapter, any accessory use or accessory structure shall be treated as a
permitted use in the zoning district in which it is located.
         b.   Yard requirements.
            1.   Front yard requirements. Except as otherwise provided in this
section, an accessory structure or use shall not be located in front of the
building line of the principal structure.
            2.   Side yard requirements. Accessory uses and structures may be
permitted in side yards, provided that their placement shall not exceed the
minimum side yard requirement of that district.
            3.   Rear yard requirement. Accessory uses and structures may be
permitted in rear yards, provided that they are located not less than ten (10)
feet from any property line.
         c.   Height restrictions. Accessory structures shall not exceed the
height limitations of the district in which they are located, unless otherwise
exempted.
         d.   Size restrictions.  
            1.   Accessory structures in residential districts shall not exceed
a maximum total area of fifty percent (50%) of the gross floor area of the
principal building or one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet, whichever
is greater, and shall not cover more than thirty percent (30%) of the yard.
Provided, however, accessory structures on lots that are two (2) acres in size
or greater in the RU Rural district shall not exceed a maximum total area of
fifty percent (50%) of the gross floor area of the principal building or twenty
five hundred (2,500) square feet.
            2.   There are no size restrictions for accessory structures that
are associated with agricultural uses in the RU district, provided that the lot
size is greater than two (2) acres and that a one hundred (100) foot setback is
maintained from all property lines.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 027-11HR, § II, 5-17-11)
Sec. 26-186. Development with Open Space Design Standards.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide optional standards
that will preserve land for conservation by permitting variation in lot sizes.
Subdivision of land into varying lot sizes provides home buyers a choice of lot
sizes according to their needs, while at the same time preserving open space,
tree cover, scenic vistas, natural drainage ways, and natural topography. Such
measures prevent soil erosion and flooding by allowing development to occur
according to the nature of the terrain, provide larger open areas with greater
utility for recreation and a "sense of community", and encourage the
development of more attractive and economical site design.
Incorporating open space into development has numerous environmental,
conservation and community benefits, including the following:
      (1)   Preserves green space.
      (2)   Provides open space for recreation.
      (3)   Reduces the impervious cover in a development. Impervious cover
contributes to degradation of water resources by increasing the volume of
surface runoff, degrading water quality by preventing infiltration into the
soil surface.
      (4)   Reduces stormwater pollutant loads to streams, receiving streams
and other resources. Protects and enhances stream and other resources.
      (5)   Reduces soil erosion and sediment delivery by reducing the amount
of clearing and grading on the site while increasing overall infiltration.
      (6)   Reduces the cost of stormwater management by minimizing the area
contributing to runoff and reducing runoff volumes and stormwater contaminants.
      (7)   Provides air quality benefits and reduces "heat island" impacts.
      (8)   Reduces the capital and long-run maintenance costs of development.
      (9)   Provides a wider range of feasible sites to locate stormwater best
management practices (BMPs).
      (10)   Reduces the cost and improves the efficiency of public services
needed by the development.
      (11)   Protects urban wildlife habitat, with a focus for corridors which
provide important habitat linkages.
      (12)   Creates a sense of community and pedestrian connectivity.
This optional section implements procedures to allow for development, while
preserving the natural attributes of the land and providing open space. This
section also encourages designing developments with open space design to
maximize larger, contiguous unconstrained open space areas [see subsection (g)
(2), below], especially areas adjacent to constrained open space areas [see
subsection (g) (1), below], and minimize smaller, isolated areas to better
achieve the benefits described in this subsection.
Conservation analysis shall take place to plan open space developments.
Applicants must prepare a Natural Resource Inventory in accordance with Section
26-222(g).
   (b)   Applicability. The owner, or his/her authorized agent, of property
within an RU, RR, RS-E, RS-LD, RS-MD, RS-HD zoning district may apply the
development standards found within this section, in lieu of the development
standards set forth for the applicable zoning district, subject to meeting the
requirements of this section.
   (c)   Application. A property owner, or his/her authorized agent, desiring
to use the development standards of this section must first submit an
application to the planning department and must meet the following
requirements:
      (1)   The minimum parcel size shall be two (2) acres;
      (2)   The application shall be accompanied by a Natural Resource
Inventory, as identified in Section
26-222(g), and a Concept Plan as required in this section;
      (3)   The property must utilize a public sanitary sewer and public water
or IOU (Investor Owned Utility) regulated water or sewer system.
   (d)   Concept Plan. At time of the development application, a Concept Plan
shall be submitted by the developer for review and approval in accordance with
the requirements and procedures of this chapter. A Concept Plan shall consist
of either a site plan or sketch plan, including the following information:
      (1)   Delineation and specifications of all open space areas and any
"Neighborhood Green," community garden, play areas or trail systems to be
constructed. Information of open space areas should include size and type and
be shown on the plan and listed in a tabular format (see example).
 
Constrained Open Space - 8.9 acres Unconstrained Open Space - 15.7 acres
Subtype                 Acreage    Subtype             Acreage
Floodplain              3.6        Native Forest       10.5
Stream Buffer           2.4        Rock Outcroppings   2.2
Slopes greater than 25% 2.9        Neighborhood Greens 3
 
      (2)   A typical detail on the plan indicating building setback lines,
street trees, sidewalks and street pavement and right-of-way width.
   (e)   Review. The use of these development standards in accordance with
subsection (c) and (d) above shall follow the permitting procedures outlined in
Sections
26-53 and
26-54.
   (f)   Open Space Requirements. Open space set aside is required in all open
space developments and shall consist of any of the following categories of
land:
      (1)   Constrained open space is land that shall be covered by the
provisions for permanent protection, per subsection (h), below, and includes
the following:
         a.   Floodways and 100-year floodplains, in lieu of exceptions defined
in Section
26-106,
         b.   Jurisdictional lines and associated buffer zones per Section
26-187,
         c.   Highly erodible soils on steep slopes of 25% or greater,
including water quality buffers per Section
26-187(g), except minimal changes may be allowed for necessary access or
impacts (wetlands, jurisdictional or non-jurisdictional) of less than a quarter
(1/4) acre,
         d.   Federal and state listed rare, endangered or threatened species/
habitats,
         e.   Archeological features eligible for or listed in the national
Register of Historic Places,
         f.   Human cemeteries or burial grounds, and
         g.   Open water, except where alterations enhance open space value, or
as exempted in Section
26-187(b).
      (2)   Unconstrained open space is land other than constrained open space
that includes important environmental, conservation, wildlife or historic areas
and is acceptable to the county for conservation designation, and shall be
covered by the provisions for permanent protection, per subsection (h), below.
These include the following:
         a.   Important historic sites, not currently determined eligible for
or listed in the National Register of Historic Places,
         b.   Existing healthy, mature forests of at least one (1) contiguous
acre,
         c.   Contiguous areas surrounding groupings of grand trees,
         d.   Scenic view sheds of natural or historic features,
         e.   Unique rock outcroppings,
         f.   Prime agricultural soils or productive agricultural lands
consisting of at least one (1) contiguous acre,
         g.   Existing trails or wooded corridors that connect the tract to
neighboring areas,
         h.   Extension of the required water quality buffer,
         i.   Headwater streams, and
         j.   Restored pond; restorative or enhancing activities.
         Also considered unconstrained open space are community gardens of a
minimum quarter (1/4) acre, neighborhood greens and low impact development
(LID) storm water management facilities and practices, and these may be
constructed and maintained in the open space area. However, neighborhood greens
shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total required open space area.
      (3)   Restored open space includes brownfield reclamation, as contracted
by the brownfield component of the SCDHEC Voluntary Cleanup Program; approved
watershed or stream restoration consistent with Section
26-187; and the removal of impervious cover and restoration of pervious areas
during redevelopment. Restored areas must be approved by Richland County staff
as part of the development review process. Restored farm ponds shall be
credited at one hundred percent (100%).
      (4)   Recreational open space includes pervious recreational areas.
   (g)   Open space design standards.
      (1)   To use these standards, one of the following alternatives must be
utilized, as appropriate for the applicable zoning district:
         a.   To utilize the density-based zoning and flexibility in lot size,
in all allowable zoning districts per subsection (b), above, all constrained
open space on a site must be set aside, plus a minimum of ten percent (10%)
unconstrained open space, for a total actual acreage set aside of fifteen
percent (15%). Open space set asides between fifteen percent (15%) and twenty-
five percent (25%) are based on a 1:1 ratio open space area to actual area.
Open space credits, as determined by the "Unconstrained Open Space Credit
Calculations" table in Section
26-186 (h) (1) b. 2., cannot be utilized to meet the open space requirements
under this alternative.
            If the constrained open space meets the twenty-five percent (25%)
minimum, then no additional unconstrained open space is required.
         b.   To utilize a density bonus over the base density, allowable only
in RU, RR, RS-E and RS-LD, a minimum of twenty-five percent (25%) open space
credits are required, which includes a minimum of ten percent (10%)
unconstrained open space credits, calculated using the "Unconstrained Open
Space Credit Calculations" table below. Constrained open space areas are based
on a 1:1 ratio of open space area to actual acreage.
            1.   A five percent (5%) density bonus is awarded for twenty-five
percent (25%) open space credits, under this alternative. Then, one percent
(1%) density bonus for every additional one percent (1%) of open space credits,
up to a maximum density bonus of twenty percent (20%) for RU, RR and RS-E and
fifteen percent (15%) for RS-LD zoning districts.
            2.   Open space will be credited based upon the following:
               i.   Constrained open space shall be credited at one hundred
percent (100%) of the land area.
               ii.   Restored open space shall be credited at two hundred
percent (200%) of the land area; except where exceptions apply per subsection
(f)(3), above.
               iii.   Recreational open space shall be credited at fifty
percent (50%) of the land area.
               iv.   Unconstrained open space shall be credited based on the
following table titled "Unconstrained Open Space Credit Calculations".
UNCONSTRAINED OPEN SPACE CREDIT CALCULATIONS
Unconstrained Open Space Category Credit Calculation with Multiplier
UNCONSTRAINED OPEN SPACE CREDIT CALCULATIONS
Unconstrained Open Space Category            Credit Calculation with Multiplier
Natural Resources Factors
Water Quality Buffer Extension (1)           Total Additional Buffer Area* 1.75
Water Quality Buffer Extension (303d listed  Total Additional Buffer Area* 2.0
water) (1)
Upstream Headwater Protection (2)            Total Headwater Area* 2.0
Steep Slopes - Erosive Soils
   (Average ≥ 15% ≤ 20%
      B Hydrologic Group               Total Steep Slope Area* 1.25
      C Hydrologic Group               Total Steep Slope Area* 1.5
   (Average ≥ 21% ≤ 25%
      B Hydrologic Group               Total Steep Slope Area* 1.75
      C Hydrologic Group               Total Steep Slope Area* 2.0
Native, Mixed Forests (0.5 acre minimum) (3)
   Clear Cut within last 2 years (UnmanageTotal Forest Area* 0.5
   Clear Cut within last 2 years (Managed)Total Forest Area* 0.75
   Clear Cut within 2 to 10 years         Total Forest Area* 0.75
(Unmanaged)
   Clear Cut within 2 to 10 years (ManagedTotal Forest Area* 1.0
   Clear Cut within 10 to 20 years        Total Forest Area* 1.25
(Unmanaged)
   Clear Cut within 10 to 20 years (ManageTotal Forest Area* 1.5
   Forest older than 20 years (Unmanaged) Total Forest Area* 1.75
   Forest older than 20 years (Managed)   Total Forest Area* 2.0
Pine, Monoculture Forests (0.5 acre minimum)
   Clear Cut within last 2 to 10 years    Total Forest Area* 0.5
(Unmanaged)
   Clear Cut within last 2 to 10 years    Total Forest Area* 0.75
(Managed)
   Clear Cut within last 10 to 20 years   Total Forest Area* 1.0
(Unmanaged)
   Clear Cut within last 10 to 20 years   Total Forest Area* 1.25
(Managed)
   Forest older than 20 years (Unmanaged) Total Forest Area* 1.75
   Forest older than 20 years (Managed)   Total Forest Area* 2.0
Protective Area of Groupings of Grand Trees  Area* Percentage of All Grand Trees
(4)                                          Protected* 1.75
Prime Agricultural Soils (0.5 acre minimum)  Total Prime Agricultural Soil Area*
                                             1.5
Important Historic Sites/Structures not      Total Historic Site Area* 1.5
considered constrained
Scenic Viewsheds (5)                         Total Parcel Viewshed Area
                                             Protected* 1.0
Rock Outcrops                                Total Rock Outcrop Area* 1.0
Pasture or Meadow (Unmanaged)                Total Area* 0.75
Pasture or Meadow (Managed)                  Total Area* 1.25
NOTES:
(1)   Not to exceed a total width of 300 feet, including the constrained water
quality buffer. Must be within the stream watershed area.
(2)   Drainage area upstream of the jurisdictional line.
(3)   Clear cut date based on best available data and estimated age of trees. To
determine whether a forest, meadow, or pasture is managed, the applicant must
provide proof to the planning department consistent with the Richland County Open
Space Management Manual.
(4)   Cluster area = critical root zone; percent of all grand trees on the site.
(5)   Viewshed area = area on the parcel where the view is visible.
Engineered Factors
LID Practice (6)
   Green/Permeable Pavement (only in open LID Practice Area* 1.5
space)
   Infiltration Bio-retention             LID Practice Area* 2.0
Neighborhood Greens                          Neighborhood Green Area* 1.0
Trails                                       Trail Area* 1.25
Wet Stormwater Detention Ponds serving as an Total Area* 0.5
amenity (Managed)
 
      (2)   Unconstrained open space areas may only be credited once per the
calculations in this section. When an unconstrained open space area qualifies
in two (2) categories, it shall be credited as follows:
         a.   Where both categories have a factor of 1.0 or greater, the
greater credit shall be applied.
         b.   If one of the two categories has a factor of less than 1.0, the
lesser credit shall be applied.
      (3)   The following activities or land uses may not be counted as a part
of designated open space:
         a.   Existing rights-of-way and utility easements,
         b.   Setbacks and lawns,
         c.   Dry stormwater detention ponds.
   (h)   Open Space Management.
      (1)   Open space areas. To maintain, enhance and sustain the
environmental, conservation, wildlife, recreational, historic, public and
community values and benefits of open space areas, property owners or his/her
authorized agents using the provisions of this Section must develop an open
space management plan. The plan shall include guidance on how to best manage
open space areas in their current condition, increase conservation values
through enhancement of existing conditions or establish processes to modify
open spaces to other intended open space functions and resultant conservation
values and benefits. The plan shall incorporate approved and current best
management practices (BMPs) for all constrained and unconstrained open space
areas as set forth in the Richland County Open Space Management Manual.
      The open space management plan must be approved by the planning
department prior to approval of the final plat.
         a.   Open space area management and maintenance. Management of the
open space area includes specific limitations on alteration of the natural
conditions. The following practices and activities are restricted within open
space areas, except with prior approval by the planning department:
            1.   Clearing or grubbing of existing vegetation,
            2.   Clear cutting of vegetation,
            3.   Soil disturbance by grading, stripping, or other practices,
            4.   Filling or dumping,
            5.   Use, storage, or application of pesticides, herbicides, and
fertilizers,
            6.   Conversion of vegetation from native to exotic species, and
            7.   Motor vehicles are not permitted in open space areas unless
during the installation of certain permitted utilities.
         b.   The following structures, practices, and activities are permitted
in open space areas, subject to prior approval from the county, and when
specific design or maintenance features are adhered to:
            1.   All activities within water quality buffers located within
open space areas shall be consistent with Section
26-187.
            2.   Pedestrian crossings, public or neighborhood bicycle or
pedestrian access, passive recreational amenities, such as pervious-surface
paths and minimum green infrastructure parking spaces, stream bank
stabilization efforts and LID stormwater control practices.
            3.   Utilities are allowed; however, utility easements shall not
qualify as open space areas.
      (2)   Open space area plat requirements. All preliminary, bonded and
final plats prepared for recording and all right-of way-plats (submitted under
this section) shall clearly:
         a.   Delineate and label all open space areas,
         b.   Provide a note to state: "There shall be no clearing, grading,
disturbance or construction or construction runoff impacts to the open space
areas except as allowed by the Public Works Department",
         c.   Provide a note to state: "All open space areas shown on the plat
are subject to perpetual conservation easements which are contained in land
records or covenants pertaining to the development",
         d.   Provide a note indicating ownership of the open space areas by
the property owners association, and
         e.   Show the location of all permanent open space boundary marker
signs.
         f.   All water quality buffer access easements shall be consistent
with Section
26-187.
      (3)   Open space area protection requirements during construction. The
following steps shall be taken during the site plan development and site
construction process to protect existing open space areas:
         a.   Open space areas must be clearly identified on all plan
submittals and construction drawings and marked with the statement "Open Space
Area. Do Not Disturb or Encroach."
         b.   Open space areas cannot be encroached upon or disturbed at any
time, unless in accordance with Section
26-187(c), Section
26-187(k) or without approval from the county.
         c.   Open space areas must be clearly marked with a warning barrier
prior to any construction activities. The marking(s) shall be maintained until
completion of all construction activities. All contractors and others working
on the construction site must be made aware of the existence of the open space
areas and the restrictions on disturbing these areas.
         d.   All open space areas must be left in the existing condition upon
completion of construction activities. Should any activities during
construction, including encroachment, cause damage or degradation to any of the
open space areas, these areas must be restored based upon preexisting
conditions or to conditions acceptable through a Richland County-approved
restoration plan.
         e.   If any trees are allowed to be removed, the tree location shall
be shown and a note shall be provided stating that the tree must be hand
cleared.
         f.   Where stormwater is concentrated into open space areas, best
management practices must be placed to protect it, as approved by the county.
         g.   The open space areas shall be shown and labeled on the
engineering plans, preliminary, bonded and final plat.
      (4)   Open space area protection requirements after construction. Open
space areas must be protected in perpetuity by either of the following options
and be in compliance with the open space management plan:
         a.   Option 1. Previous granting to qualified organization or entity.
Any proposed open space area found in this section and having previously been
granted in a conservation easement running in perpetuity to a third party
"qualified organization" recognized by Federal Treasury Regulation Section
1.170 A-14(c)(1), or successor provision, may qualify as open space area under
this section with certain exceptions. The owner must submit a copy of the
recorded easement, baseline assessment and annual monitoring inspections for
the previous three (3) years to the planning department for review. Based on a
review of the information, the department will determine if the proposed open
space areas and permitted uses protected in the easement qualify under this
section.
         Potential exceptions include, but are not limited to, active
timberlands or areas of the easement on which the conservation values have been
damaged by poor cutting and harvesting practices (conflicting with current
BMP's), encroachment by development, illegal dumping, above or below-ground
utility easements, runoff and erosion, fires, storms, insect infestation or
other damaging activity which has or continues to diminish the conservation
value of the open space area. Failure of the monitoring organization to
adequately enforce the provisions of the conservation easement shall be grounds
for refusing to accept such easement into the program.
         The property owner or property owners' association (POA) shall be
responsible for the continuous and perpetual protection, management,
maintenance and annual monitoring of all open space areas.
         b.   Option 2. Easement granted to richland county. Any proposed open
space area found in this section may be granted in a conservation easement
running in perpetuity to the Richland County conservation commission at the
time of application for an open space development. The purpose of the granting
to the Richland County conservation commission is to ensure the protection and
proper management of the open space areas and has no impact or bearing on the
acceptance of any open space areas or approval under this section by Richland
County.
         The property owner or POA (once deeded) agrees to pay a one-time
stewardship fee, to be established by the Richland conservation commission, to
cover the cost of annual monitoring, compliance and enforcement of the
conservation easement.
         The property owner or POA assumes the responsibility for the
continuous and perpetual protection, management, and maintenance of all open
space areas consistent with the guidance contained in the Richland County Open
Space Management Manual.
         c.   Option 3. Conveyance to the property owners' association. If not
utilizing Option 1 or 2 of this subsection, the property owner shall convey
ownership in a deed all open space areas in fee-simple to the POA which shall
be recorded and delivered prior to, or concurrent with, the recording of the
bonded plat for the first phase of the subdivision. To meet the purposes of
this section, the deed and covenants of the POA shall contain the following
language:
               "The conservation values and benefits of the areas conveyed by
deed and shown on the Final Plat shall remain permanently protected and shall
not be disturbed, or modified without prior approval from the Planning
Department. The open space areas identified in this covenant are intended for
public benefit, but for association members use, and it shall run in
perpetuity."
            The POA may establish criteria for public use of open space areas
protected under this section. The POA assumes the responsibility for the
continuous and perpetual protection, management, maintenance and annual
monitoring of all open space areas consistent with the guidance contained in
the Richland County Open Space Management Manual.
         d.   Option 4. Retention by the property owner. If not utilizing the
options above in this subsection, the property owner shall retain ownership of
all open space areas, which shall be recorded and delivered prior to, or
concurrent with, the recording of the bonded plat for the first phase of the
subdivision. To meet the purposes of this section, the deed shall contain the
following language:
               "The conservation values and benefits of the areas covered base
by deed and shown on the Final Plat shall remain permanently protected and
shall not be disturbed, or modified without prior approval from the Planning
Department. The open space areas identified in this covenant are intended for
public benefit, but for residents use, and it shall run in perpetuity."
            The property owner may establish criteria for public use of open
space areas protected under this section. The property owner assumes the
responsibility for the continuous and perpetual protection, management,
maintenance and annual monitoring of all open space areas consistent with the
guidance contained in the Richland County Open Space Management Manual.
         e.   Regardless of which option above is utilized, conservation
easements and/or open space areas are the property of the property owner or
POA. If a POA is established to manage open space areas, the following criteria
are recommended:
            1.   Membership in the POA is mandatory and automatic for all
property owners for the subdivision and their successors;
            2.   The POA shall have lien authority to ensure the collection of
dues from all members; and
            3.   The POA is responsible for informing each property owner at
the time of closing of the location of the open space areas and the requirement
not to disturb or encroach upon these areas.
         f.   Richland County retains an independent right of entry and
enforcement under such conservation easements independent of the property owner
or POA and such right of enforcement shall be included in all conservation
easements granted under this section and contained in the covenants for the
subdivision.
      (5)   Open space baseline surveys and annual monitoring. To quantify the
pre-construction condition and conservation values of the open space areas, the
developer shall:
         a.   Conduct a baseline survey by the applicant prior to any earth-
moving, tree clearing, infrastructure installation or home construction. The
baseline survey shall photo-document the condition of the open space areas
prior to the above activities. Photos must be of adequate quality, number and
distribution to adequately document all open space areas. Each photograph
should be geocoded to indicate both the location and bearing of the photograph
and each digital photographic file must be submitted electronically in a high-
resolution digital format.
         b.   Annual monitoring shall be conducted by the developer, POA or
qualified entity and document the existing condition of the protected open
space area. The annual monitoring shall photo-document the condition of the
open space areas. Photos must be taken at the same location and bearing as the
original baseline survey. Each photograph should be geocoded to indicate both
the location and bearing of the photograph and each digital photographic file
must be submitted electronically in a high-resolution digital format.
            As an alternative, the POA can retain the services of a qualified
entity (which could include Richland County) to perform the annual monitoring
survey.
            The annual monitoring should document any violations or changes
that have taken place since the last monitoring report, such as:
            1.   Homeowner or POA encroachment,
            2.   Removal of sand, gravel, loam, rock, etc,
            3.   Trash accumulation, dumping, organic debris,
            4.   Alteration of the open space,
            5.   Storm damage, erosion, etc,
            6.   Construction of roads, parking lots, utility lines, trails,
            7.   Removal or planting of trees or other vegetation,
            8.   Invasion of non-native species, and/or
            9.   Current use of adjacent properties and whether there are any
problems with encroachment and/or trespassing.
         c.   All baseline surveys and annual monitoring documents shall be
submitted to the planning department.
      (6)   Signage. For subdivisions, final permanent open space area boundary
marker signs are to designate open space areas prior to bonding of the
subdivision and/or finalizing the subdivision with the intent to transfer
property. Permanent boundary markers are required to ensure that property
owners are aware of the buffer. The planning department has the authority to
require the POA to replace boundary markers that have been removed or
destroyed.
         The following requirements shall apply to buffer boundary markers:
         a.   Open space area boundary markers shall be located in such a
manner as to accurately delineate the boundary. For commercial developments,
markers shall be posted every one hundred (100) feet along the buffer boundary.
For subdivisions where multiple lots are located along the boundary, a boundary
marker must be located at the intersection of every other lot line and the
boundary. The developer or POA may petition the planning department for a
lesser marker density as long as the markers are adequate to clearly mark the
boundary.
         b.   Open space area boundary markers shall include the statement
"Open Space Area - Do Not Disturb or Encroach".
         c.   The markers should be mounted to a treated wood or metal signpost
or on a non-grand tree, if not encroaching on the open space, between four (4)
and six (6) feet above the ground surface. The post must extend below the
ground surface at least twenty four (24) inches.
         d.   The boundary markers must be at least eight by twelve inches (8"x
12") and have a white or yellow background with dark lettering.
         e.   When water quality buffers are contained within an open space
area, the public works department may forgo boundary markers for the water
quality buffer. This decision is at the discretion of the public works
director.
         f.   In dark lettering, include a number for ombudsman to call for
encroachment or issues.
      (7)   Open space area restoration and enhancement plans. Prior to
reestablishing or planting the open space area, a restoration or enhancement
plan must be submitted to and approved by the planning department. Buffer
restoration and/or enhancement plans must include the following:
         a.   A drawing or plan that shows the location of the open space area
in relation to the existing or planned development; the disturbance limits for
the planned buffer restoration; direction of flow of runoff from the area;
erosion prevention and sediment control measures to be installed to protect the
open space area; access to a water source for the purposes of irrigating
vegetation; and other pertinent information. For large scale restoration and
enhancement projects the plan(s) must be stamped by a registered landscape
architect or engineer.
         b.   A visual plan and a narrative describing the vegetation plan to
restore or enhance the open space area: the area must be planted with native
trees, grasses and shrubs. Suitable native plants can be chosen from plant
species recommended and approved by the planning department.
         c.   The schedule for when plantings will occur and a two (2) year
survival guarantee provided by the responsible party.
      (8)   Penalty for noncompliance. In the event that the party responsible
for maintenance of the open space fails to maintain all or any portion of such
area as enumerated, upon ninety (90) days' notice served to the owner, Richland
County may assume responsibility for the maintenance and may enter the premises
and take corrective action, including the provision of extended maintenance.
The costs of said corrective action and maintenance by Richland County may be
charged to the owner or property owners' association.
   (i)   Development Requirements. Subdivisions shall meet the following
requirements:
      (1)   Minimum subdivision size: Two (2) contiguous acres.
      (2)   The following densities will apply to the application of these
standards, based on the applicable property zoning:
         a.   RU = 1.32
         b.   RR = 1.32
         c.   RS-E = 2.20
         d.   RS-LD = 3.63
         e.   RS-MD = 5.12
         f.   RS-HD = 8.7
      (3)   The total number of units allowed shall be determined by using the
density of the zoning district and the following formula:
         T=D*A*B
         Where:
         T =   total units (dwelling units)
         D =   density (dwelling units/gross acre)
         A =   total site area (acres)
         B =   density bonus per Section
26-186(g) (percent)
      (4)   Lot size: No minimum.
      (5)   Lot width: No minimum.
      (6)   Minimum yard areas (setbacks):
         a.   Front:
            For front loaded - twenty (20) feet to garage, where the front
porch can extend into setback no more than ten (10) feet.
            For side or rear loaded - ten (10) feet, inclusive of front porch.
            For secondary front - half (0.5) the front or ten (10) feet on the
road intersecting the local residential road.
         b.   Rear: Twenty (20) feet for front loaded lots (or five (5) feet
from rear garage on alley).
         c.   Side: Five (5) feet.
         d.   For a zero "lot line" parallel development:
            No side setbacks; front and rear setbacks are as stated in
paragraphs (6) a. and (6) b., above.
      (7)   Buffer Transition Yards. A twenty five (25) foot minimum, vegetated
buffer transition yard is required along any lot line that abuts an existing
residential use. Properties with a residential plan approved by the planning
department are considered to have an existing residential use. Provided,
however, this requirement does not apply when continuity exists by way of all
of the following: the streets provide connectivity between developments, the
developer is the same, and the parcels within the development are similar in
lot size.
         a.   Location: As set forth in Sections
26-176(f)(2)(a) and (b). Residential yards (front, side or rear) shall not
apply towards buffer transition yards.
         b.   Buffer yard credits: All existing healthy, mature trees retained
in buffer areas, can be credited toward meeting the buffer yard requirements,
upon determination that adequate screening is provided. This may require a
field visit and determination by the planning department.
         c.   Buffer yard reductions: Reductions of the minimum transition
buffer yard widths are not permitted.
         d.   Buffer material specifications: As set forth in Section
26-176(f)(7).
      (8)   Maximum Height. Three (3) stories above ground level. (For the
purpose of this subparagraph, ground level shall mean: the average finished
ground elevation at the base of a structure to the highest point of the roof of
the structure; provided that spires, belfries, cupolas, chimneys, antennas,
water tanks, ventilators, elevator housing, mechanical equipment, or other such
structures that are placed above roof level and are not intended for human
occupancy, shall not be subject to height limitations).
      (9)   Street trees shall be provided along all roads at intervals of
thirty-five (35) feet and shall be 2 ½ inch caliper/10 feet in height at time
of planting.
      (10)   Proposed utilities shall be located underground.
      (11)   Roads shall follow the provisions of Section
26-181.
      (12)   Street Lighting. If street lighting is proposed, a pedestrian
scale shall be utilized (maximum 12 feet in height).
      (13)   Stormwater Controls. Low impact development (LID) techniques are
the preferred stormwater best management practice (BMPs) within open space
developments. In order to use LID as open space credit, the applicant must
assess the feasibility of LID practices as the exclusive stormwater BMPs or the
use of LID techniques as part of an integrated stormwater management system
incorporating traditional stormwater BMPs unless shown to not meet Richland
County's stormwater standards, or pertinent state or federal statues or
regulations. The applicant must submit data and design standards detailing the
engineering and technical specifications on the use of LID techniques. Such
data and design include:
         a.   An assessment of the existing pre and post development runoff and
the feasibility of the existing onsite soils, or engineered soils, to handle
LID techniques.
         b.   Stormwater controls shall meet Richland County's standards.
         c.   All stormwater systems, including LID, should be owned and
maintained by the POA.
(Ord. No. 035-08HR, § II, 6-17-08; Ord. No. 004-09, § I, 2-17-09; Ord. No. 027-
09HR, § XX, 5-19-09; Ord. 018-10HR, § IV, 5-4-10; Ord. No. 045-13HR, § II, 9-
10- 13; Ord. No. 034-14HR, § II, 6-17-14)
Sec. 26-187. Water Quality Buffer Requirements.
   (a)   Purpose and applicability. It is the intent of the Public Works
Department to establish minimal acceptable requirements for the design of
buffers to protect the streams, wetlands and floodplains of the County of
Richland; to protect the water quality of watercourses, reservoirs, lakes, and
other significant water resources; to protect riparian and aquatic ecosystems;
and to provide for the environmentally sound use of the county’s land
resources.
      (1)   Purpose. A water quality buffer is an area of original or re-
established vegetation that borders streams, rivers, ponds, lakes, wetlands,
and seeps. Buffers are most effective when stormwater runoff is flowing into
and through the buffer zone as shallow sheet flow, rather than concentrated
flow such as channels, gullies, or wet weather conveyances. Therefore, it is
critical that design of all development include management practices, to the
maximum extent practical, that will result in stormwater runoff flowing into
the buffer zone as shallow sheet flow. Water quality buffers provide numerous
environmental protection and resource management benefits including:
         a.   Restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and biological
integrity of the water resources,
         b.   Removing pollutants delivered in urban stormwater,
         c.   Reducing erosion and controlling sedimentation,
         d.   Stabilizing stream banks,
         e.   Providing infiltration of stormwater runoff,
         f.   Maintaining base flow of streams,
         g.   Contributing the organic matter that is a source of food and
energy for the aquatic ecosystem,
         h.   Providing tree canopy to shade streams and promote desirable
aquatic organisms,
         i.   Providing riparian wildlife habitat, and
         j.   Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity.
      (2)   Applicability. Water quality buffers are required along all
perennial and intermittent streams, waterways, shorelines and wetlands
according to a USACE jurisdictional determination, to be submitted from the
developer and approved by the Public Works Department. In addition, water
quality buffers may be required to protect waters (such as isolated wetlands)
pursuant to the S.C. Pollution Control Act, as determined by the Public Works
Department.
      (3)   This Section shall apply to the following:
         a.   All proposed development except for that development which meets
the criteria for an exemption [Section 26-187 (b)] and/or a waiver [Section 26-
187 (k)].
         b.   All surface mining operations except active surface mining
operations which are operating in compliance with an approved DHEC surface
mining permit. A copy of the approved surface mining permit shall be provided
to the Public Works Department.
         c.   The construction of agricultural structures as stated in this
chapter.
         d.   Except as provided in Sections 26-187(b), and 26-187(k), this
shall apply to all parcels of land, structures and activities which are causing
or contributing to:
            1.   Pollution, including non-point pollution, of the waters of
Richland County,
            2.   Erosion or sedimentation of stream channels, or
            3.   Degradation of aquatic or riparian habitat.
   (b)   Exemptions. The water quality buffer requirements shall not apply to
the following:
      (1)   Ephemeral streams, ditches, manmade ponds, and lakes, which are
outside of natural hydrologic connectivity.
      (2)   Any existing structure or structure under construction located
within the buffer area, provided the land owner can document prior existence.
      (3)   The addition or expansion to an existing structure, provided it
does not result in an increase in the total impervious area within the buffer
area.
      (4)   Activities associated with emergency operations, such as hazardous
materials removal, flood or fire control, evacuations, and storm damage clean
up.
      (5)   Single-family parcels of land, which exist as individual lots that
are two (2) acres or less and are not part of a new subdivision development.
      (6)   All “Entitled Property”; provided, however, this exemption shall no
longer be in effect after January 19, 2017. In addition, all entitled property
shall comply with the stormwater regulations that were in effect prior to
January 19, 2010.
   If any portion of a parcel proposed for development lies within an area
designated on an officially adopted Conservation Easement as a proposed trail
or greenway, the developer shall construct the designated improvements in
accordance with county standards and dedicate such land to the county.
   (c)   Stream Buffers.
      (1)   Stream buffers shall be considered a “no disturb zone” along
jurisdictional lines. Vegetation cannot be disturbed, removed or replanted
unless a buffer restoration plan has been approved by the Public Works
Department. Section 26-187 (g) provides requirements to expand the buffer
widths depending on slopes, water pollution hazards, or other uses that may
contribute to water quality degradation. The buffer width shall be calculated
as follows:
         a.   Along jurisdictional perennial streams identified by the USACE,
not associated with a floodplain or wetlands, the buffer shall be at least
fifty (50) feet perpendicular from the jurisdictional line on each side of the
waterway.
         b.   In areas where a floodway profile has been computed along a
perennial stream (AE Zones) as part of an approved flood study, the buffer area
shall be equal to the width of the floodway, but never less than fifty (50)
feet.
         c.   In areas where a floodway profile has not been computed along a
perennial stream (A Zones) the developer shall perform a flood study, determine
the floodway and follow the buffer requirements outlined above. As an
alternative to preparing the flood study, the buffer limits shall extend to the
delineated flood plain limits.
         d.   Along jurisdictional intermittent streams identified by the
USACE, the buffer shall be at least fifty (50) feet perpendicular from the
jurisdictional line on each side of the waterway. If these streams have
associated floodway as described above, the same requirements would apply to
have a total width of fifty (50) feet.
         e.   For delineated wetland areas associated with perennial streams,
the buffer shall be at least fifty (50) feet perpendicular beyond the wetland
edge. This buffer width is independent of any wetland offset requirements of
the USACE.
         f.   For delineated wetland areas associated with intermittent
streams, the buffer shall be at least fifty (50) feet perpendicular beyond the
wetland edge. This buffer width is independent of any wetland offset
requirements of the USACE.
         g.   For wetland areas not associated with perennial, intermittent
streams, or floodway, the buffer shall be the extent of the wetland area plus
an additional fifty (50) feet perpendicular beyond the wetland edge.
      (2)   Stream Buffer Management and Maintenance. The function of the
stream buffer is to protect the physical and ecological integrity of the
waterway, to reduce flooding potential, and to filter runoff from all
development. The objective of a stream buffer is undisturbed native vegetation.
         a.   Management of the stream buffer includes specific limitations on
alteration of the natural conditions. The following practices and activities
are restricted within stream buffers, except with prior approval by the Public
Works Department:
            1.   Clearing or grubbing of existing vegetation,
            2.   Clear cutting of vegetation,
            3.   Soil disturbance by grading, stripping, or other practices,
            4.   Filling or dumping,
            5.   Use, storage, or application of pesticides, herbicides, and
fertilizers,
            6.   Conversion of vegetation from native to exotic species.
            7.   Motor vehicles are not permitted in stream buffers unless
during the installation of certain utilities permitted in the buffer zone.
         b.   The following structures, practices, and activities are permitted
in the stream buffer, subject to prior approval of the Public Works Department,
and when specific design or maintenance features are adhered to:
            1.   Stream crossings and utilities:
               [a]   An applicant shall demonstrate that stream crossings are
minimized;
               [b]   The right of way should be the minimum width needed to
allow for maintenance access and installation;
               [c]   The angle of a crossing shall be as nearly perpendicular
to the stream or buffer as practical in order to minimize clearing
requirements; and
               [d]   The minimum number of crossings should be used within each
development, and no more than one crossing is allowed for every one thousand
(1,000) linear feet of buffer zone unless the applicant demonstrates to the
Public Works Department the need for additional crossings. Where possible, the
design of roadways and lots within a development should be aligned such that
all streams are either to the rear or the side of individual lots, never along
the front.
            2.   Transportation right-of-ways, pedestrian crossings, public
access, boat ramps, docks, fishing platforms, unpaved paths (i.e., trails and
greenways), and stream bank stabilization efforts.
            3.   Utilities are allowed; and shall be installed a minimum
distance of twenty-five (25) feet measured perpendicular from the
jurisdictional line within the buffer area.
         c.   In order to maintain the functional value of the stream buffer,
indigenous vegetation may be removed as follows:
            1.   Dead, diseased, or dying trees that are in danger of falling
and causing damage to dwellings or other structures may be removed with
approval from the Public Works Department;
            2.   Debris in the buffer area that is caused by storm damage may
be removed; and
            3.   Invasive plant species may be removed if they are replaced by
native species that are equally effective in retarding runoff, preventing
erosion and filtering non-point source pollution from runoff. A buffer
restoration plan for removal of invasive species must be approved by the Public
Works Department.
   (d)   Shoreline Buffers.
      (1)   Shoreline buffers shall be considered an area of managed vegetation
adjacent to shorelines with hydrologic connectivity (stream leading into/out of
the pond/lake or obvious spring input). The shoreline buffer width shall be
fifty (50) feet perpendicular from the jurisdictional line. For ponds and
lakes, the buffer shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet from the jurisdictional
line.
   For Lake Murray, the buffer shall be measured from the 360' elevation or
current jurisdictional line as determined by USACE.
      (2)   Shoreline Buffer Management and Maintenance. The function of the
shoreline buffer is to protect the physical and ecological integrity of the
water body by providing a functional distance to reduce flooding potential,
reduce erosion, sedimentation, and filter runoff between development and the
water body.
         a.   Management of the shoreline buffer includes specific limitations
on alteration of the natural conditions. The following structures, practices
and activities are restricted in the shoreline buffer unless prior approval is
granted by the Public Works Department:
            1.   Septic systems;
            2.   Permanent structures;
            3.   Impervious cover, with the exception of paths;
            4.   Soil disturbance by grading, stripping or other practice;
            5.   Filling or dumping;
            6.   Stormwater management facilities; and
            7.   Use, application, or storage of pesticides or herbicides
except for the spot spraying of noxious weeds or other non-native species
consistent with approved agency recommendations. (Richland County, South
Carolina Forestry Commission, South Carolina Electric & Gas’ Lake Management
Department).
         b.   The following structures, practices, or activities are permitted
in the shoreline buffer, subject to the prior approval of the Public Works
Department:
            1.   Biking or hiking paths;
            2.   Recreational uses as approved by the Public Works Department;
and
            3.   Limited tree or underbrush clearing with approval from the
Public Works Department.
   (e)   Water Quality Buffer Plat Requirements. All preliminary, bonded and
final plats prepared for recording and all right-of way-plats shall clearly:
      (1)   Show the extent of any stream or shoreline buffer on the subject
property by metes and bounds;
      (2)   Label the stream and shoreline buffer;
      (3)   Provide a note to reference all buffers stating: “There shall be no
clearing, grading, construction or disturbance of vegetation except as
permitted by the Public Works Department”;
      (4)   Provide a note to reference any protective covenants governing all
buffer areas stating: “Any buffer shown on the plat is subject to protective
covenants which may be found in the land records and which restrict disturbance
and use of these areas”;
      (5)   If the buffer area will not be part of an individual lot, then
ownership must be stated by identifying who is the responsible party; and
      (6)   Provide the location of permanent boundary marker signs.
   (f)   Design Requirements.
      (1)   The buffer plan must be submitted in conjunction with the sediment
and erosion control plan, SWPPP document, and all applicable calculations for a
land disturbance permit.
      (2)   It is recommended that the buffer be marked off with a warning
barrier (orange safety fence) to show that no disturbance is allowed in the
buffer area.
      (3)   The following steps shall be taken during the site plan development
and site construction process to protect water quality buffers during
construction:
         a.   Water quality buffers must be clearly identified on all
stormwater management plans and construction drawings and marked with the
statement “Water Quality Buffer. Do Not Disturb”.
         b.   Water quality buffers cannot be encroached upon or disturbed
during project construction, unless in accordance with Section 26-187(b),
Section 26-187(k) or unless they are being established, restored, or enhanced
in accordance with an approved Buffer Enhancement Plan.
         c.   Water quality buffers must be clearly marked with a warning
barrier before the preconstruction conference. The marking shall be maintained
until completion of construction activities. All contractors and others working
on the construction site must be made aware of the existence of the buffer(s)
and the restrictions on disturbing the buffer(s).
         d.   All areas of the water quality buffer, including stream banks,
must be left in the existing condition upon completion of construction
activities. Should construction activities associated with development cause
degradation to stream banks, all eroding, bare or unstable stream banks shall
be restored to existing conditions.
         e.   If any trees are allowed to be removed, the tree location shall
be shown and a note shall be provided stating that the tree must be hand
cleared.
         f.   The locations of all signage must be clearly shown on plans.
         g.   A narrative stating the extent of the buffer areas, including any
allowed disturbance in the buffer areas (this should be in the narrative as
well as in the SWPPP document), must be included with the plans.
         h.   A double row of silt fence (with metal posts and wire backing)
shall be shown on the upstream side of applicable buffer area(s) that are
adjacent to a land disturbance.
         i.   The stream buffer shall be shown and labeled on the engineering
plans, preliminary, bonded and final plat.
         j.   If the stream buffers are dedicated to Richland County, placed in
a conservation easement, or turned over to a Homeowners Association (HOA), the
buffers shall be maintained in accordance with the maintenance and inspection
requirements for permanent storm water management structures.
            1.   If the buffer is dedicated to Richland County:
               [a]   All property lines shall terminate at the water quality
buffer.
               [b]   Access easements shall be a minimum twenty (20) foot wide
to allow maintenance of the buffer. Access points for these easements will be
coordinated with storm drainage easements during the plan review process.
            2.   If placed in a conservation easement or if the easement is
held by a viable third party, such as a land trust, land management company, or
utility, the organization shall:
               [a]   Have the legal authority to accept and maintain such
easements;
               [b]   Be bona fide and in perpetual existence; and
               [c]   Have conveyance instruments that contain an appropriate
provision for retransfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry-
out functions.
            3.   If given to an HOA, the following criteria must be met:
               [a]   Membership in the HOA is mandatory and automatic for all
homeowners for the subdivision and their successors;
               [b]   The HOA shall have lien authority to ensure the collection
of dues from all members; and
               [c]   The HOA assumes the responsibility for protecting,
monitoring and maintaining the area as an undisturbed natural area, in
perpetuity.
      (4)   Shoreline buffers shall be shown and labeled on the engineering
plans. Shoreline buffers shall be maintained by the owner in accordance with
the maintenance and inspection requirements for permanent storm water
management structures outlined in this chapter. Shoreline buffers may be deeded
to Richland County, placed in a conservation easement, or given to the HOA as
outlined in Section 26-187(f)(3)j.
   (g)   Water Quality Buffer Width Adjustments. Adjustments to the buffer
width shall be made for the following conditions:
      (1)   If streams are on a current 303d list or with an approved TMDL, the
buffer area shall be increased to one hundred (100) feet. However, see also
section 26-187(g)(10) below.
      (2)   If water bodies are on DHEC’S Outstanding National Resource Waters
(ONRW) list, the buffer area shall be increased to one hundred (100) feet.
However, see also section 26-187(g)(10) below.
      (3)   If there are fifteen percent (15%) to twenty-four percent (24%)
slopes within the required buffer area, the buffer width must be adjusted to
include an additional ten (10) feet.
      (4)   If there are twenty-five percent (25%) or greater slopes within the
required buffer area width, the buffer width must be adjusted to include an
additional twenty-five (25) feet.
      (5)   If the adjacent land use involves drain fields from on-site sewage
disposal and treatment systems (i.e., septic systems), subsurface discharges
from a wastewater treatment plant, or land application of bio-solids or animal
waste, the buffer area width must be adjusted to include an additional twenty-
five (25) feet.
      (6)   If the land use or activity involves the storage of hazardous
substances or petroleum facilities, the buffer area width must be adjusted to
include an additional fifty (50) feet. However, see also section 26-187(g)(10)
below.
      (7)   If the land use or activity involves raised septic systems or
animal feedlot operations, the buffer area width must be adjusted to include an
additional one hundred (100) feet. However, see also section 26-187(g)(10)
below.
      (8)   If the land use or activity involves solid waste landfills or
junkyards, the buffer area width must be adjusted to include an additional two-
hundred (200) feet. However, see also section 26-187(g)(10) below.
      (9)   If all on-site stormwater runoff is captured and routed through a
permanent water quality basin, and there is no sheet flow discharging into the
buffer, the buffer area may be reduced to twenty-five (25) feet. This is
intended to apply in limited situations, such as small commercial developments.
      (10)   If the applicant satisfactorily demonstrates that there will be no
degradation of the receiving water body by implementing the proposed storm
water quality controls, then the established buffer may be reduced on a case by
case basis upon approval by the Public Works Department.
   (h)   Water Quality Buffer Averaging. This subsection outlines the criteria
for buffer averaging on new and redevelopment sites. Buffer averaging can be
utilized to adjust the required buffer width, allowing some flexibility for
site development. Using buffer averaging, the width of the buffer can be varied
with the criteria stated below, as long as a minimum average width of fifty
(50) feet from the jurisdictional line are maintained.
      (1)   Requirements and policies. The following criteria must be met in
order to utilize buffer averaging on a development site:
         a.   Buffer averaging is required for water quality buffers that have
stream crossings.
         b.   An overall average buffer width of fifty (50) feet, depending on
the water quality buffer requirement, must be achieved within the boundaries of
the property to be developed.
         c.   The average width must be calculated based upon the entire length
of the stream bank or shoreline that is located within the boundaries of the
property to be developed. When calculating the buffer length, the natural
stream channel should be followed.
         d.   Stream buffer averaging shall be applied to each side of a stream
independently. If the property being developed includes both sides of a stream,
buffer averaging can be applied to both sides of the stream, but must be
applied to each side of the stream independently.
         e.   That portion of buffers in excess of one hundred (100) feet will
not be credited toward the buffer averaging formula within the boundaries of
the property to be developed. The total width of the buffer shall not be less
than twenty-five (25) feet, or the width of the floodway at any location,
except at approved stream crossings. Those areas of the buffer having a minimum
width of twenty-five (25) feet (or less at approved stream crossings) can
comprise no more than fifty percent (50%) of the buffer length.
      (2)   Areas where buffer averaging is prohibited. Buffer width averaging
is prohibited when the result of averaging would allow any of the land uses
listed below to exist within the pre-averaged buffer area:
         a.   Developments or facilities that include on-site sewage disposal
and treatment systems (i.e., septic systems), raised septic systems, subsurface
discharges from a wastewater treatment plant, or land application of bio-solids
or animal waste;
         b.   Landfills (demolition landfills, permitted landfills, closed-in-
place landfills);
         c.   Junkyards;
         d.   Commercial or industrial facilities that store and/or service
motor vehicles;
         e.   Commercial greenhouses or landscape supply facilities;
         f.   Developments or facilities that have commercial or public pools;
         g.   Animal care facilities, kennels, and commercial/business
developments or facilities that provide short-term or long-term care of
animals;
         h.   Other land uses deemed by the Public Works Department to have the
potential to generate higher than normal pollutant loadings.
   (i)   Signage. For subdivisions, permanent boundary marker signs are
required for stream buffers prior to bonding of the subdivision and/or
finalizing the subdivision with the intent to transfer property. Permanent
boundary markers are required to ensure that property owners are aware of the
buffer. Permanent boundary markers are recommended, but not required, in
shoreline buffers. The Public Works Department has the authority to require the
person or entity responsible for permanent maintenance of the buffer to replace
boundary markers that have been removed or destroyed. The following general
requirements shall apply to buffer boundary markers:
      (1)   Generally, buffer boundary markers shall be located on the landward
edge of the buffer, and at other locations which will approximately delineate
the buffer boundary. For commercial developments, markers shall be posted every
one hundred (100) feet along the buffer boundary. For subdivisions where
multiple lots are located along the buffer, it is recommended that a buffer
boundary marker be located at the intersection of every other lot line with the
landward edge of the buffer.
      (2)   Buffer boundary markers shall include the statement “Water Quality
Buffer - Do Not Disturb”.
      (3)   Where possible, the markers should be mounted to a tree larger than
three (3) inches in diameter. Where it is not possible to mount the marker to a
tree, a treated wood or metal signpost must be used. The post must extend below
the ground surface at least twenty four (24) inches.
      (4)   The boundary markers must be mounted between four (4) and six (6)
feet above the ground surface.
      (5)   The boundary markers must be at least twelve by eighteen inches
(12"x 18").
      (6)   Buffer boundary markers may be purchased from the Public Works
Department or from another vendor.
   (j)   Buffer Restoration and Enhancement Plans. Buffer restoration is
required when a buffer is disturbed without prior approval from the Public
Works Department. A developer or property owner may also wish to enhance a
buffer to bring it closer to an optimal, undisturbed native forest condition.
Prior to reestablishing or planting the buffer, a restoration or enhancement
plan must be submitted to and approved by the Public Works Department. Buffet
restoration and/or enhancement plans must include the following:
      (1)   A drawing or plan that shows the location of the buffer in relation
to the existing or planned development and to the buffered waterway; the
disturbance limits for the planned buffer restoration; direction of flow of
runoff from the site and flow within the water feature; erosion prevention and
sediment control measures to be installed to protect the waterway; any existing
or proposed stream crossings; existing or proposed stream bank stabilization
measures; access to a water source for the purposes of watering vegetation; and
other pertinent information. For large scale restoration and enhancement
projects the plan(s) must be stamped by a registered landscape architect.
      (2)   A visual plan and a narrative that describe the vegetation plan for
the buffer: stream buffers must be planted with native trees, shrubs, and
grasses that will not be mowed. Suitable native plants can be chosen from the
recommended plant species, as listed in the “Stormwater Design Manual”. Species
of plants other than those listed on the pre-approved list shall be approved by
the Public Works Department prior to planting.
      (3)   The schedule for when plantings will occur and a two (2) year
survival guarantee provided by the responsible party.
   (k)   Waivers.
      (1)   No waiver shall be granted to alter a buffer established pursuant
to this section unless the Public Works Department (or the Planning Commission,
in the event of an appeal) determines that a hardship exists and relief meets
the general purpose and intent of this Section. Within Water Quality Protection
Areas, no waiver shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that
alternative protection measures can be provided that exceed the protection
afforded by the established buffer. In no case will the buffer be reduced to
less than twenty five (25) feet from the jurisdictional line.
      (2)   In granting a request for a waiver, the Public Works Department or
Planning Commission may require site design, landscape planting, fencing, the
placement of signs, and the establishment of water quality best management
practices in order to reduce adverse impacts on water quality, streams,
wetlands, and floodplains.
      (3)   Waiver requests shall only be considered if a request meets any of
the criteria listed below.
         a.   The project involves construction of:
            1.   One single-family home for residential use by the owner of the
property; and
            2.   The property has an unusual shape or topography and there is
no opportunity to develop under any reasonable design configuration.
         b.   The project involves the construction or repair of a structure
which, by its nature, must be located within the buffer:
            1.   Dams;
            2.   Public water supply intakes;
            3.   Waste water discharges;
            4.   Docks, and boat launches;
            5.   Stabilization areas of public access to water;
            6.   Buffer intrusion is necessary to provide access to the
property; or
            7.   Project will:
               [a]   Require a Wetland Permit from USACE for impacts to
jurisdictional wetlands; and
               [b]   The USACE has approved a mitigation plan; and
               [c]   Implementation of the plan in a 404 permit condition.
      (4)   Buffer Waiver Submittal Requirements.
         a.   The applicant shall submit a written request for a waiver to the
Public Works Department. The request shall include specific reasons justifying
the waiver and any other information necessary to evaluate the proposed waiver
request.
   The Public Works Department may require an alternative analysis that clearly
demonstrates that no other feasible alternative exist and that minimal impact
will occur as a result of the project or development.
         b.   The Public Works Department shall make a determination and
decision concerning the waiver request. An appeal may be made to the Planning
Commission. An appeal of the Public Works Department’s decision shall be filed
in writing within thirty (30) days after the final decision. The Planning
Commission shall make all final determinations and decisions.
(Ord. No. 006-10HR, § X, 1-19-09)
Secs. 26-188 - 26-200. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. RESOURCE PROTECTION STANDARDS
Sec. 26-201. General.
   (a)   Purpose. In order to protect the general health, safety and welfare of
the people of Richland County, and to protect the natural assets and resources
for posterity, this article is enacted to protect the lands and waters from the
effects of excessive soil erosion and sedimentation, to prevent siltation of
streams and lakes, to prevent clogging of drainage channels, and to prevent
damages to the property of adjacent landowners. It is furthermore the purpose
of this article to provide proper drainage channels, clear of obstruction, for
stormwater runoff; to control pollution of streams and drainage channels by
urban stormwater runoff; and to prevent encroachment into natural drainage
channels by buildings or other land improvements. Proper management of the
quality and quantity of stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and
private property, ensure a functional drainage system, promote the attainment
and maintenance of property, ensure a functional drainage system, promote the
attainment and maintenance of water quality standards, enhance the local
environment associated with the drainage system, maintain as nearly as possible
the predevelopment runoff characteristics of the area, and facilitate economic
development while mitigating associated flooding and drainage impacts.
   (b)   Jurisdiction. The provisions of this article dealing with erosion and
sediment control (Section
26-202 of this chapter) and stormwater management (Section
26-203 of this chapter) shall apply to all land in the unincorporated areas of
Richland County, South Carolina and to all land within the jurisdiction of
those municipalities that agree, in writing, to have these provisions
administered within their corporate limits.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04)
Sec. 26-202. Stormwater management and SWPPPs.
   (a)   Applicability. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, the surface
of land in the county shall not be disturbed or changed for any purpose, except
in accordance with this section and other applicable sections of this chapter.
   (b)   Guidelines. For all sites subject to this section, an SWPPP shall be
prepared based on the following guidelines (see Section
26-64 of this chapter for procedural requirements for review). Plans shall
include appropriate measures and practices for erosion and sediment control,
installed in a timely sequence during the development process, and maintained
to ensure their proper function.
      (1)   Land selection for development. Land should be selected where the
drainage pattern, topography, and soils are favorable for the intended use.
Tracts of land vary in suitability for different uses. Consideration shall be
given to the major characteristics of the land area and the kinds of soil
(identifying and evaluating potential erosion and sediment problems) and to the
selection of appropriate control measures and practices.
      (2)   Land exposure. The erosion and sediment control plan shall expose
the smallest practical area of land for the least possible time during
development.
      (3)   Retention of vegetation and topsoil. When feasible, natural
vegetation shall be retained and protected. Topsoil, where practical, shall be
saved for replacing on graded areas.
      (4)   Temporary measures. Temporary plant cover, mulching and/or
structures shall be utilized to protect areas subject to erosion during
construction.
      (5)   Provisions for increased runoff. Provisions shall be made for the
increased runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions. Emphasis should
be placed on conservation of existing on-site soil. Effective means include the
use of diversion ditches, grassed or surfaced waterways and outlets, enlarged
and protected drainage channels, grade control structures, and effective use of
road gutters and storm sewers.
      (6)   Silt traps. Sediment basins or other forms of silt traps shall be
used, where practical, to remove heavy sediment loads from runoff waters
leaving the disturbed area.
      (7)   Long-term measures. Permanent vegetative cover and long-term
erosion protection measures or structures shall be installed as soon as
practical in the development process.
   (c)   Requirements and standards.
      (1)   Methods of calculating stream flow and runoff. SWPPPs shall be
based on stream flow and runoff for the site to be developed. Formulas and
values as prescribed in the county’s “Stormwater Design Manual” shall be used
for calculating all stream flow and runoff. Copies of the “Stormwater Design
Manual” may be obtained through the county engineer’s office.
         a.   Rainfall frequencies. The following rainfall frequencies shall be
used in the calculations for stormwater runoff and stormwater management
facility design, depending upon the size of the watershed:
 
Size-Acres Frequency-Years
300+       50 year
40 - 299   25 year
0-39       10 year
 
The two (2) year, twenty-four (24) hour rainfall shall also be used as
prescribed in the “Stormwater Design Manual”.
         b.   Future development. Calculations used in the design of proposed
stormwater management facilities shall reflect the anticipated future
development of the upstream watershed.
         c.   Inlet and outlet control curves. Appropriate inlet control and
outlet control curves shall be used to determine headwater depths, where
applicable.
      (2)   Primary drainage channel requirements.
         a.   General. All primary drainage channels located within or
immediately adjacent to any improvement, development or subdivision shall be
protected or improved by the applicant in accordance with the following
requirements. The applicant shall be responsible for carrying out the proposed
work in accordance with the approved SWPPP, and in compliance with the
requirements of this section. The applicant shall plan and carry out his/her
developments in a manner that will not interfere with or restrict the flow of
water, nor increase the 100-year flood elevation by more than one (1) foot. The
developer shall be responsible for any improvements to such channels, as needed
to handle increased runoff or other changes resulting from his/her development,
in accordance with the provisions of this section.
         b.   Dedication of primary drainage channels. All land adjacent to a
primary drainage channel and not protected by levees, dikes, or fill shall be
dedicated for the purpose of providing drainage right-of-way as follows:
            1.   Commercial and/or residential subdivisions. In commercial and/
or residential subdivisions, drainage easements of satisfactory width to
provide working room for construction and maintenance equipment shall be deeded
to the county for all drainage improvements, including stormwater management
facilities, and shall be separate and apart from adjoining lots.
            2.   Planned developments or town and country developments. In PDD
Planned Development Districts or TC Town and Country Districts, the property
owner(s) or HOA shall be responsible for maintenance of drainage channels and
easements. The final plat approved for recordation shall indicate the available
public easements for drainage channels. The county shall have the right to
encroach onto these public easements or permit others to encroach for any
purpose deemed appropriate by the county engineer. In no way does this right of
encroachment lessen the obligation of the property owner(s) or the
responsibility of the HOA for maintenance of the drainage channels and
easements.
         c.   Existing channel modifications. It is the intent of these
regulations that existing drainage channels within buffer areas be maintained
in their natural conditions whenever possible and whenever engineering is
feasible. It is recognized that additional capacity may be required, and the
ability to maintain such facilities must be provided, for which the following
provisions shall be followed. The existing channel lying within or contiguous
to a subdivision or parcel of land proposed for development or redevelopment
may be:
            1.   Cleaned to provide for free flow of water; and
            2.   Straightened, widened, and improved to prevent overflow
resulting from the 50-year frequency rainfall beyond the limits of the
dedicated drainage easement provided for in subsection b. above; provided:
               [a]   The SWPPP contains details of the proposed channel
modifications and includes either:
                  [1]   A mitigation plan for water quality impacts, including
best management practices to be implemented as part of the channel modification
and overall project; or
                  [2]   An engineering analysis demonstrating no water quality
impacts resulting from the proposed modifications.
               [b]   The SWPPP must be approved in accordance with this section
prior to commencing any channel modifications.
Whenever existing channel modifications are made, sodding, backsloping,
cribbing, and other bank protection shall be designed and constructed to
control erosion for the anticipated conditions and How resulting from a 50-year
rainfall.
         d.   Areas of special flood hazard. In areas of special flood hazard,
final grading of all lots and building sites for new construction, or
substantial improvement of residential structures, shall provide for elevation
on fill, pilings, or earth filled curtain walls of the lowest habitable floor
to at least two (2) feet above the 100-year flood elevation. Where fill is
added to meet this requirement, the area two (2) feet above the 100-year flood
elevation shall extend at least ten (10) feet from each side of the building
pad. Certain types of structures are permitted within the floodplain if
properly "flood-proofed" in compliance with Section
26-106(d) of this chapter and all applicable building code requirements.
         e.   Primary channels located within road easements. Primary drainage
channels located within road easements shall be placed in enclosed storm
sewers, except under the following conditions:
            1.   Where a paved road surface at least two (2) lanes wide is
provided on both sides of an improved channel so as to provide access to
abutting properties.
            2.   For lots with a double-road frontage, an open drainage channel
is permitted between the rear lot line and the paved road, provided that access
from the road to the lot is prohibited both at the time of construction and in
the future.
            3.   When a condition outlined in either 1. or 2. above is present,
adequate width shall be dedicated as right-of-way to provide for the
maintenance of an improved drainage channel and its bank.
         f.   Levees protecting structures. All levees protecting residential
structures or non-residential structures that are not flood-proofed shall be
designed, constructed, and maintained to provide protection against the 500-
year flood, plus three (3) feet of freeboard. Flood elevations shall be as
shown on the latest Flood Insurance Rate Maps or as determined by appropriate
hydrologic methods. Any levee constructed or improved under this subsection
shall also comply with the other provisions of this article, including, but not
limited to, subsection g. below.
         g.   Structures or obstructions in regulatory floodway. Not
withstanding any other provision of this chapter, no levees, dikes, fill
materials, structures or obstructions that will impede the free flow of water
during times of flood will be permitted in the regulatory floodway, unless:
            1.   Such proposed impediment is a permitted use pursuant to
Section
26-106(d) of this chapter; or
            2.   Such impediment was approved by the county engineer under this
subsection g., or under any predecessor provision, before January 1, 2001;
   PROVIDED, HOWEVER, that any specified activity permitted above must comply
with all applicable federal, state, and local requirements, including, but not
limited to, 44 C.F.R. 60.3(d)(3), as amended. Nothing in this subsection g.
shall limit provisions in this chapter or elsewhere authorizing or requiring
the maintenance and repair of levees, dikes, dams, and similar structures;
provided, however, that this sentence shall not be construed as authorizing or
requiring the repair or maintenance of any such structure to the extent that
such repair or maintenance would result in a structure that would be higher or
wider than it was before the need arose for such repair or maintenance.
         h.   National Flood Insurance Program. All applicable regulations of
the National Flood Insurance Program are incorporated by reference herein.
      (3)   Secondary drainage channel and surface requirements.
         a.   General. All secondary drainage channels that are within or
immediately adjacent to an improvement, development, or subdivision shall be
protected and improved by the applicant in accordance with the following
requirements.
         b.   Drainage maintenance. Drainage easements of satisfactory width to
provide working room for construction and maintenance equipment shall be
dedicated to the county for all drainage improvements in subdivision
developments, including stormwater management facilities. Drainage improvement
maintenance for planned developments, town and country developments, and
commercial buildings shall be the responsibility of the property owner(s) or
HOA.
         c.   Improvements.
            1.   Secondary drainage channels having a primary function of, 1)
collecting surface water from adjacent properties, or 2) intercepting and
diverting side hill drainage, shall be improved open channels.
            2.   Secondary drainage channels having a primary function of, 1)
transporting surface water through a block or development; or 2) collecting
surface water from cross channels, shall be improved as follows:
               [a]   Secondary drainage channels having drainage basins forty
(40) acres or larger shall be improved with either a closed storm sewer or
improved open channel designed to carry the runoff resulting from a 25-year
frequency rainfall. A natural stream may be approved by the county engineer for
environmental or aesthetic purposes, provided that it has the required carrying
capacity and that flood protection requirements are met.
               [b]   Secondary drainage channels having less than forty (40)
acres shall be improved with closed storm sewers designed to carry the runoff
resulting from a 10-year frequency rainfall. Variation from this requirement
may be approved by the county engineer for environmental or aesthetic purposes,
provided that it has the required carrying capacity and that flood protection
requirements are met.
            3.   All improvements to drainage channels shall be carried out
such that waters protected by the Federal Clean Water Act are not degraded.
         d.   Areas of special flood hazard. In areas of special flood hazard,
final grading of all lots and building sites for new construction, or
substantial improvement of residential structures, shall provide for elevation
on fill, pilings, or earth filled curtain walls of the lowest habitable floor
to at least two (2) feet above the 100-year flood elevation. Where fill is
added to meet this requirement, the area two (2) feet above the 100-year flood
elevation shall extend at least ten (10) feet from each side of the building
pad. Certain types of structures are permitted within the floodplain if
properly “flood-proofed” in compliance with Section 26-104(d) of this chapter
and all applicable building code requirements.
         e.   Secondary drainage channels within road easements. Secondary
drainage channels located within road easements shall be placed in enclosed
storm sewers, except under the following conditions:
            1.   Where a paved road surface at least two (2) lanes wide is
provided on both sides of an improved channel so as to provide access to
abutting properties.
            2.   For lots with a double-road frontage, an open drainage channel
is permitted between the rear lot line and the paved road, provided that access
from the road to the lot is prohibited both at the time of construction and in
the future.
            3.   When a condition outlined in either 1. or 2. above is present,
adequate width shall be dedicated as right-of-way to provide for the
maintenance of an improved drainage channel and its bank.
         f.   Off-site discharges. Off-site discharges from closed storm sewers
or improved open channels will only be permitted at natural streams or man-made
drainage channels acceptable to the county engineer, unless a drainage easement
is obtained from the adjoining landowner. Adequate provisions shall be made to
reduce discharge velocities such that the receiving channel is not degraded.
When off-site drainage channels are not adequate to accept the additional
runoff resulting from development, the developer shall install on-site
facilities for controlled release of stormwater runoff. These on-site drainage
facilities shall be designed to limit the runoff rate to predevelopment levels
during the design storm and the two-year storm.
         g.   Additional development requirements.
            1.   Single-family residential, duplex or manufactured home
development. Site grading for single-family, duplex, or manufactured home
development shall be carried out in such a manner that surface water from each
dwelling lot will flow directly to a storm sewer, improved channel, sodded
swale, or paved road without running more than two hundred (200) feet. Rooftop
runoff may be directed to pervious areas, infiltration practices, rainwater
harvesting systems, or other stormwater treatment facilities on the dwelling
lot.
            2.   Commercial, industrial, multi-family, and institutional
development. For commercial, industrial, multi-family, and institutional
development, roofs, paved areas, yards, courts, courtyards, and other
impervious surfaces shall be drained into a stormwater management facility,
with the exception that such drainage may flow directly into a road, curb and
gutter system, or improved channel when of small area and approved by the
county engineer. Construction of buildings over storm drainage improvements is
not permitted.
         h.   Surface water on roads. Surface water collected on roads shall be
diverted to enclosed storm sewers or drainage channels at satisfactory
intervals to prevent overflow of the road and its curbs and gutters, where
provided, during a 10-year frequency rainfall.
      (4)   Minimum water quality requirements.
         a.   Minimum water quality requirements. Requirements from the current
“Stormwater Design Manual” and “BMP Manual” shall be followed, and shall
provide for minimum quality control requirements for development. Such
requirements shall be adhered to unless waived by the county engineer after a
determination that both of the following have occurred:
            1.   It can be shown, by engineering calculations acceptable to the
county engineer, that stormwater management facilities are not needed to
control developed peak discharge rates and meet water quality requirements.
            2.   It can be shown that installing such facilities would not be
in the best interest of local citizens or the county.
         b.   Additional requirements. The county engineer may determine that
additional stormwater management facilities, beyond those required under this
section, are necessary for on-site stormwater management. Additional facilities
may be needed to enhance or provide for the general health, safety, and
welfare; to correct unacceptable or undesirable existing conditions; or to
provide protection for future development in a more desirable fashion. If such
a determination is made, the county engineer may do the following:
            1.   Require that the owner/applicant grant any necessary easements
to provide access to or drainage from the stormwater management facility.
            2.   Develop an agreement with the owner/applicant for the over-
design of the stormwater management facility to provide additional water
quality benefits beyond that required by this section.
            3.   Recommend financial participation by the county in
construction of the stormwater management facility, to the extent that such
facility exceeds the on-site stormwater management requirements, as determined
by -the county engineer. The county may pay the additional expenses incurred in
providing the additional storage capacity or water quality benefits, including
land costs and increased design and construction costs.
      (5)   Design criteria for improvements.
         a.   Open channels. Open channels shall be provided with an improved
section that will carry runoff from the appropriate design storm and preclude
the creation of backwater inundating any areas outside of dedicated drainage
easements. The channel shall be designed to minimize negative water quality
impacts and protect against erosion in accordance with standards adopted by the
county engineer.
         b.   Closed storm sewers and culverts. Closed storm sewers and
culverts shall be constructed of pre-cast or prefabricated pipe or box culvert
or built in place, of closed box design, in conformity with county
specifications. They shall be sized to carry the runoff from the appropriate
design storm and to preclude the creation of headwater inundating any areas
outside of dedicated drainage easements.
         c.   Bridges. Bridges shall be designed in accordance with standards
adopted by the county engineer. Construction shall be in accordance with South
Carolina Department of Transportation specifications.
         d.   Levees. Levees shall be designed, constructed, and maintained as
follows:
         1.   USACE Manuals. Design and construction shall be in accordance
with the latest edition of the USACE's Manual EM 1110-2-1913 Design and
Construction of Levees. The design and construction of drainage systems within
levees shall be in accordance with the latest edition of the USACE's Manual EM
1110-2-1413 Hydrologic Analysis of Interior Areas. A South Carolina Registered
Professional Engineer shall certify that he/she has been involved in the
design, construction, and inspection phases and shall certify that the
construction meets requirements of the corps of engineers.
            2.   Maintenance. Owners of levees will perform the necessary and
required maintenance and provide appropriate records to the county engineer.
These records shall include all of the following:
               [a]   Signed agreements of perpetual operation and maintenance
between the constructor and/or owner and the county.
               [b]   As-built construction plans sealed by a South Carolina
Registered Professional Engineer.
               [c]   A levee maintenance program in accordance with the levee
maintenance standards and procedures of the county.
               [d]   Periodic maintenance reports as required by the county
engineer.
         e.   Stormwater management facilities.
            1.   General. Stormwater management facilities may include both
structural and non-structural elements incorporating quantity and/or quality
control. A variety of different types of stormwater management facilities exist
and can be used to satisfy the minimum quantity and/or quality control
requirements. All proposed stormwater control measures shall be in accordance
with the county’s “Stormwater Design Manual”. The county engineer may reject a
SWPPP if it incorporates structures and facilities that do not meet the
requirements of this section or if the plan utilizes numerous small structures
where other alternatives are physically possible.
            2.   Restriction of runoff rate. Stormwater management facilities
shall restrict the peak post-development runoff rate to the peak pre-
development rate for the design storm. The design storm shall be ten (10),
twenty-five (25), or fifty (50) years, depending on the size of the drainage
basin. Overflow structures and emergency spillways shall be designed to
accommodate the 100-year rainfall.
            3.   Wet ponds. Wet ponds (retention structures with a permanent
pool) shall be utilized for drainage areas of twenty-five (25) acres or more,
in accordance with the county’s “Stormwater Design Manual”. Wet ponds may be
required for smaller drainage areas, as determined by the county engineer on a
case-by-case basis. In all cases, wet ponds shall be located at least fifteen
(15) feet from the property line of adjacent property.
            4.   Wet (retention) and dry (detention) facilities. Where wet
(retention) and dry (detention) facilities are used, designs that consolidate
them into a limited number of large structures are preferred over designs
utilizing a large number of smaller structures. Additional state and/or federal
permits may be required for larger stormwater management facilities impacting
waters of the state protected by the Federal Clean Water Act.
            5.   Landscaping. Landscaping of stormwater management areas shall
conform to ah requirements of this chapter and to the design approved by the
Public Works Department for any particular development. Retention/detention
areas shall be landscaped with trees, shrubs, ground covers, and native
perennials appropriate to the function as a wet or dry basin. If the landscaped
area is also designed to meet on-site stormwater management requirements, one
of the following must be met:
               [a]   The area must be designed to provide an aesthetic focal
point, such as a lake, creek or other water feature; to preserve a tree
grouping; or to utilize the existing terrain and/or geological features of the
site; or
               [b]   The landscaping for the basin shall be integrated within
the entire landscape plan.
            6.   Stormwater facilities records requirements. Drainage system
and all stormwater management structures within the county (including public
and private portions) shall be designed to the same engineering and technical
criteria and standards Owners of stormwater management facilities shall perform
the required maintenance and provide appropriate records to the county
engineer. These records shall include all of the following:
               [a]   As-built construction plans certified by a South Carolina
Registered Civil Engineer, Registered Landscape Architect, or Tier B. Land
Surveyor; and
               [b]   Periodic maintenance reports as required by the county
engineer.
      (6)   Maintenance of stormwater management facilities.
         a.   General maintenance requirements. All stormwater management
facilities shall be maintained by the owner(s) in such a manner as to maintain
and enhance the general health, safety, and welfare; to reduce and minimize
damage to public and private property; to reduce and minimize the impact of
such facilities on land and stream channel erosion; to promote the attainment
and maintenance of water quality standards; and to maintain, as nearly as
possible, the pre-development runoff characteristics of the area. All
maintenance of privately owned stormwater management facilities shall be at the
sole cost and expense of the owner(s) of such facilities.
         b.   Failure to maintain stormwater management facilities. It shall be
unlawful for the owner or occupant of any property upon which a stormwater
management facility is located, to fail to maintain the facility in such a
manner that the facility creates a danger to the general health, safety, and
welfare. Should the owner fail to so maintain the stormwater management
facility, this failure shall constitute a violation of this chapter and shall
be subject to the penalty provisions of Section 26-272.
         c.   County assistance in maintenance. All stormwater management
facilities shall be privately owned and/or maintained unless the county accepts
the facility for county ownership and/or maintenance. The county may assist
with maintenance only if the county has entered into a maintenance agreement
and the owner provides an easement (and provided that the county has available
resources to provide such assistance).
   (d)   Inspection of stormwater facilities.
      (1)   Inspection during construction. The county engineer shall
periodically inspect the work completed under the approved SWPPP. Upon
completion of such work, he/she shall make a final inspection, and if the work
has been carried out in accordance with the plan, he/she shall issue a letter
of satisfactory completion upon receipt of the as-built drawings.
      (2)   Right of entry.
         a.   General. The county engineer shall have a right-of-entry on or
upon the property of any person subject to this section. The county engineer
shall be provided ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
inspection, monitoring, sampling, inventory, examination and copying of
records, and the performance of any other duties necessary to determine
compliance with this section.
         b.   Security. Where a person has security measures in force requiring
proper identification and clearance before entry onto the premises, the person
shall make necessary arrangements with security guards so that, upon
presentation of suitable identification, the county engineer will be permitted
to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific
responsibilities.
         c.   Sampling. The county engineer shall have the right to set up on
the person’s property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or
metering of the property as it relate to stormwater management
         d.   Obstruction to access. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to
safe and easy access to the areas to be inspected and/or monitored shall be
removed promptly by the person at the written or verbal request of the county
engineer. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the person.
         e.   Imminent threat to health and/or safety. In cases where an
imminent threat to the health or safety of the general public or the
environment is suspected, the county engineer or the director of emergency
services shall inspect existing stormwater management facilities to determine
if immediate action is necessary. Such inspection shall be made with or without
the consent of the owner, manager, or signatory official. If such consent is
refused, the county engineer may seek issuance of an administrative search
warrant.
   (e)   Levees.
      (1)   General. Adequate levee maintenance is essential and cannot be
overemphasized. Failure to properly maintain levees may render the levees
inoperative during periods when their protection is needed. For safety in times
of high water or floods, levee maintenance will be thorough and continuous.
This requires a balanced maintenance program based on defined standards and
procedures.
      (2)   Maintenance standards and procedures. Levees in Richland County
will be maintained in accordance with the following standards to ensure
serviceability against floods at all times.
         a.   Sod growth. Maintenance of a sturdy sod growth on levee
embankments is highly important, as sod is one of the most effective means of
protecting the levee against erosion from rain, current, and wavewash. Periodic
mowing with tractor-operated equipment is essential to maintaining a good sod
growth, and shall be done at such intervals as necessary to keep down weeds and
other noxious growth and to prevent the grass height from exceeding twelve (12)
inches. The grass shall be mowed to a height of no less than two (2) inches but
no greater than twelve (12) inches. The number of mowings required each season
will depend on local conditions. The last mowing of the season shall be
accomplished under conditions that allow the grass to obtain a height of
approximately eight (8) inches to ten (10) inches entering the winter season.
Mowing shall be performed to a distance of at least five (5) feet beyond the
toe of the levee or berm. Burning grass and weeds is not permitted in the levee
maintenance program, except during appropriate seasons when it is not
detrimental to sod growth. During the growing season, spraying with herbicides
on an as-needed basis is permissible and desirable for weed and brush control
on levees and berms. Reseeding and fertilizing shall be completed frequently
enough to sustain sod growth on levee embankments for erosion control.
         b.   Earth embankments. Levee embankments shall be maintained to not
less than the design grade and section by replacing any material lost from the
crown or slopes. Ruts, washes, slides and subsidence shall be promptly repaired
and the entire embankment maintained sufficiently smooth for power mowing.
Levee crowns shall be graded as necessary to drain freely and prevent
impoundment of rainwater. All brush, trees, and other undesirable growth shall
be removed from the levee embankment.
         c.   Animal burrows. Levees and adjacent landward areas shall be
maintained free of all types of animal burrows. Animal burrows, when found,
will be backfilled with compacted material and sodded. To prevent recurrence,
efforts will be made to exterminate the burrowing animals.
         d.   Prevention of encroachment. Care must be taken to assure that
levees are not encroached upon. Buildings, structures, and storage of materials
or equipment shall not be permitted on the levee. Refuse dumps are an item of
frequent concern and will not be permitted. Following each high water, any
debris deposited on the riverside slope of the levee shall be removed promptly.
         e.   Roads and ramps. Access roads to and on the levees, including
ramps, shall be bladed as necessary to keep the roadway shaped properly and
free of ruts, pockets, and washes. Ramp embankments shall be maintained to
their design section and design grade. Maintenance shall be performed as
necessary to correct any encroachment into the levee crown where roads cross
levees. Road surfacing material shall be replaced as necessary to maintain the
road surface in good condition.
         f.   Miscellaneous levee facilities and appurtenances. Levee
facilities and appurtenances that are constructed on, over, or through the
levee shall be maintained in a good state of repair and/or inspected at least
annually. Facilities and appurtenances that operate only during high water must
be checked carefully and repaired as necessary, immediately prior to high water
season. Relief wells shall be checked during periods of high water. Wells that
do not flow for an extended period of time may have to be tested by pumping to
determine the extent of deterioration. Critically deteriorated wells shall be
rehabilitated by cleaning, surging, and pumping. Check valves shall be
inspected to ensure that they open freely and that the gaskets are in good
condition. The most common of the facilities and appurtenances referred to
herein are:
            1.   Drainage structures through the levee.
            2.   Toe drainage systems.
            3.   Relief wells.
            4.   Levee slope protection and protection on dike ends.
            5.   Gates, cattle guards, and fences.
            6.   Siphons and pipe crossings.
      (3)   Inspection. Frequent inspections are essential to a good levee
maintenance program. In addition to the formal inspections required by the
engineer, inspections shall be made prior to the beginning of the flood season,
during and immediately following each high water period, and at such
intermediate times as necessary to ensure satisfactory care of the levee.
   (f)   Supplemental regulations. All applicable provisions of the Standards
for Stormwater Management and Sediment Reduction (Sections 72-301, 302, 305,
307, 308, 312, 313, 314, 315, 316) administered by the South Carolina
Department of Health and Environmental Control pursuant to the South Carolina
Stormwater Management and Sediment Reduction Act of 1991 are incorporated
herein by reference.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 006-10HR, § XI, 1-19-09; Ord. No.
055-12HR, § XV, 10-16-12; Ord. No. 053-17HR, §§ XXIII - XXVI, 11-14-17)
Sec. 26-203. NPDES Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) Program.
   (a)   Purpose and applicability.
      (1)   Purpose. The primary intent of this section is to minimize the
introduction of pollutants into stormwater runoff and subsequently into surface
waters of the state. This will be accomplished through the implementation of
programs developed to address specific activities that contribute to the
contamination of stormwater. Richland County is required by its NPDES permit to
regulate all discharges within the political boundary of the county; therefore,
the county will take any measures necessary to comply with its permit and
protect water quality within the jurisdictional areas defined with the NPDES
permit. Discharge of pollutants shall be reduced to the Maximum Extent
Practicable (MEP), shall not cause, nor contribute to, violations of South
Carolina water quality standards, and shall be in compliance with TMDLs where
applicable.
      (2)   General. Applicability. The DHEC re-issued NPDES permit is hereby
adopted in its entirety. This adoption includes individual programs developed
as part of the implementation of the NPDES permit. The current NPDES permit
became effective on September 11, 2006 and expires on September 10, 2011. The
duration of the adoption of the NPDES permit will be for a term of five (5)
years, and will be automatically renewed for a like term unless this provision
is amended by County Council with an intent to terminate. Richland County
personnel, the Director of Public Works, and Stormwater Management personnel,
or their designees, may enforce any of the regulations in regards to DHEC
delegated Richland County’s NPDES storm water discharge permit programs or
language.
   (b)   Components of NPDES MS4 Program.
      (1)   Pesticide, Herbicide and Fertilizer (PHF) program. The intent of
the PHF program is to aid Richland County in reducing the discharge of
pollutants related to the storage and application of PHFs applied by county
employees or residents or contractors to public rights-of-way, parks, and other
property.
         a.   All commercial and non-commercial application of pesticides is
regulated in the state of South Carolina by the Department of Pesticide
Regulation (DPR). The DPR requires mandatory licensing for applicators involved
in pest control activities in structural, landscape and turf, aquatic, and
public health areas.
         b.   Only Richland County staff members who are properly licensed by
the DPR, or who are directly supervised by a licensed applicator, will be
permitted to apply pesticides and herbicides.
         c.   Commercial Applicators.
            1.   Richland County will only contract for pesticide and herbicide
application with commercial applicators that are licensed through the DPR.
            2.   All commercial applicators who are contracted by the county
will maintain current licensing through the DPR throughout the entire contract
with the county.
            3.   Commercial applicators contracted by the county to apply
pesticides and herbicides must provide written notification to the appropriate
county divisional manager, the Public Works Director, or the Vector Control
Director (or their designee) prior to commencement of any work involving PHF
application.
         d.   Inspections may be conducted within the county by the Stormwater
Manager or designee to ensure compliance with the PHF Program. The county may
require monitoring if deemed necessary to protect water quality within the
county.
      (2)   Illicit Connections, Illegal Discharges, Illegal Dumping, Improper
Disposal, Organic Waste and Spills. The intent of this section is to aid
Richland County in reducing and eliminating the discharge of pollutants to the
county’s MS4 related to illicit/illegal discharges, illegal dumping,
destruction of stormwater facilities, improper disposal, organic waste and
spills. This section will also fulfill one of the minimum control measures of
the Phase II Rule: IDDB. The county shall have the authority to carry out all
inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to determine
compliance and noncompliance with permit conditions, including the prohibition
on illicit discharges to the county’s municipal separate storm sewer, as well
as the stormwater systems within the jurisdictional areas of its NPDES co-
permittees.
         a.   Illicit Connections.
            1.   It shall be unlawful to connect or allow connection to any
sanitary sewer. This includes existing connections.
            2.   It shall be unlawful to cause or allow an illicit discharge to
the stormwater system, or any component thereof, or onto driveways, sidewalks,
parking lots, sinkholes, creek banks, or other areas draining to the stormwater
system.
            3.   Building permits shall be required before the construction of
any connection to the county’s publicly owned stormwater management system.
         b.   Improper Disposal. It shall be unlawful to use any stream or
watercourse to carry off water from any kitchen sink, bathtub, or privy, or to
carry off any fluid of an offensive or dangerous nature. No water or refuse
from any industrial, commercial, or institutional process, including water used
for heating or cooling, shall be discharged in any stream or watercourse by any
person until such person has obtained the appropriate local, state, and/or
federal permits. Richland County shall be allowed on-site if there is a
suspected illegal discharge for inspection and monitoring as deemed appropriate
for the protection of water quality.
         c.   Illegal Dumping. It shall be unlawful to dispose of any trash or
wastes in an unpermitted area or by disposing of such trash or waste into any
storm drain or stormwater conveyance. Richland County shall be allowed on-site
if there is suspected illegal dumping for inspection and monitoring as deemed
appropriate. In addition, all provisions and authority contained within Chapter
12 (Garbage, Trash and Refuse) and Chapter 13 (Hazardous Materials) of this
Code of Ordinances that are applicable to the protection of water quality shall
be incorporated by reference to this section.
         d.   Destruction of Stormwater Facilities. It shall be unlawful,
either willfully or negligently, to injure, deface, mutilate, destroy, tamper
or interfere with any county-owned property or any property used in the
county’s publicly owned stormwater management system.
         e.   Illegal Discharges. It shall be unlawful for any person to
discharge non-stormwater to any stormwater conveyance. The following non-storm
water discharges to the MS4, wherever they are not a source of pollutants, are
permitted:
            1.   Water line flushing.
            2.   Diverted stream flows.
            3.   Rising ground water.
            4.   Uncontaminated ground water infiltration (as defined at 40 CFR
35.2005 [20]) to separate storm sewers.
            5.   Uncontaminated pumped ground water discharges from potable
water sources.
            6.   Foundation drains.
            7.   Air conditioning condensation.
            8.   Irrigation water.
            9.   Springs
            10.   Water from crawl space pumps.
            11.   Footing drains.
            12.   Lawn watering.
            13.   Car washing at one’s residence, not for hire.
            14.   Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
            15.   Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
            16.   Road wash water.
            17.   Discharges from fire fighting.
            18.   Dye testing is an allowable discharge provided that the
Director of Public Works or Stormwater Management personnel, or designee, is
verbally notified prior to the time of testing.
         f.   Oils, Toxics and Household Hazardous Wastes. It shall be unlawful
to discharge or dispose of used motor vehicle fluids and household hazardous
wastes into the MS4.
         g.   Organic Waste.
            1.   Yard waste. It shall be the duty of the property owner to keep
grass clippings, leaves, tree and shrub clippings, stumps, organic materials,
or any other yard trash out of gutters, inlets, catch basins, and side ditches.
It shall be unlawful to place grass clippings, leaves, tree and shrub
clippings, stumps, organic materials, or any other yard trash in any road,
storm drain, stream, storm water conveyance, or any other location where
concentrated flows could wash such wastes into the storm sewer system. All yard
waste shall be bagged and set out for collection weekly.
            2.   Human and animal waste. Privies, pigpens, and stables of all
kinds shall be placed far enough away from any stream, ditch, drain, or other
stormwater conveyance that human and/or animal waste(s) will not run into them.
The Stormwater Manager (or his/her designee) shall have the authority to
determine whether a privy, pigpen or stable is deemed “far enough away” from
stormwater conveyances in order that the human or animal waste(s) will not
adversely impact the receiving conveyance.
         h.   Spill Response.
            1.   General. The Richland County Director of Emergency Services,
or an authorized fire official, shall have the authority to summarily abate,
control and contain hazardous materials that are emitted into the environment
and endanger the health or safety of the general public or the environment. The
director of emergency services or an authorized fire official shall have the
authority to enter public or private property with or without the owner’s
consent, to respond to such hazardous materials emergencies. The director of
emergency services or authorized fire official shall determine the type,
amount, and quantity of equipment and personnel required to adequately abate,
control, and contain all hazardous materials emitted into the environment.
            2.   Liability for hazardous spill. The property owner and/or
person responsible for the hazardous materials spill or release shall be held
financially liable for the response, control, containment, equipment and
materials costs, including legal fees, incurred by the county and supporting
agencies. The property owner and/or person responsible for the hazardous
material spill may provide personnel to assist abatement, removal and remedial
measures, provided such personnel have been adequately equipped and trained
pursuant to the requirements of local, state and federal laws. The county shall
not be liable for the use of outside personnel. Assistance shall consist of any
or all of the following:
               [a]   Informing Richland County Emergency Services Department
personnel of all matters pertaining to the incident.
               [b]   Supplying emergency response plan information for the
site.
               [c]   Supplying emergency response equipment, personnel and
materials.
               [d]   Charges for hazardous materials emergency response shall
be based upon the actual costs of response, control, containment, equipment and
materials, including legal fees. All fees collected shall be turned in to the
county treasurer and credited to the county’s general fund.
            3.   Fire incidents. In fire incidents involving hazardous
materials or exposure to hazardous materials, no fee will be assessed for
resources normally associated with fire fighting operations. Fees shall be
assessed for those activities and resources associated with abatement, control
and containment of the hazardous materials involvement or exposure.
         i.   SSSO and Inflow/Infiltration (I/I).
            1.   Every person, firm, corporation or other entity using the
sanitary sewer system of the county, or pipelines connected to said system,
shall maintain all sewer lines connected to the county’s sewer system, or
privately owned sewer collection systems which are connected to the county’s
system, in good condition so that the sewer will not:
               [a]   Permit any leakage of stormwater or other surface water or
groundwater into the sewer service lines or sewer collection lines system
either by visual observation or low pressure leakage test.
               [b]   Receive rainwater flow from roof downspout connections,
yard drains, uncovered building area drains, sump pumps or other sources of
rainwater flow and any other source of inflow/infiltration.
            2.   The county shall notify all persons, firms, corporations, or
other entities where sewer service lines or sewer collection systems are found
to have excessive inflow or infiltration that their service line or sewer
collection system must be repaired so as to eliminate such violation. Such
repairs must be completed within sixty days of notification by the county, or
within such other time schedule as prescribed by the county.
            3.   All private and public sanitary sewer systems that are
operated within Richland County shall report any incidences of an SSO occurring
in Richland County, or has the potential to impact surface waters with
untreated wastewater within Richland County, to the Stormwater Management
Division of the Public Works Department. This reporting requirement shall be in
addition to any other state or local SSO reporting requirement and within the
same required reporting timeframe.
            4.   The Director of Public Works and Stormwater Management
personnel, or their designees, bearing proper credentials and identification,
may enter and inspect all sanitary sewer systems and appurtenances if there is
evidence of sanitary sewer overflows which have impacted or have the ability to
impact water quality with the county’s jurisdictional areas. County personnel
shall duly notify the owner of the system or the certified operator on site,
and the inspection shall be conducted at a reasonable time.
      (3)   Industrial and High Risk Runoff Program. The intent of the Richland
County Industrial and High Risk Runoff Program is to aid Richland County in
reducing the amount of stormwater runoff and improving the quality of runoff
from industrial and high risk facilities. The county may review industrial
stormwater pollution prevention plan(s), as well as Spill Prevention Control
and Countermeasure (SPCC) plan(s), as required under the NPDES storm water
discharge permit, while outfall monitoring indicates a suspected violation, or
proactively in its routine water quality checks, as per below guidelines:
         a.   The Director of the Public Works Department and/or Stormwater
Management personnel, or designee, bearing proper credentials and
identification, may enter and inspect all properties for regular inspections,
periodic investigations, monitoring, observation, measurement, enforcement,
sampling and testing. The personnel shall duly notify the owner of said
property or the representative on site, and the inspection shall be conducted
at a reasonable time.
         b.   Upon refusal by any property owner to permit an inspector to
enter or continue an inspection, the inspector shall terminate the inspection
or confine the inspection to areas concerning which no objection is raised. The
inspector shall immediately report the refusal and the grounds to the director.
The director shall promptly seek issuance of an administrative search warrant.
         c.   In the event that the director or the designee reasonably
believes that discharges from the property into the Richland County MS4 may
cause an imminent and substantial threat to human health or the environment,
the inspection may take place at any time and without notice to the owner of
the property or a representative on site. The inspector shall present proper
credentials upon reasonable request by the owner or representative.
         d.   Inspection reports shall be maintained in a permanent file
located in the Storm Water Management Division of the Public Works Department.
         e.   At any time during an inspection or at such other times as the
director or his/her designee may request information from an owner or
representative, the owner or representative may identify areas of its facility
or establishment, material or processes which contains or which might reveal a
trade secret. If the director or his/her designee has no clear and convincing
reason to question such identification, all material, processes and all
information obtained within such areas shall be conspicuously labeled
“CONFIDENTIAL TRADE SECRET.” The trade secret designation shall be freely
granted to any material claimed to be such by the owner or representative
unless there is clear and convincing evidence for denying such designation. In
the event the director does not agree with the trade secret designation, the
material shall be temporarily designated a trade secret, and the owner or
representative may request an appeal of the director's decision in the manner
in which all such appeals are handled in this article.
         f.   All trade secret material which are prepared or obtained by or
for the director shall be marked as such and filed in a secure place separate
from regular, non-secret files, and documents. Reports from samples prepared or
obtained by or for the director or submitted for laboratory analysis shall be
marked as such and treated in the same manner as other trade secret material.
Trade secret material shall not be divulged by the director to anyone other
than:
            1.   Other employees of the county or employees of the state or
federal governments engaged in an inspection or enforcement proceeding
involving the designated material; and
            2.   To administrative or judicial courts upon order to so divulge
the material to the court.
         g.   Monitoring. The Director of the Public Works Department and/or
Stormwater Management personal, or their designee, may require the person
responsible for any private property or premises, including, but not limited
to, any private property or premises which is or may be the source of a
stormwater discharge associated with industrial activity, or the source of a
discharge from a site of industrial activity, or the source of a discharge from
a high-risk facility, or the source of an illicit discharge, at that person's
expense, to establish and maintain such records, make such reports, install,
use and maintain such monitoring equipment or methods, sample such discharge in
accordance with such methods, at such locations, and intervals as the director
shall prescribe, and provide periodic reports relating to the discharge. To the
extent practicable, the director/stormwater personal or designee shall
recognize and approve the sampling procedures and test methods established by
40 CFR136.
         h.   Best management practices. Industrial facilities and high risk
facilities may be required to implement, at their own expense, structural and/
or nonstructural BMPs, as appropriate, to prevent the discharge of pollutants
to the Richland County MS4. To the extent practicable, the director shall
recognize that storage and handling of significant materials, material handling
equipment or activities, intermediate products or industrial machinery in such
a manner that they are not exposed to stormwater is an effective BMP.
Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing
the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent
practicable, shall be deemed in compliance with the provisions of this section.
         i.   Providing false information and tampering prohibited.
            1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to provide false
information to the director or anyone working under the director’s supervision
when such person knows or has reason to know that the information provided is
false, whether such information is required by this article or any inspection,
recordkeeping or monitoring requirement carried out or imposed under this
article.
            2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to falsify, tamper with or
knowingly render inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this
article.
      (4)   Construction Site Runoff Control Program. The intent of the
Construction Site Runoff Control Program is to aid Richland County in reducing
and controlling the discharge of pollutants from construction sites.
Construction sites have potential to introduce large volumes of soil and
sediment to stormwater runoff, as well as discarded building materials,
concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter and sanitary waste. The individual
requirements that make up the Construction Site Runoff Control Program are
contained in Sections 26-64 and 26-202 of this Chapter.
      (5)   Post-Construction Maintenance Program. The intent of the Post-
Construction Maintenance Program is to aid Richland County in reducing the
discharge of pollutants from permanent water quality BMPs that are left in
place after construction is complete. If not operated and maintained properly,
permanent water quality BMPs can become sources of pollutants; the goal of this
program is to prevent this from occurring by requiring BMP maintenance to
ensure these BMPs are operating as designed.
         a.   The individual requirements that make up the Post-Construction
Maintenance Program are contained in Sections
26-64 and
26-202.
         b.   Regular maintenance of permanent structural BMPs (i.e., ditches,
ponds, etc.) will be the responsibility of Richland County if the county has an
easement allowing it to access the BMP, and if the county has accepted
maintenance responsibilities for the BMP. If the BMP is privately owned, all
maintenance will be the responsibility of the owner.
      (6)   Accidental Discharges or Damages. In the event of any accidental
discharge or damage to the municipal separate stormwater systems of Richland
County or its co-permittees, immediate notification (not to exceed 24 hours)
shall be given to the Director of the Public Works Department and/or Stormwater
Management personnel, or their designee, regarding the nature, quantity (if
applicable) and time of the occurrence. In addition to this notification, the
responsible entity shall take immediate measures to contain and/or eliminate
the discharge and minimize its effects on the receiving waters. The responsible
entity shall also take steps to eliminate the recurrence of such events. The
Director of Public Works and Stormwater Management personnel, or their
designee, shall have the authority to inspect, monitor and approve any remedial
actions taken by the responsible entity. Failure to notify Richland County as
outlined above shall result in the action being deemed an illegal or illicit
activity as described in this Section and appropriate enforcement action shall
be taken as set out in Section
26-203(d), below, and the “Enforcement Response Guide”.
      (7)   Water Quality Controls for Impaired Water Bodies and Consistency
with TMDLs. The county may take action to provide reasonable assurance that
discharges will not cause or contribute to violations of water quality
standards in Impaired Water Bodies identified on the South Carolina 303(d)
list. If a TMDL has been established for a water body, the county may also
require additional conditions necessary to ensure consistency with the TMDL.
   (c)   MS4 Authority.
      (1)   The Director of the Public Works Department and/or Stormwater
Management personnel, or designee, bearing proper credentials and
identification, may enter and inspect all properties for regular inspections,
periodic investigations, monitoring, observation, measurement, enforcement,
sampling and testing, and any other NPDES related tasks. The personnel shall
duly notify the owner of said property or the representative on site, and the
inspection shall be conducted at reasonable times.
      (2)   In the event that the Richland County or the designee reasonably
believes that discharges from the property into the Richland County MS4 may
cause an imminent and substantial threat to human health or the environment,
the inspection may take place at any time and without notice to the owner of
the property or a representative on site. The inspector shall present proper
credentials upon reasonable request by the owner or representative. In
addition, the inspector may take such action as to abate or eliminate the
discharge and begin remedial steps necessary to protect human health and/or the
environment.
   (d)   Violations. Upon determination that a violation of any of the
provisions of this article or the NPDES permit has occurred, Richland County
personnel will respond according to the procedures in the current “Enforcement
Response Guide”, which includes timely personal notice at the property where
the violation has occurred and written notice to the violator. This notice
shall specify: the nature of the violation, the proposed penalty, and the time
line (depending on the violation and is left to the discretion of the
inspector) to correct deficiencies, if appropriate. There shall be sufficient
notification to deliver the notice to the person to whom it is addressed, or to
deposit a copy of such in the United States Mail, properly stamped, certified
and addressed to the address used for tax purposes.
      (1)   Civil Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this article
shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more than five hundred dollars
($500) for each violation. Each separate day of a violation, constitutes a new
and separate violation.
      (2)   Criminal Penalties. In addition to any applicable civil penalties,
any person who negligently, willfully or intentionally violates any provision
of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished within
the jurisdictional limits of magistrate’s court. Each day of a violation shall
constitute a new and separate offense.
      (3)   Emergency Actions. Richland County reserves the right to seek
reimbursement of costs required to abate, eliminate and/or remediate discharges
that have been deemed an imminent threat to human health and/or the
environment. Such reimbursement shall be in addition to other appropriate
enforcement actions including, but not limited to, civil or criminal penalties.
   (e)   Supplemental regulations. All applicable provisions of the standards
for Stormwater Management and Sediment Reduction (Section 72-301, 302, 305,
307, 308, 312, 313, 314, 315 and 316) administered by the South Carolina
Department of Health and Environmental Control pursuant to the South Carolina
Stormwater Management and Sediment Reduction Act of 1991 are incorporated
herein by reference. All applicable provisions of the NPDES and Land
Application Permits Regulation (Section 61-9.122 Part A 122.2, 122.3, 122.4 and
Part B 122.26) administered by the South Carolina Department of Health and
Environmental Control pursuant to the South Carolina Pollution Control Act of
1976 are incorporated herein by reference.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 065-05HR, § X, 9-20-05; Ord. No.
043-07HR, §§ XXVIII, XXIX, 5-1-07; Ord. No. 072-07HR, § I, 9-11-07; Ord. No.
006-10HR, § XII, 1-19-09)
Secs. 26-204 - 26-209. Reserved.
ARTICLE IX. TRANSPORTATION
Sec. 26-210. General.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this article is to provide the information
necessary to allow decision- makers to assess the transportation implications
of traffic associated with a proposed development project; to address the
transportation-related issues associated with development proposals that may be
of concern to neighboring property owners and residents; and to provide a basis
for the negotiation regarding improvements and funding alternatives to
accomplish the identified mitigation measures.
   (b)   Traffic Impact Assessment (TIA). A TIA may be required to:
      (1)   Evaluate traffic operations and impacts at site access points;
      (2)   Evaluate the impact of site-generated traffic on affected
intersections;
      (3)   Evaluate the quality of site-generated traffic on the quality of
traffic flow in the area;
      (4)   Ensure that proper facilities for pedestrians, bicyclists and
transit users are provided;
      (5)   Identify transportation infrastructure needs, the related costs and
funding sources; and
      (6)   Provide valuable data to more accurately develop long range
transportation plans and road improvement projects for the County Capital
Improvement Program and the MPO Transportation Improvement Plan.
(Ord. 038-09HR, § XIV, 7-21-09)
Sec. 26-211. Applicability.
   (a)   A TIA shall be required for all proposed land development projects, or
phases thereof, and zoning map amendments, for which the estimated cumulative
effect with: 1) cause the annual average daily traffic count on the roadway(s)
adjacent to the subject site to increase by more than fifteen percent (15%) of
its design capacity; or 2) cause the Volume-to-Capacity (V/C) ratio on any
adjacent roadway(s) to exceed 1.35; or 3) results in 100, or more, PM peak hour
(PHPH) trips, whichever is applicable; or
   (b)   All proposed public and private school projects shall use the criteria
described above except that 100, or more, AM peak hour (AMPH) trips will be
used.
(Ord. No. 038-09HR, § XIV, 7-21-09)
Sec. 26-212. Minimum Requirements.
   The applicant shall submit all information specified in the Traffic Impact
Assessment Checklist that proscribes the requirements for a TIA.
(Ord. No. 038-09HR, § XIV, 7-21-09)
Sec. 26-213. Review Process.
   (a)   The applicant shall be required to complete a mandatory pre-
application conference to determine the study area, project phasing timetable
and other applicable TIA parameters.
   (b)   No later than fifteen (15) days after submission of the TIA, the
Department will provide the applicant with a sufficiency determination,
including identification of any deficiencies or additional analysis that may be
required.
   (c)   No later than thirty (30) days after submission of the TIA, unless
delayed by a “not sufficient” determination, the Department shall provide a
written summary of the TIA findings and recommendations to the applicant.
(Ord. No. 038-09HR, § XIV, 7-21-09)
Sec. 26-214. Mitigation.
   The applicant, the County and/or SCDOT may enter into a voluntary agreement
to effectuate completion of the identified mitigation improvements attributed
to the proposed project. The County Administrator is authorized to execute a
traffic mitigation agreement on behalf of the County.
(Ord. No. 038-09HR, § XIV, 7-21-09)
Sec. 26-215 - 26-220. Reserved.
ARTICLE X. SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Sec. 26-221. Purpose.
   The purpose of these subdivision regulations is to provide criteria for the
development of subdivisions, reduce infrastructure maintenance costs as a
result of efficient community design, provide pedestrian linkages and wildlife
corridors among residential communities, and to encourage recreational
opportunities within Richland County. These regulations shall be applied, in
addition to other relevant sections of this chapter (see in particular Article
VII.), when a subdivision is proposed in the county, and are based on and
implement the requirements of Section 6-29-1110, et seq., of the South Carolina
Code of Laws. These regulations also implement the objectives and policies of
the comprehensive plan; and preserve and protect environmental resources,
natural and cultivated landscapes for the county.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 055-12HR, § XVI, 10-16-12)
Sec. 26-222. General requirements.
   (a)   Improvements. All proposed improvements in the development of a
subdivision shall comply with the relevant standards set forth in this chapter.
   (b)   Septic tank and well systems. Persons using septic tanks and/or wells
shall obtain, prior to sketch plan review by the development review team, at
least preliminary or conceptual approval from DHEC, as required by Section 61-
57 of the South Carolina Code of Regulations.
   (c)   Subdivision and road names. Subdivision names, approved by the county
addressing coordinating specialist, and road names, approved by the planning
commission, will be issued at the preliminary plan review stage.
   (d)   Access requirements.
      (1)   Access requirements for residential subdivisions. All residential
subdivisions, and/or subdivision lots, shall have direct access to a public or
private right-of-way, which conforms to the requirements of Section
26-181(b)(2) and which has been approved by the county engineer's office.
Except for minor subdivisions, all subdivision lots shall have access only to
interior subdivision roads.
      (2)   Access requirements for commercial subdivisions. All commercial
subdivision lots shall have direct access to a public or private road, with a
minimum fifty (50) foot right-of- way and a minimum twenty (20) foot wide
passable surface approved by the county engineer’s office, or a recorded cross-
access easement, at least thirty (30) feet in width from the public or private
road to the commercial site and approved by the county fire marshal.
   (e)   Lots.
      (1)   DHEC requirements. If the South Carolina Department of Health and
Environmental Control requires a lot size for a subdivision different from what
is required in this chapter, then the project shall conform to the DHEC
standards.
      (2)   Restriction on jurisdictional lines. Lots hereinafter developed
shall not be divided by city or county lines.
      (3)   Lot lines. In so far as is practical, side lot lines shall be at
right angles to straight road lines and radial to curved road lines.
      (4)   Zoning district standards. All subdivision lots must comply with
the applicable standards for the zoning district(s) in which the subdivision is
located.
   (f)   Blocks.
      (1)   Block size.
         a.   Nonresidential block size.  Nonresidential blocks shall be of
such length and width as may be suitable for their prospective use, including
adequate provision for off-street parking and service areas.
         b.   Residential block size. Residential blocks shall not be greater
than one thousand eight hundred (1,800) feet in length nor less than six
hundred (600) feet in length. Where practical, the width of any residential
block shall be sufficient to permit at least two (2) tiers of lots.
      (2)   Dead-end roads. Dead-end roads, within a subdivision, including
cul-de-sacs, shall not exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet in length.
   (g)   Natural Resource Inventory. All sketch plan submittals must include a
natural resource inventory conducted by a qualified professional.
      (1)   The following list of features, if relevant, shall be included in
the Natural Resources Inventory:
         a.   100-year floodplain;
         b.   Riparian buffers;
         c.   Cemeteries and burial grounds;
         d.   Open space corridors of twenty-five (25) foot width or greater
and all easements;
         e.   Protected trees, as identified in Section
26-176(k)(l);
         f.   Steep slopes of greater than twenty-five percent (25%);
         g.   Wetlands, including isolated wetlands;
         h.   Archeological sites, historical sites and features eligible for
or listed in the National Register of Historic Places;
         i.   Rare, threatened, or endangered species/habitats, as identified
by federal and state listings;
         j.   Scenic view sheds;
         k.   Unique natural features;
         l.   Forestlands; and
         m.   Prime agricultural lands.
      (2)   The development review team shall have the authority to require
protections based on the requirements of this Chapter and the results of the
Natural Resource Inventory.
   (h)   Pervious material may be used for sidewalks and driveways.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 014-10HR, § II, 3-16-10; Ord. No.
05-12HR, § XVII, 10-16-12; 045- 13HR, § III, 9-10-13)
Sec. 26-223. Financial surety.
   In lieu of the completion of a subdivision development previous to final
plat approval, the county may accept a bond, in an amount and with surety and
conditions satisfactory to it, providing for and securing to the county the
actual construction and installation of all improvements within a specified
time period as expressed in the bond documents. The following types of bonds
shall be acceptable to the county, subject to review and approval by the
Richland County Legal Department and/or the county engineer.
   (a)   Surety bond. A surety bond issued by a company licensed to do business
in the State of South Carolina in an amount equal to one hundred twenty- five
percent (125%) of the estimated cost of improvements. The county engineer shall
determine the estimated cost of improvements.
   (b)   Escrow funds. Escrow funds in an account in the name of Richland
County in an amount equal to one hundred twenty-five percent (125%) of the
estimated cost of improvements. The county engineer shall determine the
estimated cost of improvements. The contract may authorize a reduction of the
escrow account upon completion of a portion of the improvements, but at no time
shall the escrow account be less than one hundred twenty-five percent (125%) of
the remaining improvements.
   (c)   Securities. The developer may pledge securities in the form of
negotiable stocks or bonds in favor of the county in an amount at least two (2)
times the estimated cost of improvements. The county engineer shall determine
the estimated cost of improvements.
   (d)   Performance bond for easements and right-of- way. In the event the
developer elects to dedicate easements and right-of-way to the public, the
developer shall arrange for the contractor to post a performance bond in the
amount of one hundred percent (100%) of the estimated construction cost holding
the construction contractor liable for any problems for a minimum of twelve
(12) months and a maximum of eighteen (18) months following the date of such
dedication.
   (e)   Letter of credit. An irrevocable letter of credit issued by a
responsible financial institution, in an amount equal to one hundred twenty-
five percent (125%) of the estimated cost of improvements. The estimated cost
of improvements shall be determined by the county engineer.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04)
Sec. 26-224. Certain subdivisions exempt from road standards.
   The planning director, or his/her designee, may exempt subdivisions from the
road construction requirements of Sec.
26-181 of this chapter only if the property is being given, for no monetary
compensation or any other consideration, to the owners' immediate family
members or is being transferred by will or intestate succession or forced
division decreed by appropriate judicial authority. The subdivider must submit
legal documentation satisfactory to the planning director, or his/her designee,
in order to establish eligibility for this exemption. In addition, the
subdivider must submit a "Hold Harmless Agreement" as to Richland County. This
exemption shall apply only to initial division of property, not to subsequent
sale or further subdivision by the heirs, devisees, or transferees. Plats of
subdivisions so exempted shall show an ingress/egress easement providing access
to all parcels. This easement may be an existing easement maintained by
Richland County. The plat shall contain the following information:
   (a)   Names of owners of each parcel being created; and
   (b)   Purpose of the subdivision; and
   (c)   A note stating that "ROAD ACCESS NOT PROVIDED"; and
   (d)   A note stating "THESE LOTS/PARCELS MAY NOT BE FURTHER SUBDIVIDED UNTIL
ROAD ACCESS IS PROVIDED AND A REVISED PLAT IS APPROVED BY RICHLAND COUNTY".
   (e)   Should the planning director, or his/her designee, exempt a proposed
subdivision from the construction of the private roadway, the property shall
also be exempt from delineation of jurisdictional and non-jurisdictional
wetlands (for purposes of approving the plat for recordation only; this section
shall not supersede any state and/or federal requirement for construction in,
around or through a jurisdictional wetland or flood zone). In the situation
that a property owner requests exemption from road construction as outlined in
this section, the property owner shall sign a statement that he/she understands
that the proposed subdivision of land shall not be exempted from any other
minimum standard set forth in this chapter; provided, however, all planning
department subdivision plan review fees shall be waived.
(Ord. No. 001-11HR, § II, 1-4-11; Ord. No. 064-11HR, § II, 11-15-11; Ord. No.
008-13HR, § I, 11-15-11)
Sec. 26-225 Private road subdivisions.
   (a)   Purpose. It is the intent and purpose of this section to furnish a
means of subdividing property in the RU zoning district of the county without
incurring the costs associated with major subdivisions.
   (b)   Applicability. The provisions of this section shall only apply to the
RU (Rural) zoning district.
   (c)   Special requirements for private road subdivisions.
      (1)   Review. Subdivision of property for a private road subdivision is
subject to the minor subdivision review procedure found at Sec.
26-54(c)(2). All Planning Department subdivision plan review fees shall be
waived; provided, however, all fees charged by DHEC (and collected by the
Richland County Public Works Department) shall be paid by the applicant.
      (2)   Roads. Roads within a private road subdivision shall be exempt from
the road paving requirements of Sec.
26-181 of this chapter, but shall not be exempt from any other road design
requirement. Roads within a private road subdivision shall not be eligible or
accepted for county maintenance, which is otherwise provided pursuant to
Section
21-5 of the Richland County Code of Ordinances, until they meet the road
construction standards provided in Chapter 21 of the Richland County Code. The
roadway shall have a minimum right-of-way width of fifty (50) feet and minimum
twenty (20) foot wide passable surface, which meets the standards established
and set forth by the county engineer. The subdivision documents shall include a
conspicuous statement stating that improvements to the roadway without the
approval of the county engineer are prohibited.
      (3)   Sidewalks. Private road subdivisions shall be exempt from the
sidewalk requirements of Sec.
26-179 of this chapter.
      (4)   Size of lots. Any and all lots created in a private road
subdivision shall conform to the RU zoning district's requirements.
      (5)   Number of lots. An owner of land may subdivide a tract of land
pursuant to this section provided that no more than seven (7) lots result from
the subdivision.
      (6)   Number of dwelling units. Only one (1) dwelling unit shall be
permitted on each lot.
      (7)   E-911 requirements. The road, and each lot, shall conform to the
county's E-911 system addressing and posting requirements.
   (d)   Legal documents required. An applicant for a private road subdivision
shall submit:
      (1)   The necessary legal documents that:
         a.   Clearly provide permanent access to each lot.
         b.   State that the county shall not be responsible for either
construction or routine (i.e. recurring) maintenance of the private road.
         c.   Clearly state that the parcels created by this process shall not
be divided again, except in full compliance with all regulations in effect at
the time.
      (2)   A "Hold Harmless Agreement" as to Richland County.
All legal documents shall be provided in a form acceptable to the county legal
department.
(Ord. No. 051-11HR, § I, 10-18-11)
Secs. 26-226 - 26-250. Reserved.
ARTICLE XI. NONCONFORMITIES
Sec. 26-251. General.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish regulations that
govern uses, structures, lots, and other current circumstances that come into
being lawfully, but that do not conform to one or more requirements of this
chapter and/or amendments thereto. Such nonconformities could be created by the
adoption of this chapter, or could have been created by a change in the
classification of property or a change in the text of this chapter.
   (b)   Nonconformities - continuation. Any nonconforming use, structure, or
lot that lawfully existed as of the effective date of this chapter and that
remains nonconforming may be continued only in accordance with the terms of
this article. Any use, structure, or lot that has become nonconforming as a
result of the adoption of this chapter, or any subsequent amendment to the text
or official zoning map, may be continued and maintained only in accordance with
the terms of this article. As used in this article, the term "effective date of
this chapter, or any amendment thereto," refers to the date of the ordinance
that first rendered a use, structure, or lot nonconforming.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04)
Sec. 26-252. Nonconforming vacant lots.
   (a)   General. A nonconforming vacant lot is a lot that was lawfully created
prior to the effective date of this chapter, or any amendment thereto, but
which does not conform to the dimensional or area requirements for the zoning
district in which it is located.
   (b)   Standards. A nonconforming vacant lot may be used for any of the uses
permitted by Article V. of this chapter in the zoning district in which it is
located if the use of the lot meets the following standards:
      (1)   All other minimum requirements for the particular zoning district
and proposed use must be met or a variance obtained from these requirements.
      (2)   The nonconforming vacant lot does not adjoin and have continuous
frontage with one or more other vacant lots in the same ownership. If a
nonconforming lot does adjoin and have continuous frontage with one or more
other vacant lots in the same ownership, such lots shall be combined or
recombined as necessary to form a conforming lot or lots. This subsection shall
not apply to a nonconforming vacant lot if a majority of the developed lots
located on either side of the road where such a lot is located and within five
hundred (500) feet of such lot are also nonconforming. The intent of this
subsection is to require nonconforming lots to be combined with other lots to
create conforming lots under the circumstances specified herein, but not to
require such combination when that would be out of character with the way the
neighborhood has been previously developed.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04)
Sec. 26-253. Nonconforming occupied lots.
   (a)   General. A nonconforming occupied lot is a lot which contained a
structure prior to the effective date of this chapter or any amendment thereto,
but which does not conform to the dimensional or area requirements for the
zoning district in which it is located.
   (b)   Standards. A nonconforming occupied lot may be used for any of the
uses permitted by this chapter in the zoning district in which it is located if
the use of the lot meets the following standards:
      (1)   Any improvement, erection, or extension of buildings or structures
on such a lot shall comply with all other minimum requirements of this chapter
or a variance must be obtained from these requirements.
      (2)   The nonconforming occupied lot does not adjoin and have continuous
frontage with one or more other vacant lots in the same ownership. If a
nonconforming lot does adjoin and have continuous frontage with one or more
other vacant lots in the same ownership, such lots shall be combined or
recombined as necessary to form a conforming lot or lots. This subsection shall
not apply to a nonconforming occupied lot if a majority of the developed lots
located on either side of the road where such a lot is located and within five
hundred (500) feet of such lot are also nonconforming. The intent of this
subsection is to require nonconforming lots to be combined with other lots to
create conforming lots under the circumstances specified herein, but not to
require such combination when that would be out of character with the way the
neighborhood has been previously developed.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04)
Sec. 26-254. Nonconforming structures occupying conforming lots.
   (a)   General. A nonconforming structure occupying a conforming lot is a
structure which lawfully existed prior to the effective date of this chapter,
or any amendment thereto, which does not meet the minimum requirements for the
zoning district in which it is located. It is a structure, however, that is
located on a lot that does conform to the zoning district requirements.
   (b)   Standards. A nonconforming structure on a conforming lot may be used
for any of the uses permitted by this chapter in the zoning district in which
it is located if the use of the lot meets the following standards:
      (1)   A nonconforming structure may undergo a change of use or renovation
without having to bring the structure into conformity with the requirements of
these regulations provided that:
         a.   The change in use or renovation involves a permitted use within
the district, and
         b.   The number of parking spaces provided for the use is in
conformity with the requirements of these regulations or a variance is obtained
from the board of zoning appeals.
      (2)   A nonconforming structure may be expanded, without bringing the
nonconforming structure into conformity with these regulations, only if the
part of the structure to be expanded and the area of the lot into which the
expansion is taking place are both brought into conformity with the
requirements of this chapter. However, a structure that is nonconforming only
because of setback standards may be enlarged along the nonconforming setback up
to ten (10) feet in residential districts or thirty (30) feet in other
districts so long as all other aspects of the structure conform to the
regulations in this chapter.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04)
Sec. 26-255. Nonconforming open uses of land.
   (a)   General. A nonconforming open use of land is an open use that was in
existence prior to the effective date of this chapter, or any amendment
thereto, and which would not be permitted by this chapter in the zoning
district in which it is located. For open uses of land, any structures
associated with the use are incidental and accessory to the actual use.
   (b)   Standards. A legally established nonconforming open use of land may be
continued subject to the following limitations:
      (1)   When a nonconforming open use of land has been changed to a
conforming use, it shall not thereafter be used for any nonconforming use.
      (2)   Nonconforming open uses of land may be converted to another
nonconforming use if the board of zoning appeals finds that the new use is more
in character with the uses permitted in the zoning district in which the
property is located and grants a special exception. In granting such a change,
the board may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accordance with
the purposes of this chapter.
      (3)   A nonconforming open use of land shall not be enlarged to cover
more land than was occupied by that use when it became nonconforming.
      (4)   When any nonconforming open use of land is discontinued for a
period in excess of twelve (12) months, any future use of the land shall be
limited to those uses permitted in the district in which the land is located.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04)
Sec. 26-256. Nonconforming uses of structures.
   (a)   General. A nonconforming use of a structure is a use that was lawfully
created in a structure prior to the effective date of this chapter, or any
amendment thereto, and which would not be permitted by this chapter in the
zoning district in which it is located.
   (b)   Standards. A legally established nonconforming use of a structure may
be continued subject to the following limitations:
      (1)   When a nonconforming use of a structure has been changed to a
conforming use, it shall not thereafter be used for any nonconforming use.
      (2)   A nonconforming use of a structure may be converted to another
nonconforming use if the board of zoning appeals finds that the new use is more
in character with the uses permitted in the zoning district in which the
property is located and grants a special exception. In granting such a change,
the board may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accordance with
the purposes of this chapter.
      (3)   A nonconforming use of a structure may be enlarged or extended only
into portions of the structure that existed at the time that the use became
nonconforming. No structural alterations will be allowed to any structure
containing a nonconforming use except:
         a.   Where such alteration does not enlarge the structure.
         b.   Where such alteration is required by law or by an order from the
county building inspector, fire marshal, or zoning administrator to ensure the
safety of the structure.
         c.   Where such alteration is of a residential structure as set forth
in subsection (4) below.
      (4)   Nonconforming existing residential structures in either commercial
or industrial districts may be enlarged, extended, or structurally altered,
provided that no additional dwelling units result from such enlargement,
extension, or alteration. Any such enlargement, extension, or alteration shall
comply with the dimensional or area requirements of the Residential, Single-
Family, High Density District.
      (5)   When any nonconforming use of a structure is discontinued for a
period in excess of twelve (12) months, any future use of the land shall be
limited to those uses permitted in the district in which the structure is
located.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04)
Sec. 26-257. Other nonconforming issues.
   (a)   Standards for replacement of nonconforming manufactured housing. Any
manufactured home used for single-family residential purposes and maintained as
a nonconforming use may be enlarged or replaced with a post-1976 manufactured
home of the same or larger size, so long as the enlargement or replacement does
not create new nonconformities with respect to such matters as yard or parking
requirements. Any replacement authorized by this subsection can only take place
if said replacement occurs within one hundred eighty (180) days of the removal
of the initial manufactured home.
   (b)   Discontinuance.
      (1)   When discontinued. A nonconforming use shall be presumed
discontinued when any of the following has occurred:
         a.   The owner has in writing or by public statement indicated intent
to abandon the use.
         b.   A conforming use or a nonconforming use of lesser impact has
replaced the original nonconforming use.
         c.   The building or structure housing the nonconforming use has been
removed.
         d.   The owner has physically changed the building or structure or its
permanent equipment in such a way as to indicate clearly a change in use or
activity to something other than the nonconforming use.
         e.   The property, structure, or use has been vacant or completely
inactive for twelve (12) or more months.
      (2)   Overcoming presumption of abandonment.  A presumption of
abandonment for a nonconforming use in a structure, based solely on the length
of time the use of the structure has remained vacant or inactive, may be
rebutted. Such a presumption may be overcome upon a showing, to the
satisfaction of the zoning administrator, that during such period, the owner of
the land has done both of the following:
         a.   The owner has been maintaining the land and structure in
accordance with the building code; and
         b.   The owner has been actively and continuously marketing the land
or structure for sale or lease or has been making necessary improvements in
order to continue the use.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04)
Sec. 26-258. Maintenance and nonconformities.
   (a)   Maintenance and required alterations or remodeling. In the interest of
public safety and health, structural alterations or remodeling of nonconforming
structures or conforming structures on nonconforming lots that are required by
any public law, and so ordered by a public officer in authority, shall be
permitted. Routine maintenance shall also be permitted for nonconforming
situations so long as no expansion of the nonconformity occurs as a result of
the maintenance.
   (b)   Repair/reconstruction of damaged structures. Any nonconforming use
that has been damaged by fire, wind, flood, or other casualty may be repaired
and used as before, provided that such repair and reconstruction shall be
accomplished:
      (1)   Without any increase in structural dimensions or area devoted to
the nonconforming use.
      (2)   Without any change in location except to provide greater
conformance with the requirements of this chapter.
      (3)   With initiation of the repairs/reconstruction within twenty-four
(24) months of the damage.
      (4)   With completion of the repairs/reconstruction within three (3)
years of the damage.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04)
Secs. 26-259 - 26-270. Reserved.
ARTICLE XII. CODE COMPLIANCE
Sec. 26-271. Duties regarding enforcement.
   The Richland County Zoning Administrator, unless specifically set forth
otherwise in this chapter, is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of
this chapter. The administrator shall be entitled to inspect all properties
subject to this chapter at all reasonable times in order to determine
compliance or non- compliance with the terms and provisions hereof.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04)
Sec. 26-272. Penalties for violations.
   (a)   Liabilities for violations. Any person who erects, constructs,
reconstructs, alters, repairs, converts, or maintains any buildings, structure,
sign or sign structure, or develops, grades, or otherwise alters property in
violation of this chapter shall be subject to penalties in accordance with this
article.
   (b)   Criminal penalties. Any person who violates the terms of this chapter
or fails to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not more than five
hundred ($500.00) dollars or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days, or
both. Each day such violation continues after due notice shall be considered a
separate offense. The owner or tenant of any building, structure, sign, use
premises or part thereof, and any architect, surveyor, engineer, builder,
contractor, agent, or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or
maintains that violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and
suffer the penalties set forth herein.
      (c)   Injunctive relief and other remedies. In addition to, or in lieu
of, the other remedies set forth in this article, the zoning administrator, in
the event of a violation of this chapter, or other appropriate authority of the
county, or an adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be specially
damaged by a violation, may institute injunction, mandamus, or other
appropriate action or proceeding to prevent the unlawful erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance, or use, or
to correct or abate the violation, or to prevent the occupancy of the building,
structure, or land. In case a building, structure, or land is or is proposed to
be used in violation of this chapter, the county zoning administrator may, in
addition to other remedies, issue and serve upon a person pursuing the activity
a stop work order requiring such person to stop all activities in violation of
this chapter.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04)
Sec. 26-273. Enforcement procedure.
   (a)   Notice of violation. When an authorized county official finds
violations of this chapter, it shall be the duty of said official to notify the
person alleged to be in violation. Such notice of violation shall be in writing
and sent by certified or registered mail or delivered by personal service. If
the violator cannot be ascertained, then the notice of violation shall be sent
to the record owner of the land on which the violation occurs. The notice of
violation shall include an opportunity to cure the violation within a
prescribed period of time. For violations of the floodplain regulations
contained in this chapter, the notice shall also indicate that a hearing will
be held before the flood coordinator at a designated place and time. Such place
and time shall be no later than twenty (20) days after the date of the notice,
at which time the owner or occupant shall be entitled to be heard in person or
by counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter.
   (b)   Extension of time to cure. Upon receipt of a written request from the
alleged violator or the property owner for an extension of time to cure or
correct the violation, the county official charged with the duty of enforcing
the regulation(s) being violated may grant a single extension of time, not to
exceed a period of thirty (30) days, in which the alleged violator may cure or
correct the violation before the county takes further action.
   (c)   Failure to cure. If the violator (or land owner if the violator cannot
be ascertained) fails to take prompt corrective action in the prescribed time,
then the county may pursue the penalties and remedies set forth above.
   (d)   Revocation of permits. In the event of a violation of any regulation
of this chapter, the county official charged with the duty of enforcing the
particular regulations, may stop any development of, use of, or activity on
property by the revocation of applicable permits.
(Ord. No. 074-04HR, § V, 11-9-04)
Sec. 26-274. Definition of violation as it applies to Section 26-106.
   For the purpose of Section
26-106 only, the term "violation" shall mean the failure of a structure or
other development to be fully compliant with the community's flood plain
management regulations.
(Ord. No. 060-10HR, § IX, 9-28-10)
Secs. 26-275 - 26-290. Reserved.
CHAPTER 27: RESERVED
   *Editor's note--Ord. No. 074-04HR, adopted November 9, 2004, provided for
the deletion of former Chapter 27, relative to landscape requirements. The
provisions of former Chapter 27 have been incorporated into Chapter 26, the
land development code.
PARALLEL REFERENCES
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE, 1976 CODE
   This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1976
Code, which are included herein. Sections of the 1976 Code not listed herein
have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and
permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto,
see the table immediately following this table.
1976 Code Section Section this Code
1976 Code Section Section this Code
1-1001            1-1
1-1004            1-3
1-1005            1-4
1-1006            1-5
1-1007            1-6
1-1008            1-8
2-1001            2-15
2-1003(b)         2-19
2-1004            2-21
2-1005            2-18
2-1008            2-22
2-1010            2-23
2-1011            2-24
2-2001            2-55
2-2006            2-57
2-2007            2-58
2-2008            2-62
2-2009            2-63
2-2010            2-2
2-3001            2-106
2-3002            2-107
2-3003(a)         2-108
2-3003(b), (c)    2-109
2-3003(d)         2-110
2-3003(e)         2-111
2-3003(f)         2-112
2-3003(g)         2-113
2-3003(h)         2-114
2-3003(i)         2-115
2-3003(j)         2-116
2-3003(k)         2-117
2-3004            2-118
2-3005            2-119
2-3006            2-120
2-3007            2-121
2-3008            2-122
2-4001            2-28
2-4002            2-29
2-4003            2-30
2-4004            2-31
2-4005            2-32
2-5001            9-1
2-5002            9-13
2-5003            9-14
2-5004            9-15
2-5005            9-16
2-5006            9-17
2-5007            9-18
2-5008            9-19
2-6001            2-1
2-7001            2-332
2-7002            2-329
2-7045            23-48
2-7046            23-49
2-7047            23-50
2-7048            23-51
2-7049            23-52
2-7061            20-11
2-7073            19-11
2-7085            14-11
2-7086            14-12
2-7087            14-13
2-7088            14-14
2-7089            14-15
2-7101            19-23
2-8001            2-39
2-8002            2-40
2-8003            2-41
2-8004            2-42
2-8005            2-43
2-8006            2-44--
                  2-46
2-8009            2-47
2-8010            2-48
2-9001            2-649
2-9002            2-650
2-9003            2-651
2-9004            2-652
2-9005            2-653
2-9006            2-654
2-9007            2-655
3-3001            2-300
3-3002            2-301
3-3003            2-302
3-3004            2-303
3-3005            2-304
3-3011            2-311
3-3012            2-312
3-3013            2-313
3-3014            2-314
3-3021            2-277
3-3022            2-278
3-3031            2-268
3-3032            2-269
3-3033            2-270
3-3041            2-286
3-3042            2-287
3-3043            2-288
3-3044            2-289
3-3045            2-290
3-3046            2-291
3-3047            2-292
3-3048            2-293
3-4081            7-11
3-4082            7-12
3-4083            7-13
3-5001            15-1
3-5002            15-2
3-5003            15-3
3-5004            15-4
3-5005            15-5
5-1001            2-590
5-1002            2-591
5-2001            2-598
5-2002            2-599
5-3001            2-606
5-3002            2-607
5-3003            2-608
5-3004            2-609
5-3005            2-610
5-3006            2-611
5-3007            2-612
5-3008            2-613
5-3009            2-614
5-3010            2-615
5-3011            2-616
5-3012            2-617
5-3013            2-618
5-3014            2-619
5-4001            2-626
5-4002            2-627
6-1004(b)         6-44
6-1004(c)         6-45
6-1004(d)         6-46
6-1009            23-1
6-1010            23-2
6-1011            23-3
6-1012            23-4
6-1013            23-6
6-2001            2-532
6-2002            2-533
6-2003            2-534
6-2004            2-535
6-2005            2-536
6-2006            2-537
6-2007            2-538
6-2008            2-539
6-2009            2-540
6-2010            2-541
6-3001            2-548
6-3002            2-549
6-3003            2-550
6-4001            2-557
6-6001            2-564
6-7001            2-571
6-7002            2-572
6-7003            2-573
6-7004            2-574
6-7005            2-575
6-7006            2-576
6-7007            2-577
6-7008            2-578
7-1001(a)         6-1
7-1001(b)         6-2
7-1001(c)         6-3
7-1002(d)         6-32
7-1002(f)         6-18
7-1003(a)--(e)    6-31
7-1003(f)         6-19
7-1003(g), (h)    6-31
7-1004(a)         6-43
                 6-64
7-1004(c)         6-44
7-1004(d)         6-45
7-1005            6-68
                 6-69
7-1005(b)         6-65
7-1005(d)         6-67
7-1005(f)         6-68
7-1006(a)         21-36
7-1006(b)         21-37
7-1007(a)         6-46
7-1007(b)         6-47
7-1007(c)         6-48
7-1007(d)         6-49
7-1008            6-50
                 6-51
7-1009(a)         6-52
7-1009(b)         6-53
7-1009(c)         6-54
7-1009(d)         6-55
7-1010            6-56
7-1013            6-33
7-1015            6-6
7-1021(a)         6-81
7-1021(b)         6-82
7-1031(a)         6-96
7-1031(b)         6-97
7-1041(a)         6-125
7-1041(b)         6-126
7-1051(a)         6-153
7-1051(b)         6-154
7-1051(c)         6-155
7-1061(1)         6-167
7-1061(3)         6-169
7-1071(a)         6-139
7-1071(b)         6-140
7-1081(a)         6-4
7-1081(b)         6-5
7-1106            6-182
7-1107            6-183
8-1001            21-1
8-1002            21-2
8-1003            21-3
8-1004            21-4
8-1005            21-5
8-1006            21-6
8-1007            21-7
8-1008            21-8
8-1009            21-9
8-1009.1          21-10
8-1010            21-11
8-1011            21-12
8-1012            21-13
8-1013            21-14
8-1015            21-15
8-1016            21-16
8-1017            21-17
8-1020            2-198
8-1021            21-18
8-1022            21-24
8-1023            21-19
8-1024            21-21
8-1025            21-20
8-1026            21-22
9-3032            6-113
9-3047            13-1
9-3048            13-2
9-3049            13-3
9-3050            13-4
9-3052            13-6
9-3053            13-7
9-3054            13-8
9-3055            13-9
9-3056            13-10
9-3057            13-11
9-3058            13-12
9-3059            13-13
9-3060            13-14
9-3061            13-15
9-3062            13-16
9-3063            13-17
9-3064            13-18
9-3065            13-19
9-3066            13-20
9-3067            13-21
10-2001           17-1
10-3001           17-3
10-3002           17-4
10-3003           17-5
10-3004           17-6
11-1001           18-1
11-1002           17-2
11-6001           5-2
11-6002           5-3
11-6003           5-29
                 5-30
11-6004           5-31
11-6005           5-32
11-6006           5-4
11-6011           5-1
11-6012           5-16
11-6015           5-28
11-6016           5-5
11-6017           5-6
11-6018           5-9
11-6019           5-7
11-6020           5-8
11-6021           5-10
11-6022           5-11
11-6023           5-12
11-6024(a), (b)   5-45
11-6024(c)        5-46
11-6024(d)        5-47
11-6025           5-33
11-6026           5-13
11-6027           5-14
                  
 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE, ORDINANCES
This table gives the location within the Code of those ordinances adopted since
the 1976 Code, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date
were incorporated into the 1976 Code, a table of which immediately precedes
this table. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed,
superseded or not of a general and permanent nature.
Ordinance Number Effective Date Section Section this Code
Ordinance Number Effective Date Section          Section this Code
285-76           3-17-76        1                2-63
294-76           3-17-76        1, 2             2-549
307-76           5-5-76         1--5             2-599
318-76           4-21-76        1                6-125,
                                                 6-126
                6-16-76        Arts. 1, 2       21-34
                6-16-76        1 Rpld           2-393
320-76           6-16-76        3                2-31
341-76           9-15-76        1 Rpld           16-28
                              2 Rpld           16-29
                              3 Rpld           16-30
                              4 Rpld           16-31
                              5 Rpld           16-32
369-77           1-2-77         1, 2             2-23
388-77           4-20-77                        21-6
389-77           4-20-77        2                10-1
383              4-27-77        Rpld             2-376
398-77           5-18-77        2 Rpld           2-446
408-77           6-29-77        1                7-11
                              2                7-12
                              3                7-13
415-77           6-12-77        1--3 Rpld        2-428
                6-15-77        Rpld             2-365
416-77           7-6-77         1                6-153--
                                                 6-155
419-77           8-2-77         1                21-9
432-77           9-29-77        1 Rpld           6-19
434-77                                         1-10(8)
                9-29-77        2                6-113
449-77           10-26-77       2                17-1
                              3                17-3--
                                                 17-6
452-77           10-26-77       1                21-4
458-77           11-2-77        1                2-270
462-77           11-22-77       2 Rpld           2-466
                              3 Rpld           2-467
                              4 Rpld           2-468
463-77           11-22-77       1 Rpld           2-428
                              2 Rpld           2-384
465-77           11-22-77       1 Rpld           2-498, 2-499
                              2 Rpld           2-500
466-77           12-7-77        1                2-550
467-77           12-7-77        1--5             21-15
469-77           12-7-77        1                9-15
501-79           10-18-78       1 Rpld           2-500
502-78           10-18-78       2 Rpld           2-400
504-78           11-15-78       1                2-598
506-78           11-15-78       1                21-15
518-79           2-7-79         1                2-501
521-79           3-7-79         1                2-24
525-79           3-7-79         1 Rnmb           6-46
                              as               6-45
526-79           3-21-79        1                2-649
                              2                2-650
                              3                2-651
                              4                2-652
                              5                2-653
                              6                2-654
                              7                2-655
529-79           4-18-79        1                6-64
                                              6-65
                                              6-67
                              Rpld             6-68
                              Rnmb             6-69
                              as               6-68
                              3 Rnmb           6-56
                              as               6-55
                              7                6-96,
                                                 6-97
                                              6-125,
                                                 6-126
                                              6-139,
                                                 6-140
                                              6-153--
                                                 6-155
                                              6-167,
                                                 6-169
                              8                6-139,
                                                 6-140
                              9                6-96,
                                                 6-97
531-79           7-1-79         1 Rpld           2-350, 2-351
                              3 Rpld           2-353
                              5                7-12
                              7                2-23
539-79           4-18-79        2 Rnmb           6-51
                              as               6-50
552-79           6-20-79        1                2-19
554-79           7-1-79         1                15-1
                              2, 3             15-2
                              4                15-3
                              5                15-4
                              6                15-5
565-79           7-25-79        1                2-571
                              2                2-572
                              4                2-574
                              5                2-575
                              6                2-576
                              8                2-577
                                              2-578
574-79           10-3-70        1 Rpld           2-495
                              2 Rpld           2-496
575-79           10-3-79        1                2-30
589-79           10-17-79       2--5             2-534
                              7--10            2-535
                              11               2-536
                              12               2-537
                              13               2-538
                              14               2-539
                              15               2-540
                              16               2-541
619-79           11-28-79       1, 2             18-1
630-79           12-19-79       1 Rpld           2-440
633-79           1-1-80         1                23-48
                              2                23-49
                              3                23-50
                              4                23-51
                              5                23-52
634-79           1-1-80         1                14-11
                              2                14-12
                              3                14-13
                              4                14-14
                              5                14-15
637-79           1-1-80         1                19-11
                                              19-23
639-79           1-1-80         1                20-11
640-80           1-2-80         1, 2             2-2
648-80           1-16-80        1                6-64
                                              6-65
                                              6-67
                              Rpld             6-68
                              Rnmb             6-69
                              as               6-68
689-80           6-4-80         1                2-30
700-80           7-1-80         Rpld             2-495
                              2 Rpld           2-501
                              3 Rpld           2-502
701-80           9-17-80        1                6-182
                              2                6-183
703-80           9-17-80        3 Rnmb           6-52
                              as               6-51
711-80           9-3-80         1                13-1
                              2                13-3
                              3                13-4
                              4                13-5
                              5                13-2
                              6                13-6
                              7                13-7
                              8                13-8
                              9                13-9
                              10               13-10
                              11               13-11
                              12               13-12
                              13               13-13
                              14               13-14
                              15               13-15
                              16               13-16
                              17               13-17
                              18               13-18
                              19               13-19
                              20               13-20
                              21               13-21
721-80           10-15-80       1                2-19
732-80           10-15-80       I                2-30
733-80           10-15-80       1                6-167,
                                                 6-169
747-80           11-19-80       1 Rpld           2-384
                              2 Rpld           2-398
760-80           12-17-80                       1-10(8)
764-81           1-7-81         I                25-12
                              II               25-13
                              III              25-14
                              IV               25-15
                              V(A)--(F)        25-16
                              V(G)             25-17
                              VI               25-18
                              VII              25-19
                              VIII             25-20
                              IX               25-21
                              XI               25-22
771-81           2-4-81         1 Rnmb           6-52
                              as               6-51
772-81                                         1-10(8)
773-81           2-4-81         I                11-11
                              II               11-12
                              III              11-13
                              IV               11-14
                              V                11-15
                              VI               11-16
                              VII              11-17
                              VIII             11-18
                              IX               11-19
                              X                11-20
                              XI               11-21
                              XII              11-22
                              XIII             11-23
                              XIV              11-24
                              XV               11-25
                              XVI              11-26
                              XVII             11-27
                              XVIII            11-28
773-81           2-4-81         XIX              11-29
                              XX               11-30
                              XXI              11-31
                              XXII             11-32
                              XXIII            11-33
                              XXIV             11-34
                              XXV              11-35
                              XXVI             11-36
                              XXVII            11-37
                              XXVIII           11-38
                              XXIX             11-39
                              XXX              11-40
                              XXXI             11-41
                              XXXII            11-42
                              XXXIII           11-43
                              XXXIV            11-44
                              XXXVI            11-45
                              XXXVIII          11-46
780-81           3-18-81        1                2-19
                              II               2-55
781-81                                         1-10(8)
788-81           4-1-81         I--V Rpld        16-33
792-81           4-15-81        II               4-11
                              III              4-12
                              IV               4-13
                              V                4-17
                              VI               4-14
                              VII              4-15
                              VIII             4-16
805-81           5-6-81         I, II            23-7
810-81           5-20-81        1, 2 Rpld        2-429
825-81           7-1-81         I Rpld           2-439
828-81           9-2-81         I                2-14
839-81           9-9-80         I--IV Rnmb       6-51
                                              6-50
845-81           10-7-81        I, II            23-49
857-81           10-21-81       1 Rnmb           6-52
                              as               6-51
866-81                                         1-10(8)
                              XVII--XXI        6-13
                              XXII             7-5
899-82           3-3-82         1-1              24-38
                              1-2              24-39
                              1-3              24-40
                              2-1              24-41
                              3-1              24-42
                              4-1              24-43
                              4-2              24-44
                              4-3              24-45
                              4-4              24-46
                              4-5              24-47
                              4-6              24-48
                              4-7              24-49
                              5-1, 5-2         24-50
                              6-1              24-51
                              6-2              24-52
                              7-1              24-53
                              7-3              25-54
921-82           5-19-82        1                6-169
922-82           6-2-82         Rpld             2-429(j)
937-82           6-16-82        1                23-3
939-82           6-16-82        I                24-11
                              II               24-12
                              III              24-13
                              IV               24-14
                              V                24-15
955-82           9-1-82         I, II            23-5
956-82           9-1-82         1                2-549
964-82           9-15-82        1                10-5
999-82                                         1-10(11)
                2-2-83(Res.)   1.5              2-19
                              1.6--1.8         2-20
                              2.1--2.5         2-16
                              2.6, 2.7         2-15
                              2.8              2-16
                2-2-83(Res.)   3.1--3.7         2-14
                              4.1--4.10        2-17
                              5.1--5.11        2-56
                              5.12--5.29       2-59
                              6.1              2-60
                              7.1              2-61
1004-82          12-15-82       1                2-608
1006-83          1-5-83         1 Rnmb           6-51(f)
                              as               6-50(f)
1012-83          1-19-83        1 Rpld           2-495(a)
                              2 Rpld           2-502(a)
                              3 Rpld           2-502(c)
1020-83          3-15-83        1                2-439(d)
1024-83          3-15-83        1, 2             24-61,
                                                 24-62
                              3-1, 3-2         24-82,
                                                 24-83
                              3-3              24-81
                              3-4              24-66
                              4-1, 4-2         24-84,
                                                 24-85
                              5-1, 5-2         24-92,
                                                 24-93
                              5-3              24-96
                              5-4, 5-5         24-94,
                                                 24-95
                              5-6              24-98
                              6                24-91
                              7-1, 7-2         24-99,
                                                 24-100
                              8                24-97
                              9                24-69
                              10               24-68
                              11-1             24-63
                              11-2             24-65
                              11-2(b)          24-67
                              11-3             24-64
1025-83          3-15-83        1 Rpld           2-368
1036-83          4-19-83        1 Rpld           2-370
1037-83          4-19-83        1                21-19(i)
1038-83          4-19-83        1, 2             2-551
1043-83          5-3-83         1 Rpld           2-411--2-416
                              2 Rpld           2-411--2-420
1046-83          5-17-83        1                4-14
                              2--4             4-12(5)--(7)
                              5                4-14
1047-83          5-17-83        1, 2             18-2
1057-83          6-21-83        2--7             24-5--
                                                 24-10
1062-83          7-26-83        2 Rpld           2-429(k)
                                                 2-590,
                                                 2-591,
                                                 2-598,
1068-83          9-6-83         1 Rpld           2-599, 2-606--
                                                 2-619,
                                                 2-626,
                                                 2-629
                                                 2-590,
                                                 2-591,
                                                 2-598,
                              Added            2-599, 2-606--
                                                 2-619,
                                                 2-626--
                                                 2-638.1
1077-83          10-4-83        1--3 Rnmb        6-51(g)
                              as               6-50(g)
1104-83          12-6-83        1--3             14-41--
                                                 14-43
                                                 14-45--
                              4                14-47,
                                                 14-49
                              5                14-48
                              6, 7             14-50--
                                                 14-51
                              8                14-44
1120-84          2-21-84        2                2-552
1121-84          2-21-84        1--4             2-549
1130-84          3-6-84         1-7              18-4
1137-84          4-3-84         1--9             Adopting ordinance, p. vii
1140-84          4-3-84         1                2-142
1147-84          5-1-84         I Rpld           2-500(a)
1164-84          6-27-84        I, IV            Ch. 10(note)
1165-84          7-1-84         II               1-10(8)
1166-84          7-1-84         II               1-10(8)
1190-84          9-4-84         I                9-7(d)
1203-84          10-2-84        I Rpld           2-433(b)
1252-84          12-18-84       I Rpld           2-438(f)
1261-85          1-8-85         I                2-262
1272-85          2-19-85        1 Rpld           2-392(b)
1273-85          2-19-85        1 Rpld           2-438(f)
1294-85          5-7-85         1                2-535(a)
1295-85          5-7-85         1, 2             2-48(e), (f)
1296-85          5-7-85         1                6-169(3)
1315-85          7-1-85         1--8             16-41--
                                                 16-48
1316-85          6-18-85        1                2-549(c)
1318-85          6-18-85        1 Rpld           2-478(e)
1321-85          6-4-85         1                23-3
1322-85          6-18-85        1                2-549(c)
1324-85          6-18-85        1 Rpld           2-478(e)
                                                 6-82, 6-85,
                                                 6-97,
1397-85          12-3-85        2                6-113,
                                                 6-140,
                                                 6-154,
                                                 6-168
1398-85          12-3-85        1                16-46(a)(2), (3)
1399-85          12-3-85        1, 2             13-3(a), (c)
1409-85          12-17-85       1                2-598(a)
                              2                2-600
1419-86          1-7-86         4                6-191
1428-86          2-4-86         1                13-1(b)
1434-86          2-8-86         2 Rpld           2-434(a)
1446-86          4-1-86         1 Rpld           2-458
1468-86          5-20-86        1 Rpld           18-2(b)
1469-86          5-20-86        1 Rpld           2-476
1479-86          6-17-86        1                13-18
1518-86          9-2-86         1--8             2-571--
                                                 2-578
1520-86          9-2-86         1                4-12(5)
1533-86          10-7-86        1                2-332
1552-86          12-2-86        1                18-2(a)--(c)
1553-86          12-2-86        1 Rpld           2-458, 2-459, 2-461, 2-462, 2-
                                                 464
                              Added            2-458, 2-459, 2-461, 2-462, 2-
                                                 464
                              Rpld             2-458, 2-459, 2-461, 2-462, 2-
                                                 464
1554-86          12-2-86        2.01--2.04       24-121--
                                                 24-124
                              3.02, 3.02       24-125
1568-86          1-31-87        1 Rpld           18-4
1569-86          12-30-86       2--3             2-330,
                                                 2-331
1588-87          2-17-87        1 Rpld           2-434(a)(1)
1589-87          3-3-87         1--4             24-49.1
1590-87          2-17-87        1.01, 1.02       24.5-1,
                                                 24.5-2
                              2.01, 2.02       24.5-3,
                                                 24.5-4
                              3.01--3.05       24.5-21--
                                                 24.5-25
                              4.01             24.5-41
                              5.01--5.03       24.5-42--
                                                 24.5-44
                              6.01             24.5-5
                              7.01             24.5-6
                              8.01--8.03       24.5-7--
                                                 24.5-9
1591-87          3-3-87         2                2-332(g)
1600-87          5-5-87         1                2-28
1611-87          5-5-87         1--5             18-4
1616-87          5-19-87        2                2-598(a)
                              4                2-600
1627-87          6-16-87        2                2-216
1628-87          6-16-87        2                2-192
                              3                2-196
1650-87          7-21-87        1                2-120(12)
1657-87          7-28-87        1 Rnmb           6-51(b)
                              as               6-50(b)
1658-87          7-28-87        1                11-21(a)
1660-87          7-28-87        1                14-41
                              2                14-43
                              3                14-45(2), (4)
                              4                14-47
                              5                14-50
1682-87          10-20-87       1 Rpld           21-91(i)
1688-87          11-3-87        1 Rnbd           2-398(c) as (d)
                              1 Rpld           2-398(d)
                              2 Rpld           2-398(c)
                              3 Rpld           16-11--
                                                 16-16
1702-88          1-5-88         1                6-82
                              2                6-97
                              3                6-126
                              4                6-140
                              5                6-154
1714-88          2-16-88        1 Rpld           2-439
1717-88          3-1-88         1                2-608(e)
1719-88          3-1-88         1                2-592
                              2 Rpld           2-165
1728-88          3-15-88        1 Rpld           2-438(f), (g)
1729-88          4-5-88         I Added          2-609
                              II Rnbd          2-609--
                                                 2-619
                              as               2-610--
                                                 2-620
1737-88          5-3-88         I                2-542
1744-88          5-17-88        I                2-601
1779-88          7-28-88        I                11-15
1800-88          10-18-88       I Rpld           2-438(f)
1801-88          10-18-88       I Rpld           2-423
                              II Rpld          2-428(j)
                              III Rpld         2-429(h)
1802-88          11-1-88        I Rnbd           2-601(5), (6)
                              as               2-601(6), (7)
                              Added            2-601(5)
1803-88          11-1-88        I                14-61--14-63
1811-88          11-1-88        I, II            6-168,
                                                 6-169
1821-88          12-13-88       I Rpld           6-19, 6-20, 6-32, 6-35, 6-44
                                                 6-43,
                                                 6-45--
                                                 6-47,
                                                 6-49--
                                                 6-51,
                              I                6-53--
                                                 6-57,
                                                 6-64,
                                                 6-65,
                                                 6-67,
                                                 6-155
                              II Rpld          6-21
                              III Rpld         6-31
                                                 2-590--
                                                 2-592,
                                                 2-598--
1825-89          1-17-89        I Rpld           2-601, 2-606--
                                                 2-620,
                                                 2-626--
                                                 2-638.1
                                                 2-590,
                                                 2-592,
                                                 2-598--
                              Added            2-601,
                                                 2-608--
                                                 2-623,
                                                 2-626--
                                                 2-638.1
1826-89          1-17-89        I                17-5(a)(1)--(3)
                              II               17-5(a)(4)
1836-89          2-21-89        I Rpld           2-437
1843-89          3-7-89         I--III           18-4
1846-89          3-21-89        I                21-13
1847-89          3-21-89        I                6-82
                              II               6-113(a)
                              III              6-126
                              IV               6-140
                              V                6-154
                              II Rnmb          6-57
                              as               6-56
1850-89          3-21-89        I                2-537(c)
1851-89          4-4-89         I                25-23--
                                                 25-34
1858-89          4-4-89         I                11-1
                              II               2-87(2)
                              III              2-227,
                                                 2-235, 2-238.1(g)
                              IV               2-263
                              IV Rpld          32-343
                                                 2-352, 2-353(a), 2-364, 2-367
                              V Rpld           (a), (c), 2-373, 2-376, 2-384,
                                                 2-386, 2-390(a), 2-391--2-393,
                                                 2-394(a)--(c), 2-395,
                              Added            2-396(a), (b)
                              Rnbd             2-396(b)
                                                 2-396(c), 2-397--2-403, 2-413,
                              as               2-417, 2-425, 2-428(b), (g),
                                                 2-429(f), 2-431, 2-433,
                              Rpld             2-438(d)
                              Rnbd             2-438(e)--(g)
                              as               2-438(d)--(f)
                                              2-439, 2-440(b), (d), 2-442
                                                 (c), 2-445(d)(1), (2)
                              VI Rpld          2-475--2-483
                              Added            2-475--2-480
                                               
1860-89          4-18-89        I                2-612(c)(10)
1862-89          4-18-89        I Rpld           2-344
1864-89          7-1-89         I                2-238.1(e)(2)
1872-89          6-6-89         I Rpld           7-11--7-13
1887-89          6-20-89        I, II Rpld       2-439(c), (d)
1888-89          6-20-89        I Added/Rpld     2-430(4), (5)
                              Rnbd             2-430(4)
                              as/Rpld          2-430(6)
                                              2-429(b)(2)
1893-89          7-18-89        I Rpld           2-432
                                                 5-1,
1899-89          7-31-89        I Rpld           5-2,
                                                 5-4--
                                                 5-16, 5-28--5-33, 5-45--5-47
                              Added            5-1--
                                                 5-13
1900-89          7-31-89        I Added/Rpld     2-388(b)
                              II Rnbd          2-388(b)--(e)
                              as/Rpld          2-388(c)--(f)
1905-89          9-5-89         I Rnbd           6-51(b)(1)
                              as               6-50(b)(1)
1907-89          9-5-89         II               2-205--
                                                 2-207
                              III              5-1
1908-89          9-5-89         II               2-117
                              III Rpld         2-120(4), (5), (8), (12)
                              Added            2-120(4)
                              Rnbd             2-120(6), (7), (9)--(11)
                              as               2-120(5)--(9)
                              IV               2-153--
                                                 2-156
                                                 2-600(1), (2),
                              Amnd             2-601(1),
                                                 2-608(a)--(c), (e), (f)
                                              2-609--
                                                 2-611,
                                              2-612(a)--(c), (e),
                                              2-613--
                                                 2-617,
                                              2-618(b)--(d),
                                                 2-619,
                                              2-620(a),
                                                 2-621(a), (b),
                                              2-623(a), (b),
                                                 2-626,
                                              2-627,
                                                 2-634(a),
                                                 2-635--
                                              2-637,
                                                 2-638(b)
                              I                2-286--2-296
1910-89          9-5-89         I                2-227(a)(1), (2)
1913-89          9-9-89         I Rpld           2-495(a)
1914-89          9-19-89        I                4-12(5)b.
1923-89          10-17-89       I Rpld           2-368
1928-89          11-7-89        I                14-12
1941-89          12-5-89        I                6-169(5)
1942-89          12-5-89        I                24.5-43
1947-90          1-16-90        I                18-3
1948-90          1-16-90        I                24-13
1953-90          2-20-90        I Rpld           2-495(a)
                              II--IV Rpld      2-495(h)--(j)
                              V Rpld           2-495(p)
                              VI Rpld          2-495(r)
                              VII Rpld         2-495(t)
                              VIII Rpld        2-498, 2-499
                              IX Rpld          2-501
                              X Rpld           2-502(a)(1)
                              XI Rpld          2-502(a)(2)
                              XII, XIII Rpld   2-503, 2-504
1956-90          3-6-90         I Rpld           2-475
1961-90          3-6-90         I                2-608(e)
                              II               2-593
1969-90          4-17-90        I Rpld           6-85
1974-90          5-15-90        I, II            6-183
2021-90          7-31-90        I Rpld           2-439(c), (d)(4)
2022-90          9-4-90         I Rpld           2-496(b)(1)
2027-90          10-2-90        II Rpld          2-286--2-296
                              III Rpld         2-227--
                                                 2-229
                              Added            2-227--
                                                 2-230
2043-90          12-4-90        I                2-228(a)(1)c, d
2044-90          12-4-90        I                2-543
2057-90          12-10-90       I Added          2-500(a), (b)
                              Rnbd             2-500(a)--(d) as (c)--(f)
                              Rpld             2-500
2060-90          12-18-90       I--III           2-332(h)
2061-90          12-18-90       I                19-1
2079-91          4-2-91         I                2-143
2080-91          4-2-91         I Rpld           2-402(c)
                              II Rpld          2-403(a)
                              III Rpld         2-428(b), (g)
                              IV Rpld          2-429(j)
2083-91          4-16-91        I                18-3(c)
2086-91          4-16-91        I, II            18-4
2090-91          5-21-91        I                2-598(b)
2091-91          5-27-91        I, II            5-1,
                                                 5-4
2114-91          7-16-91        I                2-600(10)--(14)
2124-91          7-24-91        I                18-5(a), (b)
2127-91          8-5-91         I                2-205--
                                                 2-207
2138-91          9-3-91         I                2-196(6)
2139-91          9-17-91        I                6-82
                              II               6-97
                              III              6-113(a)
                              IV               6-126
                              V                6-140
2141-91          10-15-91       I                2-332
2151-91          11-5-91        I                10-1
                              II               6-113(a)
2153-91          11-5-91        I                2-332(h)(2)
2154-91          9-19-91        I Rpld           18-4
2159-91          12-3-91        I                2-332
2163-91          12-3-91        I Rpld           2-386(c)
2165-91          12-17-91       I Rpld           4-11--4-17
2184-92          3-18-92        I                2-590
                              II               2-598(a)
                              III              2-600
                              IV Rpld          2-601(6)
                              Rnbd             2-601(7), (8)
                              as               2-601(6), (7)
                              V Rpld           2-612(c)(10)
                              VI Added         2-621.1--2-621.3
                              VII Amd.         2-623
2189-92          3-3-92         I, II            2-332(h)(1), (3)
2202-92          4-21-92        I Rpld           2-478
2209-92          5-5-92         I--VI, VIII      2-332
2211-92          5-19-92        I Rpld           2-461
2220-92          5-19-92        I Rpld            
2226-92          6-16-92        I                2-196(2)
2227-92          6-16-92        I                2-196(6)
2251.01-92       10-6-92        I Rpld           2-455
2264.1HR         11-3-92        I                11-1--
                                                 11-46
2280-92HR        12-15-92       I, II Added      18-3(a), (d)
2355-93          10-19-93       I                2-621.1(a)
2356-93          10-19-93       I                2-2(a)
                                                 21-4 --
2372-93          11-16-93       I                21-6,
                                                 21-13,
                                                 21-19
2379-93          12-7-93        I                2-332(h)(2)
004-94           1-4-94         I                2-621.4
008-94           1-18-94        I                6-97
039-94           6-7-94         I Rpld           2-3
0046-94          6-7-94         I                2-612(c)(10), (11)
                                                 2-367, 2-370(b), 2-375(b), 2-
                                                 384, 2-386(b), 2-388(b), 2-
                                                 393, 2-394(d), (e), 2-401(b),
                                                 2-403, 2-413(c), 2-423, 2-424
059-94           7-5-94         I Rpld           (a), 2-425, 2-428(c), 2-429
                                                 (a), (b), (c), (g), 2-431(a),
                                                 (c), 2-435(a), 2-438(a), (c),
                                                 2-439(b), 2-440(a), (d), (e),
                                                 (g), 2-442(b), 2-444(a), 2-
                                                 445, 2-457
071-94           10-4-94        I                16-61
079-94           11-15-94       I                6-82
                              II               6-113(a)
                              III              6-126
085-94           12-6-94        I Rpld           2-612(c)(10), (11)
                              Added            2-612(c)(10)
086-94           12-6-94        I--III           2-332
002-95HR         1-3-95         I                Ch. 13
005-95HR         1-3-95         I Rpld           2-495, 2-496, 2-500, 2-502
017-95HR         2-7-95         I                21-23
051-95HR         9-5-95         I                1-14
052-95HR         9-5-95         I, II Rnbd       6-51
                              as               6-50
087-95HR         11-7-95        I Rnbd           6-51
                              as               6-50
101-95HR         12-5-95        I                24-81
004-96HR         1-2-96         I--III           1-12
005-96HR         1-2-96         I--IV            1-13
016-96HR         1-2-96         I                17-8
035-96HR         6-4-96         I Rpld           6-68
051-96HR         7-30-96        I                6-97
061-96HR         9-17-96        I                17-6
073-96HR         9-24-96        I                21-23
                                                 2-235,
101-96HR         12-10-96       I                2-236,
                                                 2-238,
                                                 2-238.1
004-97HR         1-7-97         I Added          6-182.1
017-97HR         4-1-97         I                2-593
025-97HR         4-15-97        I Added          25-16(g)
033-97HR         5-6-97         I, II            21-5, 22-6
075-97HR         9-10-98        I                2-332
076-97HR         10-24-97       I                2-231
015-98HR         5-5-98         I                21-6
029-98HR         10-27-98       I                2-228
045-98HR         11-17-98       I--V             2-332
013-99HR         5-3-99         II               20-21
014-99HR         5-3-99         I                16-43
                              II               16-44
                              III              16-45
                              IV               16-48
017-99HR         1-1-00         I Rpld           2-434
017.5-99HR       5-4-99         I                6-82
                              II               6-113
                              III              6-126
                              IV               6-140
                              V                6-154
049-00HR         9-5-00         I                10-1
53-00HR          9-19-00        I                5-14
067-00HR         11-14-00       I                6-97
068-00HR         11-14-00       I                1-12
069-00HR         11-14-00       I Rpld           2-434
070-00HR         11-14-00       I                25-20
072-00HR         11-14-00       I Added          2-258,
                                                 2-261
080-00HR         12-19-00       I                2-262
001-01HR         1-2-01         I Rpld           2-430
007-01HR         2-6-01         I Added          2-271
017-01HR         4-3-01         I                1-8
032-01HR         5-1-01         II               2-332
033-01HR         5-1-01         I Added          2-251
035-01HR         5-1-01         I                2-332
044-01HR         7-10-01        I                6-81--
                                                 6-83
                              II               6-96--
                                                 6-112
                            III              6-113--6-124
                             IV               6-125--6-138
                              V                6-139--
                                                 6-152
                              VI               6-153--
                                                 6-166
                              VII              6-167--6-181
                              VIII             6-182--
                                                 6-190
                              IX               6-191
                              X Rpld           Ch. 6, Art. 12
045-01HR         7-10-01        I                2-216  
                                                 2-219
059-01HR         9-4-01         I Added          17-10
061-01HR         9-4-01         I                17-1--
                                                 17-10
071-01HR         11-6-01        I                21-9
075-01HR         11-6-01        I--III           18-1
087-01HR         12-18-01       II, III Added    9-2
002-02HR         1-8-02         I                17-9
003-02HR         1-29-02        II, III          9-2
017-02HR         6-4-02         I                2-332
028-02HR         7-9-02         I Rpld           2-3
030-02HR         7-9-02         I                6-82
                              II               6-96
                              III              6-113
                              IV               6-125
                              V                6-139
                              VI               6-153
                              VII              6-168
                              VIII             6-169
031-02HR         7-9-02         I Added          16-28--
                                                 16-34
                              III Rpld         16-28--
                                                 16-33
037-02HR         7-23-02        I                2-205--
                                                 2-207
039-02HR         7-23-02        I                13-2
                              II               13-13
040-02HR         7-23-02        I Added          5-16
050-02HR         9-17-02        I                2-220
051-02HR         9-17-02        I Rpld           14-61--
                                                 14-68
                              Rnbd             14-71--
                                                 14-73
                              as               14-61--14-63
                              III Added        18-4
                              II               17-10
066-02HR         11-12-02       I                24-61
                              II               24-62
067-02HR         11-12-02       I Added          5-15
                              Rnbd             5-15
                              as               5-16
005-03HR         1-21-03        I Amnd           21-1--
                                                 21-37
                              as               21-1--21-35
040-03HR         6-3-03         I                17-10
041-03HR         6-3-03         I                5-1--
                                                 5-16
042-03HR         6-3-03         I                6-97
                              II               6-182--
                                                 6-190
025-03HR         7-1-03         I Added          23-65--
                                                 23-71
053-03HR         9-16-03        I Added          2-332
014-04HR         4-6-04         I                16-32
066-04HR         10-28-04       I Rpld           5-1 
                                                 5-16
                                                 5-1 
                              Added            5-3,
                                                 5-5 
                                                 5-18
074-04HR         11-9-04        I Rpld           2-221
                              II Rpld          8-1 8-43
                              III Rpld         22-1 22-76
                              IV Rpld          27-1.1 27-9.7
                                                 26-1 26-,
                              V                26-64 26-66
                                                 26-183,
                                                 26-185 26-290
                              V Rpld           26-65, 26-184
075-04HR         11-16-04       I                6-82
                              II               6-113
                              III              6-114
                              IV               6-140
                              V                6-154
                              VI               6-169
                              VII Added        6-191,
                                                 6-192
                              Rnbd             6-191
                              as               6-200
082-04HR         11-16-04       I                2-332
001-05HR         1-4-05         I                2-332
018-05HR         4-5-05         I                2-332
047-05HR         6-21-05        I                26-53
049-05HR         7-12-05        I                6-82
                              II               6-96
                              III              6-125
                              IV               6-126
                              V                6-139
                              VI               6-153
                              VII              6-168
                              VIII             6-169
                              IX               6-182
051-05HR         7-12-05        I                2-216 -
                                                 2-219
052-05HR         7-12-05        I Rpld           21-11(d)
057-05HR         9-6-05         I                2-262
058-05HR         9-6-05         I                2-185 - 1-191
                              II               2-192 -
                                                 2-199
                              III              2-200 - 2-204
065-05HR         9-20-05        I                26-52(c)(1)
                              II               26-54(b)(2)
                              III              26-54(b)(2)
                              IV               26-54(b)(3)
                              V                26-54(b)(3)
                              VI               26-54(b)(3)
                              VII              26-54(b)(3)
                              VIII             26-64(c)(1)
                              IX Rpld          26-65(c)
                              X                26-203(c)(1)
074-05HR         10-18-05       I                26-22
                              II               26-54(b)(2)
                              III              26-54(b)(3)
075-05HR         10-18-05       I                26-54(b)(3)
                              II               26-54(b)(3)
076-05HR         11-1-05        I                23-5
088-05HR         12-6-05        I                2-252 -
                                                 2-257
                              II               13-5
093-05HR         12-6-05        I                12-11 -
                                                 12-28
095-05HR         10-3-06        I                21-6
105-05HR         12-20-05       I Rpld           2-476
106-05HR         12-20-05       I                26-141, Table 26-V-2
                              II               26-151(b)
                              III              26-151(c)
001-06HR         1-3-06         I                17-9
014-06HR         2-21-06        I                2-332
021-06HR         3-21-06        I                26-152(d)(8), (9), (10)
022-06HR         3-21-06        I                26-97(c)(5)
023-06HR         3-21-06        I                26-52(h)(1)
031-06HR         4-18-06        I                26-22
                              II               26-54(b)(2)
                              III              26-54(b)(3)
032-06HR         5-2-06         I                26-61(d)
                              II               26-61(h)
                              III              26-105(d)(1)
053-06HR         6-6-06         I                17-10
054-06HR         6-6-06         I                17-11,
                                                 17-12
                              II               17-13 - 17-17
077-06HR         7-18-06        I                2-332(b)
079-06HR         7-25-06        I Rpld           2-478(k)
081-06HR         9-12-06        I                23-69
084-06HR         9-12-06        I                26-33(b)(1)
089-06HR         9-19-06        I Rpld           2-439(c)
091-06HR         10-3-06        IV               2-332(k)
114-06HR         12-5-06        I                26-104(b)
010-07HR         2-20-07        I                26-141, Table 26-V-2
                              II               26-152(c)
                              III              26-152(d)
020-07HR         3-20-07        I                2-598(a)
022-07HR         3-20-07        I                2-332(k)
028-07HR         3-20-07        I                2-262
031-07HR         4-3-07         I                17-9
033-07HR         4-3-07         I                26-141, Table 26-V-2
                              II               26-151(b)
                              III              26-151(c)
043-07HR         5-1-07         I                26-22
                              II               26-83
                              III Rnmb         26-84
                              as               26-85
                              IV Rnmb          26-85
                              as               26-86
                              V Rnmb           26-86
                              as               26-87
                              VI Rnmb          26-87
                              as               26-88
                              VII Rnmb         26-88
                              as               26-89
                              VIII Rnmb        26-89
                              as               26-90
                              IX Rnmb          26-90
                              as               26-91
                              X Rnmb           26-91
                              as               26-92
                              XI Rnmb          26-92
                              as               26-93
                              XII Rnmb         26-93
                              as               26-94
                              XIII Rnmb        26-94
                              as               26-95
                              XIV Rnmb         26-95
                              as               26-96
                              XV Rnmb          26-96
                              as               26-97
                              XVI Rnmb         26-97
                              as               26-98
                              XVII Rnmb        26-98
                              as               26-99
                              XVIII Rnmb       26-99
                              as               26-100
                              XIX Rnmb         26-100
                              as               26-101
                              XX Rnmb          26-101
                              as               26-102
                              XXI Rnmb         26-102
                              as               26-103
                              XXII Rnmb        26-103
                              as               26-104
                              XXIII Rnmb       26-104
                              as               26-105
                              XXIV Rnmb        26-105
                              as               26-106
                              XXV Added        26-84
                              XXVI             26-36
                              XXVII            26-182(a)(2)
                              XXVIII           26-203(b)(2)d.
                              XXIX             26-203(b)(2)g.1.
                              XXX              26-131, Table 26-V-1
                              XXI              26-141, Table 26-V-2
                              XXI              26-151(b)
                              XXIII            26-151(c)
046-07HR         5-15-05        I                21-11
050-07HR         5-15-07        I                2-332(k)
069-07HR         7-24-07        I                16-1 -
                                                 16-21
070-07HR         9-11-07        I                17-2(a)(6)
071-07HR         9-11-07        I                2-97 - 2-106
072-07HR         9-11-07        I                26-203(e)
079-07HR         10-2-07        I                2-332
001-08HR         1-8-08         I                23-69
                              II               23-70
010-08HR         3-4-08         I                23-67I(c)
                              II               23-73
                              III              23-74
011-08HR         3-4-08         I                16-28 - 16-40
016-08HR         3-4-08         I                2-216 - 2-221
                              II               2-222 -
                                                 2-226
019-08HR         3-18-08        I                26-22
                              II               26-83(a)
                              III              26-83(e)
                              IV               26-107
                              V                26-108 - 26-130
024-08HR         5-20-08        I                16-5
025-08HR         5-20-08        I                16-5
029-08HR         6-3-08         I                2-332
033-08HR         6-17-08        I                18-6
035-08HR         6-17-08        I                26-22
                              II               26-186 - 26-200
                              III              26-85(c)
                              IV               26-87(c)
                              V                26-88(c)
                              VI               26-89(c)
                              VII              26-90(c)
038-08HR         7-15-08        I                6-82
                              II               6-97
                              III              6-113 - 6-124
                              IV               6-125 - 6-138
                              V                6-139 - 6-152
                              VI               6-154
                              VII              6-167,
                                                 6-168
                              VIII             6-182
042-08HR         7-15-08        I                26-152(d)
043-08HR         7-15-08                        26-141, Table 26-V-2
044-08HR         7-15-08        I                16-1 -
                                                 16-3
                              II               16-6,
                                                 16-7
                              III              16-10
                              IV               16-13
                              V                16-15 -
                                                 16-21
                              VII              16-22
045-08HR         7-15-08        I                26-22
                              II               26-151(c)
047-08HR         9-9-08         II               23-60 -
                                                 23-64
052-08HR         9-16-08        I                26-180
053-08HR         9-16-08        I                16-151(c)
054-08HR         9-16-08        I, II, V         26-141, Table 26-V-2
                              III, VI          26-151
                              IV, VII, VIII    26-152
061-08HR         6-5-08         I                26-22
                              II               26-105
064-08HR         10-21-08       I                26-52
067-08HR         10-28-08       I                18-6
069-08HR         12-2-08        I                23-69
                              II               23-70
077-08HR         12-2-08        I                26-34
                              II, III          26-59
088-08HR         12-16-08       I                26-22
                              II               26-177
089-08HR         12-16-08       I                26-151
                              II               26-141, Table 26-V-2
001-09HR         1-6-09         I                10-1 -
                                                 10-16
004-09HR         2-17-09        I                26-186
005-09HR         2-17-09        I                26-22
                              II               26-83
                              III              26-108
008-09HR         2-17-09        I--VIII          26-151
                              IX, X            26-152
                              XI               26-141, Table 26-V-2
009-09HR         2-17-09        I                16-5
011-09HR         2-17-09        I                21-3
                              II               21-20
012-09HR         3-3-09         I                6-1 -
                                                 6-6
                              Rpld             6-18 - 6-21, 6-24, 6-31, 6-32,
                                                 6-35, 6-44, 6-68
                              Rnbd             6-22, 6-23, 6-33 - 6-36, 6-45
                                                 - 6-57, 6-69
                                                 6-18,
                                                 6-19,
                                                 6-31 -
                              as               6-33,
                                                 6-45 -
                                                 6-56,
                                                 6-68
                              Added            6-75
015-09HR         3-3-09         I                1-15
016-09HR         7-1-09         I                23-66
                              II               23-69
                              III              23-70
018-09HR         1-10-10        II               16-7
                4-21-09        III              16-19
                              IV               16-22
                                               
                                               
019-09HR         3-17-09        I                26-171
025-09HR         4-21-09        I, II            26-180
027-09HR         5-19-09        II               26-86
                              III              26-87
                              IV               26-88
                              V                26-89
                              VI               26-90
                              VII              26-91
                              VIII             26-92
                              IX               26-93
                              X                26-94
                              XI               26-95
                              XII              26-96
                              XIII             26-97
                              XIV              26-98
                              XV               26-99
                              XVI              26-100
                              XVII             26-101
                              XVIII            26-102
                              XIX              26-103
                              XX               26-186
028-09HR         5-19-09        I                26-88
                              II               26-89
                              III              26-90
                              IV               26-91
                              V                26-92
                              VI               26-93
                              VII, VIII        26-94
                              IX, X            26-95
                              XI, XII          26-98
029-09HR         5-19-09        I                26-22
                              II               26-104
038-09HR         7-21-09        I                26-22
                                                 26-22,
                                                 26-53,
                                                 26-54,
                              II               26-59,
                                                 26-102,
                                                 26-103,
                                                 26-109
                              III              26-52
                              IV - VI          26-54
                              VII              26-59
                              VIII             26-103
                              IX               26-175
                              X                26-181
                              XIV Added        26-210 -
                                                 26-214
040-09HR         7-21-09        I                26-152
044-09HR         7-1-09         I                6-82
046-09HR         10-6-09        I                26-180
052-09HR         11-3-09        I                26-181
053-09HR         11-3-09        I                26-22
                              II               26-151
                              III              26-141, Table 26-V-2,
                                                 26-151
                              IV               26-180
054-09HR         11-3-09        I                26-83
                              II - XXVIII Rnbd 26-84 -
                                                 26-109
                              as               26-85 -
                                                 26-110
                              XXIX Added       26-84
056-09HR         11-3-09        I                26-54
                              II               26-106
057-09HR         11-17-09       I                21-10
062-09HR         11-17-09       I                25-20
077-09HR         12-15-09       I                23-69
001-10HR         1-5-10         I                18-1
002-10HR         1-5-10         I                2-14
005-10HR         1-19-10        I                26-177
006-10HR         1-19-10        I, II            26-22
                              III              26-35
                              IV               26-36
                              V                26-51
                              VI               26-64
                              VIII             26-83
                              IX Added         26-108
                              X Added          26-187
                              XI               26-202
                              XII              26-203
008-10HR         2-2-10         I, II            18-6
009-10HR         2-16-10        I                17-10
010-10HR         2-16-10        I                18-4
014-10HR         3-16-10        I                26-22
                              II               26-222
017-10HR         4-20-10        I                26-177
018-10HR         5-4-10         I                26-22
                              II               26-83
                              III              26-111
                              IV               26-186
020-10HR         5-4-10         I                26-141, Table 26-V-2,
                                                 26-151
022-10HR         5-18-10        I                26-22
                              II               26-183
025-10HR         5-18-10        I                26-141, Table 26-V-2
026-10HR         5-18-10        I                26-181
028-10HR         6-1-10         I, II            26-177
040-10HR         7-6-10         I                23-65
                              II               23-71
                              III              23-72
                              IV               23-73
046-10HR         7-20-10        I                26-59
057-10HR         9-21-10        I                26-22
058-10HR         9-21-10        I                17-9
059-10HR         9-21-10        I                23-69
                              II               23-70
060-10HR         9-29-10        I-III            26-22
                              IV               26-35
                              V                26-36
                              VI-VIII          26-106
                              IX Added         26-274
065-10HR         10-19-10       I                26-54
069-10HR         11-16-10       I                26-141, Table 26-V-2
                              II, III          26-151
070-10HR         11-16-10       I                18-2
073-10HR         12-7-10        I                18-1
001-11HR         1-4-11         I                26-22
                              II Added         26-224
004-11HR         1-4-11         I Added          6-84
006-11HR         2-1-11         I                6-43
007-11HR         2-1-11         I                6-75
008-11HR         2-1-11         I                26-180
011-11HR         2-15-11        I                26-53
012-11HR         2-15-11        I                26-180
015-11HR         3-1-11         I                2-326 -
                                                 2-332
017-11HR         3-15-11        I                2-332
027-11HR         5-17-11        I                26-22
                              II               26-185
028-11HR         6-7-11         I                6-96
                              II               6-97
                              III              6-113
                              IV               6-125
                              V                6-139
                              VI               6-153
                              VII              6-192
030-11HR         6-7-11         II Added         16-65 -
                                                 16-70
033-11HR         6-21-11        I                26-22
                              II               26-179
034-11HR         6-21-11        I                26-22
                              II, III          26-180
040-11HR         9-6-11         I                6-52
042-11HR         9-6-11         I                18-6
058-11HR         10-18-11       I                26-173
064-11HR         11-15-11       I                26-22
                              II               26-224
068-11HR         12-13-11       I                2-332
003-12HR         1-17-12        I                26-105
                              II               26-109
                              III              26-151
004-12HR         2-7-12         I                6-18
                              II               6-19
                              III              6-31
                              IV               6-33
                              V                6-45
                              VI               6-46
                              VIII             6-67
                              IX               Ch. 6, Div. 5
005-12HR         2-7-12         I                5-1
                              II               5-2
                              III              5-3
                              V                5-5
                              VI               5-7
                              VII              5-8
                              VIII             5-10
                              IX               5-12
                              X                5-13
                              XI               5-14
                              XII              5-15
                              XIII             5-16
                              XIV              5-17
                              XV               5-18
                              XVI              5-19
009-12HR         2-21-12        I                26-131
013-12HR         3-6-12         I                16-7
023-12HR         4-17-12        I                26-53
                              II               26-53
                              III              26-54
                              IV               26-54
                              V                26-54
                              VI               26-54
                              VII              26-54
027-12HR         4-17-12        I                26-175
029-12HR         5-15-12        I                26-179
030-12HR         5-15-12        I                26-99
031-12HR         5-15-12        I                26-151
032-12HR         5-15-12        I                26-177
038-12HR         6-19-12        I                26-141
                              II               26-151
                              III              26-151
                              IV               26-152
                              V                26-152
044-12HR         9-11-12        I                26-141
                              II               26-151
045-12HR         9-11-12        I                26-54
055-12HR         10-16-12       I                26-22
                              II               26-22
                              III              26-22
                              IV               26-22
                              V                26-54
                              VI               26-64
                              VII              26-64
                              VIII             26-173
                              IX               26-173
                              X                26-175
                              XI               26-175
                              XII              26-176
                              XIII             26-179
                              XIV              26-181
                              XV               26-202
                              XVI              26-221
                              XVII             26-222
059-12HR         10-16-12       I                26-58
061-12HR         11-13-12       I, II Rpld       23-19 - 23-21, 23-33 - 23-36
                              III Rnmbd        2-215
                              as               2-211
                              V                2-212 -
                                                 2-215
064-12HR         11-13-12       I Rnmbd          2-246
                              as               2-242
                              II               2-243 -
                                                 2-246
071-12HR         11-20-12       I                26-176
078-12HR         12-11-12       I                26-53
079-12HR         12-11-12       I                26-54
001-13HR         1-8-13         I                21-22
002-13HR         1-8-13         I                25-20
008-13HR         11-15-11       I                26-224
011-13HR         3-5-13         I                6-192
012-13HR         3-19-13        I                21-21
016-13HR         4-2-13         I, II            6-31
018-13HR         4-16-13        I                26-54
019-13HR         5-7-13         I                23-60
                              II, III          23-62
                              IV, V            23-63
                              VI, VII          23-64
022-13HR         6-18-13        I                17-2
                              II               17-3
028-13HR         6-18-13        I                26-52
029-13HR         6-18-13        I                26-141
                              II, III          26-151
032-13HR         7-2-13         I                21-13
034-13HR         7-2-13         I, II            2-332
045-13HR         9-10-13        I                26-22
                              II               26-186
                              III              26-222
049-13HR         9-17-13        I Rnmbd          2-639
                              as               2-647 -
                                                 2-653
                              II Added         2-639 -
                                                 2-646
050-13HR         10-1-13        I                6-82
                              II               6-97
                              III              6-114
                              IV               6-125,
                                                 6-126
                              V                6-139
                              VI               6-140
                              VII              6-153
                              VIII             6-154
                              IX               6-182
056-13HR         11-5-13        I                21-5.5
                              II               21-6
057-13HR         11-5-13        I                6-84
058-13HR         11-5-13        I                6-66
064-13HR         11-19-13       I                26-21
065-13HR         11-19-13       I, II            26-151
066-13HR         11-19-13       I                26-152
068-13HR         12-3-13        I                6-168
073-13HR         12-10-13       I                23-69
010-14HR         3-18-14        I                26-151
016-14HR         5-6-14         I Rnmbd          2-647 - 2-653
                              as               2-649 -
                                                 2-655
                              II, III          2-639
                              IV               2-641
                              V                2-647
017-14HR         5-6-14                         2-591
019-14HR         5-20-14        I                1-15
024-14HR         5-20-14        I                26-177
025-14HR         5-20-14        I                26-22
                              II               26-141
                              III, IV          26-151
                              V                26-176
029-14HR         6-3-14         I                2-648
034-14HR         6-17-14        I                26-176
                              II               26-186
037-14HR         7-1-14         I                2-197
                              II               21-4
                              III              21-16
039-14HR         7-15-14        I Rpld           2-232 - 2-234
                              II Added         2-232 - 2-234
041-14HR         7-15-14        I                26-180
043-14HR         7-29-14        I                21-3
                              II               21-20
045-14HR         9-9-14                         2-591
050-14HR         10-21-14       I                2-639
                              II               2-641
058-14HR         11-18-14       I                17-9
061-14HR         11-18-14       I                23-69
                              II               23-70
064-14HR         11-18-14       I Rpld           2-232 - 2-234
                              II Added         2-153.5
071-14HR         12-9-14        I                26-22
                              II               26-141
                              III, IV          26-151
                              V, VI            26-152
073-14HR         12-9-14        I                23-65 -
                                                 23-73
076-14HR         12-9-14        I Added          2-602
001-15HR         2-10-15        I                17-10
002-15HR         2-10-15        I                6-200 -
                                                 6-218
                              II               6-223
012-15HR         5-5-15         I                24-7
                              II               24-8
                              III              24.5-42
                              IV               24.5-43
                              V                24.5-44
020-15HR         6-16-15        I                24-81
024-15HR         6-16-15        I                26-141
                              II, III          26-151
026-15HR         7-7-15         I                6-84
034-15HR         7-21-15        I, II, III    26-22
                              IV, V            26-54
035-15HR         7-21-15        I, II            26-54
036-15HR         7-28-15        I                26-22
                              II               26-141
                              III, IV          26-151
                              V, VI            26-173
039-15HR         9-15-15        II   Added    2-166 -
                                                 2-168
040-15HR         9-15-15        I   Added     8-1 -
                                                 8-9
047-15HR         10-20-15       I                21-20
048-15HR         11-3-15        I   Rpld      19-1 - 19-23
002-16HR         2-9-16         I                18-4
012-16HR         3-15-16        I                26-172
016-16HR         4-19-16        I                26-22
                              II               26-141
                              III, IV          26-151
018-16HR         5-17-16        I                2-332
020-16HR         6-7-16         I                26-152
027-16HR         6-21-16        I                26-151
028-16HR         9-21-16        I                2-644
035-16HR         9-13-16        I, XIII          6-82
                              II               6-96,
                                                 6-97
                              III              6-113
                              IV               6-114
                              V                6-125
                              VI               6-126
                              VII              6-139
                              VIII             6-140
                              IX               6-153
                              X                6-154
                              XI               6-168
                              XII              6-182
047-16HR         10-18-16       I                26-141
                              II, III          26-151
051-16HR         12-7-16        I                26-141
                              II, III          26-151
058-16HR         12-6-16        I   Rpld      2-153.5
                              II               2-639
                              III              2-639 -
                                                 2-646
002-17HR         2-7-17         I   Added     1-16
010-17HR         4-20-17        I   Rpld      2-75 - 2-156
                                 Added      2-75 -
                                                 2-105
                              II   Rnmbd    2-157 - 2-184
                                 as         2-106 -
                                                 2-122
                              III   Rpld    2-185 - 2-261
                                 Added      2-123 -
                                                 2-168
                              IV   Added    21-25,
                                                 21-26
                              V   Added     1-17
019-17-HR        5-2-2017       I                5-1 -
                                                 5-3
                              I   Rpld      5-4
                              I   Added     5-4
                              I                5-1 -
                                                 5-19
053-17HR         11-14-17       I - VI           26-22
                              VII              26-36
                              VIII             26-61
                              IX - XXII        26-106
                              XXIII - XXVI     26-202
007-18HR         2-20-18        I                26-181
018-18HR         4-17-18        I                2-327
020-18HR         5-1-18         I Added          18-7
022-18HR         5-1-18         I                5-4
040-18HR         9-11-18        I                17-9
043-18HR         9-18-18        I                21-1
                              II               21-2
063-18HR         12-11-18       I                26-141
                              II, III          26-151
                              IV, V            26-152
002-19HR         2-5-19         I                18-4
004-19HR         2-19-19        I                18-3
012-19HR         4-2-19         I                17-10
013-19HR         4-16-19        II Added         18-8
                              III              16-18
019-19HR         5-7-19         I Added          16-23
041-19HR         9-17-19        I                24-48
008-20HR         5-5-20         I                6-82
                              II               6-113
                              III              6-114
                              IV               6-125
                              V                6-126
                              VI               6-139
                              VII              6-140
                              VIII             6-153
                              IX               6-154
                              X                6-96
                              XI               6-97
                              XII              6-168
                              XIII             6-182
009-20HR         5-5-20         III              23-67
050-21HR         11-9-21        I                2-612
052-21HR         11-16-21       I                16-1 -
                                                 16-22
007-22HR         4-5-22         I                16-5
                5-1-23         II               16-7
008-22HR         4-5-22         I Rpld           12-1 - 12-47
                                                 12-1 -
                                                 12-3,
                                                 12-8 -
                                                 12-15,
                                                 12-18 -
                              Added            12-29,
                                                 12-33 -
                                                 12-47,
                                                 12-50 -
                                                 12-55,
                                                 12-58 -
                                                 12-68
030-22HR         11-1-22        I                2-14
001-23HR         2-7-23         I Added          16-71 -
                                                 16-73
004-23HR         7-1-23         I Added          18-9
030-23HR         7-18-23        I                21-20
035-23HR         9-12-23        I                16-5
040-23HR         9-19-23        I                15-2
                              II               2-332
001-24HR         2-6-24      I   Rpld      3-1—3-4, 3-21—3-23
                                                 3-1—
                                                 3-4,
                                                 3-7—
                                                 3-9,
                                                 3-12—
                                                 3-19,
                                 Added      3-21—
                                                 3-27,
                                                 3-30—
                                                 3-40,
                                                 3-43—
                                                 3-48,
                                                 3-51—
                                                 3-56
002-24HR         2-6-24      I                18-4
004-24HR         2-13-24        I                6-82
                              II               6-113
                              III              6-114
                              IV               6-125
                              V                6-126
                              VI               6-139
                              VII              6-140
                              VIII             6-153
                              IX               6-154
                              X                6-96
                              XI               6-97
                              XII              6-168
                              XIII             6-182
                                                 Added   
007-24HR         4-9-24         I                16-80—
                                                 16-83
011-24HR         5-7-24         I   Added  �18-10
013-24HR         6-4-24         I                17-10
014-24HR         6-4-24         I                12-66
                                                 5-1—
025-24HR         7-16-24        1   Rpld      5-19
                                   Added      5-1—
                                                 5-22
033-25HR         6-3-25         I                Added   
                                                 18-11
                                               
 
 
STATUTORY REFERENCE TABLE
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes
following the text, of references to the state law or related matters.
 
Constitution of the State of South Carolina (1895) Section Section this Code
Article
VIII                                               13      21-1,
                                                           21-2
                                                  16      24-5,
                                                           24.5-1(a)
                                                  17      24-5
X                                                  12      24.5-41
                                                  14(8)   2-51(8), (9)
 
 
S.C. Code 1976 Section Section this Code
S.C. Code 1976 Section     Section this Code
1-23-380                   2-621.1(g)
4-9-20                     2-549
4-9-25                     16-23
4-9-30                     16-5,
                           16-23
4-9-30(5)                  24-11(b)
4-9-30(5)(a)               24.5-1(a)
4-9-30(6)                  Ch. 2, Art. VII(note)
4-9-30(7)                  2-79
4-9-30(11)                 Ch. 11, Art. II(note)
4-9-30(12)                 16-7
4-9-30(14)                 24-5
4-9-35                     15-1
4-9-39                     15-1
4-9-40                     21-1,
                           21-2
4-9-41                     21-1,
                           21-2
4-9-60                     Ch. 2, Art. VI, Div. 6(note)
                          Ch. 2, Art. VI, Div. 5(note)
4-9-90                     9-2
4-9-100                    2-23
4-9-110                    Ch. 2, Art. II, Div. 4(note)
                          2-18
4-9-120--4-9-130           Ch. 2, Art. II, Div. 2(note)
4-9-130                    2-535(a)
                          2-535(c)
                           1-12,
                           16-23,
4-9-145                    17-10,
                           18-3,
                           18-8
4-9-160                    Ch. 2, Art. X(note)
4-9-170                    14-14
                          23-33
                          23-48
4-9-660                    Ch. 2, Art. XI(note)
                          2-642(a)
4-25-10                    Ch. 6(note)
5-7-60                     24-11
                          24-11(a)
5-27-910                   16-31
6-7-1010                   Ch. 26(note)
Tit. 6, Ch. 15             24.5-2(a)
                           26-3,
Tit. 6, Ch. 29             26-4,
                           26-22 
6-29-310                   Ch. 2, Art. VII(note)
6-29-540                   20-35
6-29-770                   26-151
6-29-780—6-29-860        26-33
6-29-1110 et seq.          26-54,
                           26-221
                           26-53,
6-29-1150                  26-54,
                           26-56 -
                           26-58
6-29-1150(c)               26-54
                           26-53,
6-29-1155                  26-54,
                           26-56 -
                           26-58
6-29-1200                  2-220,
                           26-183
6-29-1510 et seq.          26-53,
                           26-54
7-1-6                      23-69
7-5-130                    9-1
8-17-110                   2-475
8-21-310                   2-270
11-15-10                   24.5-24(d)
11-27-40(5)                2-571(9)
11-35-410                  2-591
11-35-1530                 2-601(6)
11-35-3210                 2-598
12-1-60                    2-577
12-4-580 et seq.           24.5-42
12-21-2720(A)(3)           16-19
12-28-2740                 21-3
12-39-10                   Ch. 2, Art. VI, Div. 6(note)
12-39-20                   2-312
12-39-30                   2-313
12-39-160                  2-314
12-43-10                   23-50
12-43-220(c)(1), (2,), (3) 23-5
12-45-10                   Ch. 2, Art. VI, Div. 5
12-45-20                   2-301
12-45-30                   2-302
12-45-40                   23-2
12-45-70                   23-3
12-45-90                   23-4
12-45-180                  23-3
12-45-220                  Ch. 2, Art. IX(note)
12-45-260                  Ch. 2, Art. IX(note)
12-45-270                  Ch. 2, Art. IX(note)
12-45-280                  Ch. 2, Art. IX(note)
12-45-310                  Ch. 2, Art. IX(note)
12-54-85(F)                23-5
12-56-10 et seq.           24.5-42
Title 14, Ch. 7, Art. 17   2-271
14-17-10                   Ch. 2, Art. VI, Div. 2(note)
                          2-268
14-17-40                   2-268
15-43-10                   18-8
15-78-10 et seq.           11-18
Title 16                   18-11
Title 16, Ch. 13           16-15
Title 16, Ch. 14           16-15
16-15-90                   16-17
16-15-100                  16-17
16-15-305                  16-17
16-15-325                  16-17
16-15-335                  16-17
16-15-342                  16-17
16-15-345                  16-17
16-15-355                  16-17
16-15-365                  16-17
16-15-385                  16-17
16-15-387                  16-17
16-15-395                  16-17
16-15-405                  16-17
16-15-410                  16-17
16-15-415                  16-17
16-15-425                  16-17
16-23-440                  18-1
17-5-10                    Ch. 2, Art. VI, Div. 3(note)
Tit. 18, Ch. 7             12-25
19-405                     16-6
Title 23, Ch. 9            16-6
20-7-2700(b)               26-22
23-35-60                   10-13
23-47-10--23-47-8          2-139
23-47-40(A),(B), and (D)   2-139
23-47-50(B)                2-139
23-47-50(C)                2-139
23-47-50(E)                2-139
24-13-1510 et seq.         1-17
24-13-1530                 1-17
30-4-10                    2-591
                          2-652
                          2-653
30-4-20                    2-150
30-4-30                    2-150
Tit. 33, Ch. 31            2-639,
                           2-641
33-56-10 et seq.           16-31
38-1-20                    16-2
38-33-140(D)               16-2
39-15-1190                 16-15
Title 39, Ch. 43           16-6
40-22-10, et seq.          26-22
40-28-10, et seq.          26-22
40-41-10                   Ch. 15, Art. III(note)
40-41-10 et seq.           16-30
43-25-70                   2-599
44-61-10 et seq.           2-228(a)(1)c
44-7-610                   Ch. 2, Art. VII(note)
Tit. 44, Art. 15           24.5-2(b)
44-55-1010                 Ch. 12(note)
44-55-1210                 Ch. 12(note)
44-56-20                   12-2
44-61-10                   2-139
44-96-10                   12-2
47-1-10 et seq.            Ch. 5(note)
47-3-20 et seq.            Ch. 5(note)
47-3-210 et seq.           Ch. 5(note)
47-5-10 et seq.            Ch. 5(note)
47-5-130                   Ch. 5(note)
47-3-510                   5-17
48-14-10 et seq.           Ch. 26(note)
48-35-10 et seq.           10-3,
                           10-4
51-13-10                   Ch. 2, Art. VII(note)
52-1-10                    Ch. 4(note)
52-17-10                   4-11, 4-14
55-1-10                    Ch. 3(note)
55-11-310                  Ch. 3(note)
56-5-710                   Ch. 17(note)
56-7-80                    1-13
56-15-10                   2-602
57-9-10 et seq.            21-9
57-9-10                    21-14
57-17-10                   Ch. 21(note)
58-12-10                   11-13
58-23-50                   Ch. 25, Art. II(note)
61-6-10 et seq.            16-16
61-107.19                  12-2
Title 63                   18-11
                           
 
