SULLIVAN’S ISLAND,
SOUTH CAROLINA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2026 S-4 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2025-06, passed 12-16-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 * www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE 2022-02
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE TOWN OF SULLIVAN'S ISLAND,
SC, REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, RECODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE TOWN DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF
ORDINANCES.
   WHEREAS, the present and permanent ordinances of the Town are required by
Ordinance to be professionally rectified and indexed from time to time; and
   WHEREAS, the Town has retained the service of American Legal to assist in
the recodification and rectification;
   WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of South Carolina empower
and authorize the Town to revise, amend, restate, recodify and compile any
existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted or published
and to incorporate such ordinances into one loose leaf ordinance book form; and
   WHEREAS, the Town Council has authorized a general compilation, revision and
recodification of the ordinances of a general and permanent nature and
publication of such ordinance in book form; and
   WHEREAS, the grammatical revisions, correction of scrivener's errors, update
of annotations and the general rectification and recodification of the Town
Code of Ordinances will assist in the daily operation of the Town and assist
its citizens and the general public in viewing the Town's Ordinances; and
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and Town Council of the Town of
Sullivan's Island, in Council duly assembled:
Section 1.   The general ordinances of the Town as revised, amended, restated,
recodified, and compiled in loose leaf book form are hereby adopted as and
shall constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the Town of Sullivan's Island, SC."
Section 2.   Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 is attached hereto
and incorporated herein by reference; and shall consist of the following
Titles:
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
10.   General Provisions
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
30.   Administration
31.   Town Council
32.   Departments
33.   Elections
34.   Municipal Court
35.   Planning Commission
36.   Personnel and Personnel Policies
37.   Purchasing Policies
38.   Taxation
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
50.   Water Supply
51.   Sewer and Sewage Disposal
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
70.   Motor Vehicles and Traffic
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
90.   Animals
91.   Garbage, Refuse and Weeds
92.   Nuisances
93.   Fire Protection
94.   Parades and Processions
95.   Watercraft Regulations
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
110.   Licensing
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
130.   Smoking of Tobacco Products
131.   Cable Television
132.   Miscellaneous Provisions
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
150.   Buildings
151.   Dwellings and Dwelling Units Unfit for Human Habitation
152.   Standards for Dwelling Units Fit for Human Habitation
153.   Flood Damage Prevention
154.   Filling and Draining Low Lots
155.   Stormwater Management
156.   Beaches
157.   Zoning
Section 3.   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such
Code of Ordinances shall be deemed superseded by these ordinances after the
effective date of this ordinance except as they are included and re-ordained in
whole or in part in such Code; provided, however they shall not affect any
offense committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the
effective date of this ordinance, nor shall they affect the provisions of
ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory,
establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons,
authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing
of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property,
granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use,
vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall
they affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or pertaining
to subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.
Section 4.   The Planning Commission has held a public hearing on the
rectification and recodification on April 13, 2022.
Section 5.   Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption
and approval by the Town Council and the Clerk of the Town of Sullivan's Island
is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Code of Ordinances in
the Office of the Clerk.
Section 6.   Such Code shall be in full force and effect, and such Code shall
be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the ordinance and all
provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein contained and of the
date of passage, and that the same is properly signed, attested, recorded, and
approved and that any public hearings and notices thereof as required by law
have been given.
THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BE EFFECTIVE UPON RATIFICATION.
SIGNED, SEALED, AND DELIVERED THIS 21st DAY OF June 2022.
Attest:
Bridget Welch /s/
Bridget Welch, Town Clerk
Patrick M. O'Neil /s/
Patrick M. O'Neil, Mayor
First Reading: April 19, 2022
Second Reading: May 17, 2022
Third Reading and Ratification: June 21, 2022
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   How code is designated and cited
   
10.02   Definitions; rules of construction
   
10.03   Rules of construction; acts prohibited or punishable
   
10.04   Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances
   
10.05   Severability of parts of code
   
10.06   Catchlines of sections
   
10.07   Effect of repeal or expiration of code section or ordinance
   
10.08   Fiscal year
   
10.09   Town seal
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 HOW CODE IS DESIGNATED AND CITED.
   The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections and
all future ordinances amendatory thereof shall constitute and be designated
“The Code of the Town of Sullivan’s Island, South Carolina”, and may be so
cited. Such ordinances may also be cited as “Sullivan’s Island Town Code”.
(Prior Code, § 1-1)
§ 10.02 DEFINITIONS; RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   In the construction of this code and of all ordinances of the town, the
following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless
inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Town Council or the context
clearly required otherwise.
   AND, OR. The word “and” may be read as “or”, and the word “or” as “and”,
where the sense requires it.
   COMPUTATION OF TIME. The time within which an act is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first day and including the last day. If the last day
be Sunday or a legal holiday, it shall be excluded.
   COUNCIL or TOWN COUNCIL. The Town Council of the Town of Sullivan’s Island,
South Carolina.
   COUNTY. The County of Charleston, in the State of South Carolina.
   GENDER. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and
neuter.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
   NUMBER. Words used in the singular include the plural and the plural shall
include the singular number.
   OATH. Includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN
shall be equivalent to the words “affirm” or “affirmed”.
   OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD. Whenever certain hours are named, they shall mean
standard time or daylight saving time, as may be in current use in the town.
   OWNER. Applied to a building or land, shall include any licensee, part
owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety,
of the whole or part of such building or land.
   PERSON. Includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization
and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes every species of property except real property,
as herein defined.
   PRECEDING, FOLLOWING. Next before and next after, respectively.
   PROPERTY. Includes real and personal property.
   REAL PROPERTY and REAL ESTATE. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
   ROADWAY. The portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel.
   SIDEWALK. Any portion of a street between the curb line, or the lateral
lines of all roadways where there is no curb, and the adjacent property line,
intended for the use of pedestrians.
   STATE. The words “the state” or “this state” shall be constructed to mean
the State of South Carolina.
   STREET. Includes avenues, boulevards, highways, roads, alleys, lanes,
bridges, and approaches thereto, and viaducts and all other public
thoroughfares in the town, and shall mean the entire width thereof between
opposed abutting property lines; it shall be construed to include a sidewalk or
footpath, unless the contrary is expressed or unless such construction would be
inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Town Council.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. Applied to a building or land, shall include any person
who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or
with others.
   TOWN. The Town of Sullivan’s Island in the County of Charleston and State of
South Carolina, except as otherwise provided.
   YEAR. A calendar year.
(Prior Code, § 1-2)
Statutory reference:
   Calculating time, see S.C. Code § 15-1-20
§ 10.03 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; ACTS PROHIBITED OR PUNISHABLE.
   In the construction of this code and of all ordinances of the town, all acts
prohibited or punishable under this code or under any particular ordinance
shall, unless a contrary intent appears, be construed to refer to such acts
when committed or occurring within the limits of the town or in other places
over which the town police have authority or jurisdiction under the laws of the
state, even though the code or the particular ordinance only provides that such
acts shall be prohibited and punishable and shall not specifically designate
the jurisdiction or scope thereof.
(Prior Code, § 1-3)
§ 10.04 PROVISIONS CONSIDERED AS CONTINUATION OF EXISTING ORDINANCES.
   The provisions appearing in this code, so far as they are the same as
existing ordinances, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not a new
enactment.
(Prior Code, § 1-4)
§ 10.05 SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE.
   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Town Council that the
sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code are
severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this
code shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or
decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or
invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences,
paragraphs and sections of this code.
(Prior Code, § 1-5)
§ 10.06 CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS.
   The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor,
unless expressly so provided, shall they be deemed when any of such sections,
including catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
(Prior Code, § 1-6)
§ 10.07 EFFECT OF REPEAL OR EXPIRATION OF CODE SECTION OR ORDINANCE.
   (A)   The repeal of a code section or an ordinance, or its expiration by
virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued,
any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred or any proceeding
commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired.
   (B)   When an ordinance which repealed another ordinance or code section
shall itself be repealed, the previous ordinance or code section shall not be
revived without express words to that effect.
(Prior Code, § 1-8)
§ 10.08 FISCAL YEAR.
   The fiscal year of the town shall extend from July 1 up to and including
June 30 of the next succeeding year.
(Prior Code, § 1-9)
§ 10.09 TOWN SEAL.
   The seal of the town, until otherwise directed, shall be a circular scroll
inscribing the words “Town of Sullivan’s Island” and the figures “1975.” The
seal shall be kept in the custody of the Town Clerk, who shall affix it to all
deeds of real estate executed on behalf of the town, all notes, bonds and other
evidences of indebtedness executed on behalf of the town, all certifications on
behalf of the town, and to such other instruments as the Town Council shall
direct.
(Prior Code, § 1-10)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Wherever in this code, or in any ordinance or resolution of the town, or
rule or regulation or order promulgated by any officer or agency of the town
under authority duly vested in him, her or it, any act is prohibited or is
declared to be unlawful or an offense or misdemeanor, or the doing of any act
is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an
offense or a misdemeanor, and no specific penalty is provided for the violation
thereof, the violation of any such provisions of this code, or any such
ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order shall be punished by a fine of
not more than $500 or by imprisonment for not more than 30 days. Each day any
violation of this code, or any such ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or
order shall continue shall constitute, except where otherwise provided, a
separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 1-7) (Ord. passed 9-23-1997)
Cross-reference:
   Fine of owner of impounded dog, see §§
90.04 and
90.18
   Reward for information leading to conviction of person for making false fire
alarm, see §
93.02
   Trial of code violations, see §
34.01
Statutory reference:
   Authorizing municipality to fix fines and penalties for violation of
ordinances, see S.C. Code § 5-7-30
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   ADMINISTRATION
      
31.   TOWN COUNCIL
      
32.   DEPARTMENTS
      
33.   ELECTIONS
      
34.   MUNICIPAL COURT
      
35.   PLANNING COMMISSION
      
36.   PERSONNEL AND PERSONNEL POLICIES
      
37.   PROCUREMENT CODE
      
38.   TAXATION
CHAPTER 30: ADMINISTRATION
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Adoption of form of government
   
30.02   Composition of Council
   
30.03   Mayor’s term of office
   
30.04   Terms of office of Council members
   
30.05   Staggering terms of initial Council members
   
30.06   Vacancy during term of Mayor or Council members
   
30.07   Oath of Mayor and Council members
   
30.08   Salaries and expenses of Mayor and Council members
   
30.09   Holdover in case of unfilled vacancy at term expiration
Mayor
   
30.20   Powers and duties generally
   
30.21   Specific powers and duties
   
30.22   Emergency powers of Mayor
   
30.23   Power to suspend officers for disobedience or misconduct
   
30.24   Rights of accused officer
   
30.25   Temporary filling of vacant office
   
30.26   Election of Mayor Pro Tempore; duties
Officers Generally
   
30.40   Appointment of town officers
   
30.41   Filling vacancies in town offices
   
30.42   Bonds of town officers
   
30.43   Salaries of officers and employees
   
30.44   Enforcement duties of officers and employees
   
30.45   Entrance upon premises and vehicles by officers and employees
Cross-reference:
   Elections, see
Chapter 33
   Personnel and Personnel Policies, see
Chapter 36
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 ADOPTION OF FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   The form of government known as the Council Form of Government, as set forth
in S.C. Code §§ 5-5 and 5-11, is adopted for the town.
(Prior Code, § 2-1) (Ord. passed 9-25-1975)
§ 30.02 COMPOSITION OF COUNCIL.
   The Town Council shall be composed of seven members, six Council members and
a Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 2-2) (Ord. passed 9-2-1975)
§ 30.03 MAYOR’S TERM OF OFFICE.
   The Mayor shall serve a four-year term from June, 1977, and the term of that
office thereafter shall be four years, pursuant to S.C. Code § 5-15-40.
(Prior Code, § 2-3) (Ord. passed 8-2-1976)
§ 30.04 TERMS OF OFFICE OF COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   The terms of office of Council members shall be for four years; provided,
however, that the terms of office of the Council members elected in June, 1977,
shall be so staggered so that no more than three members shall be elected at a
given election for a regular four-year term, pursuant to S.C. Code § 5-15-40.
(Prior Code, § 2-4) (Ord. passed 8-2-1976)
§ 30.05 STAGGERING TERMS OF INITIAL COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   (A)   Of those Council members elected at the June 1977 election, those
three Council members receiving the three largest numbers of votes shall serve
four-year terms, and those three receiving the three lowest numbers of votes
shall serve two-year terms, but thereafter all successors elected to a regular
term shall serve four years, so that the election shall comply with this
chapter.
   (B)   The determination of which Council member shall serve four-year terms
and which Council member shall serve an initial two-year term beginning in 1977
shall be as follows: if three or more candidates receive a majority vote in the
first election, then of those, the three receiving the largest number of votes
cast in the first election shall serve four-year terms; if less than three
candidates receive a majority vote in the first election, those so elected
shall serve four-year terms and the vacant four-year terms shall be filled by
those elected and receiving the largest votes in the second or subsequent
elections equal to the number of vacancies to be filled; the remaining three
elected Council members shall serve terms of two years.
(Prior Code, § 2-5) (Ord. passed 8-2-1976; Ord. passed 4-4-1977)
§ 30.06 VACANCY DURING TERM OF MAYOR OR COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   A vacancy during the term of the Mayor or any Council member shall be filled
for the remainder of the unexpired term at the next regular election or at a
special election if the vacancy occurs 180 days or more prior to the next
general municipal election.
(Prior Code, § 2-6)
Statutory reference:
   For similar state law, see S.C. Code § 5-7-200
§ 30.07 OATH OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   The Mayor and Council members, before entering upon the duties of their
respective offices, shall take the following oath, to-wit:
I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I am duly qualified, according to the
Constitution of this State, to exercise the duties of the office to which I
have been elected and that I will, to the best of my ability, discharge the
duties thereof, and preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of this State
and of the United States.
As Mayor (or Council member) of the Town of Sullivan’s Island, I will equally,
fairly, and impartially, to the best of my ability, and skill, exercise the
trust reposed in me, and will use my best endeavors to preserve the peace and
carry into effect according to law the purposes for which I have been elected.
So help me God.
(Prior Code, § 2-7)
§ 30.08 SALARIES AND EXPENSES OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   The Town Council, by ordinance adopting the annual operating budget or by
special ordinance, shall determine the annual salaries of the Mayor and Council
members, but no salary change shall become effective until the date of
commencement of the terms of Council members elected at the next general
election following ratification of the ordinance setting forth the change. The
Mayor and Council members also may receive payment for actual expenses incurred
in the performance of their duties and approved by Council, (see amendment of
Ord. passed 5-18-1993 on file giving Council members the option to be
compensated an amount of $25 per year to render them eligible for SC Retirement
System membership).
(Prior Code, § 2-8)
§ 30.09 HOLDOVER IN CASE OF UNFILLED VACANCY AT TERM EXPIRATION.
   A Mayor or Council member whose term has expired shall continue in office
until his or her successor has been elected and qualified, but when the terms
of two or more Council members expire simultaneously and successors to some but
not all of them have qualified, then the Council member to hold over
temporarily shall be determined by lot among those whose terms are expiring.
(Prior Code, § 2-9)
MAYOR
§ 30.20 POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY.
   The Mayor shall be the chief executive of the town. As such, he or she shall
have the powers and perform the duties prescribed for him or her by statute,
this code and other ordinances. He or she shall be vigilant and active at all
times in causing the ordinances and laws for the government of the town to be
duly executed and put in force. The Mayor shall have the usual powers and
duties incident to his or her office.
(Prior Code, § 2-10) (Ord. passed 7-21-1975; Ord. passed 5-15-1978)
§ 30.21 SPECIFIC POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Mayor shall:
   (A)   Appoint, suspend and remove town employees, with the advice and
consent of Town Council;
   (B)   Direct and supervise all municipal agencies;
   (C)   Give such directions to subordinate officers of the town as may be
necessary to carry the ordinances and the police laws and regulations into
effect;
   (D)   Direct an annual audit to be made of the books of the Town Clerk and
other officers of the town having custody or control of any funds or securities
of the town;
   (E)   Call upon officers, boards, commissions and agencies of the town, from
time to time, as he or she may deem necessary to furnish him or her in writing
with any information connected with any of their respective offices;
   (F)   Submit or cause the submission of all necessary reports on the
operation of municipal agencies and the finances thereof; and
   (G)   Communicate to the Town Council from time to time such information and
recommend to the Council such measures as may tend to improve the finances, the
police, the health, security, cleanliness, ornament and general welfare of the
town.
(Prior Code, § 2-11) (Ord. passed 7-21-1975)
§ 30.22 EMERGENCY POWERS OF MAYOR.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Mayor to take all proper measures for the
suppression of riots and the preservation of public order. Whenever at times of
catastrophe, disaster, rioting or civil disturbance it appears that local
police authorities will be unable to maintain public order and protect lives or
property, he or she may issue a proclamation declaring a state of emergency,
requiring town officers and employees and requesting citizens to assist him or
her. Under such conditions, he or she may request the assistance of the
military and police forces of state and other local agencies. He or she also
may declare a general or limited curfew, imposing such conditions as to him or
her shall appear necessary to protect life and property and maintain peace and
good order.
   (B)   The Mayor shall exercise direction and control of town emergency
operations, as provided by the Sullivan’s Island “Emergency and Disaster
Evacuation Plan”, adopted by Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-12)
§ 30.23 POWER TO SUSPEND OFFICERS FOR DISOBEDIENCE OR MISCONDUCT.
   It shall be the duty of the Mayor, in case of the disobedience or misconduct
of any of the town officers elected by the Town Council, to suspend such
officer, if necessary, until the charges shall be heard and tried by the
Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-13) (Ord. passed 7-21-1975)
§ 30.24 RIGHTS OF ACCUSED OFFICER.
   At any public hearing of charges preferred by the Mayor against any town
officer, the accused shall have the right to counsel and process to compile the
attendance of witnesses and the production of books and papers in his or her
own defense.
(Prior Code, § 2-14) (Ord. passed 7-21-1975)
§ 30.25 TEMPORARY FILLING OF VACANT OFFICE.
   The Mayor, in case of any vacancy that may occur in any town appointive
office, or when any appointive town officer may be suspended, shall be
authorized to appoint persons to fill such vacancies until they can be filled
by the Town Council, or as provided by statute.
(Prior Code, § 2-15) (Ord. passed 7-21-1975)
§ 30.26 ELECTION OF MAYOR PRO TEMPORE; DUTIES.
   The Town Council, at its annual meeting, shall elect a Council member to
serve as Mayor Pro Tempore until the next annual meeting and thereafter until
his or her successor shall have been elected and qualified. The Mayor Pro
Tempore shall act as Mayor during the absence or disability of the Mayor. If a
vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tempore shall serve as
Mayor until a successor is elected.
(Prior Code, § 2-16)
Statutory reference:
   Election, see S.C. Code § 5-7-190
OFFICERS GENERALLY
§ 30.40 APPOINTMENT OF TOWN OFFICERS.
   The appointment of officers to offices created by Town Council shall take
place at the annual meeting of Council, and a person so appointed shall
continue in office until the next annual meeting of Council and thereafter
until his or her successor is appointed and qualified, unless he or she vacates
the office or is removed for cause.
(Prior Code, § 2-33)
§ 30.41 FILLING VACANCIES IN TOWN OFFICES.
   Council shall fill the unexpired term of any office vacancy which occurs
between annual meetings; provided, that the Mayor may name a temporary
appointee to perform the duties of an officer absent for a short while because
of sickness, leave or any other cause.
(Prior Code, § 2-34)
§ 30.42 BONDS OF TOWN OFFICERS.
   Those town officers who handle town money shall be bonded within ten days of
election to office. The bond, for the benefit of the town, its successors and
assigns, shall be conditioned upon faithful discharge of the duties of office.
It shall be written in an amount approved by the Council Committee on Ways and
Means, with a surety company licensed to do business in South Carolina, and the
premium therefor shall be paid by the town.
(Prior Code, § 2-35)
§ 30.43 SALARIES OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   The salaries of officers and employees of the town shall be set forth in the
ordinance adopting the budget, but may be adjusted from time to time by
ordinance or resolution of Town Council, as emergency requires.
(Prior Code, § 2-36)
§ 30.44 ENFORCEMENT DUTIES OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   It shall be the duty of all officers and employees to enforce statutes,
ordinances, rules and regulations pertaining to their designated sphere of
activity, to assist other officers and employees of the town, to report
violations of town ordinances, and to institute or appear as a witness in
proceedings to enforce statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations.
(Prior Code, § 2-37)
§ 30.45 ENTRANCE UPON PREMISES AND VEHICLES BY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   An officer or employee in performing his or her duties may enter premises or
vehicles at reasonable times when authorized or required by this code or by
statute, ordinance, rule, regulation or court order to do so.
(Prior Code, § 2-38)
CHAPTER 31: TOWN COUNCIL
Section
Council Meetings
   
31.01   Time of Council meetings
   
31.02   Minutes of Council meetings
   
31.03   Presiding officer; rules of order
   
31.04   Quorum
Council Committees
   
31.15   Standing committees of Council
   
31.16   Ad hoc committees of Council
   
31.17   Committee reports on ordinance violations and other matters of interest
   
31.18   Committee examination of ordinances, recommendations, and signature of
reports
Ordinances Generally
   
31.30   Acts to be accomplished by ordinances only
   
31.31   Adoption of annual budgets and levy of taxes
   
31.32   Procedure for enactment of town ordinances
   
31.33   Contents of proposed ordinances
   
31.34   Interval between first and second readings
   
31.35   Exception for emergency ordinances
   
31.36   Recodification of ordinances; distribution of standard and technical
codes
   
31.37   Loose-leaf ordinance book and current revision thereof
COUNCIL MEETINGS
§ 31.01 TIME OF COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   (A)   Regular meeting of the Town Council shall be held on the third Tuesday
in every month at 6:00 p.m. at the Town Hall.
   (B)   The annual meeting shall be held on the third Tuesday in June of each
year at the same time and place.
   (C)   Special meetings shall be held at the same place, unless prevented by
physical conditions, at such times as the Mayor shall call and designate on his
or her own initiative or on the written request of not less than three Council
members. Side meeting notice shall state the nature and objects of the call.
   (D)   All regular, annual and special meetings of Council shall be open to
the public. The Town Clerk shall give public notice of all such meetings by
advertising, posting on the town bulletin board or other method directed by
Council.
   (E)   Whenever a regular meeting date falls on a holiday observed by the
town office, the meeting shall be held on the succeeding Wednesday.
(Prior Code, § 2-17) (Ord. passed 8-20-1984; Ord. passed 9-16-1986; Ord. passed
2-19-2008)
§ 31.02 MINUTES OF COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   The Town Clerk shall keep minutes of all Council meetings, which shall be
presented for approval at the next Council meeting and, when approved, shall
become a part of the permanent records, shall be posted on the town bulletin
board and shall be indexed by the Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 2-18)
§ 31.03 PRESIDING OFFICER; RULES OF ORDER.
   The Mayor, or in his or her absence, the Mayor Pro Tempore, shall preside at
all Council meetings. Meetings shall be conducted under Robert’s Rules of
Order, Newly Revised, 1970 Edition, except when said rules conflict or are
inconsistent with state law, this code, town ordinances or rules of order
adopted by Council. All questions of order shall be decided by the Mayor
without debate, subject to an appeal to Council. Rules of order may be
suspended only by unanimous consent of those Council members who are present.
(Prior Code, § 2-19)
§ 31.04 QUORUM.
   The presence of the presiding officer and at least three other members of
Council shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of business. If a quorum
fails to appear within 15 minutes after the appointed hour, no member shall be
required to attend longer, unless he or she chooses to do so.
(Prior Code, § 2-20)
COUNCIL COMMITTEES
§ 31.15 STANDING COMMITTEES OF COUNCIL.
   (A)   A majority of the Town Council at each annual meeting shall appoint
all standing committees of Council. The Chairperson of each committee shall be
selected by a majority of Council.
   (B)   The standing committees of Council shall be as follows (except for the
Finance Committee, each committee shall consist of three members of Council):
      (1)   Finance (all members of Council), to whom shall be referred all
matters connected with town finances, taxes and licenses. Additionally, this
Committee shall prepare and submit an annual operating budget and capital
improvement program to Council for its consideration and approval;
      (2)   Public Safety, to whom shall be referred all matters relating to
the police and fire departments, and other matters regarding emergency
preparedness;
      (3)   Water and Sewer, to whom shall be referred all matters relating to
the Water and Sewer Department and systems;
      (4)   Administration, to whom shall be referred all matters relating to
oversight of implementation of the following town administrative functions:
personnel; licensing; Town Attorney; court; rules; solicitations for boards and
commissions; administrative infrastructure; communication; and community
outreach;
      (5)   Land Use and Natural Resources, to whom shall be referred all
matters relating to the zoning and building ordinances and their
implementation, and natural resources including town-owned land;
      (6)   Public Facilities, to whom shall be referred all matters relating
to construction, maintenance and improvements of streets, beach paths, and
town-owned buildings; sanitation services including trash and garbage;
stormwater management; and energy and resource conservation programs; and
      (7)   Recreation, to whom shall be referred all matters relating to the
creation, expansion or improvement of facilities and programs in the area of
parks and recreation, and community wellness programs.
(Prior Code, § 2-21) (Ord. passed 8-20-2013)
§ 31.16 AD HOC COMMITTEES OF COUNCIL.
   The Council also may appoint ad hoc committees to handle any matter which
does not logically fall within the duties of a standing committee.
(Prior Code, § 2-22)
§ 31.17 COMMITTEE REPORTS ON ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS AND OTHER MATTERS OF
INTEREST.
   Each standing committee shall report from time to time to the Town Council
such violations of ordinances as they may ascertain, or any other matter
connected with their particular subjects which may seem to them to be the best
interest of the town.
(Prior Code, § 2-23) (Ord. passed 7-21-1975)
§ 31.18 COMMITTEE EXAMINATION OF ORDINANCES, RECOMMENDATIONS, AND SIGNATURE OF
REPORTS.
   It shall be the duty of each of the standing committees and the members
thereof to examine the ordinances of the town pertaining to the subject with
which such committee is especially charged and to endeavor to ascertain, from
time to time, whether the ordinances appertaining are sufficient and
satisfactory, and to suggest to the Council from time to time such changes in
the ordinances as they may deem proper. All committee reports to Council shall
be approved by a majority of the committee.
(Prior Code, § 2-24) (Ord. passed 7-21-1975; Ord. passed 8-20-2013)
ORDINANCES GENERALLY
§ 31.30 ACTS TO BE ACCOMPLISHED BY ORDINANCES ONLY.
   (A)   In addition to other acts required by law to be done by ordinance,
Council shall accomplish the following acts only by ordinance:
      (1)   Adopt or amend an administrative code or ordinance, create, alter
or abolish any municipal department, office or agency;
      (2)   Provide for a fine or other penalty or establish a rule or
regulation in which a fine or other penalty is imposed for violations;
      (3)   Appropriate funds and adopt a budget;
      (4)   Grant, renew or extend franchises, or close or abandon streets;
      (5)   Authorize the borrowing of money or the issuance of bonds;
      (6)   Levy taxes, or assess property for improvements;
      (7)   Annex area to the town;
      (8)   Convey or lease or authorize the conveyance or lease of any lands
of the town; and
      (9)   Amend or repeal any ordinance described in divisions (A)(1) through
(A)(8) above.
   (B)   In all other matters Council may act either by ordinance or
resolution, recorded in the minutes.
(Prior Code, § 2-25)
Statutory Reference:
   For similar state law, see S.C. Code § 5-7-260
§ 31.31 ADOPTION OF ANNUAL BUDGETS AND LEVY OF TAXES.
   Council shall pass annually, prior to the beginning of the fiscal year, an
ordinance or ordinances adopting operating and capital budgets for the
operation of the town government. In said budgets, Council shall identify the
sources of anticipated revenue, including taxes, necessary to meet the
financial requirements of the budgets adopted. Council shall further provide
for the levy and collection of taxes necessary to meet all budget requirements,
except as provided for by other revenue sources.
(Prior Code, § 2-26)
§ 31.32 PROCEDURE FOR ENACTMENT OF TOWN ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Form and procedures. Only the Mayor, a Council member or a Council
committee may introduce a proposed ordinance. Every proposed town ordinance
shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption.
(See §
31.33). All ordinances shall be read three times on at least two separate days
with at least six days between two of the readings. All ordinances may be read
by title only.
   (B)   First reading. The first reading of a town ordinance shall be for
information purposes. Discussions and motions to amend at first reading are
permissible if requested by at least two Council members present. Upon an
affirmative vote by the majority of Council present and duly assembled, the
ordinance shall be read.
   (C)   Second reading. The second reading of an ordinance shall be at a
subsequent meeting of the Council, and shall be for the purpose of passing the
same to have the full force of the law. Discussions and motions to amend are
permissible at this time and shall be made prior to second reading. Upon an
affirmative vote of a majority of Council present and duly assembled, the
ordinance shall be read.
   (D)   Third reading. The third reading of an ordinance shall be held at the
next meeting of the Council, unless the Council present unanimously votes to
have the third reading immediately following the second reading. Discussions
and motions to amend are permissible prior to the third reading if requested by
at least two Council members present. Upon an affirmative vote for third
reading by the majority of Council present and duly assembled, the ordinance
shall be read for the purpose of passing the same to have the full force of the
law.
   (E)   Ratification. After an ordinance shall have received its third
reading, it shall be signed by the Mayor, or the Mayor Pro-Tem or the presiding
officer and attested to by the Clerk or in his or her absence, the Town
Administrator, affixed with the seal of the municipality of the town, and
placed in the town's code of ordinances by the Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 2-27) (Ord. passed 10-16-2012; Ord. 2015-11, passed 1-19-2016)
§ 31.33 CONTENTS OF PROPOSED ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Every proposed ordinance shall include:
      (1)   A title briefly and accurately describing its content;
      (2)   The enacting clause, which shall begin with the words: “Be it
ordained by the Town Council of Sullivan’s Island”;
      (3)   The provisions of the ordinance, including section numbers if it is
to be codified as a new section, or if it is to amend, replace or repeal an
existing section of the code;
      (4)   The effective date of the proposed ordinance;
      (5)   Spaces for inspection of the dates of adoption and ratification,
the signature of the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tempore, if he or she is presiding, and
attestation by the Town Clerk; and
      (6)   Space for insertion of the ordinance number. The number shall be
inserted by the Clerk at the time of ratification and shall be the year of
ratification followed by a slash and the arithmetic sequence of ordinances
ratified that year; in other words, the sixth ordinance ratified in 1979 shall
be numbered 1979-6.
   (B)   If desired by the author or considered advisable for legal reasons, an
ordinance may also contain a preamble setting forth the findings of fact or
reasons or the basis on which the ordinance is proposed.
(Prior Code, § 2-28)
§ 31.34 INTERVAL BETWEEN FIRST AND SECOND READINGS.
   An interval of at least six days shall intervene between the first and
second Council readings of proposed ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 2-29)
§ 31.35 EXCEPTION FOR EMERGENCY ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Notwithstanding the provisions of §§
31.31 and
31.34, the Town Council, to meet public emergencies affecting life, health,
safety or the property of the people, may adopt emergency ordinances, but such
ordinances shall not levy taxes; grant, renew or extend a franchise; or impose
or change a service rate.
   (B)   Every emergency ordinance shall be enacted by the affirmative vote of
at least two-thirds of the members of Council present. An emergency ordinance
shall be effective immediately upon its enactment without regard to any
reading, public hearing, publication requirements or public notice
requirements. Emergency ordinances shall expire automatically as of the sixty-
first day following the date of enactment.
(Prior Code, § 2-30)
Statutory reference:
   For similar state law, see S.C. Code § 5-7-250(d)
§ 31.36 RECODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES; DISTRIBUTION OF STANDARD AND TECHNICAL
CODES.
   The general and permanent ordinances of the town shall be professionally
rectified and indexed not less frequently than once every ten years, and Town
Council shall provide the necessary funds thereof. Copies of the latest
recodification, which may be typewritten or printed, bound or loose-leaf, shall
be available for public inspection during normal business hours at the office
of the Town Clerk. Copies of standard or technical regulations adopted by
reference by Council also shall be available for distribution.
(Prior Code, § 2-31)
§ 31.37 LOOSE-LEAF ORDINANCE BOOK AND CURRENT REVISION THEREOF.
   In addition to copies of ordinances appearing in the official minutes of
Council, the Town Clerk as a public record shall keep and maintain a loose-leaf
ordinance book, which shall consist of the latest professional recodification,
wherein the Town Clerk shall insert immediately after ratification in an
appropriate place all new, amending or repealing ordinances. The Town Clerk
shall place on the first page of each inserted ordinance a notation of the
number of the inserted ordinance, date of ratification and number of repealed
or amended ordinance, if any. The ordinance book index also shall be
appropriately amended to reflect said inserted and deleted ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 2-32)
CHAPTER 32: DEPARTMENTS
Section
Department of General Administration
   
32.001   Department of General Administration created
   
32.002   Town Clerk position established
   
32.003   Duties of Town Clerk
   
32.004   Who may draw on town funds
   
32.005   Independent audit of financial records and transactions
   
32.006   Town Administrator position established
   
32.007   Duties of Town Administrator
   
32.008   Town Attorney position established
   
32.009   Duties of Town Attorney
   
32.010   Building Inspector position established
   
32.011   Duties of Building Inspector
Police Department
   
32.025   Police Department and office of Chief of Police established
   
32.026   Powers and duties of police personnel
   
32.027   Uniform Ordinance Summons
   
32.028   Chief of Police enforcement responsibilities
Fire Department
   
32.040   Fire Department and office of Fire Chief established
   
32.041   Powers and duties of Fire Department personnel
   
32.042   Investigation of fire and fire hazards
   
32.043   Enforcement of public safety and housing laws
Water and Sewer Departments
   
32.055   Water and Sewer Departments and offices of Superintendent thereof
established
   
32.056   Duties of Superintendent of Water and Sewer
Streets and Maintenance Department
   
32.070   Department of Streets and Maintenance and office of Superintendent
thereof established
   
32.071   Duties of Superintendent of Streets and Maintenance
Town-Owned Real Estate
   
32.085   Sale of town-owned real estate
   
32.086   Issuance of fee simple deed to existing property owners in the town
DEPARTMENT OF GENERAL ADMINISTRATION
§ 32.001 DEPARTMENT OF GENERAL ADMINISTRATION CREATED.
   A Department of General Administration for the town hereby is created to
function at the direction and supervision of the Ways and Means Committee
Chairperson. To it shall be assigned those officers and functions which by
their nature do not logically fall under or are not assigned to other
departments.
(Prior Code, § 2-39)
§ 32.002 TOWN CLERK POSITION ESTABLISHED.
   The office of Town Clerk hereby is created. The Town Clerk shall be
appointed by Council and shall function in the Department of General
Administration.
(Prior Code, § 2-40)
Statutory reference:
   For state law creating office, see S.C. Code § 5-7-220
§ 32.003 DUTIES OF TOWN CLERK.
   (A)   The Town Clerk shall give members of Council notice of all meetings
thereof. He or she shall attend all Council meetings and keep a permanent
record of all proceedings. On behalf of Council, he or she shall receive and
deliver all petitions, motions, information, applications and communications,
and shall make all communications that the Town Council shall direct.
   (B)   The Clerk shall be the custodian of the official copies of all
ordinances and indexes and codification thereof, which shall be available for
public inspections at the Town Hall at reasonable times.
   (C)   The Clerk shall be the custodian of the titles and deeds of town-owned
property, bonds, insurance policies and financial records of the town.
   (D)   The Clerk shall receive all monies due or coming to the town, deposit
the same as shall be directed by Town Council or any committee acting under its
authority, and shall pay out monies only as directed in like manner.
   (E)   The Clerk shall keep a current account of all monies, accounts and
inventories of town property, real and personal, and render reports thereon as
directed by Town Council. He or she shall issue all licenses and badges for
which provision may be made and shall safeguard the stock of unissued licenses
and badges.
   (F)   The Clerk shall sign or countersign all purchase orders after assuring
that the necessary funds therefor have been budgeted by Town Council.
   (G)   The Clerk also shall perform such other duties and services in
connection with the foregoing duties and relative thereto or connected
therewith as shall from time to time be prescribed the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-41)
§ 32.004 WHO MAY DRAW ON TOWN FUNDS.
   Any town funds deposited shall be subject to the joint order of the Mayor
and the Town Clerk, provided, that in the absence or disability of the Mayor,
the Mayor Pro Tem shall have the authority to act for him or her, and in the
absence of both of them, the Chairperson of the Committee on Ways and Means
shall act, and in the absence or disability of the Town Clerk, the Town
Administrator shall have authority to act for him or her.
(Prior Code, § 2-42) (Ord. passed 7-21-1975; Ord. passed 8-20-1991)
§ 32.005 INDEPENDENT AUDIT OF FINANCIAL RECORDS AND TRANSACTIONS.
   (A)   The Town Council shall provide funds for an independent annual audit
of all financial records and transactions of the town government by a certified
public accountant or firm of such accountants having no personal interest,
direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the town government or any of its
officers.
   (B)   The auditor shall be selected not later than 30 days after the
beginning of the fiscal year, and the contract shall be for a term not less
than one nor more than four years. Council in its discretion may accept for
inclusion in the general audit an independent audit of any municipal agency or
department.
(Prior Code, § 2-43)
Statutory reference:
   For similar state law, see S.C. Code § 5-7-240
§ 32.006 TOWN ADMINISTRATOR POSITION ESTABLISHED.
   The Town Council may create the office of Town Administrator, who shall
function in the Department of General Administration. The title may be assigned
solely to one person, or may be assigned as an additional title to a person
holding another office of the town.
(Prior Code, § 2-44) (Ord. passed 8-20-1991)
§ 32.007 DUTIES OF TOWN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Town Administrator shall work under the Mayor and Town Council and shall
perform such duties as shall be assigned to him or her, including, but not
limited to: transmission of instructions from the Mayor and Town Council to
department heads; investigation of complaints, petitions and other matters for
the Mayor and Town Council; preparation of reports, surveys and studies
relating to governmental functions, problems, activities and programs for the
use of the Mayor and Council; and the compilation of submission of data, as
directed by the Mayor and Council. The Town Administrator shall supervise the
normal and usual day-to-day operational functions of the town and prepare,
develop and supervise the annual budget and maintain records and investments of
all town monies and accounts, including the Special Revenue Fund.
(Prior Code, § 2-45) (Ord. passed 5-22-1991; Ord. passed 8-20-1991)
§ 32.008 TOWN ATTORNEY POSITION ESTABLISHED.
   The office of Town Attorney hereby is created. The Town Attorney shall be
licensed to practice law in state and federal courts in South Carolina.
(Prior Code, § 2-46)
Statutory reference:
   Creating office, see S.C. Code § 5-7-230
§ 32.009 DUTIES OF TOWN ATTORNEY.
   The Town Attorney shall function in the Department of General
Administration, subject to the direction and supervision of the Mayor and Town
Council. He or she shall advise the Mayor, the Town Council members and town
officers on legal matters affecting the town or said officials and officers in
their official capacities and, when required by Council, shall render a formal
legal opinion in writing. He or she shall draw or review the draft of proposed
ordinances and legal instruments to be considered or executed by Town Council.
He or she shall attend Council meetings and Municipal Court, when requested by
the Mayor and/or Town Council member, and shall be the legal representative of
the town on routine court matters. Additionally, he or she may be retained by
the Town Council for protracted or extraordinary litigation.
(Prior Code, § 2-47)
§ 32.010 BUILDING INSPECTOR POSITION ESTABLISHED.
   The office of Building Inspector for the town is hereby created. The
Building Inspector shall be appointed by Council or Town Council may elect to
contract for building inspection services. The function shall be in the
Department of General Administration, subject to the direction of the Town
Council and its Committee on Buildings and Construction. Building inspection
may be a full-time or part-time employee or a contracted service, as the
Council from time to time shall determine.
(Prior Code, § 2-48) (Ord. passed 12-15-1975; Ord. passed 3-16-1992)
Statutory reference:
   Appointment, see S.C. Code § 5-25-120
§ 32.011 DUTIES OF BUILDING INSPECTOR.
   The Building Inspector or Building Inspections Contractor shall review and
approve or disapprove plans for new construction, renovation, repair or
demolition of buildings or structures. The employee or contractor shall inspect
all construction or reconstruction to assure compliance with the Building Code,
the standard construction codes and technical regulations adopted by Council,
the flood control laws, the zoning laws and other applicable laws and
regulations. The Building Inspector or Building Inspections Contractor shall
have full police power to enforce said laws and regulations.
(Prior Code, § 2-49) (Ord. passed 3-19-1992)
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.025 POLICE DEPARTMENT AND OFFICE OF CHIEF OF POLICE ESTABLISHED.
   A Police Department of the town and the office of Chief of Police are hereby
created. The Chief of Police shall be appointed by Town Council and shall
administer the Department, subject to the direction of the Town Council or its
Police Committee, acting through its Chairperson. The Department’s second in
command shall be the Assistant Chief of Police of the town.
(Prior Code, § 2-50) (Ord. passed 8-21-1990)
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to appointment of Chief, see S.C. Code § 5-7-110
§ 32.026 POWERS AND DUTIES OF POLICE PERSONNEL.
   (A)   The Chief of Police, the Assistant Chief of Police and police officers
should be vested with all the powers and duties conferred by law upon
constables and shall perform such additional duties as are imposed upon them by
Town Council.
   (B)   It shall be their duty to enforce the provisions of this code and all
town ordinances, rules and regulations and to assist other town officers and
employees in the enforcement thereof. They shall enforce state statutes adopted
by reference by Town Council and other state law with respect to which
jurisdiction has been vested in municipal officers. They shall exercise their
power on all public and private property within the corporate limits of the
town and on all property owned or controlled by the town, wheresoever situate,
and in all other areas to which police jurisdiction or criminal jurisdiction of
the town may be extended by state law.
(Prior Code, § 2-51)
§ 32.027 UNIFORM ORDINANCE SUMMONS.
   (A)   The town does hereby adopt the Uniform Ordinance Summons in the form
presented to Council duly assembled, and further authorizes all law enforcement
officers and code enforcement officers of the town to enforce all ordinances
and codes of the town as from time to time may be amended by citing the
violation on the Uniform Ordinance Summons and the service of the Uniform
Ordinance Summons on any such violator.
   (B)   Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the town nor any of
its law enforcement or code enforcement officers from enforcing ordinances by
means otherwise authorized by law.
(Prior Code, § 2-51A) (Ord. passed 6-19-2000)
§ 32.028 CHIEF OF POLICE ENFORCEMENT RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The Police Chief shall be the Deputy Public Safety and Housing Officer and
shall perform the duties of the Public Safety and Housing Officer when that
officer is absent and when so directed by the Town Council or its
representative.
(Prior Code, § 2-52) (Ord. passed 1-17-1989)
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.040 FIRE DEPARTMENT AND OFFICE OF FIRE CHIEF ESTABLISHED.
   A Fire Department for the town and the office of Fire Chief are hereby
created. The Fire Department shall be administered by the Fire Chief, appointed
by and subject to the direction and supervision of the Town Council or its Fire
Committee, acting through its Chairperson. The Department’s second in command
shall be the Assistant Fire Chief of the town.
(Prior Code, § 2-53) (Ord. passed 8-21-1990)
Statutory reference:
   Appointment of Fire Chief, see S.C. Code §§ 5-25-20 and 5-25-110
§ 32.041 POWERS AND DUTIES OF FIRE DEPARTMENT PERSONNEL.
   The Fire Chief or, in his or her absence, the Assistant Fire Chief, shall
direct and control all operations at a fire. Any person who shall oppose,
interfere with, or refuse to obey the directions of the Fire Chief or other
officer of the Fire Department or in any way interfere with the Fire
Department, or in any way interfere with the Fire Department at a fire, may be
arrested and removed beyond the area of operations, and upon conviction shall
be punished as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 2-54)
§ 32.042 INVESTIGATION OF FIRE AND FIRE HAZARDS.
   The Fire Chief shall cooperate with the Building Inspector, the Police
Department and the State Fire Marshal in investigating the origin of fires and
in the abatement of discontinuance of fire hazards and shall make such reports
as required in connection therewith.
(Prior Code, § 2-55)
§ 32.043 ENFORCEMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY AND HOUSING LAWS.
   The Fire Chief shall be the Public Safety and Housing Officer of the town.
He or she shall, on his or her own initiative or upon complaint, inspect
buildings or other structures to determine whether they are hazardous to life
or property, and particularly defined in the Public Safety and Housing Law and
the Minimum Housing Standards Ordinance of the town.
(Prior Code, § 2-55.1) (Ord. passed 1-17-1989)
WATER AND SEWER DEPARTMENTS
§ 32.055 WATER AND SEWER DEPARTMENTS AND OFFICES OF SUPERINTENDENT THEREOF
ESTABLISHED.
   A Water Department of the town and the office of Superintendent of Water are
hereby created. Likewise, a Sewer Department of the town and the office of
Superintendent of Sewer hereby are created. The Superintendent of Water and
Superintendent of Sewers shall be appointed by the Town Council and shall
administer the departments, subject to the direction and supervision of the
Town Council or its Water and Sewer Committee, acting through its Chairperson.
(Prior Code, § 2-56)
§ 32.056 DUTIES OF SUPERINTENDENT OF WATER AND SEWER.
   (A)   The Superintendent of Water shall be responsible for enforcement of
code provisions, ordinances, rules and regulations applicable to the water
system in the town and shall have full police power with respect thereto.
   (B)   The Superintendent of Sewers shall be responsible for enforcement of
the code provisions, ordinances, rules and regulations applicable to the sewer
system in the town and shall have full police power with respect thereto.
(Prior Code, § 2-57)
STREETS AND MAINTENANCE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.070 DEPARTMENT OF STREETS AND MAINTENANCE AND OFFICE OF SUPERINTENDENT
THEREOF ESTABLISHED.
   A Department of Streets and Maintenance hereby is created. The
Superintendent of Streets and Maintenance shall be appointed by the Town
Council and shall administer the Department, subject to the direction and
supervision of Town Council or its Committee on Streets and Maintenance, acting
through its Chairperson.
(Prior Code, § 2-58)
§ 32.071 DUTIES OF SUPERINTENDENT OF STREETS AND MAINTENANCE.
   The Superintendent of Streets and Maintenance shall be responsible for
enforcement of code provisions, ordinances, rules and regulations relating to
streets, drainage, street signs, street lighting, sanitation, building and
maintenance, and shall have full police power with respect thereto.
(Prior Code, § 2-59)
TOWN-OWNED REAL ESTATE
§ 32.085 SALE OF TOWN-OWNED REAL ESTATE.
   (A)   The Town Council shall not offer for sale or sell, any piece or parcel
or real estate owned by the town, except pursuant to one or more of the
following procedures:
      (1)   By advertising the real estate at least three times in a newspaper
of general circulation in the metropolitan area, calling for sealed bids on the
same, and reserving the right to reject any and all bids or to accept any bid
most advantageous to the town;
      (2)   By advertising the real estate at least three times in a newspaper
of general circulation in the metropolitan area, offering it for sale at public
auction, with or without a minimum price; or
      (3)   By listing the real estate with a real estate broker licensed in
the State of South Carolina at a minimum price after specific approval by Town
Council. The price thereafter may be raised or lowered by resolution, duly
passed by Town Council.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to sales to town-owned real estate to
agencies processing the power of condemnation, or sales to public agencies for
public purposes.
(Prior Code, § 2-60) (Ord. passed 11-21-1977; Ord. passed 6-17-2014)
§ 32.086 ISSUANCE OF FEE SIMPLE DEED TO EXISTING PROPERTY OWNERS IN THE TOWN.
   The town shall issue fee simple deeds for real estate owned by property
owners in the town, only in the following manner.
   (A)   Applicant shall give written request to the Town Clerk, along with a
$25 fee, and provide a plat of the property and a current title opinion of an
attorney who is a member of the South Carolina Bar Association stating that the
lease and sole interest in the property is owned by the person or persons
requesting the fee simple deed and that nothing has been done to alienate any
interest in the property owner of his or her predecessor in title by the town
which granted the original leasehold interest.
   (B)   Upon receipt of the above, the Town Clerk shall forward all documents
to the Town Attorney who will conduct the necessary research. Upon approval by
the Town Attorney, the Town Attorney shall draft a deed and forward all
documents and the proposed deed to the Real Estate Committee Chairperson. Upon
approval of the Real Estate Committee Chairperson, the deed shall be forwarded
to the Town Clerk, who shall place the deed on the agenda of the next meeting
of Council for execution.
   (C)   After execution of the deed, the Town Clerk shall forward the deed to
the owner or his or her duly appointed representative by cover letter
instructing the recipient that the deed must be recorded at the office of the
Register of Mesne Conveyances and a copy of the recorded deed furnished to the
town.
(Prior Code, § 2-61)
CHAPTER 33: ELECTIONS
Section
   
33.01   Adoption of non-partisan and run-off method
   
33.02   At-large election of Town Council
   
33.03   Determination of majority vote
   
33.04   Run-off election procedure
   
33.05   Regular election date and beginning of term of office
   
33.06   Nominations by petition; contents of petition
   
33.07   Notice of election date and deadline for filing
   
33.08   Qualification of elected officers; procedure when results are contested
   
33.09   Municipal Election Commission disbanded; authority transferred
§ 33.01 ADOPTION OF NON-PARTISAN AND RUN-OFF METHOD.
   All regular and special elections for the offices of Mayor and Town Council
of the town held after this date shall be conducted under the non-partisan
election and run-off election method as prescribed in S.C. Code § 5-15-62, as
amended.
(Prior Code, § 6-1) (Ord. passed 3-19-1979)
Statutory reference:
   Elections generally, see S.C. Code § 5-15
§ 33.02 AT-LARGE ELECTION OF TOWN COUNCIL.
   Members of the Town Council shall be elected from the town at large.
(Prior Code, § 6-2) (Ord. passed 3-19-1979)
§ 33.03 DETERMINATION OF MAJORITY VOTE.
   (A)   Results in elections conducted on Sullivan’s Island shall be
determined by a majority of the votes cast.
   (B)   A majority within the meaning of this chapter shall be determined as
follows.
      (1)   When more than one person is seeking election to a single office,
the majority shall be ascertained by dividing the total votes cast for all
candidates by two. Any excess of the sum so ascertained shall be a majority and
the candidate who obtains a majority shall be declared elected.
      (2)   When more persons are seeking election to two or more offices
(constituting a group) than there are offices to be filled, the majority shall
be ascertained by dividing the total votes cast for all candidates by the
number of offices to be filled and by dividing the results by two. Any excess
of the sum so ascertained shall be a majority and the candidates who obtain a
majority shall be declared elected. If more candidates obtain a majority than
there are offices to be filled, those having the highest vote (equal to the
number of offices to be filled) shall be declared elected.
(Prior Code, § 6-3)
§ 33.04 RUN-OFF ELECTION PROCEDURE.
   If no candidate for a single office receives a majority of the votes cast in
the first election or if an insufficient number of candidates receives a
majority of the votes cast for a group of offices, a run-off election shall be
held as herein provided.
   (A)   If no candidate for a single office receives a majority of the votes
cast in the first election, a second election shall be conducted two weeks
later between the two candidates receiving the largest number of votes in the
first election who do not withdraw. The candidates receiving a majority of the
votes cast in the run-off election shall be declared elected.
   (B)   If two or more offices (constituting a group) are to be filled and
aspirants for some or all of the positions within the group do not receive a
majority of the votes cast in the first election, a second election shall be
conducted two weeks later between one more than the number of candidates
necessary to fill the vacant offices. The candidates receiving the highest
number of votes cast in the second election equal in number to the number to be
elected shall be declared elected.
(Prior Code, § 6-4) (Ord. passed 3-19-1979)
§ 33.05 REGULAR ELECTION DATE AND BEGINNING OF TERM OF OFFICE.
   (A)   All regular general elections for the office of Mayor and the offices
of Town Council members shall be held on the first Tuesday following the first
Monday of November in odd numbered years. The terms of office of persons
elected in a regular election shall begin at the first regular meeting in
December, and terms of those elected in special elections shall begin at the
first regular meeting of Council following their election and qualification.
   (B)   Upon the enactment of this section, the town’s next general election
shall be on November 4, 2025, thus extending the terms of office of the Mayor
and three Council persons to the first regular Council meeting in December
2025. Thereafter the next general election shall be held on November 2, 2027,
thus extending the terms of three Council persons to the first regular Council
meeting in December 2027.
(Prior Code, § 6-5) (Ord. 2024-01, passed 5-21-2024)
Cross-reference:
   Temporary holdover when successor has not qualified, see §
30.09
Statutory reference:
   Special elections, see S.C. Code § 5-7-200
§ 33.06 NOMINATIONS BY PETITION; CONTENTS OF PETITION.
   Nominations for public office shall be by petition. Said petitions shall be
filed with the Municipal Clerk by 12:00 noon 75 days before the election and
shall bear the signatures of not less than 5% of the number of qualified
registered electors of the town. Each petition shall also contain a statement
of the purpose of the petition, the name of the candidate, the office sought,
the date of the election, signature and printed name of the voter, the address
of residence where registered and precinct of the voter of those signing and
shall be on good quality original bond paper sized eight and one-half inches by
14 inches. The signatures of registered voters should be numbered
consecutively. Petitions with more than one page must have pages consecutively
numbered when filing with the Municipal Clerk. All petition candidates must
also submit their statement of economic interest to the Municipal Clerk when
filing their petition.
(Prior Code, § 6-6) (Ord. passed 3-19-1979; Ord. passed 10-19-2004; Ord. 2024-
01, passed 5-21-2024)
Statutory reference:
   Filing of economic interest statements with petition, see S.C. Code § 8-13-
910
§ 33.07 NOTICE OF ELECTION DATE AND DEADLINE FOR FILING.
   (A)   The Board of Elections and Voter Registration for Charleston County
shall give public notice twice of all elections, the first notice published at
least 60 days prior thereto, noting therein the date of the election and the
deadline for filing petitions with the Municipal Clerk. The second notice must
be published not later than two weeks after the first notice.
   (B)   The notice must contain the following information:
      (1)   The last date one can register to be eligible to vote in the
upcoming election;
      (2)   The date, time and location any hearing on challenged ballots will
be held;
      (3)   The precincts involved in the election and the polling places in
those precincts;
      (4)   The time and place absentee ballots will be counted; and
      (5)   Information instructing potential candidates on how to file for
office in an election.
(Prior Code, § 6-7) (Ord. passed 3-19-1979; Ord. passed 10-19-2004; Ord. 2024-
01, passed 5-21-2024)
Statutory reference:
   Notice, see S.C. Code § 5-15-50
§ 33.08 QUALIFICATION OF ELECTED OFFICERS; PROCEDURE WHEN RESULTS ARE
CONTESTED.
   Newly-elected officers shall not be qualified until at least 48 hours after
the closing of the polls, and in the case a contest is filed, the incumbent
shall hold over until the contest is finally determined.
(Prior Code, § 6-8) (Ord. passed 3-18-1979)
§ 33.09 MUNICIPAL ELECTION COMMISSION DISBANDED; AUTHORITY TRANSFERRED.
   (A)   The town hereby disbands its Municipal Election Commission and
transfers the authority to conduct the town’s municipal elections to the Board
of Elections and Voter Registration for Charleston County. The Board of
Elections and Voter Registration for Charleston County shall conduct the
municipal elections in accordance with S.C. Code of Election Laws Title 7
unless otherwise specified by S.C. Code Title 5. The Board of Elections and
Voter Registration for Charleston County shall certify the results of each
election to the municipality immediately following the certification of the
votes cast in each election.
   (B)   The town shall reimburse the Board of Elections and Voter Registration
for Charleston County for all costs incurred in providing ballots, advertising
elections, printing costs, poll managers compensation and other related
additional expenses incurred in its conduct of municipal elections in the town.
Poll managers will be paid at the standard rate set by the county for all other
elections. In the event a protest is filed or litigation is commenced in
connection with the conduct of municipal elections, the town shall pay all
fees, costs, and expenses incurred in such protest or litigation. The
Charleston County Board of Elections and Voter Registration shall provide
invoices and/or other documentation to the town of all such costs and expenses
incurred in the conduct of the town municipal elections, protests,
certification of results, litigation or other costs which may be incurred, not
specifically mentioned in this section.
(Ord. 2024-01, passed 5-21-2024)
CHAPTER 34: MUNICIPAL COURT
Section
   
34.01   Court established; jurisdiction
   
34.02   Election of Judge; temporary appointee
   
34.03   Proceedings to be summary; jury trial under certain conditions
   
34.04   Jury commissioners to prepare box and select names
   
34.05   Drawing of jury list
   
34.06   Selection of jurors from list
   
34.07   Subsequent drawings
   
34.08   Court duties of Police Chief and police officers
   
34.09   Stenographic transcription under certain conditions
   
34.10   Appeal of sentence or judgment
   
34.11   Return of municipal Judge upon appeal
 
   
34.99   Penalty
§ 34.01 COURT ESTABLISHED; JURISDICTION.
   (A)   The Municipal Court of the town hereby is established.
   (B)   The Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction to try and determine all
cases arising under the ordinances of the town and also all such powers, duties
and jurisdiction in criminal cases as are conferred by state law upon
magistrates of the county.
   (C)   The Municipal Court Judges shall have the same power as a magistrate
to compel attendance of witnesses and require them to give evidence upon trial
before them of any person.
(Prior Code, § 12-1)
Statutory reference:
   Judicial system, see S.C. Code §§ 5-7-30, 5-7-90, 5-7-230, 14-25-510 to 14-
25-540, 14-25-910 et seq. and Act 480 approved 6-10-1980, amending S.C. Title
14, Ch. 25
§ 34.02 ELECTION OF JUDGE; TEMPORARY APPOINTEE.
   (A)   The Town Council shall elect at its annual meeting a Judge or Judges
of the Municipal Court, who shall serve until a successor is elected and
qualified. The salary of the Judges shall be determined by Town Council and
shall not be increased or diminished during the term of office. Before entering
upon his or her duties, a Judge shall take the oath prescribed by the State
Constitution.
   (B)   The Mayor may, in the absence, sickness, incapacity or
disqualification for any reason whatsoever of a Judge, appoint a disinterested
practicing attorney or other competent person residing in the town to serve
temporarily as acting Judge. Such appointee shall take the prescribed oath of
office before entering upon his or her duties.
(Prior Code, § 12-2)
§ 34.03 PROCEEDINGS TO BE SUMMARY; JURY TRIAL UNDER CERTAIN CONDITIONS.
   Persons charged in Municipal Court shall be speedily tried in a summary
manner without a jury unless jury trial is demanded by the accused.
(Prior Code, § 12-3) (Ord. passed 3-21-2000)
Statutory reference:
   Trials, see S.C. Code §§ 5-7-90 and 56-5-6220m
§ 34.04 JURY COMMISSIONERS TO PREPARE BOX AND SELECT NAMES.
   The Mayor and members of Town Council shall be the jury commissioners for
the Municipal Court. They shall prepare a box to be known as the “Jury Box”
which shall contain two apartments designated as “A” and “B” respectively. On
or before May 1 of each year, they shall prepare and place in apartment “A” of
said box the names of not less than 75% of the qualified electors of the town
of good moral character and eligible for jury duty. After placing said names in
apartment “A”, the Municipal Judge shall lock the box and keep it in a place of
safety.
(Prior Code, § 12-5)
Statutory reference:
   Jury selection, see S.C. Code § 14-25-510
§ 34.05 DRAWING OF JURY LIST.
   In all criminal cases in said Court in which a jury may be demanded either
by the town or the defendant, said jury shall be selected in the following
manner. The Municipal Judge shall draw out of apartment “A” of the jury box 18
ballots, each containing the name of an eligible juror, and list said 18 names
in duplicate, delivering one copy of the list to the municipal attorney and one
copy to the attorney for the defendant.
(Prior Code, § 12-6)
Statutory reference:
   Jury selection, see S.C. Code § 14-25-520
§ 34.06 SELECTION OF JURORS FROM LIST.
   (A)   A person appointed by the Municipal Judge shall place the 18 ballots
so drawn in a container and shall draw out one and the person so drawn shall be
one of the jury, unless challenged by either party, and the person appointed by
the presiding Judge shall then proceed until he or she shall have drawn six who
shall not have been challenged, neither party being allowed more than six
challenges.
   (B)   If the first 12 drawn shall be challenged and the parties do not agree
to a choice, the last six shall be the jury. When any of the six jurors so
drawn cannot be found or are disqualified by law to act in said case and the
parties do not supply the vacancy by agreement, the person appointed by the
Judge shall proceed to draw out of the jury box ballots for three times the
number of those deficient which shall be disposed of and be drawn as herein
provided.
(Prior Code, § 12-7)
Statutory reference:
   Jury selection, see S.C. Code § 14-25-530
§ 34.07 SUBSEQUENT DRAWINGS.
   After a jury has been drawn as provided in this chapter, the Municipal Judge
or person appointed by him or her shall place all ballots so drawn out of
apartment “A” of the jury box in apartment “B” thereof and they shall remain in
said apartment until all the names have been exhausted in drawing juries from
apartment “A”, at which time all names in apartment “B” shall be returned to
apartment “A”, and thereafter juries shall continue to be drawn therefrom in
the manner provided in this chapter until the next annual preparation of the
box.
(Prior Code, § 12-8)
Statutory reference:
   Jury selection, see S.C. Code § 14-25-540
§ 34.08 COURT DUTIES OF POLICE CHIEF AND POLICE OFFICERS.
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall attend upon the sessions of the Municipal
Court. The Chief of Police and the police officers shall be subject to the
order of the Court and shall execute the orders, writs and mandates thereof and
perform such other duties in connection with the court as may be prescribed by
town ordinances.
   (B)   The Chief of Police and police officers shall also be invested with
the same powers and duties as are devolved upon magistrate’s constables.
(Prior Code, § 12-10)
Statutory reference:
   Police duties, see S.C. Code § 14-25-950
§ 34.09 STENOGRAPHIC TRANSCRIPTION UNDER CERTAIN CONDITIONS.
   Any party shall have the right to have the testimony at a jury trial in the
Municipal Court taken stenographically by a stenographer appointed by the
Municipal Judge; provided, said party shall first tender or pay the charges of
such stenographer for taking and transcribing the same.
(Prior Code, § 12-11)
Statutory reference:
   Testimony, see S.C. Code § 14-25-960
§ 34.10 APPEAL OF SENTENCE OR JUDGMENT.
   Any party shall have the right to appeal from the sentence or judgment of
the Municipal Judge to the Circuit Court; provided, notice of intention so to
appeal be given in writing and served on the Municipal Judge within five days
after sentence is passed or judgment rendered and the party appealing enters
into bond, payable to the town, to appear and defend said appeal at the next
term of the Circuit Court or pay the fine assessed. The return shall be filed
with the Clerk of Circuit Court as the Municipal Judge shall determine.
(Prior Code, § 12-12)
Statutory reference:
   Appeal, see S.C. Code § 14-25-1000
§ 34.11 RETURN OF MUNICIPAL JUDGE UPON APPEAL.
   In the event of an appeal, the Municipal Judge shall make a return to the
tribunal to which the appeal is taken and the appeal shall be heard by the
presiding Judge upon such return. The return of the Municipal Judge shall
consist of a written report of the charges preferred, the testimony, the
proceedings and the sentence or judgment and, when the testimony has been taken
by a stenographer as herein provided, shall embrace the stenographer’s report
of the testimony. If the appeal is taken to the Circuit Court, the return shall
be filed with the Clerk of that court and the cause shall be docketed for trial
in the same manner as is not provided in case of appeals from magistrate’s
courts.
(Prior Code, § 12-13)
Statutory reference:
   Appeal, see S.C. Code § 14-25-1010
§ 34.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any person convicted of violation of this chapter, any amendment
thereof, any ordinance or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, or any state law
triable in Municipal Court shall be punished by fine not exceeding $500 or
imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, in the discretion of the Municipal Judge,
unless a different penalty for said offense is specifically imposed by the Code
section, ordinance or state law violated.
      (2)   All fines and forfeitures recovered and collected in Municipal
Court for any offense whatsoever shall belong to the town and shall be paid
into the treasury thereof.
(Prior Code, § 12-4)
   (B)   If any juror duly summoned shall neglect or refuse to appear in
obedience to any venire issued by the Municipal Court and shall not within 48
hours render to the Municipal Judge a sufficient reason for his or her
delinquency, he or she shall forfeit and pay a fine of $500 to the treasury of
the town, to be assessed by the Municipal Judge and collected on his or her
warrant. A failure to pay forthwith said fines so assessed shall constitute a
contempt of court and shall be punished accordingly.
(Prior Code, § 12-9) (Ord. passed 9-23-1997)
Statutory reference:
   For similar state law, see S.C. Code § 14-25-430
   Scope of authority to impose penalties, see S.C. Code § 5-7-30
CHAPTER 35: PLANNING COMMISSION
Section
   
35.01   Planning Commission created
   
35.02   Function of Commission
   
35.03   Membership; terms; vacancies
   
35.04   Appointment of members; removal
   
35.05   Officers of Commission; meetings; records
   
35.06   Staff and expenditures
   
35.07   Duties, responsibilities and powers
   
35.08   Preparation of proposed zoning ordinance and map
   
35.09   Approval of subdivision, re-subdivision and lot line changes
   
35.10   Endorsement of plats before recordation
   
35.11   Exceptions
   
35.12   Comprehensive Plan
§ 35.01 PLANNING COMMISSION CREATED.
   A Municipal Planning Commission is hereby established to exercise
jurisdiction over the entire area within the corporate limits of the town.
(Prior Code, § 17-1) (Ord. passed 9-16-1974)
Statutory reference:
   Authorizing Planning Commission, see S.C. Code §§ 6-7-320 et seq.
§ 35.02 FUNCTION OF COMMISSION.
   It shall be the function of this Commission to prepare a comprehensive plan
and program for the physical, social and economic growth of the town in order
to promote the public health, morals, convenience, prosperity or the general
welfare, as well as efficiency and economy of the town.
(Prior Code, § 17-2) (Ord. passed 9-16-1974)
§ 35.03 MEMBERSHIP; TERMS; VACANCIES.
   The Commission shall consist of seven persons, none of which may hold an
elected public office in this municipality or the county. The terms of the
membership shall be three years and until their successors are appointed and
qualified. The initially appointed Commission members served two-year staggered
terms. All subsequent members will serve three-year staggered terms. All terms
run from September 1 to August 31. Members may be re-appointed at the
expiration of their terms. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for
the unexpired term in the same manner of the original appointments.
(Prior Code, § 17-3) (Ord. passed 9-16-1974; Ord. passed 11-16-1999; Ord.
passed 11-20-2001; Ord. 2016-01, passed 6-21-2016)
§ 35.04 APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS; REMOVAL.
   The Town Council shall appoint the members of the Commission and may remove
any member of the Commission for cause after written notice and public hearing.
(Prior Code, § 17-4) (Ord. passed 9-16-1974)
§ 35.05 OFFICERS OF COMMISSION; MEETINGS; RECORDS.
   The Commission shall organize by electing one of its members as Chairperson,
one as Secretary. The terms of these officers shall be for one year each. The
Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairperson or of any three members.
It shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of
its transactions, findings and determinations. Records shall be open to the
public.
(Prior Code, § 17-5) (Ord. passed 9-16-1974)
§ 35.06 STAFF AND EXPENDITURES.
   (A)   The Commission may employ such staff and consult with and retain such
experts as it deems necessary consistent with funds which it may have available
on hand. Its expenditures, exclusive of gifts to the Commission or contract
receipts, shall be within the amounts appropriated to the Commission by the
Town Council.
   (B)   Requests for subdivision, re-subdivision, lot line changes, plat
approvals, zoning and/or re-zoning shall be submitted on forms provided by the
Zoning Administrator with an application fee the amount of which shall be
established by resolution of the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 17-6) (Ord. passed 9-16-1974; Ord. passed 9-18-2007)
§ 35.07 DUTIES, RESPONSIBILITIES AND POWERS.
   The Planning Commission shall have the duties, responsibilities and powers
as provided in S.C. Code §§ 6-29-310 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 17-7) (Ord. passed 9-16-1974; Ord. passed 4-20-1999)
§ 35.08 PREPARATION OF PROPOSED ZONING ORDINANCE AND MAP.
   The Planning Commission shall make and certify to the Town Council the text
of the recommended zoning ordinance and zoning map for the town. The text and
the zoning map shall be prepared with all due dispatch of the Planning
Commission and it shall hold a public hearing on the text and the map which
shall be advertised and conducted according to the state’s Local Government
Comprehensive Enabling Act of 1994, S.C. Code §§ 6-29-310 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 17-8) (Ord. passed 9-16-1974; Ord. passed 4-20-1999)
§ 35.09 APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION, RE-SUBDIVISION AND LOT LINE CHANGES.
   No land shall be subdivided or re-subdivided, no lot shall be laid out and
no boundary lines of a lot or parcel of land shall be changed except with prior
written approval of the Planning Commission. Prior to the submission of a plat
to the Planning Commission, the plat must first be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator for his or her review and recommendations. The Zoning
Administrator’s recommendations must be submitted to the Planning Commission
along with the proposed plat. Any division of land made without said Planning
Commission approval after the effective date of this amendment is unlawful;
provided, however, that subdivisions made and recorded prior to the effective
date of this amendment that met prior requirements are hereby declared to be
legal.
(Prior Code, § 17-9) (Ord. passed 4-20-1999; Ord. passed 1-18-2000)
§ 35.10 ENDORSEMENT OF PLATS BEFORE RECORDATION.
   No plat of a subdivision of land within the limits of the town shall be
filed or recorded in the office of the Register of Mesne Conveyance until the
approval of the Planning Commission shall have been endorsed thereon by the
Planning Commission Chairperson, or in his or her absence the Vice-Chairperson.
(Prior Code, § 17-10) (Ord. passed 4-20-1999; Ord. passed 1-19-2000)
§ 35.11 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   In the case of any proposed plat or survey of a lot or lots of land is
presented to the Zoning Administrator for the town, the Zoning Administrator
may review and give his or her endorsement of approval thereon provided the
following requirements are met:
      (1)   The plat or survey is a re-survey of an existing lot or lots and
does not create a subdivision or re-subdivision of land and no significant lot
line changes are shown;
      (2)   The plat or survey is prepared by a surveyor licensed by the State
of South Carolina and has placed his or her certification thereon;
      (3)   The appropriate tax map numbers are placed on the adjacent
property, and any adjacent rights-of-way are designated;
      (4)   Each lot sold, platted or surveyed shall show and designate the
street address, the lot number, tax map identification number and all metes,
bounds, courses and distances;
      (5)   All marsh lands are shown and designated and, in the event the
DHEC/OCRM critical line within any lot boundary, the critical line shall be so
designated; and
      (6)   The survey has such notes and conditions as required by the Zoning
Administrator.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator’s endorsement of approval shall be made with
the notation that his or her plat or survey is exempt from the subdivision
regulation and is hereby approved.
(Prior Code, § 17-11) (Ord. passed 9-15-2009)
Statutory reference:
   State requirements, see S.C. Code § 5-23-190
§ 35.12 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   Pursuant to S.C. Code §§ 6-29-510 et seq., Council does hereby adopt,
approve and ratify the “Town of Sullivan’s Island Comprehensive Plan 2018-2028,
2024 5-Year Review,” dated January 21, 2025, a copy of which is attached to the
ordinance codified herein and incorporated herein by reference.
(Prior Code, Comprehensive Plan) (Ord. 2009-6, passed 10-20-2009; Ord. 2019-04,
passed 8-20-2019; Ord. 2024-09, passed 11-19-2024)
CHAPTER 36: PERSONNEL AND PERSONNEL POLICIES
Section
Responsibility for Administration
   
36.001   Establishment of personnel policies
   
36.002   Establishment of Personnel Committee
   
36.003   [Repealed]
   
36.004   Delegation of responsibility of Town Council
   
36.005   Conferences on Personnel Matters Committee
Attendance, Leave and Related Personnel Practices
   
36.040   [Repealed]
   
36.041   Holidays
Separation from Service
   
36.080   [Repealed]
   
36.081   [Repealed]
   
36.082   [Repealed]
   
36.083   [Repealed]
   
36.084   [Repealed]
   
36.085   [Repealed]
   
36.086   [Repealed]
   
36.087   [Repealed]
   
36.088   [Repealed]
   
36.089   Employed at will
Employment Records and Reports
   
36.100   [Repealed]
   
36.101   Public inspection of certain records
   
36.102   Record destruction
Cross-reference:
   Administration, see
Chapter 30
   Elections, see
Chapter 33
RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION
§ 36.001 ESTABLISHMENT OF PERSONNEL POLICIES.
    The Town Council shall be responsible for establishing personnel policies.
In accordance with the performance of this responsibility, the Town Council
hereby adopts the town’s Personnel Handbook appended to Ord. 2023-01. A copy of
the Personnel Handbook is available for public inspection in the office of the
Town Clerk during normal business hours. The Town Council may amend the
Personnel Handbook from time to time by resolution of Town Council in meeting
duly assembled.
(Prior Code, § 16-1) (Ord. passed 3-15-1976; Ord. 2023-01, passed 6-20-2023)
§ 36.002 ESTABLISHMENT OF PERSONNEL COMMITTEE.
   The Personnel Committee shall have the responsibility for the administration
of the town personnel program and procedures, based on the personnel policies
established by the Town Council in this chapter and in the town’s Personnel
Handbook. The Personnel Committee shall consist of the Town Administrator, the
Mayor, and the Chairman of the Administration Committee.
(Prior Code, § 16-2) (Ord. passed 3-15-1976; Ord. 2023-01, passed 6-20-2023)
§ 36.003 [REPEALED].
§ 36.004 DELEGATION OF RESPONSIBILITY OF TOWN COUNCIL.
   The Council, at its discretion, may delegate all or any part of any
responsibility conferred upon it pursuant to this chapter and other ordinances
of the town and the state law relating to hiring, complaints, discipline and
discharge of employees to the Personnel Committee.
(Prior Code, § 16-4) (Ord. passed 3-15-1976)
§ 36.005 CONFERENCES ON PERSONNEL MATTERS COMMITTEE.
   (A)   A department head or supervisor shall confer with the Town
Administrator regarding any and all matters relating to personnel.
   (B)   The Administrator shall confer with Council Committee Chairpersons
regarding matters of personnel relating to any such Council Committee.
   (C)   The Administrator shall confer with the Town Council regarding matters
relating to personnel.
(Prior Code, § 16-5) (Ord. passed 3-15-1976; Ord. 2023-01, passed 6-20-2023)
ATTENDANCE, LEAVE AND RELATED PERSONNEL PRACTICES
§ 36.040 [RESERVED].
§ 36.041 HOLIDAYS.
   (A)   All regular full-time employees of the town shall observe the
following official holidays as vacation with pay:
      (1)   January 1, New Year’s Day;
      (2)    Third Monday in January, Martin Luther King, Jr. Day;
      (3)   Third Monday in February, Presidents’ Day;
      (4)   Memorial Day;
      (5)   July 4, Independence Day;
      (6)   First Monday in September, Labor Day;
      (7)   November 11, Veteran’s Day;
      (8)   Thanksgiving Day;
      (9)   Day after Thanksgiving Day;
      (10)   December 24, Christmas Eve;
      (11)   December 25, Christmas Day;
      (12)   December 26, day after Christmas;
      (13)   Personal day of choice (with supervisor’s approval); and
      (14)   Other holidays as may be designated by the town.
   (B)   For each paid holiday, each regular, full-time employee shall receive
a holiday allowance equal to his or her normal pay for one workday. This time
shall be counted as hours worked for the purpose of computing overtime.
   (C)   If one of the above holidays falls on other than a workday, employees
shall be granted a holiday on a day either preceding or following the holiday,
the determination to be made by the Personnel Committee with the approval of
Town Council.
   (D)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, holidays for
personnel providing 24-hour essential services to town residents shall be
governed by the practices essential to appropriate operation within that
department.
(Prior Code, § 16-15) (Ord. passed 9-19-2000, Ord. passed 12-3-2001; Ord.
passed 1-22-2013; Ord. 2022-01, passed 5-17-2022; Ord. 2022-06, passed 7-19-
2022)
SEPARATION FROM SERVICE
§ 36.080 [RESERVED].
§ 36.081 [RESERVED].
§ 36.082 [RESERVED].
§ 36.083 [RESERVED].
§ 36.084 [RESERVED].
§ 36.085 [RESERVED].
§ 36.086 [RESERVED].
§ 36.087 [RESERVED].
§ 36.088 [RESERVED].
§ 36.089 EMPLOYED AT WILL.
   (A)   A decision of the state’s Supreme Court requires that the town inform
its employees in a conspicuous manner that they are employed “at will”. This
means that they are free to terminate their employment at any time, with or
without notice and with or without reason. The town retains the same right.
   (B)   No person except Town Council has authority to enter into a contract
of employment which is not terminable at will. Neither the town’s policies, not
its practices, nor the oral assurances of its representatives create a contract
of employment.
   (C)   A contract of employment entered into by the town must be in writing,
must state that it is a “Contract of Employment” and must be signed by the
Mayor after a public vote by Town Council.
(Prior Code, Chapter 16)
EMPLOYMENT RECORDS AND REPORTS
§ 36.100 [RESERVED].
§ 36.101 PUBLIC INSPECTION OF CERTAIN RECORDS.
   The following information relative to employees and former employees is
available for public inspection at reasonable times and in accordance with such
procedures as the Personnel Committee may prescribe: name; address; and class
(job) title. Examination records, performance rating reports and salary are
accessible only to the department head concerned, the Personnel Committee and
the employee involved. Other personnel information may be made available for
official purposes at the discretion of Town Council, but in compliance with all
state and federal freedom of information acts.
(Prior Code, § 16-36) (Ord. passed 3-15-1976)
§ 36.102 RECORD DESTRUCTION.
   All records shall be kept three years. All other records, including
correspondence, applications and examinations may be destroyed after three
years at the discretion of the Personnel Committee.
(Prior Code, § 16-37) (Ord. passed 3-15-1976)
CHAPTER 37: PROCUREMENT CODE
Section
   
37.01   Title
   
37.02   Authority
   
37.03   Compliance with other laws and regulations
   
37.04   Ethical procurements
   
37.05   Procurement limitations and authorization
   
37.06   Resolution of protested solicitations and awards
   
37.07   Open records
   
37.08   Disposal of town property other than real property
   
Appendix A: Procurement Regulations Guide
§ 37.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be referred to as the “Procurement Code for the Town of
Sullivan’s Island, South Carolina.”
(Ord. 2020-22, passed 1-19-2021)
§ 37.02 AUTHORITY.
   (A)   This chapter is adopted pursuant to and in compliance with South
Carolina law and with the authority of the Town Council of Sullivan’s Island.
Town Council shall develop the policies dictating the procurement of goods and
services. Town Council has the right to assume full and final authority in any
procurement matter.
   (B)   As used in this chapter, PROCUREMENT is defined as the process and
procedure for obtaining goods and services, including all activities from the
planning steps including the preparation and processing of a requisition,
through receipt and acceptance of delivery and processing of a final invoice
for payment.
   (C)   The Council of the town delegates to the Town Administrator, or
designee, the duties and responsibilities for administering the procurement of
all supplies, services, and construction, as well as the management and
disposal of surplus supplies and equipment in accordance with this chapter.
   (D)   The Town Comptroller or authorized designee, shall provide for
implementation and compliance with all requirements of this chapter in order to
maximize the purchasing value of public funds, providing safeguards for
maintaining quality and integrity within the procurement system, yet providing
for the fair and equitable treatment of all involved in public procurement. The
Town Comptroller shall organize and execute all procurement activities for the
town as set forth in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 22-2) (Ord. 2020-22, passed 1-19-2021)
§ 37.03 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent any municipal department from
complying with the terms and conditions of state or federal laws and/or
regulations which may be applicable.
   (B)   Procurement which involves the expenditure of federal assistance,
contract funds, any grants, gifts, or bequest shall also comply with such
federal and state laws and authorized regulations as are mandatorily applicable
regardless of whether they are presently reflected in this chapter.
Notwithstanding where requirements within this chapter are more restrictive,
federal or state requirements shall be followed.
   (C)   The Town Administrator and Comptroller have created a set of
regulations which are hereby adopted and are incorporated into this chapter as
Appendix A.
(Ord. 2020-22, passed 1-19-2021)
§ 37.04 ETHICAL PROCUREMENTS.
   (A)   In all actions involving the procurement of supplies, services, or
construction for the town, the provisions of S.C. Code, Title 8, Chapter 13
(State Ethics Act), 1976, as amended, shall be complied with and observed.
Every contract or duty imposes an obligation of good faith in the negotiation,
performance, or enforcement by town staff. GOOD FAITH means honesty in fact in
the conduct or transaction concerned and the observance of reasonable
commercial standards of fair dealing. All procurement activities shall be
performed in an ethical manner. No member of Town Council or any officer or
employee of the town, shall have a financial interest in any contract or in the
sale to the town or to a contractor supplying the town of any land or rights or
interest in any land, material supplies or services; except when a majority of
the Town Council determines such exception is in the best interest of the town,
provided, that no Councilperson whose interest is involved shall vote on the
question. Any willful violation of this section shall constitute malfeasance in
office, and any officer or employee of the  town found guilty thereof shall
thereby forfeit his or her office or position. Any violation of this section
with the knowledge, expressed or implied, of the person or corporation
contracting with the town shall render the contract voidable by the Town
Administrator or the Town Council.
   (B)   The following actions are prohibited and shall be avoided by all those
involved in the procurement activities of the town:
      (1)   Not obligate the town financially or otherwise by any means,
including but not limited to purchase orders and contracts, when the employee
or Councilmember has a personal, financial, or other interest in the
obligation;
      (2)   Prohibited from directly or indirectly soliciting or accepting any
rebate, kickback, gift, gratuity, or favor for personal gain from any
individual, corporation, organization, or group. Doing so may lead to
disciplinary action.
      (3)   Prohibited from accepting any form of gratuities, with the
exception of nonconsumable marketing or promotional mementos valued at $25 or
less which may be accepted but shared with all town employees (i.e., pens,
paper clips, pencils, cups, and the like). Accepting any other such form of
gratuities, may lead to disciplinary action.
(Prior Code, § 22-1) (Ord. 2020-22, passed 1-19-2021)
§ 37.05 PROCUREMENT LIMITATIONS AND AUTHORIZATION.
   (A)   It is the town’s policy to develop competition to ensure maximum
purchasing value for all procurements and to make awards based on the lowest,
responsive, responsible bid/offer received. Nothing in this section shall
prohibit a higher level, more stringent procurement method being used if it is
determined that the town’s best interest would be better served. No contract or
purchase shall be subdivided to avoid the requirements of this section.
   (B)   Upon verification of adequate monies, procurement of goods and/or
services shall be executed as follows:
      (1)   $1 to $5,000 - administrative process “delegated authority.”
Competitive bidding is not required. The department initiating the purchase
should exercise good judgment in accordance with this chapter.
      (2)   $5,001 to 10,000 – verbal quotations.
         (a)   Competitive pricing is required. The departments will request
verbal quotations from vendors in order to obtain competitive pricing. At
minimum, three verbal quotes shall be solicited.
         (b)   The Town Administrator or the Town Comptroller, or designees,
must approve before the purchase is made.
      (3)   $10,001 to $25,000 – written quotations.
         (a)   Competitive pricing is required. The departments will request
written quotations from vendors in order to obtain competitive pricing. At
minimum, three written quotes shall be solicited.
         (b)   The Town Administrator and the Town Comptroller, or designees,
must approve before the purchase is made.
         (c)   Purchases inclusive of grants and those with federal funds shall
be referred to the Town Comptroller for processing.
      (4)   $25,001 to $49,999 – informal solicitations for bids or proposals.
         (a)   Competitive bidding is required. The Town Council will issue a
written Invitation for Bids (IFB), Request for Proposals (RFP), or Request for
Qualifications (RFQ) depending on the type of procurement. At minimum, three
written bids or responses should be solicited.
         (b)   The Town Administrator and the Town Comptroller, or designees,
must approve before the purchase.
         (c)   Purchases inclusive of grants and those with federal funds shall
be referred to the Town Comptroller for processing.
      (5)   Purchases $50,000 and over – formal solicitations for bids or
proposals.
         (a)   Competitive, sealed bidding is required; however, approval by
Council is required before the purchase is made.
         (b)   Procurements involving construction may use a construction
contracting administration method which is most advantageous to the town and
will result in the most timely, acceptable quality, economical, and successful
completion of the construction project. The Town Administrator or designees,
shall make a determination regarding the appropriate method of construction
contracting administration for a particular construction project.
         (c)   When it is determined that competitive, sealed bidding is either
not practical, appropriate, or advantageous, competitive, formal sealed
proposals shall be used. Approval by the Council is required before the
purchase is made.
   (C)   Exceptions to bidding include the sole source, professional services,
emergency procurements, purchasing cooperatives, multiterm contracts, and
critical procurements as defined below.
      (1)   SOLE SOURCE.
         (a)   Sole source procurement is acceptable when, after a good faith
review of all possible sources, it is determined there is only one viable
source for material, supply, or service.
         (b)   Sole source requests should not be made unless town staff is
confident the request is reasonable and appropriately justified.
         (c)   For sole source procurements between $5,001 and $25,000, at the
request of the department manager, the Town Administrator, the Comptroller, or
their designees, must approve the written sole source justification prior to
the purchase being made. Approval by the Town Administrator, or designee is
required for procurements between $25,001 to $50,000.
      (2)   PROFESSIONAL SERVICES. Professional services shall be advertised
formally when services are expected to be $50,000 or greater.
      (3)   EMERGENCY PROCUREMENTS. The Town Administrator, or designee, may
make or authorize others to make emergency procurements when there exists a
threat to public health, welfare, or safety under emergency conditions or where
normal daily operations are affected or in jeopardy.
      (4)   PURCHASING COOPERATIVES. The State of South Carolina and its
agencies, Charleston County and other South Carolina counties, South Carolina
municipalities or purchasing cooperatives write numerous indefinite-delivery-
type contracts yearly with manufacturers, service providers and contractors for
regional and/or nationwide items or services. In all cases, town procurement of
equipment, goods or services may be made from suppliers which have contracts in
place through the State of South Carolina or one of its agencies, or Charleston
County or other South Carolina county, or South Carolina municipality, or the
U.S. General Services Administration, or purchasing cooperative, without
seeking competitive bids or proposals.
      (5)   MULTITERM CONTRACTS. Multiterm contracts, also known as indefinite
delivery or indefinite quantity contracts, may be used for products, goods,
and/or services of such nature that an ongoing annual requirement exists. Where
and when such conditions exist, multiterm contracts should be used as much as
possible to be in the best interests of the town. Multiterm contracts for
supplies and services may be entered into for specified periods of time, not to
exceed five years.
         (a)   Subject to the limitations of this chapter, any type of contract
which promotes the best interests of the town may be used, with the exception
of cost-plus-a-percentage-of-cost contract which is prohibited. A cost
reimbursement, or a cost reimbursement-plus-a-fixed-fee, may be used when it is
determined that such a contract would be less costly to the town than any other
type, or that it is impracticable to obtain the supplies, services, or
construction required except under such a contract.
         (b)   The town’s best interest shall be served by contracts originated
by using competitive prices obtained by: itemized unit measurement with cost,
itemized project description breakdown with costs itemized, and lump sum
project cost.
      (6)   CRITICAL PROCUREMENT. The Town Administrator, or designee, may make
or authorize procurements that in nature are critical to the town, and time
does not permit for solicitation or re-solicitation, and that the procurement
may be accomplished in such a method that provides the town’s best interest be
served.
(Prior Code, §§ 22-3, 22-4, 22-8, 22-9, 22-10) (Ord. 2020-22, passed 1-19-2021)
§ 37.06 RESOLUTION OF PROTESTED SOLICITATIONS AND AWARDS.
   (A)   Right to protest. Any actual or prospective bidder, offeror,
contractor, or subcontractor who is aggrieved in connection with the
solicitation or award of a contract may protest in writing by hand-delivered or
certified mail, return receipt requested to the Town Administrator. The
protest, setting forth, in detail, the grievance shall be submitted in writing,
and received within five calendar days from the time of award of the goods or
services being grieved.
   (B)   Authority to resolve protests.
      (1)   Informal solicitation of purchases less than $50,000, and its
award.
         (a)   The Town Administrator, or designee, shall have the authority to
settle and resolve a protest of the aggrieved concerning the solicitation or
award of an informal contract, of which the value of the solicitation or award
was not expected to exceed an amount of $50,000.
         (b)   The Town Administrator, or designee, shall meet with the
aggrieved, within five business days to review and receive comments and facts
giving rise thereto.
      (2)   Formal solicitation and its award.
         (a)   The Town Administrator, or designee, shall deliver to the Mayor
to settle and resolve a protest of the aggrieved concerning the solicitation or
award if it would have or was expected to exceed $50,000.
         (b)   The Mayor, having received a protest of the aggrieved shall:
            1.   Schedule and convene, within ten business days, a special
meeting of Council; or
            2.   Put on the agenda for the next scheduled meeting, whichever is
quicker.
         (c)   The Council shall review and offer to hear comments from the
aggrieved setting forth their grievance and the facts giving rise thereto.
         (d)   The Council’s authority shall be utilized in a manner consistent
with this chapter and regulations governing the procurement of supplies,
services, and construction for the town.
   (C)   Decision.
      (1)   Informal solicitation of purchases less than $50,000 and its award.
The Town Administrator, or designee, shall promptly issue a decision in writing
to the protestor. The Town Administrator’s response shall be issued within ten
business days from the date of meeting with the protestant.
      (2)   Formal solicitation of purchases of $50,000 and greater and its
award. The Council shall promptly issue a decision in writing to the protestor.
The Council’s response shall be issued within ten business days from the date
of having convened the Council and received or heard comments from the
protestant.
   (E)   Notice of decision. A copy of the notice of the decision under
division (C) of this section shall be delivered by certified mail, return
receipt requested immediately upon issuance to the protestor and any other
party intervening.
   (F)   Finality of decision. A decision under division (C) of this section
shall be final and conclusive, unless fraudulent, or unless any person
adversely affected by the decision requests a final appeal in writing, setting
forth the grievance, within five business days of receipt of notice of the
decision.
      (1)   Appeal. Any actual or prospective bidder, offeror, contractor, or
subcontractor, having received the notice of decision, may file a final appeal.
      (2)   Appeal of Town Administrator’s decision (informal solicitations).
The final appeal, setting forth the specific reasons and basis for the appeal
of the Town Administrator’s decision, shall be received in writing, by hand-
delivery or by certified mail, return receipt requested, within five business
days of receipt of notice of the Administrator’s decision, to the Mayor.
   (G)   Authority to resolve appeals; final appeal of Administrator’s
decision. The Mayor, having received a request for appeal of a decision
rendered by the Administrator shall bring before full Council and resolve in
like manner as protests under division (B)(2) of this section.
   (H)   Decision of appeal. The Mayor shall promptly issue the decision of the
Council, in writing to the appellant within ten business days of having heard
and reviewed the appeal. The decision shall state the reasons for the actions
taken.
   (I)   Finality of decision. A decision rendered under division (H) of this
section is considered final and conclusive, unless fraudulent. Such a decision
is the final administrative review and the decision of the town which can be
appealed to the Circuit Courts of the state.
(Prior Code, § 22-11) (Ord. 2020-22, passed 1-19-2021)
§ 37.07 OPEN RECORDS.
   The Procurement Division shall keep a record of all open solicitations and
bids submitted in competition thereon, and such records shall be open to public
inspection in accordance with the town policies on the Freedom of Information
Act.
(Ord. 2020-22, passed 1-19-2021)
§ 37.08 DISPOSAL OF TOWN PROPERTY OTHER THAN REAL PROPERTY.
   The sale, lease, or disposal of surplus supplies, inventories, and other
town properties, other than real properties, shall be by in-house auction,
outside auction, formal or informal bidding process, online auction services,
broker services, or other appropriate competitive methods designated herein or
otherwise as authorized by the Town Administrator, or authorized designee. The
sale, lease, or disposition of real properties rests within the authority of
full Council.
(Ord. 2020-22, passed 1-19-2021)
APPENDIX A: PROCUREMENT REGULATIONS GUIDE
Effective February 13, 2018 - Updated October 2, 2019
   Table of Contents
   SECTION 1: WHAT IS PROCUREMENT
   
1.1   Procurement Authority
   
1.2   Procurement Mission Statement
   
1.3   Procurement Objectives and Standards
   
1.4   Procurement Ethics
   
1.5   Procurement Organization Structure
   SECTION 2: TOWN POLICIES AFFECTING PROCUREMENT
   
2.1   Solicitation Policies
   
2.2   Procurement Levels
   
2.3   Exceptions to Bidding
   
2.3A   Sole Source
   
2.3B   Emergency Procurement
   
2.3C   Purchasing Cooperatives
   
2.3D   Critical Procurement
   
2.4   Invalid purchases
   
2.5   Insurance
   
2.6   Training
   
2.7   Retention and Disposition
   SECTION 3: METHODS OF PROCUREMENT
   
3.1   Appropriated Monies
   
3.2   Contracts or Agreements
   
3.3   Purchase Orders
   
3.4   Change Orders
   SECTION 4: TOWN PROCEDURES FOR SOLICITATIONS
   
4.1   Notice/Advertisement of Solicitations
   
4.2   Specifications
   
4.3   Receipt, Safeguarding and Opening of Solicitations
   
4.4   Corrections or Withdrawals
   
4.5   Late Bids/Proposals
   
4.6   Acceptance and Evaluation
   
4.7   Negotiations
   
4.7A   Informal Bids
   
4.7B   Sealed Bids
   
4.7C   Sealed Proposals
   
4.7D   Multi-step Sealed Bidding/Proposals
   
4.8   Award
   
4.8A   Tied Offerors
   
4.8B   Award Delay
   
4.9   Policies for Offerors
   
4.9A   Collusion or Anticompetitive Practices
   
4.9B   Responsibility of Offerors
   
4.9C   Approved Accounting Systems
   
4.9D   Right to Audit Records
   
4.9E   Resolution of Protested Solicitations and Awards
   SECTION 5: CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTING
   
5.1   Design-Bid-Build Method of Construction Contracting
   
5.2   Design-Build Method of Construction
   
5.3   Construction Manager at Risk Method of Construction
   
5.4   Bid Security
   
5.5   Performance Bonds
   
5.6   Retention
   SECTION 6: PROFESSIONAL SERVICES
   SECTION 7: VENDOR ISSUES
   
7.1   Resolution of Contract Controversies
   
7.2   Violations of Law
   
7.3   Authority to Debar or Suspend
   SECTION 8: TYPES OF CONTRACTS
   
8.1   Term
   
8.2   Multi-Term
   
8.3   Contract Clauses
   
8.4   Price Adjustments
   SECTION 9: MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL OF TOWN PROPERTY OTHER THAN REAL PROPERTY
   
9.1   Salvageable Personal Property
   
9.2   Non-Salvageable Personal Property
   
9.3   Seized Assets and Unclaimed Properties
SECTION 1: WHAT IS PROCUREMENT
Procurement is the process through which requisitions are received,
solicitations issued, vendors selected, contracts awarded, purchase orders
issued, goods or services are received, and payment is made.
One of Procurement’s main roles is ensuring goods and services are of high
quality, available when needed and not overpriced. Additionally, taxpayers must
know that public funds are spent wisely on its behalf and not for the personal
benefit of government employees, officials, or their friends.
The Procurement Agents, consisting of the Town Administrator and the
Comptroller, procure goods and services for the Town of Sullivan's Island
(Town) by performing the following tasks:
   •   Process and approve certain purchase requisitions
   •   Issue purchase orders and change orders
   •   Review specifications
   •   Advertise and issue solicitations
   •   Evaluate bids, proposals, and quotations
   •   Negotiate and draft contracts
   •   Maintain vendor contact lists
   •   Administer and closeout contracts
   •   Resolve vendor/contractor performance complaints and contract compliance
issues
   •   Verify licenses and insurance coverage for contractors (as needed)
   •   Provide procurement training
   •   Ensure compliance with the Procurement Code (Chapter 37 of Town
Ordinances) and audit procurement files
   •   Manage surplus and seized property and disposition
   •   Review and Update the Town’s Procurement Regulations Guide on an annual
basis.
1.1: Procurement Authority
The Procurement Agents derive their authority from Town Ordinance Chapter 37.
Town Council passed and adopted Ordinance Chapter 22, to govern the procurement
activities of the Town, under the direction of the Town Administrator and the
Comptroller. In general, the Ordinance established that the Procurement Agents'
duties have been prescribed by the laws of the State of South Carolina and Town
Council. Federal law is applicable to Town procurement activities anytime
Federal funds are used for certain procurements.
1.2: Procurement Mission Statement
To effectively manage the costs of goods and services to best meet the needs of
Town departments and to deliver superior performance in a manner that is
distinctive and impactful to each person served and establishes a standard for
quality that endures for generations.
1.3: Procurement Objectives and Standards
All procurements will be conducted with the following values:
   •   Avoid unfair practices and give all qualified vendors an equal
opportunity to do businesses with the Town.
   •   Refuse to accept any form of bribery and prevent any appearance of doing
so.
   •   Receive counsel from colleagues and cooperate with them to promote a
spirit of teamwork and unity.
   •   Behave with fairness and dignity, and demand honesty and truth
throughout the procurement process.
   •   Strive for greater knowledge of procurement methods and the materials
and services purchased.
   •   Purchase without prejudice, stimulate competition on all procurements,
and seek to obtain the maximum value for each dollar spent of taxpayer monies.
   •   Maintain competitive bidding procedures as the primary, preferred,
method of procurement.
   •   Develop material standards that afford a wide area of competitive
bidding consistent with the required levels of quality.
   •   Maintain open, public records of firms solicited, and all prices quoted
and paid for items obtained for Town use.
   •   Furnish clear indications of quality and service required in all bid
solicitations.
1.4: Procurement Ethics
The following ethic statements are applicable to all Town employees who
participate in the procurement process:
   •   Town employees shall not obligate the Town financially or otherwise by
any means, including but not limited to purchase orders and contracts, when the
employee has a personal, material, financial or other interest in the
obligation.
   •   Employees are prohibited from directly or indirectly soliciting or
accepting any rebate, kickback, gift, gratuity, or favor for personal gain from
any individual, corporation, organization, or group. Doing so may lead to
disciplinary action.
   •   Town employees shall not accept any form of gratuities, with the
exception of non-consumable marketing or promotional mementos valued at $25 or
less which may be accepted but shared with all Town employees (i.e., pens,
paper clip holders, pencils, cups, etc.). Accepting any other such form of
gratuities, may lead to disciplinary action.
Every contract or duty imposes an obligation of good faith in the negotiation,
performance or enforcement by Town staff. Good faith means honesty in fact in
the conduct or transaction concerned and the observance of reasonable
commercial standards of fair dealing.
In all actions involving the procurement of Town items, the provisions of South
Carolina State Ethics Act shall be complied and observed.
1.5: Procurement Organization Structure
The Town Administrator, or designee, shall be responsible for administering the
Procurement Code.
The Comptroller, or designee, shall provide for implementation and compliance
with all the requirements of this policy to meet the objectives and standard
set forth. The Town Administrator and Comptroller shall coordinate with the
Department Heads in establishing specifications for use in the procurement of
all materials, supplies, equipment, construction, or services, including
directing the bidding process of appropriate purchases, supervising the
evaluation of bids, and participating in contract negotiations. They shall
coordinate the awarding and executing of contracts and purchases within the
confines of the procurement ordinance and ensure compliance with local, State,
and Federal guidelines. The Comptroller shall be responsible for training staff
in the procurement policies and establishing and maintaining an effective
professional working relationship between all personnel and suppliers,
department heads, contracts, and other governmental units and the public.
Department heads and/or any Town agent shall provide for implementation and
compliance with all the requirements of this policy and as applicable to small
purchases, departmental procurement inclusive of internal departmental
processes and procedures or the expenditure of public monies.
The Administrative Department is located at the Town hall at 2056 Middle
Street. Office hours are Monday through Friday, 8 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
SECTION 2: TOWN POLICIES AFFECTING PROCUREMENT
2.1: Solicitation Policies
It is the Town’s policy to develop competition to ensure maximum purchasing
value for all procurements and to make awards based on the lowest, responsive,
responsible Bid/Offer received.
Nothing in this section shall prohibit a higher level, more stringent
procurement method being used if it is determined that the Town’s best interest
would be better served.
Purchase orders will be issued, using the Town’s financial software, to the
recommended vendor. Purchase requisitions entered into the financial software
must be approved based upon the correct level of authorization which
corresponds to the purchase price.
2.2: Procurement Levels
$1 to $5,000 - Administrative Process “Delegated Authority”
Competitive bidding is not required. At the Buyer’s discretion, a purchase
order will be issued to the vendor recommended by the requesting department.
The department head, or designee, must approve the purchase requisition in the
financial software which authorizes the purchase. The department should
exercise good judgement in accordance with this Guide. The department head, or
designee, shall ensure funds are budgeted sufficient for the purchase.
$5,001 to $10,000 - Verbal Quotations
Competitive pricing is required. Departments shall request verbal quotations
from vendors in order to obtain competitive pricing. At minimum, three quotes
shall be solicited.
$10,001 to $25,000 - Written Quotations
Competitive pricing is required. Departments shall request written quotations
from vendors in order to obtain competitive pricing. At minimum, three written
quotes shall be solicited.
If three quotes cannot be solicited, please see section on Sole Source. Award
is made to the lowest quote.
The Town Administrator and the Comptroller, or designees, must approve before
the purchase is made if between $10,001 to $25,000.
Purchases inclusive of grants, those with Federal funds, or those requiring
contracts shall be referred to the Town Administrator for processing.
$25,001 to $49,999 - Informal Solicitations for Bids or Proposals
Procurement will issue a written Invitation for Bids (IFB), a Request for
Proposal (RFP), or a Request for Qualifications (RFQ), depending on the type of
procurement. Typically, commodity items are procured using a bid process where
an award is made to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder. However, in
some instances an RFP may be used.
At minimum, three written bids should be solicited in the case of an IFB. If
three bids cannot be solicited, please see section on Sole Source. Award is
made to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder. In the case of RFP/RFQ,
award is made in accordance with the evaluation criteria, terms and conditions
stated therein.
Purchases inclusive of grants, those with Federal funds, or those requiring
contracts shall be referred to the Town Administrator for processing.
For normal competitive purchases, the department manager, the Town
Administrator, and the Comptroller, or designees shall approve before the
purchase is made.
Purchases over $49,999 - Formal Bids or RFQ/RFPs
Competitive, sealed bidding is required; however, approval by the Town Council
for purchases over $49,999 is required before the purchase is made.
Procurements involving construction may use a construction contracting
administration method which is most advantageous to the Town and will result in
the most timely, acceptable quality, economical, and successful completion of
the construction project. The Town Administrator or designee, shall make a
determination regarding the appropriate method of construction contracting
administration for a particular construction project.
When it is determined that competitive, sealed bidding is either not practical,
appropriate or advantageous, competitive, formal sealed proposals shall be
used. Approval by the Council is required before the purchase is made.
2.3: Exceptions to Bidding
2.3A: Sole Source
Sole Source procurement is acceptable when, after a good faith review of all
possible sources, it is determined there is only one viable source for
material, supply, or service. To be a sole source:
   •   a vendor shall have the ability to deliver a unique material or service,
   •   have technical expertise or qualifications,
   •   have software license,
   •   the ability to deliver at a particular time, or
   •   have the ability to fulfill the needs for a special purpose or situation
from a qualified provider.
Sole source requests should not be made unless the department is confident the
request is reasonable, appropriately justified to meet the Town’s requirements,
and can withstand a possible audit. Sole source minimizes or eliminates
competition and should be prudently used.
The department manager, or designee, may use “delegated authority” practices
for purchases $5,000 and under. From $5,000 to $25,000 the department manager,
the Town Administrator, or the Comptroller, or designees, must approve the
written sole source justification before the purchase may be made. For
purchases between $25,001 to $49,999, the department must coordinate with the
Comptroller, or designees, before obtaining approval by the Town Administrator,
or designee.
2.3B: Emergency Procurement
The Town Administrator, or designee, may make or authorize others to make
emergency procurements when there exists a threat to public health, welfare, or
safety under emergency conditions or where normal daily operations are affected
or in jeopardy.
Technically, an emergency need is one that could not have been foreseen.
Failure to submit a requisition on time does not constitute a valid emergency.
2.3C: Purchasing Cooperatives
The State of South Carolina and its agencies, Charleston County and other South
Carolina counties, South Carolina municipalities or purchasing cooperatives
write numerous indefinite-delivery-type contracts yearly with manufacturers,
service providers and contractors for regional and/or nationwide items or
services. In all cases, town procurement of equipment, goods or services may be
made from suppliers which have contracts in place through the State of South
Carolina or one of its agencies, or Charleston County or other South Carolina
county, or South Carolina municipality, or the U.S. General Services
Administration, or purchasing cooperative, without seeking competitive bids or
proposals.
For purchases over $10,000, departments must coordinate with the Comptroller,
or designee, to ensure proper procurement.
The Town may sell to, under the guidance of the Town Administrator, may acquire
from, or use any supplies belonging to another public procurement unit as
agreed upon between the parties. The Town, under the guidance of the Town
Administrator, may enter into agreements for the common use or lease of
warehousing facilities, capital equipment, and other facilities with another
public procurement unit under the terms agreed upon between the parties.
2.3D: Critical Procurement
The Town Administrator, or designee, may make or authorize procurements that in
nature are critical to the Town, and time does not permit for solicitation or
re-solicitation, and that the procurement may be accomplished in such a method
that provides the Town’s best interest be served.
The Town Administrator, or designee, may make or authorize others to make,
critical procurements when in nature, it is critical to the Town and time does
not permit for solicitation or re-solicitation and that the method provides
that the Town’s best interest is served. In such cases, the department head
must coordinate with the Comptroller, or designee, before seeking written
approval by the Town Administrator, or designee.
2.4: Invalid purchases
The Town may consider as void, any purchase or contract made on behalf of the
Town which is contrary to the provisions of Town Ordinance
Chapter 37 or this policy. The employee making such purchase transactions will
be considered for disciplinary action by their department manager or the Town
Administrator as appropriate.
2.5: Insurance
The Town requires that contractors have, and maintain, certain types of
insurance coverage when they repair, install, construct, or otherwise perform
services. Insurance requirements vary depending on the type/scope of services
provided. In certain cases, the contractor will need to provide insurance
coverage. Insurance coverage may include commercial general liability,
automobile liability, worker's compensation insurance, and/or professional
liability insurance. The departments are required to follow up with the
contractor to ensure insurance records are kept and maintained up-to-date. If
the contractor fails to provide insurance coverage requirements, or
documentation is not provided to the Town; the Town reserves the right to
terminate the contract with the contractor for cause.
2.6: Training
The Town will provide, at least annually, a training session for all Town
departments to familiarize themselves with the Town’s policies, procedures and
guidelines for the procurement process.
2.7: Retention and Disposition
The Public Records Act (Code of Laws of South Carolina 1976, as amended,
Sections 30-1-10 through 30-1-170) sets forth requirements for the retention
and disposition of Procurement Files. Departments should coordinate records
retention and disposition with the Town Clerk.
SECTION 3: METHODS OF PROCUREMENT
3.1: Appropriated Monies
Except for emergencies or other authorized exceptions, no procurement or
commitment of monies shall be made by any department, or employee of the Town
unless monies have been appropriated and are available in the appropriate
account. Monies can be transferred from other line items within a department
with the approval of the Town Administrator, Comptroller, or designee.
3.2: Contracts or Agreements
A contract, or an agreement, is a legally binding document that is used for
most purchases over $50,000. It authorizes the contractor to design, build,
provide services or deliver materials or supplies in accordance with the terms
and conditions specified thereon (or incorporated from a bid or other document
by reference). It also acknowledges the obligation of the Town to pay for goods
or services ordered, upon the receipt and proper invoice. The Town Council and/
or the Town Administrator, or authorized designee, may legally bind the Town in
procurement documents. All negotiations, contracts and the like are not
finalized until written signature of the Town Administrator or authorized
designee.
3.3: Purchase Orders
A purchase order (PO) authorizes the vendor to deliver materials or supplies in
accordance with the terms and conditions specified thereon (or incorporated
from a bid or other document by reference). It also acknowledges the obligation
of the Town to pay for goods or services ordered, upon the receipt and proper
invoice. Unless a separate contract document is executed, the purchase order
establishes the contractual relationship between the Town and the vendor.
A PO is a legally binding contract. The PO is the Town’s commitment for the
value of the material or service ordered.
One-time purchase orders are generally issued for a finite quantity of
products, construction, or services. Once a PO has been issued, the accounting
system will automatically encumber, or set aside, the monies from the
department’s budget. This allows the department to more closely monitor their
budget. Once the goods or service has been received, and the invoice has been
received and approved; payment may be applied.
A blanket purchase order may be used for purchases that are made on an “as-
needed” basis. Only items, or services, that are described on the blanket
purchase order may be purchased. Control of the use of the blanket purchase
order is the responsibility of the Comptroller, or designee. Blanket PO’s allow
departments to order as-needed items throughout the fiscal year without having
to request a new PO for each purchase as well as the ability to qualify for
lower, consolidated pricing. Any authorized Town employee may issue a release
for specific goods described by the blanket PO pursuant to its terms and
conditions.
In certain instances, for example, purchases from utilities, PO’s may not be
required. It is the responsibility of the Comptroller to make the determination
as to the necessity of a PO for such purchases.
3.4: Change Orders
Because the contract or purchase order (PO) is a legal document that
represents, or forms the basis of, the contractual relationship between the
Town and a vendor, any changes to that contract must be in writing. When change
orders are needed, they must be approved in the same sequence as the initial
contract or PO, up to and including approvals by the Comptroller, Town
Administrator, or designees. Any payments to the vendor will be delayed while
proper documentation is completed. Furthermore, the contractual rights of the
Town and the vendor are jeopardized by such unauthorized changes.
SECTION 4: TOWN PROCEDURES FOR SOLICITATIONS
4.1: Notice/Advertisement of Solicitations
Offers shall be requested and obtained from at least three sources whenever
possible. When the procurement of goods or services is anticipated to be
greater than $25,000, the solicitation must be accomplished in writing.
Solicitations shall be issued in an efficient and economical manner to at least
attempt to secure, if available, three qualified sources.
All suppliers solicited shall be afforded complete, unbiased information as to
the description or requirements of the goods and services, including any
special conditions of the expected procurement.
Solicitations shall include specifications, a clearly defined scope of goods or
services, and all contractual terms and conditions applicable to the
procurement.
Adequate notice for the formal solicitations shall be given, no less than ten
calendar days prior to the date set forth therein for the opening of the bids.
Such notice shall include publication in a newspaper of general circulation
within the appropriate classified section, or publication on the Town’s
website, or publication on the South Carolina Business Opportunities (SCBO)
website.
Written responses will be acceptable as disclosed in the solicitation.
4.2: Specifications
Specifications are defined in this context as, any technical or purchase
description or other description of the physical quality or functional
characteristics, or of the nature of a supply, service, or construction item.
It may also include a description of any requirement for inspecting, testing or
preparing a supply, service, or construction item for delivery. It is the
primary responsibility of the requesting department head to furnish adequate
specifications to the Town Administrator. The Town reserves the right to
specify brand names based on its experience, current inventory and other
qualifications specified by the requesting department. However, on occasion
brand names may be noted as descriptive, not restrictive information, and in
such cases, are used to indicate the quality and characteristics of products
that will be satisfactory. In these instances, the Town in its solicitation
will note that it will consider Bids offering “equal” products other than the
one described by brand name if such products are clearly identified in the Bid
response to the Town.
Specifications should be adequately detailed, precise, clear but simply worded,
not unduly restrictive to permit competitive bidding, and to encourage cost
effective procurement.
No changes in specifications shall be made to an invitation or any
solicitation, unless all prospective offerors shall be notified of any changes.
In the case of formal invitations, this shall be accomplished by written
addenda and delivered to all offerors known to have received an invitation. In
the case of informal solicitations, this may be accomplished by telephone,
verbally, email, through the Town’s Procurement Portal, by fax transmission or
in writing, depending on the complexity of the change. The changes must be
clear, precise, assuring no misunderstanding by an offeror, no matter how the
change is communicated. The changes shall be made available to all prospective
offerors.
Should it be determined, after all bids of $50,000 or more have been received
and reviewed, that a product or service with an alternate specification would
prove to better serve the Town’s needs and best interest; all such bids may be
rejected at the discretion of the Council.
It is desirable that the Town stay abreast and current with rapid changes in
methods and state-of-the-art products, goods, and services. Alternate
specifications may be requested and considered when it is determined by the
Town that such proposals would be in the Town’s best interest and clearly
indicated within the invitation.
Specifications as written and solicited are generally the minimal requirements
which will be acceptable for the needs of the Town. Superior or “better than”
offers may be considered and accepted by the Town if the following conditions
are met:
   •   Superior products, goods, or services do not exceed the cost of the
lowest or next lowest responsive offer or under budget;
   •   the overall integrity is not jeopardized as far as the form, fit, and
function is maintained; and
   •   it is in the best interests of the Town.
4.3: Receipt, Safeguarding and Opening of Solicitations
All bids received prior to the advertised opening shall be kept secure and
unopened. Formal, sealed bids and proposals that are hand delivered will be
initialed, indicating the date and time received into the Administrative
Department.
Sealed bids shall be opened in the presence of one or more witnesses at the
time and place designated in the solicitation. The name of each bidder, the
amount of each bid, and other relevant information as specified in the
solicitation, will be tabulated. The bid tabulation shall be open to public
inspection at that time.
Proposals shall be opened publicly in the presence of one or more witnesses at
the time and place designated in the solicitation. However, only the names of
the offerors will be read aloud, recorded, and open for public inspection.
Contents of the successful offeror’s proposal, upon written request, shall be
made available for inspection. Information considered confidential shall not be
disclosed.
The Town Administrator may authorize use of electronic submission of bids/
proposals. If electronic submission is authorized, the solicitation shall
specify the acceptable method that offerors may use.
4.4: Corrections or Withdrawals
Corrections or withdrawals or inadvertently erroneous bids prior to bid
opening, withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids after award, or
cancellation of awards or contracts based on such bid mistakes may be permitted
in accordance with this Guide and the solicitation.
Any offeror may, by requesting in writing, withdraw the bid or proposal for any
reason prior to the scheduled opening.
Properly worded and directed changes or corrections, which do not disclose the
total bid amount, may be made by any bidder if submitted to the Town in writing
prior to the bid opening. Changes that indicate or openly divulge the total
amount of the bid shall not be accepted. These changes or corrections may be
delivered as disclosed in the solicitation.
   •   To increase or decrease a previously submitted lump sum bid amount, the
bidder shall instruct the Town the amount that the bid is to be increased or
decreased by.
   •   In a case of a bid which contains multi-items, the bidder shall instruct
the Town the item and the amount that is desired to be increased or decreased.
After the opening, no changes in offeror prices or other provisions of the bid/
proposal prejudicial to the interest of the Town or fair competition shall be
permitted.
4.5: Late Bids/Proposals
It shall be the responsibility of all offerors to provide adequate means
whereby their proposal or bid, whether electronically submitted, mailed or
hand-delivered be received by the Town no later than the date and time as
stated in the solicitation. Any proposal, modification, or withdrawal received
at the Town’s designated office in the solicitation after the exact time
specified for receipt of solicitation is “late” and will not be considered.
4.6: Acceptance and Evaluation
All responses received shall be evaluated for price, quality, acceptability, as
specified, availability of goods or services, past performance, transportation
or any other special cost or factors which may apply, including any special
conditions or exceptions which the offeror may have stipulated.
Bids and proposals shall be accepted unconditionally without alteration or
correction, except as may be otherwise authorized in this Guide. The
solicitation, whether sealed bids or proposals, shall state the evaluation
criteria. No criteria may be used in the bid evaluation that is not set forth
in the invitation for bids. The request for proposals shall state the relative
importance of price and of each evaluation factor. The Town may, prior to the
evaluation of any offer received, establish numerical weightings for each
factor. Additionally, the Town may determine that the use of competitive sealed
bidding is either not practicable or advantageous, and as such may use
competitive best value bidding. The purpose of best-value bidding is to allow
factors other than price to be considered in the determination of award for
specific supplies, services, or information technology based on pre-determined
criteria identified by the Town in the solicitation. With best-value bid, the
award shall be made to the responsive and responsible bidder whose bid is
determined, in writing, to be most advantageous to the Town; taking into
consideration all evaluation factors set forth in the best-value bid.
The Town should be able to evaluate bids solely using the information as
supplied by the offeror’s bid. However, it is sometimes determined that, for
clarification and more professional evaluation, additional information is
desirable and often necessary. Therefore, as provided in the IFB, the Town
reserves the right to hold discussions, review the specifications as believed
offered, and request clarification or any additional technical information
which may provide a fair and impartial evaluation by the Town. All discussion
shall be limited to the offeror’s products, goods or services, and no
discussion shall be permitted regarding offers by others.
As provided in the request for proposals, prior to any negotiations, discussion
may be conducted with any offerors submitting a proposal, which appears to be
eligible for contract award pursuant to the selection criteria as set forth in
the invitation for proposals. All such discussions shall be of the nature of
clarification of offeror’s understanding of specifications, scope of work,
goods or services, offeror’s qualifications, availability of qualified
personnel, proven experience, including referenced clients and the financial
stability and responsibility of the offeror. In conducting any such
discussions, there must be no disclosure of any information derived from
proposals submitted by other competing offerors.
4.7: Negotiations
4.7A: Informal Bids
Negotiation is generally not applicable to informal bids. However, negotiations
may be conducted and in the event that negotiations are unsuccessful in
reaching a price or scope of work or services which would be agreeable, the
Town, at its discretion, may terminate all negotiations with the lowest
offeror, and enter new negotiations with the next lowest offeror; and likewise,
the third and sequential offerors should negotiations not be productive with
the second lowest offeror.
4.7B: Sealed Bids
Generally, sealed bids are not negotiated; but in the event all bids exceed
available funds as certified by the Town’s Comptroller or considered
unreasonable; the Town shall be authorized, in situations where the Town’s best
interest precludes re-solicitation of work, goods, or services of a reduced
scope; to negotiate an adjustment in the bid price, including change in the
requirements, with the low, responsive and responsible bidder, in order to
bring the bid within the amount of available funds.
In the event that negotiations are unsuccessful in reaching a price or scope of
work or services which would be agreeable, the Town, at its discretion, may
terminate all negotiations with the lowest offeror, and enter new negotiations
with the next lowest offeror; and likewise, the third and sequential offerors
should negotiations not be productive with the second lowest offeror.
Should subsequent negotiations be conducted, all negotiations shall be
conducted in like manner as with the first offeror. No changes or reductions in
scope of work or services shall be permitted during negotiations with
sequential offers that was not permitted or offered within the negotiations
with previous responsive offerors.
In conducting negotiations, there must be no disclosure of any information
derived from bids submitted by competing offerors.
4.7C: Sealed Proposals
After evaluation, if in the best interest of the Town, as provided in the
invitation for proposals, negotiations may be conducted with any offerors
submitting a proposal which has been determined by the Town Administrator to be
eligible for contract award. All apparently eligible offerors must be afforded
the opportunity to submit best and final proposals if negotiations with any
other offeror results in material alteration or reduction in the scope of work
or services to the invitation for proposals, and such alteration or reduced
scope of work or services has a cost consequence that may alter the order of
offerors’ price quotations contained in the initial proposal. In conducting
negotiations, there must be no disclosure of any information derived from
proposals submitted by competing offerors.
4.7D: Multi-step Sealed Bidding/Proposals
When it is considered initially impractical by the Town Administrator to
prepare a procurement description complete with specifications to support an
award based on price, a solicitation may be issued requesting the submission of
unpriced offers to be followed by an invitation for bids/proposals limited to
those offerors whose offers have been qualified under the criteria set forth in
the first solicitation.
4.8: Award
Award shall be made to the most responsive, responsible offeror whose response
has been evaluated and determined to meet the requirements and to be in the
best interest of the Town.
Formal bids and proposals shall be awarded with reasonable promptness by
written notice to the most responsive, responsible bidder whose bid meets the
requirements and specifications and any other award criteria as set forth in
the solicitation document, and in the best interest of the Town.
Where bids or proposals have been requested and received other than lump-sum
total, the Town Council may, in the best interest of the Town, award projects
or requirements to the lowest, most responsive offeror, considering the sum
total for each project, goods, or services, or the combined sum total for all
projects, goods, or services.
In all cases, the Town Council shall reserve the right to reject or accept any
or all proposals and to waive any informalities or irregularities in the bids
if it is in the best interest of the Town.
4.8A: Tied Offerors
If two or more offerors are tied in price while otherwise meeting all of the
required conditions, award shall be determined as follows:
   1.   All tied offerors shall be notified of the existing tied conditions;
   2.   All tied offerors shall be provided the opportunity to submit best and
final offers in an effort to break the tie;
   3.   All tied offers shall be given sufficient time considered reasonable
and shall be notified of date and time required to submit best and final offer;
   4.   Best and final offers will be received, opened, and recorded in like
manner of the original opening;
   5.   Offerors failing to submit best and final offers shall be considered
unresponsive;
   6.   Best and final offers shall only be accepted from invited tied
offerors.
As the offers are in the final stage and limited to monetary cost, then no
further discussions or negotiations are to be considered.
4.8B: Award Delay
Should the Town have reasonable cause why a contract cannot or should not be
entered into within the allocated time indicated in the solicitation, the
acceptance time may be extended for all or any projects, goods, or services by
mutual agreement between the Town and the successful offeror(s).
4.9: Policies for Offerors
4.9A: Collusion or Anticompetitive Practices
When collusion or other anticompetitive practices are suspected among other
bidders or offerors, an immediate notice of the relevant facts shall be
transmitted to the Comptroller, the Town Administrator, and the Town Attorney.
4.9B: Responsibility of Offerors
Responsibility of the bidder or offeror shall be ascertained for each contract
solicited by the Town concerning the capacity and capability to meet the terms
of the contracts, and based upon past record of performance for similar
contracts.
A written determination of non-responsibility of a bidder or offeror shall be
made. The unreasonable failure of a bidder or offeror to supply information
promptly in connection with an inquiry with respect to responsibility may be
grounds for a determination of non-responsibility with respect to such offeror.
4.9C: Approved Accounting Systems
The Town may require the selected offeror have:
   1.   An accounting system that permits timely development of all necessary
cost data in the form required by the specific contract type contemplated.
   2.   An adequate accounting system to allocate costs in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles.
   3.   An accounting system that retains records which may apply to the
contract, or subcontract, for a period of three years from the date of the
final payment under the prime contract, unless a shorter period is otherwise
authorized in writing.
4.9D: Right to Audit Records
The Town and its authorized representatives shall have the right to audit, to
examine, and to make copies or extracts from all financial and related records
(in whatever form they may be kept, whether written, electronic, or other)
relating to or pertaining to the contract or agreement with the Town kept by or
under the control of the contractor, its employees, agents, assignors,
successors, and subcontractors. Such records shall include, but not be limited
to, accounting records, written policies and procedures; subcontract files
(including proposals of successful and unsuccessful bidders, bid recaps, etc.);
all paid vouchers including those for out-of-pocket expenses; other
reimbursement supported by invoices; ledgers; cancelled checks; deposit slips;
bank statements; journals; original estimates; estimating work sheets; contract
amendments and change order files; back charge logs and supporting
documentation; insurance documents; payroll documents; timesheets; memoranda;
cost of pricing data, testing reports, submittal requirements; records
pertaining to the performance of work; and correspondence.
The contractor shall at any time requested by the Town, whether during or after
completion of the agreement, and at the contractor’s own expense, make such
records available for inspection and audit (including copies and extracts of
records as required) by the Town. Such records shall be made available to the
Town during normal business hours at the contractor's office or place of
business. In the event that no such location is available, then the financial
records, together with the supporting or underlying documents and records,
shall be made available for audit at a time and location that is convenient for
the Town.
Costs of any audits conducted under the authority of this right to audit and
not addressed elsewhere will be borne by the Town unless certain exemption
criteria are met. If the audit identifies overpricing or overcharges (of any
nature) by the contractor to the Town, in excess of one-half one percent (0.5%)
of the total contract billings, the contractor shall reimburse the Town for the
total costs of the audit. If the audit discovers substantive findings related
to fraud, misrepresentation, or non-performance, the Town may recoup the costs
of the audit work from the contractor. Any adjustments and/or payments that
must be made as a result of any such audit or inspection of the contractor's
invoices and/or records shall be made within a reasonable amount of time (not
to exceed 90 days) from the presentation of the Town’s findings to the
contractor.
4.9E: Resolution of Protested Solicitations and Awards
Any actual or prospective bidder, offerors, contractor, or subcontractor who is
aggrieved in connection with the solicitation or award of a contract may
protest in accordance with Town Ordinance, Chapter 22.
SECTION 5: CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTING
The method of construction contracting administration used for a Town
construction project shall be determined to be that method which is most
advantageous to the Town and will result in the most timely, acceptable
quality, economical, and successful completion of the construction project. All
Town construction contracts valued at $50,000 or greater shall be procured
based on the following as set forth in this section.
The Town Administrator, the Comptroller, and the appropriate department head,
or designees, shall make a determination regarding the appropriate method of
construction administration for a particular construction project. Methods
include, but not limited to design-bid-build, design-build, or construction
manager at risk.
5.1: Design-Bid-Build Method of Construction Contracting
Design-bid-build method is where the Town will sequentially award separate
contracts, the first for the architectural and engineering services to design
the project and the second for construction of the project according to the
design. Both contracts are separately solicited and awarded. Architectural and
engineering services are procured using the methods outlined under Professional
Services.
Construction contracting under this method shall be awarded by sealed bidding
pursuant to the procedures as set forth elsewhere in this chapter, with the
following exceptions:
The invitation shall include, but not be limited to, all contractual terms and
conditions applicable to the procurement. Bids shall be accepted
unconditionally without alteration or correction, except as otherwise noted in
this chapter. The invitation for bids shall set forth all requirements of the
bid, including the following, as determined necessary. Where required by the
invitation, all responsive bidders shall include subcontractor information as
specified.
   1.   Any bidder, in response to an invitation for bids, shall set forth in
the bid or offer, the names and the locations of the place of businesses for
each subcontractor, or supplier, who will or is expected to perform work or
render service to the prime contractor to or about construction, and who will
specifically fabricate and install a portion of the work which is expected to
exceed 3% of the prime contractor’s total base bid, or any subcontractor whose
construction elements are deemed vital by the Town for the project and so
listed and specified by the Town within the invitation and the bidding
documents.
   2.   Failure to list subcontractors, or suppliers, when required and
specified by the invitation in accordance with this section may render the
prime contractor’s bid as nonconforming.
   3.   No prime contractor whose bid is acceptable in accordance with this
section shall substitute any person as subcontractor in place of the
subcontractor listed in the original bid, except with the consent of the Town,
for good cause shown. The Town reserves the right to reject any and all
subcontractors for justifiable cause, with a substitute to be agreed-upon by
both parties.
   4.   The Town shall make available to all in attendance, a copy of the
record of the bid tabulation at the public opening of the bids. Like
information shall be provided to those not in attendance at the opening, when
so requested in writing.
5.2: Design-Build Method of Construction
The design-build method is where the Town will enter into a single contract for
design and construction of the construction project. Contracts for design-build
shall be procured by competitive sealed proposals. Each Request for Proposal
(RFP) for design-build shall include: evaluation factors, design
specifications, and a solicitation for proposal development documents. When the
Town Administrator determines that the cost of preparing proposals is high in
view of the size, estimated price, and complexity of the procurement, the Town
may:
   1.   prequalify vendors by issuing a Request for Qualifications (RFQ) in
advance of the RFP, or
   2.   select a short list of responsible vendors prior to discussions and
evaluations, provided the number of proposals will be short-listed is stated in
the RFP and prompt public notice is given to all vendors as to which proposals
have been short-listed, or
   3.   pay stipends to unsuccessful vendors, provided that the amount of such
stipends and terms under which stipends will be paid are stated in the RFP.
Each RFP for design-build shall state the relative importance of the following
evaluation factors:
   •   demonstrated compliance with the design requirements,
   •   vendor qualifications,
   •   financial capacity,
   •   project schedule,
   •   price,
   •   and other factors, if any, as disclosed in the RFP.
5.3: Construction Manager at Risk Method of Construction
The construction manager at risk (CMAR) method is where the Town enters into a
single contract with a construction manager to deliver the construction project
within a Guaranteed Maximum Price (GMP) which is based on the construction
documents and specifications at the time of the GMP plus any reasonably
inferred items or tasks. The CMAR provides professional services and acts as a
consultant to the Town in the design development as well as the construction
phases. The CMAR may provide some of the actual construction of the project
depending on the availability of bidders and subcontractors. In addition to
acting in the Town’s best interest, the CMAR must manage and control
construction costs to not exceed the GMP because contractually any costs
exceeding the GMP that are not change orders are the financial liability of the
CMAR.
Each RFP for CMAR shall include: evaluation factors, design specifications, and
a GMP. When the Town Administrator determines that the cost of preparing
proposals is high in view of the size, estimated price, and complexity of the
procurement, the Town may:
   1.   prequalify vendors by issuing a Request for Qualifications (RFQ) in
advance of the RFP, or
   2.   select a short list of responsible vendors prior to discussions and
evaluations, provided the number of proposals will be short-listed is stated in
the RFP and prompt public notice is given to all vendors as to which proposals
have been short-listed, or
   3.   pay stipends to unsuccessful vendors, provided that the amount of such
stipends and terms under which stipends will be paid are stated in the RFP.
Each RFP for CMAR shall state the relative importance of the following
evaluation factors:
   •   demonstrated compliance with the design requirements,
   •   vendor qualifications,
   •   financial capacity,
   •   project schedule,
   •   price,
   •   and other factors, if any, as disclosed in the RFP.
5.4: Bid Security
The Town may, at its discretion, require bid security deposits as stated in the
invitation for bids on any projects. Construction projects valued at $50,000
and over will be required to hold bid securities. These deposits may take the
form of a certified check, a cashier’s check or bond executed by a surety
company licensed under the laws of South Carolina to execute such bonds. The
bid security shall be in an amount to at least 5% of the amount of the bid.
When the invitation for bids requires security, noncompliance requires that the
bid be rejected. Bid deposits will be returned to the unsuccessful bidders
after an award determination has been made. In the event the successful bidder
shall fail to enter into a contract within the terms of the invitation after
having been notified of the award, the bid security deposit shall, at the
option of the Town, be forfeited to the Town and retained and deposited to the
Town’s account. In such an instance, the Town may renegotiate with the second
lowest, responsive and responsible bidder, or resolicit new bids; whichever is
determined in the best interest of the Town.
5.5: Performance Bonds
When construction contracts are awarded, labor, material, and performance
payment bonds may be required at the option of the Town and in all cases where
the contract price exceeds the sum of $50,000. These bonds, in such instances,
shall be written by an acceptable surety company licensed in South Carolina and
meet the requirements for issuing such bonds in accordance with South Carolina
law.
Bonds shall guarantee the performance by the bidder. The successful bidder
shall provide bonds in accordance with the contract in an amount equal to or
greater than 100% for contracts of $50,000 or greater. All contract bonds shall
be for a period of not less than one year from the date of the final payment.
The Town reserves the right to request bonds for projects under $50,000, if it
is in the best interest of the Town to do so. Such requirement will be
reflected within the bidding documents.
In lieu of corporate surety, material, labor, and performance payment bonds,
the successful bidder may request to post certified funds with the Town in such
amounts as may be agreed upon by the Town Administrator and which funds shall
be held in accordance with the terms as agreed upon between the Town and the
successful bidder. Prior to approval of such request for bond alternate, a
determination in writing must be made as to why the request should be granted,
the overall project risk and the responsibility of the offeror which has
requested such an alternate, or any other factors which may weigh heavily on
granting such an approval.
Every person who has furnished labor or material to the contractor or its
subcontracts for the work specified in the contract, in respect of which a
payment bond is furnished under this section, and who has not been paid in full
before the expiration of a period of 90 days after the day on which the last of
the labor was performed by such person or material was furnished or supplied by
such person for which such claim is made; shall have the right to sue on the
payment bond for the amount, or the balance thereof, unpaid at the time of
institution of such suit, and to prosecute such action for the sum or sums
justly due such person. Any person having a direct contractual relationship
with a subcontractor of the contractor, but no contractual relationship
expressed or implied with the contractor furnishing such payment bond, shall
have a right of action on the payment bond, upon giving written notice to the
contractor within 90 days from the date on which such person did or performed
the last of the labor or furnished or supplied the last of the material upon
which such claim is made, stating with substantial accuracy the amount claimed
and the name of the party to whom the material was furnished or supplied or for
whom the labor was done or performed. Such written notice to the contractor
shall be personally served or served by mailing the same by registered or
certified mail, postage prepaid, in an envelope addressed to the contractor at
any place the contractor maintains an office or conducts its business.
Every suit instituted upon a payment bond shall be brought in a court of
competent jurisdiction for the county or circuit in which the construction
contract was to be performed, but no such suit shall be commenced after the
expiration of one year after the day on which the last of the labor was
performed or material was supplied by the person bringing suit. The obligee
named in the bond need not be joined as a party in any such suit.
5.6: Retention
Contracts that provide for installment progress payments that are based upon an
estimated percentage of completion, with a percentage of the contract's
proceeds to be retained by the Town pending completion of the contract, the
retained amount of each progress payment or installment shall be as agreed-upon
by negotiation, but not less than 5%. When the work to be performed on a Town
project by multiple prime contractors or by a prime contractor and multiple
subcontractors, the work contracted to be done by each individual contractor or
subcontractor may be considered a separate division of the contract for the
purpose of retention. As each such division of the contract is certified as
having been completed, that portion of the retained funds which is allocable to
the completed division of the contract may be released forthwith to the prime
contractor, who shall, within ten days of its receipt, release to the
subcontractor responsible for the completed work the full amount of any
retention previously withheld by the prime contractor.
SECTION 6: PROFESSIONAL SERVICES
Architectural, engineering, construction management, land surveying, legal,
financial, insurance, audit, banking, certain consulting services and other
professional services shall be procured as provided within this subsection.
Announcements or solicitations for professional services within this section
shall be advertised formally when the services are expected or anticipated to
be $50,000 or greater. Otherwise, informal solicitations are allowed. In either
application, the solicitation shall include, but not limited to, the project
title, the general scope of work, a description of all professional services
required for the project, the submission deadline, how interested firms may
apply for consideration and the evaluation criteria that shall be used for
selection determination.
Submissions of information from interested persons or firms in response to an
invitation shall not be less than ten days after publication of the formal
invitation or the time considered fair and reasonable if the solicitation is
informal.
The Town Administrator and the appropriate department head shall review and
evaluate each response received using the selection criteria as reflected
within the solicitation. The Town Administrator and the appropriate department
head may select and hold interviews with firms or persons who have responded to
the invitation and who are deemed most qualified on the basis of information
available prior to the interviews.
The respondents will be evaluated using the following guidelines:
   •   past performance,
   •   the ability and availability of professional personnel,
   •   willingness to meet Town time and budget requirements,
   •   location as directly related to the complexity of the project, and
especially so if the project is a joint effort being accomplished between Town
staff and the person/firm,
   •   Recent, current and projected workloads of the firms,
   •   Related experience referenced from past or similar projects, and
   •   Any other criteria as deemed appropriate by the evaluation committee.
Based upon these evaluations, the Town Administrator shall recommend to the
Council, if $50,000 or more, the offerors which, in its judgment, are the most
qualified, ranking the offerors in priority order. The selection results may be
made available to all persons or firms who responded when, upon acceptance and
approval by the Council.
The Town may review and evaluate each response received as a result of informal
invitations and may conduct, but are not required to, conduct interviews with
offerors should they determine that further information is needed. Town staff
shall review and evaluate informal responses using the same or similar criteria
and shall rank, in its judgement, the most qualified offerors in priority
order. The selection results may be made available to all persons or firms who
responded when, upon acceptance and approval of the Council, or upon the Town
Administrator’s determination of the most qualified offeror.
SECTION 7: VENDOR ISSUES
Vendors sometimes call on Town departments and divisions. Although they may
offer helpful information, they may also subject Town employees to high-
pressure sales pitches. Town staff can direct vendors to the Comptroller. The
Comptroller will gather information about their products and services and give
them directions on how to register on the Town’s vendor registration program.
Because the Town, like all public agencies buys goods on an open, competitive
basis, employees must not promise any vendor future business. However,
employees may designate a vendor as a recommended source for future procurement
needs with the Comptroller.
Departments wishing to lodge a complaint about a vendor (for poor service,
failure to meet specifications, etc.) should contact the Town Administrator.
The Town Administrator will attempt to resolve the problem with the vendor and
will add the complaint to the vendor’s performance history file. Documentation
of vendor performance issues is extremely important. Without it, the Town will
not be able to disqualify vendors.
7.1: Resolution of Contract Controversies
This section applies to controversies between the Town and a contractor and
which arises under, or by virtue of, a contract between them. This includes,
without limitation, controversies based upon breach of contract, mistake,
misrepresentation, or other causes for contract modifications or rescission.
The Town Administrator, or authorized designee, is authorized to settle and
resolve controversies, as described in this section whereby the contract amount
or the amount of the controversy shall not exceed 5% of the total project cost,
or an aggregate of up to $49,999.99, whichever is greater. Any contract
controversy above this amount shall be referred to the Council.
Either the Town Administrator or the Council, as applicable, shall schedule and
meet with the contractor to receive and review comments, which thereafter shall
issue a decision to be placed in writing within 15 business days of the
meeting. The decision shall state the reasons for the action taken and inform
the contractor of other rights which may be available. A copy of the decision
shall be sent via certified mail or otherwise hand-delivered, email, or fax,
immediately to the contractor.
A contractor, having received the notice of decision, may appeal in writing to
the Mayor, who shall then convene the full Council at a time and date
established by the Mayor to receive and review the comments of the contractor.
The Mayor shall issue the decision of Council, in writing, within 15 business
days of the Council hearing. The decision shall state the reason for the action
taken. A decision rendered shall be final and conclusive unless fraudulent. The
appeal decision of the Mayor and Town Council is the final administrative
review and the decision of the Town, and such decision can be appealed to the
Circuit Courts of the State.
7.2: Violations of Law
If prior to award it is determined that a solicitation or proposed award of a
contract is in violation of the law, then the solicitation or proposed award
shall be:
   1.   Canceled or revised by addenda if prior to the closing acceptance date
of the solicitation.
   2.   If after the closing acceptance date of the solicitation but prior to
award, the pending contract agreement shall be modified to comply with the law.
Should it be determined that such a modification would have a cost impact, the
Town shall have the right to:
      a.   Accept the cost impact if considered fair and reasonable,
      b.   Negotiate with the offeror,
      c.   Open negotiations with other offerors, or
      d.   Reject all offerors in their entirety.
If after an award it is determined that a solicitation or award of a contract
is/was in violation of the law and the person or persons has/have not acted
fraudulently or in bad faith, the Town may:
   1.   Modify the contract agreement by an appropriate change order agreeable
to both parties to comply with the law; or
   2.   The Town may terminate the contract and the person awarded the contract
shall be compensated for the actual expenses reasonably incurred under the
contract, plus a reasonable profit for cost incurred prior to the termination.
If after an award it is determined that a solicitation or award of a contract
is/was in violation of the law and the person or persons has/have acted
fraudulently or in bad faith, the Town may:
   1.   Declare the contract null and void; or
   2.   At its discretion, take any other actions which are appropriate and in
the best interests of the Town.
7.3: Authority to Debar or Suspend
The suspension and debarment process protects the Town from fraud, waste, and
abuse by using tools to avoid doing business with non-responsible contractors
and vendors. This section applies to a debarment for cause from consideration
for award of contracts, goods, or services, or a suspension from such
consideration during an investigation where there is probable cause for such
debarment. Additionally, if Federal or State monies are being utilized for the
procurement, the Town will ensure that potential vendors are not listed on the
Federal debarment and suspension list before awarding contracts.
The Town Administrator, after reasonable notice of debarment to the person or
firm involved and reasonable opportunity for that person or firm to be heard,
and having consulted with the Council and Town Attorney, shall have the
authority to:
   •   disbar the person or firm for cause from consideration for award of
contracts, goods, or services; provided that doing so is in the best interest
of the Town. The debarment shall be for a period as determined by the Town
Administrator, but not more than two years.
   •   Suspend the person or firm for cause from consideration for award of
contracts, goods, or services; provided that doing so is in the best interest
of the Town. The suspension shall be for a period as determined by the Town
Administrator, but not more than 12 months.
The causes for debarment or suspension include:
   •   Conviction for commission of a criminal offense as an incident to
obtaining or attempting to obtain a public or private contract or subcontract,
or in the performance of such contract or subcontract;
   •   Conviction under State or Federal statutes of embezzlement, theft,
forgery, bribery, falsification, or destruction of records, receiving stolen
property or any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity or
business honesty which currently, seriously, and directly affects
responsibility as a Town contractor, vendor, or supplier.
   •   Conviction under State or Federal antitrust statutes arising out of the
submission of bids, quotes, offers, contracts, or proposals;
   •   Violation of contract, bid, proposal or quotation provisions, as set
forth below, of a character which is regarded by the Town Administrator to be
so serious as to justify debarment action. This would include, deliberate
failure without good cause to perform in accordance with the specifications or
within the time limit provided in the contract, bid, proposal, offer, or
quotation; or a recent record of failure to perform or of unsatisfactory
performance in accordance with the terms of one or more contracts, proposals,
offers, bids or quotations;
   •   Any other causes the Town Administrator determines to be so serious and
compelling as to affect responsibility as a Town contractor, supplier or
vendor, including debarment by another governmental entity for cause;
   •   For violation of the ethical standards set forth in the South Carolina
State Ethics Act.
A contractor, supplier, or vendor shall not be considered for suspension or
disbarment if the failure to perform or unsatisfactory performance were caused
by acts beyond the control of the contractor, supplier, or vendor.
With the advice and consent of the Council, the Town Administrator shall issue
a written decision within 30 days to debar or suspend. The decision shall be
final and conclusive. The decision shall state the reason of the action taken
and inform the debarred or suspended person, company, or corporation involved
of their rights to a final appeal. This notice shall be sent by certified mail,
hand-delivered, or by email.
SECTION 8: TYPES OF CONTRACTS
8.1: Term
Subject to the limitations of this chapter, any type of contract which promotes
the best interests of the Town may be used, with the exception of cost-plus-a-
percentage-of-cost contract which is prohibited. A cost reimbursement, or a
cost reimbursement-plus-a-fixed-fee, may be used when it is determined that
such a contract would be less costly to the Town than any other type, or that
it is impracticable to obtain the supplies, services, or construction required
except under such a contract.
The Town’s best interest shall be served by contracts originated by using
competitive prices obtained by: itemized unit measurement with cost, itemized
project description breakdown with costs itemized, and lump sum project cost.
8.2: Multi-Term
Multiterm contracts are for products, goods, and/or services of such nature
that an ongoing annual requirement exists. Where and when such conditions
exist, multiterm contracts should be used as much as possible to be in the best
interests of the Town, as described below.
   1.   Multiterm contracts for supplies and services may be entered into for
specified periods of time, not to exceed five years, provided the terms of the
contract and the conditions for renewal or extension, if any, are included and
so specified in the invitation, and that funds are provided and available for
the initial term.
   2.   As specified within the invitation, multiterm contracts may be firm
fixed pricing for one or more years. Contracts limited to annual, first-year
pricing may be extended or renewed for the second and subsequent years, when
prices, having been evaluated, are determined, in writing, to be fair and
reasonable to the Town. Validity or justification shall be requested from and
provided by the supplier in writing, addressing any requests which are
considered unreasonable.
   3.   Multiterm contracts shall not cause undue hardship on either party.
Either party may submit in writing a request for reevaluation of the contract,
in whole or in part, due to extreme verifiable conditions or circumstances.
   4.   All multiterm contracts shall contain a “municipality” termination
clause, whereby all such type contracts may be terminated by the Town, and at
no cost to the Town, should fund sufficient to support continuation of
performance not be appropriated or otherwise made available for subsequent
fiscal period.
   5.   Whereas, some multiterm contracts may be established upon estimated
needs and/or usage, the contract liability shall be limited to actual products,
goods, or services received and accepted by the Town. Contract liability shall
not be predicated on any estimated or minimum requirements.
   6.   Multiterm contracts may be extended on a case-by-case basis for when in
the best interest of the Town. The Town may require continued performance of
any contract within the limits and at the rates specified in the contract. The
option provision may be exercised more than once.
8.3: Contract Clauses
All contracts for supplies, services, and construction shall include provisions
necessary to define the responsibilities and rights of the parties to the
contract. At the direction of the Town Council, the Town Administrator, or
authorized designee, may issue clauses appropriate for supply, service, or
construction contracts addressing at least the following subjects:
   •   The unilateral right of the Town to order written changes in the work
within the scope of the contract;
   •   The unilateral right of the Town to order, in writing, temporary
stoppage of the work or delaying performance that does not alter the scope of
the contract;
   •   Variations occurring between estimated quantities of work in a contract
and actual quantities;
   •   Defective pricing;
   •   Liquidated damages;
   •   Specified excuses for delay or nonperformance;
   •   Termination of the contract for default;
   •   Termination of the contract, in whole or in part, for the convenience of
the Town;
   •   Suspension of work on a construction project ordered by the Town;
   •   Site conditions differing from those indicated in the contract, or
ordinarily encountered except that differing site condition clauses need not be
included in a contract;
   •   When the contract is negotiated;
      •   When the contract provides the site or design; or
      •   When the parties have otherwise agreed with respect to the risk of
differing site conditions.
   •   Hazardous materials;
   •   Drug-free work place;
   •   Affirmative action.
The Town may establish standard contract clauses for use in Town contracts.
8.4: Price Adjustments
A contractor shall be required to submit cost or pricing data if any adjustment
in the contract price is desired. Adjustments in price resulting from the use
of contract clauses shall be computed in one or more of the following means:
   •   By agreement on a fixed-price adjustment before commencement of the
pertinent performance or as soon thereafter as practicable;
   •   By unit prices specified in the contract or subsequently agreed upon;
   •   By the cost attributable to the events or situations under such clauses
with adjustment of profit or fee, all as specified in the contract or
subsequently agreed upon;
   •   In such other manner as the contracting parties may mutually agree; or,
   •   In the absence of agreement by the parties, by unilateral determination
by the Town of the reasonable costs allocable, either directly or indirectly,
to the events or situations under such clauses as accounted for in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles, and adjustment of profit or fee,
as appropriate, and subject to the provisions of legal and contractual
remedies.
SECTION 9: MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL OF TOWN PROPERTY OTHER THAN REAL PROPERTY
The sale, lease, or disposal of surplus supplies, inventories, and other Town
properties, other than real properties, shall be by in-house auction, outside
auction, formal or informal bidding process, online auction services, broker
services, or other appropriate competitive methods designated herein or
otherwise as authorized by the Town Administrator. The sale, lease or
disposition of real properties rests within the authority of full Council.
9.1: Salvageable Personal Property
The Town Administrator, or authorized designee, shall be responsible for all
disposals of surplus or antiquated, but salvageable material, such as, but not
limited to, furniture, computer equipment, automobiles, automobile and
equipment parts, trucks, tractors, lawn mowers, scrap, and the like. Sales
shall be awarded to the highest bidder in these processes. Funds will be turned
into the Comptroller, deposited, and recorded in the Town's General Ledger,
unless otherwise directed by the Comptroller per Generally Accepted Accounting
Principles.
9.2: Non-Salvageable Personal Property
When items or articles are broken beyond repair, and it is determined that a
salvage value is nonexistent, or the proceeds from the sale of such items would
not offset the cost incurred to sell, then such items are articles may be
disposed of with the best method(s) that serves the best interest of the Town,
as determined by the Town Administrator, or designee. When it is determined
that community’s interest shall be best served by making donations of either
surplus, antiquated or salvageable personal property to another agency,
nonprofit entity or worthy individual or group, the Town Administrator, or
authorized designee, may authorize such transfers of personal property whose
value is determined to be $10,000 or less.
Receipt of monetary contributions whose value is $10,000 or less may be
accepted upon authorization of the Town Administrator, or authorized designee.
The authorization of transfers or receipt of monetary contributions whose value
is greater than $10,000 must be authorized by Town Council, upon a
recommendation forwarded from the appropriate committee. Disbursement of
monetary contributions to another agency, nonprofit entity or worthy individual
or group, must be authorized by Town Council, usually considered as part of the
annual or midyear budget process.
9.3: Seized Assets and Unclaimed Properties
All seized assets and unclaimed properties, including but not limited to,
vehicles, bicycles, jewelry and other miscellaneous items, shall be disposed of
pursuant to one of the following procedures:
   1.   The Town shall place the property within the regular operating
inventory of the Town for use by the Town, subject to approval by the Chief of
Police.
   2.   Disposal of this property shall be performed in the same manner as
previously designated elsewhere herein.
   3.   The property or proceeds received from the disposal of this property
shall be donated to a recognized nonprofit organization in an effort to promote
community relations and goodwill. Proceeds, inventories and other properties,
if not donated, shall be deposited into the Town’s General Fund.
(Ord. 2020-22, passed 1-19-2021)
CHAPTER 38: TAXATION
Section
Property Taxes and Assessments
   
38.001   Annual tax to be levied
   
38.002   Ten year lien
   
38.003   Homestead exemption for elderly and disabled approved
   
38.004   Extent of exemption for elderly or disabled
   
38.005   Furnishing qualifying information to state
   
38.006   Maintenance to tax records
   
38.007   Back-taxing unreported property
   
38.008   Protection of town’s tax lien at Sheriff’s sale
   
38.009   Protection of town’s lien on removal, bankruptcy or judgment
   
38.010   Remedy when taxpayer questions taxes
   
38.011   County officials as town’s agents in collecting taxes and the like
   
38.012   Actions at law or attachments for collection of taxes
Delinquent Taxes on Real Estate
   
38.025   Levy and sale of real property for delinquent taxes and the like
   
38.026   Notice to certain mortgage owners
   
38.027   Seizure and sale under execution
   
38.028   Redemption of real estate
   
38.029   Sheriff’s deed prima facie evidence of good title
Delinquent Personal Property Taxes
   
38.040   Levy and sale of personal property for taxes
   
38.041   Driving motor vehicle upon which taxes are delinquent
   
38.042   Real estate transfer fee discontinued
Local Accommodations Fee
   
38.055   Definition
   
38.056   Fee
   
38.057   Accommodations Fee Fund
   
38.058   Enforcement
   
38.059   Violations
Hospitality Tax
   
38.070   Established
   
38.071   Collection/enforcement
   
38.072   Hospitality tax account
   
38.073   Violation
Delinquent Debt
   
38.085   Delinquent debt fee
 
   
38.999   Penalty
PROPERTY TAXES AND ASSESSMENTS
§ 38.001 ANNUAL TAX TO BE LEVIED.
   To provide funds for appropriations made in the annual budget and to pay
other municipal expenses legally contracted, the Town Council shall levy an
annual ad valorem tax on all real and personal property situated within the
corporate limits of the town not specifically exempted from taxation by state
law and also on property located elsewhere which state law authorizes to be
taxed by the town.
(Prior Code, § 19-1) (Ord. passed 12-6-1976)
Statutory reference:
   Municipal taxation generally, see S.C. Constitution, Art. X §§ 5(l), 5-7-30
and 5-21-110 et seq.
§ 38.002 TEN YEAR LIEN.
   Taxes so levied, with penalties and costs, shall constitute a lien upon the
property upon which said levy is made, paramount to all other liens, except the
lien for county and state taxes, for a period of ten years after the tax shall
have become due and payable.
(Prior Code, § 19-2) (Ord. passed 12-6-1976)
§ 38.003 HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION FOR ELDERLY AND DISABLED APPROVED.
   The Town Council finds:
   (A)   The General Assembly of South Carolina in 1971 enacted legislation
providing for a homestead exemption, whereby the dwelling place of persons more
than 65 years of age and the dwelling place of other persons having certain
physical disabilities would be exempted from a portion of local real estate
taxes, and said program subsequently was extended to include partial exemption
from municipal taxation and to provide for state reimbursement to municipal
governments for taxes not collected because of said exemption;
   (B)   Applicable state statutes thereafter have been amended to enlarge said
exemption and to provide additional qualifications, terms and conditions
applicable thereto; and
   (C)   The Town Council approves, endorses and supports the state’s policy of
granting special homestead exemptions to elderly and disabled persons.
(Prior Code, § 19-3)
§ 38.004 EXTENT OF EXEMPTION FOR ELDERLY OR DISABLED.
   The Town Council, in consideration of the state’s appropriation of funds to
reimburse the town for municipal tax revenue not collected as a result thereof,
shall exempt the property of certain elderly or disabled persons from municipal
taxation to the extent provided by and under the terms and conditions imposed
by applicable state law.
(Prior Code, § 19-4)
§ 38.005 FURNISHING QUALIFYING INFORMATION TO STATE.
   The Town Clerk, the Administrative Assistant and other municipal officials
shall promptly furnish state departments or commissions such statements,
accounting and data as shall be required to qualify for and receive
reimbursement for taxes not collected as a result of the state policy of
homestead exemption for elderly or handicapped.
(Prior Code, § 19-5)
§ 38.006 MAINTENANCE TO TAX RECORDS.
   The Town Clerk shall maintain appropriate books of account and records
showing the taxes against each parcel of real or personal property, the name of
the owner or owners, the amounts of taxes paid and such other information as
shall be determined by the Council Committee on Ways and Means.
(Prior Code, § 19-7) (Ord. passed 12-6-1976)
§ 38.007 BACK-TAXING UNREPORTED PROPERTY.
   The Town Clerk shall report to assessing officials any taxable property
within the taxing jurisdiction of the town which said officials have not
assessed and shall request an assessment thereof.
(Prior Code, § 19-8) (Ord. passed 12-6-1976)
Statutory reference:
   For similar state law, see S.C. Code §§ 12-49-80, 12-55-60
§ 38.008 PROTECTION OF TOWN’S TAX LIEN AT SHERIFF’S SALE.
   At a sale to enforce collection of delinquent town taxes, in case there be
no bid equal in amount to the taxes, charges, penalties and costs for which the
property is sold, the Town Clerk, Mayor or any person designated by him or her
shall buy the property for the Town Council as the actual purchaser thereof,
for the amount of said taxes, penalties, costs and charges, and the Sheriff
thereafter shall execute titles to the town as to any other purchaser and in
the manner provided in this chapter and shall put authorized agents of the town
in possession of said property.
(Prior Code, § 19-10) (Ord. passed 12-6-1976)
§ 38.009 PROTECTION OF TOWN’S LIEN ON REMOVAL, BANKRUPTCY OR JUDGMENT.
   (A)   Whenever any property listed for taxation is about to be removed
beyond the jurisdiction of the town, and all taxes due the town have not been
paid, it shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to arrange for execution on such
property and collection of the taxes due.
   (B)   Likewise, the Town Clerk shall endeavor to protect the town’s lien in
bankruptcy and judgment actions against properties on which taxes are due.
(Prior Code, § 19-11) (Ord. passed 12-6-1976)
§ 38.010 REMEDY WHEN TAXPAYER QUESTIONS TAXES.
   A taxpayer who conceives that taxes or other charges have been assessed
erroneously, unjustly or illegally against his or her property shall pay the
taxes or charges notwithstanding under protest, and at any time within 30 days
thereafter may bring in the Court of Common Pleas an action for the recovery
thereof.
(Prior Code, § 19-12) (Ord. passed 12-6-1976)
Statutory reference:
   Remedy, see S.C. Code §§ 12-47-210 to 12-47-270
§ 38.011 COUNTY OFFICIALS AS TOWN’S AGENTS IN COLLECTING TAXES AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   Pursuant to Art. 8, § 13 of the Constitution of South Carolina and
S.C. Code § 6-1-20, the town and the county have agreed upon the joint
administration of a plan for tax assessments and collection of current and
delinquent taxes of the town. For the purpose of carrying out this plan, the
appropriate county officials including, but not limited to the County Auditor,
County Treasurer and County Sheriff, are hereby designated as agents of the
town in the performance of duties necessary for or incidental to the collection
of taxes and other sums levied by the Town Council against owners of real and
personal property and the delivery of the same from time to time to the Town
Clerk.
   (B)   The Town Clerk shall cooperate with the appropriate county officials
in maintenance of records in their respective offices to adequately reflect the
levy, collection or non-collection and disposition of all taxes, penalties and
costs due and payable to the town.
(Prior Code, § 19-13) (Ord. passed 12-6-1976)
§ 38.012 ACTIONS AT LAW OR ATTACHMENTS FOR COLLECTION OF TAXES.
   If any tax shall be unpaid at the time fixed for the payment thereof or
returned delinquent, the Sheriff may not only distrain property for the payment
thereof, but may recover the same with the penalties thereon, by action at law,
proceedings in attachment, or other means authorized by law to be used by
private individuals in the collection of debts, which action or other
proceedings shall be prosecuted in the name of the Town Council. If the Sheriff
should die or go out of office before the termination of such action or
processing, the final collection of the money or any order or judgment thereon,
his or her successor in office may from time to time prosecute such action.
(Prior Code, § 19-14) (Ord. passed 12-6-1976)
DELINQUENT TAXES ON REAL ESTATE
§ 38.025 LEVY AND SALE OF REAL PROPERTY FOR DELINQUENT TAXES AND THE LIKE.
   All taxes and assessments shall be due and payable on or before the day
prescribed by ordinance and thereafter penalties and costs shall attach, as
prescribed by ordinance. If real estate taxes, penalties and costs are not paid
on or before the fifteenth day of April following the date when they are due
and payable, an execution shall be issued, and if said taxes, penalties and
costs continue unpaid thereafter, the sheriff shall levy, by distress and sale,
upon so much of the defaulting taxpayer’s estate as may be sufficient to
satisfy the delinquent taxes, assessments, charges, penalties and costs, in the
same manner as provided by law for collection of delinquent county taxes. The
distress and sale of personal property shall not be a condition precedent to
seizure and sale of real property upon which taxes are delinquent.
(Prior Code, § 19-15) (Ord. passed 12-6-1976)
§ 38.026 NOTICE TO CERTAIN MORTGAGE OWNERS.
   An owner of a mortgage or mortgages on real estate subject to town taxes may
file a listing of said mortgage or mortgagees provided in S.C. Code §§ 12-49-
210 to 12-49-300, and upon his or her compliance therewith the Sheriff shall
give him or her 20 days’ notice of an impending sale for delinquent taxes,
penalties, costs and charges, as therein provided.
(Prior Code, § 19-16) (Ord. passed 12-6-1976)
§ 38.027 SEIZURE AND SALE UNDER EXECUTION.
   (A)   Under and by virtue of a warrant or execution for real property taxes,
the Sheriff shall:
      (1)   Seize and take exclusive possession of so much of the defaulting
taxpayer’s estate, real, personal or both, as may be necessary to raise the
sums of money named therein and charges thereon;
      (2)   After due advertisement, sell the property so seized before the
courthouse door in the county, on a regular sales day and within the usual
hours for public sales for cash;
      (3)   Give to the purchaser upon his or her complying with the terms of
sale a receipt for the purchase money and annex such receipt to the duplicate
warrant with the endorsement thereon of his or her action thereunder;
      (4)   After deducting from the proceeds of sale the costs and expenses of
sale, pay over to the Town Clerk the taxes, charges and penalties due and
incurred by the defaulting taxpayer; and
      (5)   Upon written notice given or information ascertained from the
records of any mortgage or other lien on the premises so sold for taxes, hold
the excess, if any, until authorized or directed by proper judicial authority
as to the mode of disposition thereof or until he or she shall receive the
written consent of the defaulting taxpayer that the excess be paid over to a
mortgagee or lien creditor, according to priority if more than one, when he or
she shall comply with such authorization or direction of proper judicial
authority or with the terms of such written consent.
   (B)   The Sheriff shall not make title to the purchaser until the expiration
of 12 months from the day of sale and then only if the property sold be not
redeemed as provided in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 19-17) (Ord. passed 12-6-1976)
Statutory reference:
   Seizure, see S.C. Code § 12-49-460
§ 38.028 REDEMPTION OF REAL ESTATE.
   (A)   The owner, any grantee from the owner or any mortgage or judgment
creditor may, within 12 months from the day of sale of real estate for
delinquent taxes, redeem said property by paying to the Sheriff the taxes,
penalties, costs and expenses of sale, together with 6% interest on the whole
amount of the purchase price of the land so sold and also any and all amounts
paid by the bidder as taxes on the property, receipt for which has been filed
with the Sheriff.
   (B)   Thereupon, the Sheriff shall pay back and refund to the purchaser the
amount paid on his or her bid, with interest as above stated, and all taxes
paid by the bidder and bid by the purchaser shall be then canceled and revoked,
the owner or his or her grantee remaining in possession of such land.
   (C)   Should any mortgage or judgment creditor redeem any such land as above
permitted, the amount so paid by him or her for taxes, charges, cost and
penalties shall be added to the mortgage debt or other lien, with the same
incidents as to priority, with the same rate of interest and collectible in the
same way as the original mortgage or judgment debt.
(Prior Code, § 19-18) (Ord. passed 12-6-1976)
Statutory reference:
   Redemption, see S.C. Code § 12-49-530
§ 38.029 SHERIFF’S DEED PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF GOOD TITLE.
   The Sheriff’s deed of conveyance, whether executed to a private person, a
corporation or to the town, shall be held and taken as prima facie evidence of
a good title in the holder and that all proceedings have been regular, and all
requirements of the law have been duly and fully complied with. No action for
recovery of property sold by the Sheriff or the possession thereof shall be
maintained unless brought within two years from the date of such sale.
(Prior Code, § 19-19) (Ord. passed 12-6-1976)
Statutory reference:
   Evidence, see S.C. Code § 12-49-570
DELINQUENT PERSONAL PROPERTY TAXES
§ 38.040 LEVY AND SALE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY FOR TAXES.
   All personal property subject to taxation shall be liable to distress and
sale for the payment of taxes and assessments. Upon receiving an execution
directed against personal property, the Sheriff shall seize and take exclusive
possession of so much of the personal property or other personal property of
the taxpayer as may be necessary to raise the sums of money named therein and
the costs, fees and commissions thereon and, after advertisement once a week
for two consecutive weeks, sell said property on a regular sales day within the
hours for legal sales to the highest bidder for cash and deliver possession of
the property so sold to the purchaser upon payment of the purchase price, there
shall be no redemption period for property so sold.
(Prior Code, § 19-20) (Ord. passed 12-6-1976)
Statutory reference:
   Sale of property, see S.C. Code § 12-49-580
§ 38.041 DRIVING MOTOR VEHICLE UPON WHICH TAXES ARE DELINQUENT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any resident of the town to operate within
the corporate limits of the town or upon the public streets or ways of said
town any motor vehicle upon which personal property taxes due to the town are
unpaid and delinquent.
   (B)   Personal property taxes assessed against any vehicle owned by a town
resident shall be delinquent within the meaning of this section when the same
are past due, unpaid and have gone into executions provided in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 19-21) (Ord. passed 12-6-1946)
§ 38.042 REAL ESTATE TRANSFER FEE DISCONTINUED.
   The town will no longer impose and collect a fee of equal to 0.0025% of
purchase price upon the transfer of any property interest in any real property
situated in the town.
(Prior Code, § 19-23) (Ord. passed 9-23-1997)
LOCAL ACCOMMODATIONS FEE
§ 38.055 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCOMMODATION. Any room (excluding meeting and conference rooms), campground
spaces, recreational vehicle spaces, lodgings or sleeping accommodations
furnished to transients by any hotel, motel, inn, condominium, bed and
breakfast, residence, or any other place in which rooms, lodgings, or sleeping
accommodations are furnished for a consideration within the town. This
definition includes short-term rentals. The gross proceeds received from the
lease or rental of sleeping ACCOMMODATIONS supplied to the same person or
persons for a period of not less than 30 continuous days are not considered
proceeds and shall not be subject to the accommodation fee imposed by this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 23-1) (Ord. passed 1-21-2003)
§ 38.056 FEE.
   (A)   A uniform fee of 1% is hereby imposed on the gross proceeds derived
from the rental of any accommodations within the town.
   (B)   Payment of the municipal accommodations fee established herein shall
be the obligation of the consumer of the accommodations. The fee shall be paid
at the time of provision of the accommodations to which the fee applies and
shall be collected and remitted by the provider of the accommodations. The
provider of services shall remit the form required by the County Business
License/User Fee Department for reporting local accommodations fees. The fees
shall be remitted no later than the twentieth of each month to the
aforementioned Department along with a copy of the State of South Carolina
sales tax computation form. Fees shall be remitted in the manner prescribed to
Charleston County Accommodations, 4045 Bridge View Drive, North Charleston, SC
29405-7464.
(Prior Code, § 23-1) (Ord. passed 1-21-2003)
§ 38.057 ACCOMMODATIONS FEE FUND.
   An interest-bearing, segregated and restricted account to be known as the
“Town of Sullivan’s Island Accommodations Fee Special Revenue Fund” is hereby
established. All revenues received from the municipal accommodations fee shall
be deposited into this Fund. All principal and interest in this Fund shall be
used in accordance with state law and as permitted by this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 23-1) (Ord. passed 1-21-2003)
§ 38.058 ENFORCEMENT.
   For the purpose of monitoring and enforcing the provisions of this
subchapter, the Town Administrator, or other authorized agent of the town, are
authorized and empowered to enter upon the premises of any person or entity
subject to this subchapter to make inspections and examine or audit any and all
business and financial books and records of such person or entity. It shall be
unlawful for any person or entity to fail or refuse to make available the
requested books and records during normal business hours upon 24 hours’ prior
written notice. In the event an audit reveals that the provider or its agents
have filed inaccurate or incorrect information, the cost of the audit shall be
added to any fees determined to be due. The County Business License/User Fee
Department may make systematic inspections of all accommodations within the
town to ensure compliance with this subchapter. Records of inspections shall
not be deemed public records.
(Prior Code, § 23-1) (Ord. passed 1-21-2003)
§ 38.059 VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be a violation of this subchapter to:
   (A)   Fail to collect any municipal accommodations fees imposed by this
subchapter;
   (B)   Fail to timely remit to the County Business License/User Fee
Department the municipal accommodations fees collected hereunder as required by
this subchapter;
   (C)   Knowingly provide false, inaccurate or misleading information on the
fee reporting form or in connection with any inspection, examination or audit
conducted pursuant to this subchapter; or
   (D)   Fail to provide access to all business and financial books and records
of the provider to the town or its duly authorized agents for the purpose of an
audit, upon 24 hours’ advance notice.
(Prior Code, § 23-1) (Ord. passed 1-21-2003) Penalty, see §
38.999
HOSPITALITY TAX
§ 38.070 ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby imposed a tax of 2% on the gross proceeds derived from the
sale of prepared meals, food and beverages sold in establishments, or sales of
prepared meals, food and beverages sold in establishments licensed for on-
premises consumption of alcoholic beverages, beer or wine, and is imposed on
every person engaged in the business of furnishing food and beverage services,
whether dine in or take out, within the town.
(Prior Code, § 24-1) (Ord. passed 1-21-2003)
§ 38.071 COLLECTION/ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The tax imposed by this subchapter shall be collected from any patron
when he or she tenders payment for his or her meal, food or beverage and shall
be held in trust for the benefit of the town until the same is paid to the
county as herein after provided. Every establishment subject to this
hospitality tax shall, on the date or within the time period hereinafter
prescribed, make a return to the county on forms provided by the office
delineating gross proceeds of sales of prepared meals, food and beverages for
the previous month, and the amount of the tax due by virtue of this subchapter.
At the time the return is filed, the full amount of any tax due hereunder shall
be remitted. Taxes and required reports shall be submitted to the county by the
twentieth day of the month and shall cover sales of the previous month. Any
taxes not remitted in a timely fashion shall be subject to a penalty of 25%.
The failure to collect from patrons shall not relieve any establishment subject
to these requirements from making the required remittance.
   (B)   For the purpose of enforcing this subchapter, the Town Administrator,
the Building Inspector, or the County Business License/User Fee Department or
other authorized agent of the town is empowered to enter upon the premises of
any person or entity subject to this subchapter and to make inspections, and
examine and audit books and records. It shall be unlawful for any person or
entity to fail or refuse to make available the necessary books and records
during normal business hours upon 24 hours’ notice. In the event that an audit
reveals that false information has been filed by the remitter, the cost of the
audit shall be added to the amount of fees determined to be due. Records of
inspections shall not be deemed public records.
(Prior Code, § 24-1) (Ord. 1-21-2003) Penalty, see §
38.999
§ 38.072 HOSPITALITY TAX ACCOUNT.
   A special account shall be established, known as the Hospitality Tax
Account, into which all monies remitted to the town under this subchapter shall
be deposited. Any and all funds in the Hospitality Tax Account, including any
interest as may accrue, shall be use for the purposes as set forth in S.C. Code
§ 6-1-730, as may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 24-1) (Ord. passed 1-21-2003)
§ 38.073 VIOLATION.
   It shall be a violation of this subchapter to:
   (A)   Fail to collect the municipal hospitality tax in connection with the
sale of meals, food and beverages;
   (B)   Fail to remit to the county or other designee taxes collected pursuant
to this subchapter on a monthly basis;
   (C)   Provide false information on the form of return submitted to the
county or other designee;
   (D)   Fail to provide books and records to the town or other authorized
agent for the purpose of an audit with 24 hours’ notice; and/or
   (E)   Fail to comply with any other specific provisions or requirements of
this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 24-1) (Ord. passed 1-21-2003) Penalty, see §
38.999
DELINQUENT DEBT
§ 38.085 DELINQUENT DEBT FEE.
   (A)   The town may impose a collection cost of up to $25 to defray its
internal costs of collection for any delinquent debts that are sought to be
collected pursuant to the provisions of the Setoff Debt Collection Act, S.C.
Code Ann. §§ 12-56-10 et seq. This cost is hereby declared to be a collection
cost that arises by operation of law and shall be added to the delinquent debt
and recovered from the debtor.
   (B)   The town hereby declares that the administrative fee charged by the
state’s Municipal Association is also a collection cost to the town, which
shall also be added to the delinquent debt and recovered from the debtor.
(Prior Code, § 26-1) (Ord. 2019-06, passed 10-15-2019)
§ 38.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   A civil penalty of 5% of the amount of the fees due under §
38.056, compounded monthly, up to a maximum of 100% of the amount of the fees
due hereunder, shall be assessed for each violation of §§
38.055 through
38.058. Additionally, violators may be subject to prosecution pursuant to
municipal codes for the town for each violation of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 23-1)
   (C)   The failure of an establishment to remit to the county the required
taxes when due shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more
than $500 or imprisonment for up to 30 days, or both. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, any misrepresentation of the information required by returns as set
forth in this chapter or the failure to collect or timely remit to the county
the taxes imposed by this chapter may result in the suspension and/or
revocation of the business license of the offending establishment, as may be
determined.
(Prior Code, § 21-1) (Ord. passed 1-21-2003)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   WATER SUPPLY
      
51.   SEWER AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
CHAPTER 50: WATER SUPPLY
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Contract for service prerequisite to use
   
50.02   Opening fire hydrants or private pipes
   
50.03   Permit required to turn water supply to premises on or off
   
50.04   Pollution of water supply prohibited
   
50.05   Permit required to extend service to be on annual basis; contracting
party to advise Town Council of correct address
   
50.06   Contracts for water service to be on annual basis; contracting party to
advise Town Council of correct address
   
50.07   Number of contracts per lot
   
50.08   Conditions prerequisite to new installations or reinstallations;
conditions prerequisite to subdivision of lots in the CCOD 1 and 2 districts
   
50.09   Meter deposit
   
50.10   Establishment and revision of service charges and hydrant charges
   
50.11   Billing date for water service charges; when bills payable;
discontinuance of service for failure to pay bill; charge for restoration of
service
   
50.12   Contracting party responsible for water beyond meter
   
50.13   Pool filling
   
50.14   Checking of meters
Drought Response
   
50.25   Declaration of policy
   
50.26   Goal of policy
   
50.27   Definitions
   
50.28   Identification of drought/shortage indicators
   
50.29   Rationing
   
50.30   Enforcement
   
50.31   Variances
   
50.32   Prohibited acts when proclamation in effect
 
   
50.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 CONTRACT FOR SERVICE PREREQUISITE TO USE.
   (A)   All houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, commercial, recreation or other similar purposes is hereby required
to be connected to the public water supply of the town. It shall be unlawful
for any person to take water from any public hydrant or private pipe connected
to the public water supply of the town for domestic, industrial, fire or other
purposes without having previously contracted for such service. All privately
held parcels shall pay a monthly water basic facility charge whether connected
or not, unless the public water supply is not available at a location on or
adjacent to the parcel.
   (B)   No person shall combine water from any private source with the town’s
supply of water within any water distribution system whether inside or outside
of any residence, commercial building or any accessory building.
   (C)   In the event the town discovers a violation of division (B) above, the
town shall give ten days’ written notice to have the violation removed. In the
event the violation is not removed within ten days, the town shall disconnect
the town’s water supply until the violation has been removed. In addition
thereto, the violator of division (B) above shall be punished in accordance
with §
50.99.
   (D)   Notwithstanding anything else stated in this chapter, the town shall
have no obligation to pay for and extend the public water supply system of the
town to undeveloped lots that do not currently have such water service lines
adjacent to them. Any such extension shall require an agreement between the
town and the requesting property owner as to payment of the cost of the
extension, in addition to the town’s approval of the specifications for
construction as well as the final installation.
   (E)   As part of an agreement for the property owner to extend the water
service lines to an undeveloped lot that does not currently have adjacent water
service lines, the town reserves the right to require such property owner to
construct water service lines to accommodate service to other adjacent
properties along the same service line, at the property owner’s cost and
expense, subject to reimbursement from other adjacent property owners as
provided in division (F) below.
   (F)   If the town requires a property owner to construct water lines to
accommodate water service to adjacent parcels, the town shall require the owner
of each such adjacent parcel to compensate the constructing property owner for
a pro rata cost of construction of the water line at the time the adjoining
property owner submits an application to the town for water or sewer service.
The pro rata cost of construction shall be determined by Town Council by
dividing the final cost of constructing the water line extension by the number
of buildable lots in which water service has been provided pursuant to division
(E) above. To the extent sewer service is also extended pursuant to §
51.006, the construction of the sewer and water line extensions may be
performed under the same construction contract. Assessment of a monthly water
basic facility charge shall not relieve any property owner from the obligation
to pay the pro rata cost of construction as provided herein.
(Prior Code, § 20-1) (Ord. passed 11-2-1969; Ord. passed 3-19-1996; Ord. passed
7-15-2008; Ord. passed 9-16-2008; Ord. passed 4-17-2012) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.02 OPENING FIRE HYDRANTS OR PRIVATE PIPES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to open any fireplug, hydrant or private
pipe connected with or appurtenant to the waterworks of the town or to draw
water therefrom, except officials and employees of the town, including the Fire
Chief and members of the Fire Department, acting under the direction of the
Town Council or with its permission.
(Prior Code, § 20-2) (Ord. passed 11-2-1969) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.03 PERMIT REQUIRED TO TURN WATER SUPPLY TO PREMISES ON OR OFF.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with the meter boxes or meters
installed by the town. Residents under contract with the town for water service
may, as necessary, use the green shut off valve on the property owners side of
the meter to turn service on or off.
(Prior Code, § 20-3) (Ord. passed 3-19-1996) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.04 POLLUTION OF WATER SUPPLY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   General regulation. It shall be unlawful for any person to pollute the
water supply of the town.
   (B)   Cross-connection control. The town shall be responsible to CPW for the
protection of the public potable water distribution system from contamination
of pollution due to the backflow of contaminates or pollutants through the
water service connection. In the event a person has connected or cross-
connected any private well or any private water system in any way, shape or
form to or with the public water system which such connection or cross-
connection is not in violation of §
50.01, the same shall be subject to the following: town personnel, when deemed
necessary, shall require an approved backflow prevention assembly to be
installed by the landowner for the safety of the water system in accordance
with the Cross-Connection Control Policy and South Carolina State Primary State
Drinking Water Regulations (Safe Drinking Water Regulations), being R. 61-58.
The town shall give notice, in writing, to the customer to install an approved
backflow prevention assembly at each service connection to the owner’s
premises. In the event that the assembly is not installed as required by the
town, the water service will be disconnected until such assembly has been
properly installed in the sole discretion of the town.
   (C)   Application for connection. Prior to any landowner, tenant or water
user connecting or cross-connecting any private well or water system with the
public water system (not in violation of §
50.01) the same shall apply in writing with the town, thereafter, upon town
approval shall follow requirements contained in division (B) above.
(Prior Code, § 20-4) (Ord. passed 11-2-1969; Ord. passed 3-19-1996; Ord. passed
2-21-2006) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.05 PERMIT REQUIRED TO EXTEND SERVICE TO BE ON ANNUAL BASIS; CONTRACTING
PARTY TO ADVISE TOWN COUNCIL OF CORRECT ADDRESS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to extend service pipes attached to
mains of the public water supply on any premises within the town without first
obtaining permission therefor in writing from the town. Before any worker or
plumber shall perform any work connected with the extension of such, written
permission for such extension shall be obtained from the Water Department
Manager.
(Prior Code, § 20-5) (Ord. passed 11-2-1969; Ord. passed 3-19-1996) Penalty,
see §
50.99
§ 50.06 CONTRACTS FOR WATER SERVICE TO BE ON ANNUAL BASIS; CONTRACTING PARTY TO
ADVISE TOWN COUNCIL OF CORRECT ADDRESS.
   (A)   All contracts for the service of water for commercial or residential
use shall be on an annual basis covering the period from January 1 through
December 31 of each year and automatically renewable. All owners of residential
and commercial parcels occupied or vacant, shall contract with the town for
water service for the purpose of paying the monthly basic facility charge.
Persons entering into contracts with the town for water service shall be
responsible for ascertaining and paying water service charges hereinafter
provided as such charges accrue. All water contracts now in existence are
hereby amended to conform with all of the provisions hereof and as so amended
shall continue in force. The Town Council will mail notices of accruing charges
to water users at mailing addresses furnished by the contracting parties, but
it is the responsibility of the contracting party that the Town Council be
advised of his or her current and correct address.
   (B)   Any residential and/or commercial property owner who fails to contract
with the town for the monthly basic facility charge, any monthly usage charge,
any penalties and interest, if any, shall accrue and become the obligation of
the owner. In addition, a lien shall be placed upon the property.
   (C)   The amount owed to the town under this section along with any
penalties, fines, interest and cost of collection including attorney fees are
declared to be a charge and continuing lien upon the property (lot) and shall
run with the land. The town shall have the right to enforce the lien by
bringing an action to the Small Claims Court for Charleston County of the
Circuit Court. The cost of collection, including, but not limited to, filing
fee, process of service and attorney fees shall be the responsibility of the
property owner and shall become a part of the lien.
   (D)   Where an institutional mortgagee obtains title to the property (lot)
as a result of foreclosure of its first mortgage or deed in lieu of
foreclosure, such institutional mortgagee shall not be liable for the amount
due and owing pertaining to that property (lot) that became due prior to the
acquisition of title by such mortgagee as a result of the foreclosure or deed
in lieu thereof, unless the amount due and owing is secured by a claim of lien
recorded prior to the recording of the applicable mortgage.
(Prior Code, § 20-6) (Ord. passed 11-2-1969) (Ord. passed 7-15-2008)
§ 50.07 NUMBER OF CONTRACTS PER LOT.
   (A)   Only one contract and one meter for each residential lot is allowed,
except those nonconforming contracts established prior to February 20, 1996.
During residential construction, water-only service may be provided until such
time that the property is to be occupied, then the service shall be water and
include sewer service. Only one contract for the service of water for
residential use will be entered into with respect to any one residential lot;
provided further, that there shall be no limitations as to the number of
separate contracts for water service for commercial purposes on one lot.
   (B)   Water-only service, providing only water service to a residential lot
and no sewer service, shall be limited to: a new construction site prior to
connecting to the public sewer system and/or the issue of a certificate of
occupancy; or a lot with or without a residential structure, using water
service only for irrigation and/or pool filling and/or water service to a dock
attached to the lot, with no sewer service for any use. There shall be no leak
adjustments for a water-only service.
   (C)   Except as provided in division (B) above and division (D) below, all
contracts for the servicing of water shall include the servicing of sewer and
the bill for the usage of the water shall be computed in accordance with the
current adopted town rate schedule.
   (D)   The town will allow for a property owner or renter of a residential
lot with or without a residential structure to apply for a single separate
meter for water-only service for landscape irrigation and/or pool filling and/
or water service to a dock. Such a separate water-only meter will not be
activated until after a CO has been issued and/or it is in compliance with this
chapter. Properties with water-only meters shall not be granted the annual pool
filling permit. There shall be no leak adjustments for service to a water-only
meter.
   (E)   Nothing herein shall prohibit the town from continuing to allow
contracts for water use only with accounts for properties where accounts have
previously been established prior to February 10, 1996.
(Prior Code, § 20-7) (Ord. passed 11-2-1969; Ord. passed 3-19-1996; Ord. passed
2-21-2006; Ord. passed 7-15-2008; Ord. passed 12-21-2010)
§ 50.08 CONDITIONS PREREQUISITE TO NEW INSTALLATIONS OR REINSTALLATIONS;
CONDITIONS PREREQUISITE TO SUBDIVISION OF LOTS IN THE CCOD 1 AND 2 DISTRICTS.
   All new installations or reinstallations of water service are subject to the
following conditions.
   (A)   The property line shall be clearly defined by the owner at the point
of water service entry so that the meter may be installed outside the property
line.
   (B)   The owner shall provide on his or her property a cut-off valve between
the structure being serviced and the meter.
   (C)    The owner shall keep access to the meter and backflow device free of
all obstructions. Road right-of-way may be planted with grass only. Plants,
shrubs, trees, landscape berms, landscape irrigation, and the like are strictly
prohibited in the right-of-way.
   (D)   The Town Council shall establish and may revise from time to time
installation and reinstallation charges for various sizes of meters. Copies of
such resolutions shall be made available at Town Hall upon request.
   (E)   The Town Council shall establish and may revise from time to time
unmetered private fire line tie-in fees by resolution. Copies of such
resolution shall be made available at the Town Hall upon request.
   (F)   The owner shall be responsible for costs involved in connections from
the water main to property and is subject to yearly inspections by the Water
and Fire Departments.
   (G)   Lots in CCOD 1 and 2; additional water meters.
      (1)   Additional water and sewer capacity from the town’s water and sewer
systems is necessary and therefore must comply with all state and federal
regulations as well as
Chapters 50 and
51 of the town’s ordinances. Specifically, §§
50.06,
50.07 and
50.10, there is only one sewer tap per single lot allowed and in accordance
with §
50.06, every property must have a sewer tap into the system.
      (2)   The owner of a split zone lot shall, prior to subdividing the lot
or prior to obtaining a building permit to construct a building on the lot
shall:
         (a)   Obtain a water and sewer tap for the portion of the lot zoned
commercial (if it does not already have one that is operable) and a water and
sewer tap for the portion of the lot zoned residential (if it does not already
have one that is operable); The cost of the sewer and water taps shall be paid
by the owner of said lot in an amount to be determined by the town’s Water and
Sewer Department; and
         (b)   1.   Provide a reasonable size utility easement that will run
with the land connecting with the town’s water and sewer lines (on Jasper
Avenue for CCOD 1 lots and I’on Avenue or Station 22 for CCOD 2 lots) and
extending to the portion of the lot zoned commercial. The easement shall be
owned and maintained by the owner of that portion of the lot zoned commercial
at the owner’s sole expense; and
            2.   Construct water and sewer lines within said easements at the
owner's sole expense and the owner shall maintain repair or replace said sewer
and water lines as required by the town’s Water and Sewer Department, at the
owner’s sole expense; and the town’s Water and Sewer Department shall provide
the specifications of the water and sewer lines and the owner shall obtain the
approval of the town’s Water and Sewer Department prior to subdividing or
obtaining a building permit or, with the approval of the town, to provide to
the town Water and Sewer Department an estimate of the cost to do such work
that is satisfactory to the Water and Sewer Department and post with the town a
bond equal to one and one-half times the amount of such estimate to ensure that
required water and sewer lines will be constructed as required; and
            3.   In the event the town has installed water and sewer lines
along or in Middle Street adjacent to a split zoned lot, then prior to
subdividing the lot or obtaining a building permit to construct a building on
the lot, the owner shall pay to the town 25% of the total cost incurred by the
town in constructing the water and sewer lines along Middle Street in the CCOD
1 and the owner shall pay to the town 12.5% of the total cost incurred by the
town in constructing the water and sewer lines along Middle Street in the CCOD
2.
(Prior Code, § 20-8) (Ord. passed 11-2-1969; Ord. passed 12-17-1991; Ord.
passed 3-19-1996; Ord. passed 2-21-2006; Ord. passed 7-15-2008; Ord. 2022-08,
passed 9-20-2022)
§ 50.09 METER DEPOSIT.
   The Town Council by resolution shall establish and may revise from time to
time meter deposits, which will be required of all water users, such deposit to
be paid at the time the contract for water service is made; provided, that this
requirement for a deposit may be waived where the contract for water service is
with the property owner and where the property owner, in writing, assumes
responsibility for payment of all amounts due for water service furnished such
property.
(Prior Code, § 20-9) (Ord. passed 11-2-1969)
§ 50.10 ESTABLISHMENT AND REVISION OF SERVICE CHARGES AND HYDRANT CHARGES.
   The Town Council by resolution shall establish and may from time to time
revise residential and commercial water service charges, including minimum
charges for hydrant use.
(Prior Code, § 20-10) (Ord. passed 11-2-1969)
§ 50.11 BILLING DATE FOR WATER SERVICE CHARGES; WHEN BILLS PAYABLE;
DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE FOR FAILURE TO PAY BILL; CHARGE FOR RESTORATION OF
SERVICE.
   (A)   Meters will be read each month of the year. Bills for water shall be
rendered by the first day of each month and said bills shall be payable when
rendered at the office of the Town Council, and shall become past due after the
fifteenth day of the month in which they were rendered. No further notice or
billing shall be required. Under no circumstances shall a partial payment of a
water bill be accepted.
   (B)   If a bill is not paid by the fifteenth of the month following
rendition, a $10 service charge is added to the bill. If the bill is not paid
by the first of the month following rendition, water service will be
discontinued and if restored during normal working hours, is due along with the
$10 service charge and a $15 reconnection fee. The after-hours (hours other
than between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday) reconnection fee
is $30 and must be paid along with the past due bill and the $10 service charge
by 2:00 p.m. the following business day. If these charges are not satisfied
within this time frame, water service will be disconnected a second time and an
additional $60 will be added to the bill. If the total charges are not
satisfied by 2:00 p.m. the following business day, the customer shall be mailed
a registered or certified letter indicating meter removal and all payments and
fees associated with the reinstallation along with all past due bills and an
additional $100 reinstallation shall be charged. The Town Council by resolution
shall establish and from time to time may revise “turn on” fees and meter
reinstallation fees, which shall be charged in addition to the regular bill and
mailing charges, before service is restored.
(Prior Code, § 20-11) (Ord. passed 3-19-1996; Ord. passed 7-15-2008)
§ 50.12 CONTRACTING PARTY RESPONSIBLE FOR WATER BEYOND METER.
   (A)   The town’s contract for water service provides for service of water at
the point where the property owner’s line is attached to the town’s meter.
   (B)   Since the operation and condition of the property owners’ water lines
on private property are beyond the observation and control of the town, the
Town Council shall not be responsible for water used, lost or wasted after
passing through the meter, nor will the town assume the responsibility for
billing or collecting from tenants who have not made the required deposit or
signed a water contract with the town.
   (C)   Since the town is purchasing its water from an outside source, the
town shall not be required to make any adjustments to a bill when the water
bill and/or sewer bill has been substantially increased due to any excessive
water used by the contract owner/property owner when the water has passed
through the meter and was subsequently lost or wasted.
   (D)   The town, in its sole discretion, may adjust the sewer bill but not
the water bill by charging the customer the average monthly sewer bill charge
of the previous six months on the account, provided the customer can
satisfactorily prove to the town personnel that:
      (1)   There was an undetected leak;
      (2)   Said excessive water usage did not enter a sanitary sewer; and
      (3)   That a reasonable inspection of property would not have discovered
said leak.
   (E)   Additionally, an adjustment in the sewer bill will only be made once
every three years for a customer and such adjustment would only cover two
consecutive months.
   (F)   No adjustments in the water and/or sewer bill will be made for any
leaks in any irrigation systems, pool systems or docks.
(Prior Code, § 20-12) (Ord. passed 11-2-1969; Ord. passed 3-19-1996; Ord.
passed 8-20-2002; Ord. 2016-07, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 50.13 POOL FILLING.
   One pool filling per year in accordance with the following:
   (A)   No pool filling permit shall be allowed if an irrigation meter or dock
only meter is present;
   (B)   Customer must apply at Town Hall, pay the fee, and sign liability
waiver. Water Department personnel will inspect pool within three business days
of the date of permit application. Inspection of pool will consist of verifying
that pool is empty and verifying pool dimensions and that pool drainage does
not enter sanitary sewer;
   (C)   With permit approval, users will be required to pay for the water used
to fill the pool and will not be assessed for sewer treatment. The dimensions
of the pool (length x width x average depth) submitted on permit will be used
to calculate the volume of water for the sewer adjustment; and
   (D)   If no pool filling permit is obtained, sewer treatment charges will
not be adjusted and be required to be assessed in accordance with normal
billing procedures.
(Prior Code, § 20-12.1) (Ord. passed 3-19-1996; Ord. passed 8-20-2002; Ord.
passed 12-21-2010)
§ 50.14 CHECKING OF METERS.
   At the user’s request, a meter’s accuracy will be checked against a
certified meter by the town for a fee established by resolution of Town
Council, which fee will be refunded should it be determined that the meter’s
measure of water used is excessive or should the check indicate loss of metered
water from the meter.
(Prior Code, § 20-13) (Ord. passed 11-2-1969)
DROUGHT RESPONSE
§ 50.25 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   To achieve the greatest public benefit from domestic water use, sanitation
and fire protection, and to provide water for other purposes in an equitable
manner, the Town Council adopts the following concerning the delivery and
consumption of water.
(Prior Code, § 20-14)
§ 50.26 GOAL OF POLICY.
   (A)   The objective of this drought response subchapter is to establish
authority, ordinance and procedure by which the town will take the proper
actions to manage water demand during a drought-related shortage. The
subchapter satisfies the requirements of the Drought Response Act of 2000,
being S.C. Code §§ 49-23-10 et seq., and has the goal of achieving the greatest
public benefit from limited supplies of water needed for domestic water use,
sanitation, and fire protection and allocating water for other purposes in an
equitable manner.
   (B)   This subchapter outlines the actions to be taken for the conservation
of water supplied by the town. These actions are directed both towards an
overall reduction in water usage and the optimization of supply.
   (C)   To satisfy these goals, the town hereby adopts the following
regulations and restrictions on the delivery and consumption of water. This
subchapter is hereby declared necessary for the protection of public health,
safety and welfare and shall take effect upon its adoption by the town.
   (D)   If it becomes necessary to conserve water in its service area due to
drought, the town is authorized to issue a proclamation (a “proclamation”) that
existing conditions prevent fulfillment of the usual water use demands. The
proclamation is an attempt to prevent depleting the water supply to the extent
that water-use for human consumption, sanitation, fire protection and other
essential needs becomes endangered.
   (E)   Immediately upon issuance of such a proclamation, regulations and
restrictions set forth under this subchapter shall become effective and remain
in effect until the water supply shortage has ended and the proclamation
rescinded. The drought water usage rates, as set in the latest water and sewer
rates and fee schedule, shall be in effect during this time.
   (F)   Water uses that are regulated or prohibited under this subchapter are
considered to be non-essential and continuation of such uses during times of
water supply shortages is deemed to constitute a waste of water, subjecting the
offender(s) to penalties.
(Prior Code, § 20-14.1) (Ord. passed 10-21-2003; Ord. passed 4-12-2011)
Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.27 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this plan and the accompanying ordinances, the following
definitions will apply.
   AESTHETIC WATER USE. Water use for ornamental or decorative purposes such as
fountains, reflecting pools and waterfalls.
   COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL USE. Water use integral to the production of goods
and/or services by any establishment having profit as its primary aim.
   CONSERVATION. Reduction in water use to prevent depletion or waste of the
resource.
   CUSTOMER. Any person, company or organization using finished water owned or
supplied by the town.
   DOMESTIC WATER USE. Water use for personal needs or for household purposes
such as drinking, bathing, heating, cooking, sanitation or for cleaning a
residence, business, industry or institution.
   DROUGHT ALERT PHASES. There are four drought alert phases to be determined
by the Drought Response Committee for the state. The four phases are:
      (1)   Incipient drought;
      (2)   Moderate drought;
      (3)   Severe drought; and
      (4)   Extreme drought.
   DROUGHT RESPONSE MANAGEMENT AREA. 
      (1)   There are four drought management areas corresponding to the major
river basins in the state. These four areas are:
         (a)   West or Savannah;
         (b)   Central or Santee;
         (c)   Northeast or Pee Dee; and
         (d)   Southern or Ashepoo, Combahee and Edisto.
      (2)   In order to prevent overly broad response to drought conditions,
drought response measures shall be considered within individual drought
management areas or within individual counties, as applicable.
   DROUGHT RESPONSE COMMITTEE. A committee composed of state and local
representatives created for the purpose of coordinating responses to water
supply shortages within drought management areas and making recommendations for
action to the state’s Department of Natural Resources and/or the Governor. The
COMMITTEE is composed of state agency representatives from the state’s
Emergency Management Division of the office of the Adjutant General, state’s
Department of Health and Environmental Control, state’s Department of
Agriculture, state’s Forestry Commission and state’s Department of Natural
Resources, as well as local committees representing counties, municipalities,
public service districts, private water suppliers, agriculture, industry,
domestic users, regional councils of governments, commissions of public works,
power generation facilities, special purpose districts and soil and water
conservation districts.
   ESSENTIAL WATER USE. Water used specifically for firefighting, maintaining
in-stream flow requirements and to satisfy federal, state or local public
health and safety requirements.
   FINISHED WATER. Water distributed for use after treatment. The terms “water
use”, “water user” and “water customer” refer to FINISHED WATER use unless
otherwise defined.
   INSTITUTIONAL WATER USE. Water used by government, public and private
educational institutions, churches and places of worship, water utilities and
organizations within the public domain.
   IRRIGATION WATER USE. Water used to maintain gardens, trees, lawns, shrubs,
flowers, athletic fields, rights-of-way and medians.
   NON-ESSENTIAL WATER USE. Categories of water use other than essential water
use. Examples of NON-ESSENTIAL WATER USE include landscape irrigation and
washing of buildings, parking lots, automobiles, boats and the like.
   PALMER INDEX. A measure of the severity of a drought or a wet spell in an
area. Dry conditions are associated with negative values, wet conditions with
positive values, and normal conditions have a value of zero.
   RESIDENTIAL EQUIVALENT UNIT (REIT). An equivalency unit defined to be equal
to one single-family residence. The town’s allocated water capacity equals 300
gallons per day per REU.
   SC DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES. The state agency with primacy to
implement the provisions of the Drought Response Act, being S.C. Code §§ 49-23-
10 et seq.
   WATER SUPPLY SHORTAGE. Lack of adequate, available water caused by drought
to meet normal demands.
(Prior Code, § 20-14.2) (Ord. passed 10-21-2003)
§ 50.28 IDENTIFICATION OF DROUGHT/SHORTAGE INDICATORS.
   (A)   Moderate drought phase. Upon notification by the Drought Response
Committee and/or Charleston CPW that a moderate drought condition is present
and is expected to persist, and/or upon determination by the town that a
moderate water supply shortage exists based on trigger levels, the town will
seek voluntary reductions from its customers in the use of water for all
purposes and voluntary reductions on using water during certain peak water
demand periods. Specifically, the goal during this phase is to achieve a
reduction of 20% in residential water use and 15% in other water uses such as
commercial, industrial, institutional and irrigation; with an overall reduction
of >15% water use. To accomplish this, the town will take the following
actions:
      (1)   Issue a proclamation to be released to local media, the town’s
customers and to the state’s Department of Natural Resources Drought
Information Center that moderate drought conditions are present;
      (2)   Provide written notification to the state’s Department of Natural
Resources Drought Information Center and routinely publish in The Charleston
Post & Courier and the Moultrie News the voluntary conservation measures that
the customers are requested to follow during moderate drought conditions,
including:
         (a)   Reduce residential water use to 65 gallons per person per day or
a maximum of 200 gallons per household per day, whichever is less;
         (b)   Eliminate the washing down of sidewalks, walkways, driveways,
parking lots, tennis courts and other hard surfaced areas;
         (c)   Eliminate the washing down of buildings for purposes other than
immediate fire protection;
         (d)   Eliminate the flushing of gutters;
         (e)   Eliminate the domestic washing of motorbikes, boats, cars and
the like;
         (f)   Eliminate the use of water to maintain fountains, reflection
ponds and decorative water bodies for aesthetic or scenic purposes, except
where necessary to support aquatic life;
         (g)   Reduce watering of lawns, plants, trees, gardens, shrubbery and
flora on private or public property to the minimum necessary. Encourage outdoor
watering to be done during off-peak hours;
         (h)   Reduce the amount of water obtained from fire hydrants for
construction purposes, fire drills or for any purpose other than firefighting
or flushing necessary to maintain water quality; and
         (i)   Limit normal water use by commercial and individual customers
including, but not limited to, the following:
            1.   Stop serving water in addition to another beverage routinely
in restaurants;
            2.   Stop maintaining water levels in scenic and recreational ponds
and lakes, except for the minimum amount required to support aquatic life; and
            3.   Cease water service to customers who have been given a ten-day
notice to repair one or more leaks and have failed to do so.
      (3)   Intensify maintenance efforts to identify and correct water leaks
in the distribution system;
      (4)   Cease to install new irrigation taps on the water system; and
      (5)   Continue to encourage and educate customers to comply with
voluntary water conservation.
   (B)   Severe drought phase. Upon notification by the Drought Response
Committee and/or Charleston CPW that a severe drought condition is present and
is expected to persist and/or upon determination by the town that a severe
water supply shortage exists based on trigger levels, the town will seek
voluntary reduction in the use of water for all purposes and mandatory
restrictions on nonessential usage and restrictions on times when certain water
usage is allowed. Specifically, the goal during this phase is to achieve a
reduction of 25% in residential water use, 20% in all other water use
categories and a reduction in overall water use of >20%. To accomplish these
goals, the town will take the following actions:
      (1)   Issue a proclamation to be released to the local media, the town’s
customers and to the state’s Department of Natural Resources Drought
Information Center that severe drought conditions are present;
      (2)   Provide written notification to the state’s Department of Natural
Resources Drought Information Center and routinely publish in The Charleston
Post & Courier and the Moultrie News the voluntary conservation measures and
mandatory restrictions to be placed on the use of water supplied by the
utility, including:
         (a)   Voluntary reduction of residential water use by the utility’s
customers to 55 gallons per person per day or a maximum of 170 gallons per
household or REU per day, whichever is less;
         (b)   Control landscape irrigation by the utility’s customers by
staggering watering times;
         (c)   Mandatory restrictions on the use of water supplied by the
utility for activities including:
            1.   Eliminate the washing down of sidewalks, walkways, driveways,
parking lots, tennis courts and other hard surfaced areas;
            2.   Eliminate the washing down of buildings for purposes other
than immediate fire protection;
            3.   Eliminate the flushing of gutters;
            4.   Eliminate domestic washing of motorbikes, boats, cars and the
like;
            5.   Eliminate the use of water to maintain fountains, reflection
ponds and decorative water bodies for aesthetic or scenic purposes, except
where necessary to support aquatic life;
            6.   Eliminate filling or maintaining public or private swimming
pools; and
            7.   Eliminate obtaining water from fire hydrants for construction
purposes, fire drills or any purpose other than firefighting or flushing
necessary to maintain water quality.
         (d)   Limit use of water by commercial and individual customers
including, but not limited to, the following:
            1.   Serve water only upon request in addition to another beverage
routinely in restaurants;
            2.   Stop maintaining water levels in scenic and recreational ponds
and lakes, except for the minimum amount required to support aquatic life;
            3.   Limit irrigating golf courses and any portion of its grounds
to existing surface water supplies;
            4.   Cease water service to customers, where appropriate, who have
been given a ten-day notice to repair one or more leaks and have failed to do
so; and
            5.   Limit expanding commercial nursery facilities, placing new
irrigated agricultural land in production or planting or landscaping when
required by site design review process.
      (3)   Intensify maintenance efforts to identify and correct water leaks
in the distribution system;
      (4)   Continue to cease installation of new irrigation taps on the water
system;
      (5)   Publicize widely the penalties to be imposed for violations of
mandatory restrictions and the procedures to be followed if a variance in the
restrictions is requested;
      (6)   Expand the use of education and public relations efforts and
emphasize the penalties associated with violating the mandatory restrictions;
and
      (7)   Provide written notification monthly to the state’s Department of
Natural Resources Drought Information Center regarding the success of the
voluntary and mandatory restrictions.
   (C)   Extreme drought phase. Upon notification by the Drought Response
Committee and/or Charleston CPW that an extreme drought condition is present
and is expected to persist, and/or upon determination by the town that an
extreme water supply shortage exists based on the trigger levels, the town will
impose mandatory restrictions in the use of water for all purposes and on the
times when certain water usage is allowed. Specifically, the goal during this
phase is to achieve a reduction of 30% in residential water use, 25% in all
other categories of water uses and a reduction in overall water use of >25%. To
accomplish these goals, the town will take the following actions:
      (1)   Issue a proclamation to be released to the local media, the town’s
customers and to the state’s Department of Natural Resources Drought
Information Center that extreme drought conditions are present;
      (2)   Provide written notification to the state’s Department of Natural
Resources Drought Information Center and routinely publish in The Charleston
Post & Courier and the Moultrie News the mandatory restrictions to be placed on
the use of water supplied by the utility, including:
         (a)   Limiting residential water use to 45 gallons per person per day
or a maximum of 150 gallons per household or REU per day, whichever is less;
         (b)   Eliminate landscape irrigation by the utility’s customers;
         (c)   Mandatory restrictions on the use of water supplied by the
utility for activities including:
            1.   Eliminate the washing down of sidewalks, walkways, driveways,
parking lots, tennis courts and other hard surfaced areas;
            2.   Eliminate the washing down of buildings for purposes other
than immediate fire protection;
            3.   Eliminate the flushing of gutters;
            4.   No domestic washing of motorbikes, boats, cars and the like;
            5.   Eliminate the use of water to maintain fountains, reflection
ponds, and decorative water bodies for aesthetic or scenic purposes, except
where necessary to support aquatic life;
            6.   Eliminate filling or maintaining public or private swimming
pools; and
            7.   Eliminate obtaining water from fire hydrants for construction
purposes, fire drills or any purpose other than firefighting or flushing
necessary to maintain water quality.
         (d)   Limit normal water use by commercial and individual customers
including, but not limited to, the following:
            1.   Stop serving tap water in addition to another beverage
routinely in restaurants;
            2.   Stop maintaining water levels in scenic and recreational ponds
and lakes, except for the minimum amount required to support fish and wildlife;
            3.   Limit irrigating golf courses and any portion of their grounds
to existing surface water sources;
            4.   Cease water service to customers who have been given a ten-day
notice to repair one or more leaks and have failed to do so; and
            5.   Limit expanding commercial nursery facilities, placing new
irrigated agricultural land in production, or planting or landscaping when
required by site design review process.
      (3)   Intensify maintenance efforts to identify and correct water leaks
in the distribution system;
      (4)   Continue to cease installation of new irrigation taps on the water
system;
      (5)   Publicize widely the penalties to be imposed for violations of
mandatory restrictions (§
50.30 of this code of ordinances) and the procedures to be followed if a
variance (§
50.31 of this code of ordinances) in the restrictions is requested;
      (6)   Expand the use of education and public relations efforts as
conducted under the moderate and severe drought phase and emphasize the
penalties associated with violating the mandatory restrictions; and
      (7)   Provide written notification monthly to the state’s Department of
Natural Resources Drought Information Center regarding the success of the
mandatory restrictions.
(Prior Code, § 20-14.3) (Ord. passed 10-21-2003)
§ 50.29 RATIONING.
   If a drought threatens the protection of public health and safety, the town
is hereby authorized to ration water.
(Prior Code, § 20-14.4) (Ord. passed 10-21-2003)
§ 50.30 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   If any customer of the town fails to comply with the mandatory water
use restrictions of this subchapter, the customer shall be given a written
notice of such failure to comply, which cites the date of said violation, and
shall be assessed surcharges in accordance with the following schedule:
      (1)   First violation: $50 surcharge shall be added to the customer’s
water bill;
      (2)   Second violation: an additional $150 surcharge shall be added to
the customer’s water bill; and
      (3)   Third violation: the customer’s water service shall be terminated
and restored only after payment of a surcharge of $300 in addition to all
previously assessed surcharges.
   (B)   Law enforcement agencies and other authorized agencies or designated
employees in the respective jurisdiction that is being supplied water by the
town shall diligently enforce the provisions of the drought response
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-14.5) (Ord. passed 10-21-2003)
§ 50.31 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Customers, who in their belief are unable to comply with the mandatory
water use restrictions of this drought response subchapter, may petition for a
variance from restrictions by filing a petition with the town within ten
working days after the issuance of the proclamation requiring water use
restrictions.
   (B)   All petitions for variance shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Name and address of the petitioner;
      (2)   Purpose of water usage;
      (3)   Special provision from which the petitioner is requesting relief;
      (4)   Detailed statement as to how the curtailment declaration adversely
affects the petitioner;
      (5)   Description of the relief desired;
      (6)   Period of time for which the variance is sought;
      (7)   Economic value of the water use; and
      (8)   Damage or harm to the petitioner or others if petitioner complies
with the subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 20-14.6) (Ord. passed 10-21-2003)
§ 50.32 PROHIBITED ACTS WHEN PROCLAMATION IN EFFECT.
   Immediately upon the issuance of a proclamation as provided for in §
50.28, and so long as the same may be in force, it shall be unlawful for any
person to do such of the following acts as may be prohibited in such
proclamation:
   (A)   Washing of automobiles;
   (B)   Sprinkling of private or public lawns;
   (C)   Sprinkling of streets;
   (D)   Washing of pavements;
   (E)   Use of water in public or private swimming pools;
   (F)   Use of water in flushing of sewers;
   (G)   In all public drinking places and soda fountains, sanitary cups shall
be used instead of utensils which require washing with water; and/or
   (H)   All unusual water requirements, such as jetting of piling or well
points.
(Prior Code, § 20-15) (Ord. passed 11-2-1969; Ord. passed 3-19-1996) Penalty,
see §
50.99
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter or any provision relative
to which a proclamation has been issued as provided in §
50.28, when declared to be in force by the Clerk of the Town Council, shall be
punished as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 20-16) (Ord. 20-17, passed 10-6-2003; Ord. passed 11-2-2016)
CHAPTER 51: SEWER AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
Section
General Provisions
   
51.001   Privies and ideal sanitary closets
   
51.002   Septic tank prohibited
   
51.003   Deposit of objectionable waste on property
   
51.004   Discharge of sewage or polluted water to natural outlets
   
51.005   Use of private sewage disposal facilities restricted
   
51.006   Toilet facilities required in buildings; connection with public sewer
required
Building Sewers and Sewer Connections
   
51.020   Permit for sewer connection or opening
   
51.021   Application and fee for sewer connection
   
51.022   Cost of building sewer to be borne by property owner
   
51.023   Separate building sewer required for each building; exceptions
   
51.024   Use of old building sewers
   
51.025   Specifications for building sewers
   
51.026   Connection of sources of surface runoff or ground water to building
sewers
   
51.027   Connections to comply with other regulations
   
51.028   Notice to Town Council when building sewer ready for inspection
   
51.029   Guarding of excavations; restoration of streets, sidewalks and the
like after excavation
   
51.030   Record to be kept of connections
Restrictions on Use
   
51.045   Discharge of stormwater, collecting water and the like into sewers
prohibited
   
51.046   Discharge of hazardous substances into sewers prohibited
   
51.047   Industrial and other harmful wastes
   
51.048   Authority of Town Council to reject or require pretreatment of wastes
   
51.049   Grease, oil and sand interceptors may be required
   
51.050   Maintenance of preliminary treatment and flow-equalizing facilities
   
51.051   Control manholes and meters may be required
   
51.052   Standards for measurements, tests and analyses
   
51.053   Discharge of other wastes into sewer system prohibited
Scavengers’ Wastes
   
51.065   Disposal in sewer system prohibited
   
51.066   Method of disposal
Sewer Service Charges and Contracts
   
51.080   Contracts to be on annual basis; contracting party to furnish town
correct address
   
51.081   Number of contracts per lot
   
51.082   Establishment of sewer service charges; flat rate for properties not
using town water
   
51.083   Billing date for sewer service charges; when bills payable;
discontinuance of service for failure to pay bill; charge for restoration of
service
   
51.084   Sewer and water service may be terminated for failure to pay sewer
service charges
   
51.085   Water distribution agency to collect sewer service charges
Cross-reference:
   Stormwater management, see
Chapter 155
   Zoning, see
Chapter 157
Statutory reference:
   Sewerage systems generally, see S.C. Code §§ 5-31-10 to 5-31-2040
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.001 PRIVIES AND IDEAL SANITARY CLOSETS.
   No person shall keep, use or maintain any privy or “ideal sanitary closet”
on any lot or land within the town.
(Prior Code, § 18-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.002 SEPTIC TANK PROHIBITED.
   No person shall install, maintain or use a septic tank in the town.
(Prior Code, § 18-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.003 DEPOSIT OF OBJECTIONABLE WASTE ON PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited, in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
town or in any area under the jurisdiction of the town, any human or animal
excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
(Prior Code, § 18-3) (Ord. passed 12-3-1969) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.004 DISCHARGE OF SEWAGE OR POLLUTED WATER TO NATURAL OUTLETS.
   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the town or
in any area under the jurisdiction of the town any sewage or other polluted
water, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 18-4) (Ord. passed 12-3-1969) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.005 USE OF PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL FACILITIES RESTRICTED.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful to
construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(Prior Code, § 18-5) (Ord. passed 12-3-1969) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.006 TOILET FACILITIES REQUIRED IN BUILDINGS; CONNECTION WITH PUBLIC SEWER
REQUIRED.
   (A)   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, commercial, recreation or other similar purposes is
hereby required, at his or her expense, to install suitable toilet facilities
therein, and to be connected to the public sewer system of the town. It shall
be unlawful for any person to discharge to or be connected to the public sewer
system of the town for domestic, industrial, commercial or other purposes
without having previously contracted for such service. All privately held
parcels shall pay a monthly sewer basic facility charge whether connected or
not, unless the public sewer system is not available at a location on or
adjacent to the parcel.
   (B)   Notwithstanding anything else in this chapter, the town shall have no
obligation to pay for and extend the public sewer system of the town to
undeveloped lots that do not currently have such sewer lines adjacent to them.
Any such extension shall require an agreement between the town and the
requesting property owner as to payment of the cost of the extension in
addition to the town’s approval of the specifications for construction as well
as the final installation.
   (C)   As part of an agreement for the property owner to extend sewer lines
to an undeveloped lot that does not currently have adjacent sewer lines, the
town reserves the right to require such property owner to construct sewer lines
to accommodate service to other adjacent properties along the same service
line, at the property owner’s cost and expense, subject to reimbursement from
other adjacent property owners as provided in division (D) below.
   (D)   If the town requires a property owner to construct sewer lines to
accommodate sewer service to adjacent parcels, the town shall require the owner
of each such adjacent parcel to compensate the constructing property owner for
a pro rata cost of construction of the sewer line at the time the adjoining
property owner submits an application to the town for water or sewer service.
The pro rata cost of construction shall be determined by Town Council by
dividing the final cost of constructing the sewer line extension by the number
of buildable lots in which sewer service has been provided pursuant to division
(C) above. To the extent water service is also extended pursuant to §
50.01, the construction of the sewer and water line extensions may be performed
under the same construction contract. Assessment of a monthly sewer basic
facility charge shall not relieve any property owner from the obligation to pay
the pro rata cost of construction as provided herein.
(Prior Code, § 18-6) (Ord. passed 12-3-1969; Ord. passed 7-15-2008; Ord. passed
9-16-2008; Ord. passed 4-17-2012)
BUILDING SEWERS AND SEWER CONNECTIONS
§ 51.020 PERMIT FOR SEWER CONNECTION OR OPENING.
   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening
into, or use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 18-7) (Ord. passed 12-3-1969) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.021 APPLICATION AND FEE FOR SEWER CONNECTION.
   (A)   Conditions prerequisite to new installations or reinstallations;
conditions prerequisite to subdivision of lots in the CCOD 1 and 2 Districts.
All installations or reinstallations of sewer service are subject to the
following conditions:
      (1)   The property line shall be clearly defined by the owner at the
point of sewer service entry so that the double sweep clean outs may be
installed inside the property line.
      (2)   The owner shall keep access to the sewer clean outs free of all
obstructions. Clean outs may not be fenced in. Road right of way may be planted
with grass only. Plants, shrubs, trees, landscape berms, landscape irrigation,
and the like are strictly prohibited in the right of way.
      (3)   The Town Council shall establish by resolution and may revise from
time to time rates and fees including installation and reinstallation charges
for sewer service connection. Copies the current rates and fees are posted on
the town website.
      (4)   The property owner shall be responsible for all costs involved in
connections from the sewer main to property and subject to yearly inspection by
Water and Sewer Departments.
   (B)   Lots in CCOD 1 and 2; the following easements, line installations and
conditions required prior to subdivision; additional water and sewer taps.
      (1)   Additional water and sewer capacity from the town’s water and sewer
systems is necessary and therefore any additional taps must comply with all
state and federal regulations as well as Chapters 50 and 51 of the town’s
ordinances. Specifically, §§
51.006,
51.020 and
51.023, there is only one sewer tap per single lot allowed and in accordance
with §
51.006, every property must have a sewer tap into the system.
      (2)   The owner of a split zone lot shall, prior to subdividing the lot
or prior to obtaining a building permit to construct a building on the lot
shall;
         (a)   Obtain a water and sewer tap for the portion of the lot zoned
commercial (if it does not already have one that is operable) and a water and
sewer tap for the portion of the lot zoned residential (if it does not already
have one that is operable); The cost of the sewer and water taps shall be paid
by the owner of said lot in an amount to be determined by the town’s Water and
Sewer Department; and
         (b)   Provide a reasonable size utility easement that will run with
the land connecting with the town’s water and sewer lines (on Jasper Avenue for
CCOD 1 lots and I’on Avenue or Station 22 for CCOD 2 lots) and extending to the
portion of the lot zoned commercial. The easement shall be owned and maintained
by the owner of that portion of the lot zoned commercial at the owner’s sole
expense; and
         (c)   Construct water and sewer lines within said easements at the
owner’s sole expense and the owner shall maintain repair or replace said sewer
and water lines as required by the town’s Water and Sewer Department, at the
owner’s sole expense; and the town’s Water and Sewer Department shall provide
the specifications of the water and sewer lines and the owner shall obtain the
approval of the town’s Water and Sewer Department prior to subdividing or
obtaining a building permit or, with the approval of the town, to provide to
the town Water and Sewer Department an estimate of the cost to do such work
that is satisfactory to the Water and Sewer Department and post with the town a
bond equal to one and one-half times the amount of such estimate to ensure that
required water and sewer lines will be constructed as required; and
         (d)   In the event the town has installed water and sewer lines along
or in Middle Street adjacent to a split zoned lot, then prior to subdividing
the lot or obtaining a building permit to construct a building on the lot, the
owner shall pay to the town 25% of the total cost incurred by the town in
constructing the water and sewer lines along Middle Street in the CCOD 1 and
the owner shall pay to the town 12.5% of the total cost incurred by the town in
constructing the water and sewer lines along Middle Street in the CCOD 2.
(Prior Code, § 18-8) (Ord. passed 12-3-1969; Ord. 2022-07, passed 9-20-2022)
§ 51.022 COST OF BUILDING SEWER TO BE BORNE BY PROPERTY OWNER.
   All cost and expense incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the town
from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the
installation of the building sewer.
(Prior Code, § 18-9) (Ord. passed 12-3-1969)
§ 51.023 SEPARATE BUILDING SEWER REQUIRED FOR EACH BUILDING; EXCEPTIONS.
   Every separate dwelling house on a single lot where the dwelling houses on
such lot in excess of one have been declared to be lawful, except under
conditions determined by the Committee on Water and Sewer of the Town Council
and not conflicting with other provisions of this chapter, shall be connected
with the public sewers. Each dwelling house, servant’s house or guest house
separate from the main dwelling on the lot shall be regarded as a separate
building. No more than one building sewer line shall be used to connect all
separate dwelling houses on a single lot with the public sewer without special
permit of the Committee on Water and Sewers.
(Prior Code, § 18-10) (Ord. passed 12-3-1969; Ord. passed 7-15-2008) Penalty,
see §
10.99
§ 51.024 USE OF OLD BUILDING SEWERS.
   Old building sewers may be used in connection with the new buildings only
when they are found on examination and test by the Superintendent of Sewers or
his or her designated representative to meet all requirements of this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 18-11) (Ord. passed 12-3-1969)
§ 51.025 SPECIFICATIONS FOR BUILDING SEWERS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make connections with the
public sewer in any other manner and with any other material than is provided
in this section. Every pipe connecting with the public sewers from a point four
feet out of the foundation walls or piers of the building shall be strong,
sound and impervious in all its parts shall be solidly laid on a true grade,
which grade shall be not less than one foot in 100 feet, without the written
permission of the Committee on Water and Sewers. All lines shall be laid as
nearly as possible in a straight line.
   (B)   In ditches where the bottom is unsafe from any cause, the grade shall
be made secure by planking, concrete or other means to the satisfaction of the
Committee on Water and Sewers or by the use of cast iron fibre pipe of
satisfactory quality, as specified in the Standard Plumbing Code adopted by
Town Council. All lines shall be jointed in the best manner and covered at
least to a depth of one foot with well-rammed earth entirely free from stones
and rubbish. All lines of less than one foot shall be of cast iron with well
caulked lead joints. If water pipe is laid in the sewer connection trench, it
shall be laid well to one side and above the sewer.
   (C)   All lines connected with the public sewer shall be four inches in
diameter, except that six-inch lines may be laid in private property where
there is not less than ten feet to the closet or slop sink and where there are
a number of houses on one lot, and subject in all cases to approval by the
Committee on Water and Sewers.
(Prior Code, § 18-12) (Ord. passed 12-3-1969) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.026 CONNECTION OF SOURCES OF SURFACE RUNOFF OR GROUND WATER TO BUILDING
SEWERS.
   No person shall make connections of roof downspouts, exterior foundations
drains, interior sumps, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or
ground water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
(Prior Code, § 18-13) (Ord. passed 12-3-1969) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.027 CONNECTIONS TO COMPLY WITH OTHER REGULATIONS.
   The connection of building sewers to the public sewer shall conform to the
requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code and other applicable rules and
regulations of the town. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and
material must be approved by the Town Council before installation.
(Prior Code, § 18-14) (Ord. passed 12-3-1969)
§ 51.028 NOTICE TO TOWN COUNCIL WHEN BUILDING SEWER READY FOR INSPECTION.
   The applicant for a building sewer permit shall notify the Town Council in
writing when the building sewer is ready for inspection and has been connected
to the public sewer.
(Prior Code, § 18-15) (Ord. passed 12-3-1969)
§ 51.029 GUARDING OF EXCAVATIONS; RESTORATION OF STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND THE
LIKE AFTER EXCAVATION.
   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 18-16) (Ord. passed 12-3-1969)
§ 51.030 RECORD TO BE KEPT OF CONNECTIONS.
   The Town Council shall cause to be kept a permanent and accurate record of
the location, depth and direction of all new sewer connections, including such
landmarks as may be necessary to make an adequate description.
(Prior Code, § 18-17) (Ord. passed 12-3-1969)
RESTRICTIONS ON USE
§ 51.045 DISCHARGE OF STORMWATER, COLLECTING WATER AND THE LIKE INTO SEWERS
PROHIBITED.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface
water, ground water, roof runoff, sub-surface drainage, uncontaminated cooling
water or unpolluted industrial waters to any sanitary sewer.
(Prior Code, § 18-18) (Ord. passed 12-3-1969) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.046 DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES INTO SEWERS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
   (A)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;
   (B)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including, but not limited
to, cyanide in excess of two mg/l as CN in the wastes as discharged to the
public sewer;
   (C)   Any waters or wastes having pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment
and personnel of the sewage works; and/or
   (D)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works, such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, ground garbage, cement, concrete, whole blood, paunch manure,
hair and fleshing, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk container, and the
like, either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
(Prior Code, § 18-19) (Ord. passed 12-3-1969) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.047 INDUSTRIAL AND OTHER HARMFUL WASTES.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely, in the
opinion of the Town Council, that such wastes can harm either the sewers,
sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving
stream or can otherwise endanger life, limb or public property or constitute a
nuisance. In forming its opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the
Town Council shall give consideration to such factors as the quantities of
subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the
sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage
treatment plant and other pertinent factors.
   (B)   The substances prohibited are:
      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F or 65°C;
      (2)   Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°F and 150°F or 0°C and
65°C;
      (3)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths
horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Town Council;
      (4)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes
or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not;
      (5)   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and
similar objectionable or toxic substances or wastes exerting excessive chlorine
requirements, to such degree that any such material received in the composite
sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the Town
Council for such materials;
      (6)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other odor-producing
substances in such concentrations as exceeds limits which may be established by
the Town Council as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet
the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies having
jurisdiction over such discharge into the receiving waters;
      (7)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such shelf-life or
concentrations as may exceed limits established by the Town Council in
compliance with applicable state of federal regulations;
      (8)   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5;
      (9)   Materials which exert or cause:
         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate);
         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions);
         (c)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works; and
         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes which exceeds
for more than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration
or flow during normal operation.
      (10)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters.
(Prior Code, § 18-20) (Ord. passed 12-3-1969) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.048 AUTHORITY OF TOWN COUNCIL TO REJECT OR REQUIRE PRETREATMENT OF WASTES.
   (A)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged into the public sewers which waters contain the substances or
possess the characteristics enumerated in §§
51.050 or
51.051, and which, in the judgment of the Town Council, may have deleterious
effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or
which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the
Town Council may:
      (1)   Reject the wastes;
      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
      (4)   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions
of §
51.047.
   (B)   If the Town Council permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject
to the review and approval of the Town Council, and subject to the requirements
of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
(Prior Code, § 18-21) (Ord. passed 12-3-1969)
§ 51.049 GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS MAY BE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided by the owner at
his or her expense when, in the opinion of the Town Council, they are necessary
for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive
amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients, except
that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or
dwelling units.
   (B)   All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Town
Council, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection.
(Prior Code, § 18-22) (Ord. passed 12-3-1969)
§ 51.050 MAINTENANCE OF PRELIMINARY TREATMENT AND FLOW-EQUALIZING FACILITIES.
   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for
any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner at his or her expense.
(Prior Code, § 18-23) (Ord. passed 12-3-1969)
§ 51.051 CONTROL MANHOLES AND METERS MAY BE REQUIRED.
   (A)   When required by the Town Council, the owner of any property serviced
by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole, together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the
wastes.
   (B)   Such manholes, when required, shall be accessible and safely located,
and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Town Council.
   (C)   The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his or her expense, and
shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
(Prior Code, § 18-24) (Ord. passed 12-3-1969)
§ 51.052 STANDARDS FOR MEASUREMENTS, TESTS AND ANALYSES.
   (A)   (1)   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of
waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health
Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon
suitable samples taken at such control manhole.
      (2)   In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control
manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public
sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.
   (B)   (1)   Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards of life, limb and property. The particular analysis
involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of premises
is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.
      (2)   Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are
obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pHs are determined
from periodic grab samples.
(Prior Code, § 18-25) (Ord. passed 12-3-1969)
§ 51.053 DISCHARGE OF OTHER WASTES INTO SEWER SYSTEM PROHIBITED.
   No other material and substances, chemicals or chemical compounds or
industrial wastes will be permitted to be discharged into the public sewer
systems, except as heretofore provided.
(Prior Code, § 18-26) (Ord. passed 12-3-1969)
SCAVENGERS’ WASTES
§ 51.065 DISPOSAL IN SEWER SYSTEM PROHIBITED.
   Scavenger wastes will not be permitted to be disposed of in the sewer
system. SCAVENGER WASTES are considered to be any putrid or offensive matter,
the contents of privies, septic tanks and cesspools.
(Prior Code, § 18-27) (Ord. passed 12-3-1969) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.066 METHOD OF DISPOSAL.
   Scavenger wastes may be disposed of within the town in accordance with the
rules and regulations of the State Board of Health and Environmental Control
and County Health Department.
(Prior Code, § 18-28) (Ord. passed 12-3-1969)
SEWER SERVICE CHARGES AND CONTRACTS
§ 51.080 CONTRACTS TO BE ON ANNUAL BASIS; CONTRACTING PARTY TO FURNISH TOWN
CORRECT ADDRESS.
   (A)   All contracts for sewer service for commercial or residential use will
be on an annual basis covering the period from January 1 through December 31 of
each year and automatically renewable. All residential and commercial parcels,
occupied or vacant, shall contract with the town for sewer service for the
purpose of paying the monthly basic facility charge unless the public sewer
system is not available at a location on or adjacent to the parcel. Persons
entering into contracts with the town for sewer service shall be responsible
for ascertaining and paying sewer service charges hereinafter provided as such
charges accrue. The Town Council will mail notices of accruing charges to sewer
users at mailing addresses furnished by the contracting parties, but it is the
responsibility of the contracting party that the town be advised of this
current and correct address.
   (B)    Whenever any residential and/or commercial property owner, who has
the public sewer system available at a location on or adjacent to the owner’s
parcel, fails to contract with the town for the monthly basic facility charge,
any monthly usage charge, any penalties and interest, if any, shall accrue and
become the obligation of the owner. In addition, a lien shall be placed upon
the property.
   (C)   The amount owed to the town under this section along with any
penalties, fines, interest and cost of collection including attorney fees are
declared to be a charge and continuing lien upon the property (lot) and shall
run with the land. The town shall have the right to enforce the lien by
bringing an action to the Small Claims Court for the county of the Circuit
Court. The cost of collection, including, but not limited to, filing fee,
process of service and attorney fees shall be the responsibility of the
property owner and shall become a part of the lien.
   (D)   Where an institutional mortgagee obtains title to the property (lot)
as a result of foreclosure of its first mortgage or deed in lieu of
foreclosure, such institutional mortgagee shall not be liable for the amount
due and owing pertaining to that property (lot) that became due prior to the
acquisition of title by such mortgagee as a result of the foreclosure or deed
in lieu thereof, unless the amount due and owing is secured by a claim of lien
recorded prior to the recording of the applicable mortgage.
(Prior Code, § 18-29) (Ord. passed 12-3-1969; Ord. passed 7-15-2008)
§ 51.081 NUMBER OF CONTRACTS PER LOT.
   Only one contract for sewage service for residential use shall be entered
into with respect to any one town residential lot; provided, that separate
contracts may be permitted for each separate dwelling house on a single lot
where the dwelling houses on such lot in excess of one have been declared to be
lawful; and provided further, that there shall be no limitation as to the
number of separate contracts for sewer service for commercial purposes on any
one commercial lot.
(Prior Code, § 18-30) (Ord. passed 12-3-1969)
§ 51.082 ESTABLISHMENT OF SEWER SERVICE CHARGES; FLAT RATE FOR PROPERTIES NOT
USING TOWN WATER.
   The Town Council shall establish by resolution and from time to time may so
revise residential and commercial sewer service charges, which shall be based
on water service charges.
(Prior Code, § 18-31) (Ord. passed 12-3-1969; Ord. passed 7-15-2008)
§ 51.083 BILLING DATE FOR SEWER SERVICE CHARGES; WHEN BILLS PAYABLE;
DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE FOR FAILURE TO PAY BILL; CHARGE FOR RESTORATION OF
SERVICE.
   (A)   Meters will be read each month of the year. Bills for sewer shall be
rendered by the first day of each month, and said bills shall be payable when
rendered at the office of the Town Council. Bills shall become past due after
the fifteenth day of the month in which they were rendered. No further notice
or billing will be required.
   (B)   Under no circumstances shall a partial payment of a sewer bill be
accepted. If the bill is not paid by the first of the month following
rendition, the sewer service will be discontinued.
   (C)    The Town Council by resolution shall establish, and from time to time
may revise, “turn on” fees which shall be paid in addition to the regular bill
as a charge for restoring service which has been discontinued for non-payment.
(Prior Code, § 18-32) (Ord. passed 12-20-1990; Ord. passed 7-15-2008)
§ 51.084 SEWER AND WATER SERVICE MAY BE TERMINATED FOR FAILURE TO PAY SEWER
SERVICE CHARGES.
   Upon failure of a person having a contract for sewer service to pay for such
service when due, the town may terminate sewer service and water service, or
either, to such person and such service shall not be resumed until all back
charges are paid.
(Prior Code, § 18-33) (Ord. passed 12-3-1969)
§ 51.085 WATER DISTRIBUTION AGENCY TO COLLECT SEWER SERVICE CHARGES.
   The water distribution agency of the town is hereby designated, pursuant to
S.C. Code §§ 5-31-2010 through 5-31-2040, as the agent of the Town Council for
the purpose of collecting such sewer service charges as the town shall from
time to time impose upon those using its sewage disposal facilities, and such
water distribution agency is hereby empowered as such agent to disconnect water
service upon failure of any user to pay such sewer service charges.
(Prior Code, § 18-34) (Ord. passed 9-20-1971)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 70: MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Section
General Provisions
   
70.001   State law adopted
   
70.002   Careless driving or riding
Stopping, Standing and Parking
   
70.015   Impounding unoccupied and unattended vehicles
   
70.016   Driver of vehicle to stop at stop signs
   
70.017   Where stopping, standing and parking prohibited generally
   
70.018   Unauthorized moving of parked vehicle
   
70.019   Prohibited for certain purposes
   
70.020   Standing or parking close to curb; angle parking
   
70.021   Parking on right side of street
   
70.022   Parking within lines indicating parking spaces
   
70.023   Loading and unloading passengers
   
70.024   Loading or unloading where curbs are painted white
   
70.025   Owner responsible for illegal parking
   
70.026   Authority of Chief of Police to promulgate special regulations
Dead Storage of Vehicles
   
70.040   Dead storage defined
   
70.041   Dead storage prohibited on streets and public property
Regulation of Mopeds
   
70.055   Moped defined
   
70.056   Registration required
   
70.057   License tags, issuance and attachment to moped
   
70.058   Fee for registration and issuance of license tags
   
70.059   Term of registration; fee for renewal
   
70.060   Disposition of fees collected; reports of license tags issued
   
70.061   Transfer of ownership; report of possession
   
70.062   Forfeiture, sale and redemption of unlicensed or improperly licensed
mopeds
   
70.063   Operation of unlicensed or improperly licensed mopeds
   
70.064   Possession of unlicensed moped as evidence of violation
   
70.065   Liability insurance policy required
   
70.066   Effect of policy cancellation or expiration
   
70.067   Driver’s license required
   
70.068   Manner of riding
   
70.069   Riding more than one abreast prohibited
   
70.070   Carrying articles
   
70.071   Application of traffic laws
   
70.072   Muffler devices required
   
70.073   Lighting equipment required
   
70.074   Bells
 
   
70.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Scattering or spilling materials on streets from vehicles, see §
132.19
   Use of certain signals for safe operation of buses, trucks and the like, see
§
93.22
Statutory reference:
   Motor vehicles and traffic generally, see S.C. Code §§ 56-1-10 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.001 STATE LAW ADOPTED.
   The provisions of S.C. Code § 56-1-10, insofar as they are applicable to
motor vehicles and the operation thereof in the town, are hereby adopted as the
law relating to motor vehicles and the operation of the same on the streets of
the town and each section, paragraph, part of parcel thereof is hereby adopted
and made a part of this chapter the same as if such section, paragraph, part or
parcel were written herein.
(Prior Code, § 11-1)
Statutory reference:
   For jurisdiction of Municipal Court, see S.C. Code §§ 14-25-10 et seq., 5-7-
140, 56-1-510, and 56-5-6150
§ 70.002 CARELESS DRIVING OR RIDING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or ride any vehicle without
care and caution and full regard for the safety of persons and property. Any
person failing to do so shall be guilty of careless driving or riding. The
operation of any vehicle when the same or any of its appliances is not in
proper or safe condition shall be prima facie evidence of careless driving or
riding.
(Prior Code, § 11-1) (Ord. passed 3-19-1984) Penalty, see §
70.999
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
§ 70.015 IMPOUNDING UNOCCUPIED AND UNATTENDED VEHICLES.
   Any unoccupied and unattended vehicle found violating the terms of this
subchapter may be removed and impounded by any police officer or duly
authorized person and shall be surrendered to the duly identified owner thereof
only upon payment of cost of impounding.
(Prior Code, § 11-2) (Ord. passed 10-21-1968)
§ 70.016 DRIVER OF VEHICLE TO STOP AT STOP SIGNS.
   When stop signs are erected upon streets or stop lines are clearly marked
thereon, every driver of a vehicle shall stop at every such sign or stop line
before entering the intersection, except when directed to proceed by a police
officer or traffic-control signal.
(Prior Code, § 11-3) (Ord. passed 10-21-1968)
Statutory reference:
   Duty of drivers to stop at signs, see S.C. Code § 56-5-2740
§ 70.017 WHERE STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING PROHIBITED GENERALLY.
   It shall be prohibited to park a motor vehicle in the following locations or
in the following manner:
   (A)   On a sidewalk;
   (B)   In front of a public or private approved driveway;
   (C)   On a beach path or in front of a beach path;
   (D)   Within an intersection;
   (E)   Within ten feet of a fire hydrant;
   (F)   On a crosswalk;
   (G)   Within 25 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
   (H)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or
traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;
   (I)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by signs or markings;
   (J)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station;
   (K)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
   (L)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street;
   (M)   At any place where official signs prohibit parking or stopping or in
violation of official signs restricting stopping or parking; and/or
   (N)   Where curbs are painted yellow.
(Prior Code, § 11-4) (Ord. passed 10-21-1968; Ord. 2016-04, passed 7-19-2016)
Penalty, see §
70.999
Statutory reference:
   For similar state law, see S.C. Code § 56-5-253D
§ 70.018 UNAUTHORIZED MOVING OF PARKED VEHICLE.
   No person shall move a vehicle not owned by such person into any prohibited
area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
(Prior Code, § 11-5) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.019 PROHIBITED FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES.
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway for the purposes
of:
   (A)   Displaying it for sale;
   (B)   Advertising of any nature whatsoever; and/or
   (C)   Washing, greasing, storing or repairing such vehicle except repairs
necessitated by emergency.
(Prior Code, § 11-6) (Ord. passed 10-21-1968) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.020 STANDING OR PARKING CLOSE TO CURB; ANGLE PARKING.
   (A)   It shall be prohibited to park a motor vehicle in such a manner that
any wheels are on the pavement or any portion of the vehicle extends over the
pavement, except where a curb is present or expressly permitted and marked by
signage.
   (B)   All parking shall be parallel to the road except where expressly
permitted and marked by signage.
   (C)   If parking is allowed on a curb, the vehicle wheels must be no more
than one foot from the curb.
(Prior Code, § 11-7) (7-19-2016) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.021 PARKING ON RIGHT SIDE OF STREET.
   Vehicles shall park on the right side of the street except where regulations
restrict parking to one side only.
(Prior Code, § 11-8) (Ord. passed 10-21-1968)
§ 70.022 PARKING WITHIN LINES INDICATING PARKING SPACES.
   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street in such a
manner as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for
the free movement of vehicular traffic, except that a driver shall stop when
necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals or a
police officer.
(Prior Code, § 11-9) (Ord. passed 10-21-1968) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.023 LOADING AND UNLOADING PASSENGERS.
   No operator of a vehicle shall load or unload passengers, except when the
vehicle is stopped at the curb, and then only when such movement can be made
with safety.
(Prior Code, § 11-10) (Ord. passed 10-21-1968) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.024 LOADING OR UNLOADING WHERE CURBS ARE PAINTED WHITE.
   Where curbs are painted white, vehicles shall stop only long enough to load
or unload.
(Prior Code, § 11-11) (Ord. passed 10-21-1968) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.025 OWNER RESPONSIBLE FOR ILLEGAL PARKING.
   No person shall allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his or her
name to stand or park in any street in violation of any of the provisions of
this subchapter or other ordinances of the town regarding the standing or
parking of vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 11-12) (Ord. passed 10-21-1968) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.026 AUTHORITY OF CHIEF OF POLICE TO PROMULGATE SPECIAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The Chief of Police, with the approval of the Town Council, shall have
authority to make, promulgate and enforce special traffic regulations,
including the designation of one-way streets, dangerous intersections where
traffic shall be required to slow down or stop, express avenues, school zones,
safety zones, parking meter zones and regulations as to parking, nonparking and
time limits for parking and cause to be erected or placed signs, signals,
parking meters and other traffic-control devices for the purpose of enforcing
the same. Any person failing or refusing to obey any such regulations shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (B)   Before any such regulations shall become effective, notice thereof
shall be published at least once in a newspaper published in the county.
(Prior Code, § 11-13) (Ord. passed 10-21-1968)
DEAD STORAGE OF VEHICLES
§ 70.040 DEAD STORAGE DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEAD STORAGE OF VEHICLES. The leaving, keeping, parking or maintenance of a
vehicle under any one of the following conditions:
      (1)   Where the vehicle is required to have a license plate for operation
upon the streets and roads of this state and such vehicle does not have a
current license plate;
      (2)   Where the vehicle is designed to be propelled by motor power and is
not in operable condition; or
      (3)   The vehicle in question has been parking or left standing for more
than one week.
(Prior Code, § 11-14) (Ord. passed 3-16-1970)
§ 70.041 DEAD STORAGE PROHIBITED ON STREETS AND PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful to use the public streets, ways or other public areas
of the town for the dead storage of motor and other vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 11-15) (Ord. passed 3-16-1970) Penalty, see §
70.999
REGULATION OF MOPEDS
§ 70.055 MOPED DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MOPED. Any pedal bicycle which is equipped with a pedal-activated helper
motor with a manufacturer’s certified maximum 1.0 brake horsepower which
produces only ordinary pedaling speeds up to a maximum of 20 mph.
(Prior Code, § 11-16) (Ord. passed 3-19-1979)
§ 70.056 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   The owner or operator of every moped operated or furnished for
operation or use, or which is used, either by the owner or any or any other
person, on the streets or public places in the town, shall cause such moped to
be registered at the Police Department, giving the make, model, motor number
and such other description as may be reasonable on a form to be furnished by
the Police Department, which shall be kept on file.
   (B)   No person shall operate a moped on any town street, sidewalk or
bicycle path unless the moped has been licensed hereunder, or unless it is
owned by a non-resident of the town and is duly licensed or registered by the
owner according to the laws or ordinances of his or her place of residence. If
the non-resident owner’s place of residence does not require a licensing or
registering, then the moped shall be licensed hereunder if the moped is
operated has herein described for any part of ten days within a 30-day period.
(Prior Code, § 11-17) (Ord. passed 3-19-1979) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.057 LICENSE TAGS, ISSUANCE AND ATTACHMENT TO MOPED.
   There shall be issued for each such moped registered, as provided in §
70.056, a decal license tag containing a number and other appropriate
identification information. This decal license tag shall be attached to the
rear fender of the moped for which it was issued.
(Prior Code, § 11-18) (Ord. passed 3-19-1979)
§ 70.058 FEE FOR REGISTRATION AND ISSUANCE OF LICENSE TAGS.
   The fee for registration and issuance of the license tag shall be the sum of
$7, which sum shall be collected by the town’s Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 11-19) (Ord. passed 3-19-1979)
§ 70.059 TERM OF REGISTRATION; FEE FOR RENEWAL.
   Registration shall be for a period of one calendar year. The fee for renewal
shall be the sum of $1, which sum shall be collected by the town’s Police
Department.
(Prior Code, § 11-20) (Ord. passed 3-19-1979)
§ 70.060 DISPOSITION OF FEES COLLECTED; REPORTS OF LICENSE TAGS ISSUED.
   Fees collected for moped registration and renewal of registration shall be
turned over to the Town Clerk daily, together with a record of license tags
issued or renewed.
(Prior Code, § 11-21) (Ord. passed 3-19-1979)
§ 70.061 TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP; REPORT OF POSSESSION.
   (A)   Whenever there shall be a transfer of the ownership of a moped, such
transfer shall be reported to the Police Department by the seller within 24
hours and information shall be furnished in regard thereto, setting forth the
name of the transferor and the transferee, which information shall be recorded
in the Police Department along with the original application for registration,
and the purchaser shall immediately register such moped in his or her name and
shall pay a fee therefor in the sum of $1.
   (B)   Any person purchasing or coming into possession of a moped shall,
within 24 hours, report the same to the Police Department and effect the
transfer provided for in this section.
(Prior Code, § 11-22) (Ord. passed 3-19-1979)
§ 70.062 FORFEITURE, SALE AND REDEMPTION OF UNLICENSED OR IMPROPERLY LICENSED
MOPEDS.
   (A)   Any moped found on the streets of the town and any moped operated on
the streets of the town without bearing a license tag which was not legally
issued for such moped shall be seized by the Police Department and forfeited to
the town.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Police Department from time to time to
advertise and sell any and all mopeds so seized, upon giving the usual notice
of sale and publication in a newspaper of regular circulation in the town, as
in the case of other personal property seized and forfeited; but the owner of
such moped may, upon satisfactory proof of his or her ownership before the time
of sale, redeem the moped by the payment of any costs or disbursements incurred
in the seizure, advertisement and sale.
(Prior Code, § 11-23) (Ord. passed 3-19-1979)
§ 70.063 OPERATION OF UNLICENSED OR IMPROPERLY LICENSED MOPEDS.
   It shall be unlawful to use or operate a moped in the town without a license
tag as above provided, or with a license tag that has been issued for a moped
other than the one to which it is attached.
(Prior Code, § 11-24) (Ord. passed 3-19-1979) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.064 POSSESSION OF UNLICENSED MOPED AS EVIDENCE OF VIOLATION.
   The possession or custody of a moped without the license tag required by
this subchapter shall be prima facie evidence that the same was used or
intended to be used in violation of the terms of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 11-25)
§ 70.065 LIABILITY INSURANCE POLICY REQUIRED.
   (A)   Before the issuance or renewal of a license tag for any moped, the
owner of the moped shall procure and show to the town’s Police Department a
liability insurance policy, together with a receipt showing the payment of the
premium therefor issued by a good and responsible insurance company, such
company being one authorized to do business in South Carolina and in possession
of a certificate issued by the Insurance Commissioner of the state.
   (B)   The amount of such liability insurance for each moped shall be as
follows:
      (1)   An amount not less than $15,000 because of bodily injury or death
of one person in any one accident;
      (2)   Subject to such limit for one person, in the amount of $30,000
because of bodily injury or death of two or more persons in any one accident;
and
      (3)   The amount of $5,000 because of injury to or destruction of
property of others in any one accident and amount not less than $1,000 in
“first part” medical and economic loss coverage.
(Prior Code, § 11-26) (Ord. passed 3-19-1979)
§ 70.066 EFFECT OF POLICY CANCELLATION OR EXPIRATION.
   In the event of cancellation or expiration of the policy of insurance,
required in §
70.065, its license tag, as provided in §
70.057, shall become null and void and shall be immediately surrendered by the
owner of the moped to the town’s Police Department, and the operation of the
moped after the cancellation of such insurance shall be a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 11-27) (Ord. passed 3-19-1979)
§ 70.067 DRIVER’S LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate a moped in the town unless he or she shall have a
valid driver’s license or beginner’s permit issued by the state or by another
state, if he or she is a resident of such state.
(Prior Code, § 11-28) (Ord. passed 3-19-1979) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.068 MANNER OF RIDING.
   The operator of a moped shall not ride other than upon or astride a
permanent and regular seat attached thereto, nor shall more than one person
ride on it at the same time.
(Prior Code, § 11-29) (Ord. passed 3-19-1979) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.069 RIDING MORE THAN ONE ABREAST PROHIBITED.
   Persons operating a moped upon a roadway shall ride not more than one
abreast.
(Prior Code, § 11-30) (Ord. passed 3-19-1979) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.070 CARRYING ARTICLES.
   No person operating a moped shall carry any package, bundle or article which
prevents the rider from keeping both hands upon the handle bars.
(Prior Code, § 11-31) (Ord. passed 3-19-1979) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.071 APPLICATION OF TRAFFIC LAWS.
   Every person riding a moped upon a roadway shall be granted all of the
rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a
vehicle by this chapter, except as to special regulations in this subchapter
and except as to provisions of this chapter which by their nature can have no
application.
(Prior Code, § 11-32) (Ord. passed 3-19-1979)
§ 70.072 MUFFLER DEVICES REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate a moped with the muffler removed or altered such
that the operation creates a loud and annoying noise.
(Prior Code, § 11-33) (Ord. passed 3-19-1979) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.073 LIGHTING EQUIPMENT REQUIRED.
   Every moped when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on the
front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 500
feet to the front and a lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of
500 feet to the rear.
(Prior Code, § 11-34) (Ord. passed 3-19-1979)
§ 70.074 BELLS.
   No person shall operate a moped unless it is equipped with a bell, horn or
other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least 100
feet, except that a moped shall not be equipped with nor shall any person use
upon a moped any siren or whistle.
(Prior Code, § 11-35) (Ord. passed 3-19-1979) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.999 PENALTY.
   Persons or vehicles found in violation of this chapter or other provisions
of this code or other ordinances of the town regulating the parking or use of
vehicles on the streets and ways of the town shall be punished as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 11-36)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   GARBAGE, REFUSE AND WEEDS
      
92.   NUISANCES
      
93.   FIRE PROTECTION
      
94.   PARADES AND PROCESSIONS
      
95.   WATERCRAFT REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Town declared bird sanctuary; birds protected
   
90.02   Equine and certain other animals prohibited
   
90.03   Wild animals prohibited
   
90.04   Impounding; fine; sale when wild animals not redeemed
   
90.05   Offenses for the ill treatment of dogs and other animals
Dogs
   
90.15   Dog pound and dog control personnel
   
90.16   Quarantine of dogs and release therefrom
   
90.17   Dog permits and badges required
   
90.18   Offenses by dogs or owners
   
90.19   Impounded dogs and disposition thereof
 
   
90.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Animals generally, see S.C. Code §§ 47-1-10 et seq.
   Cruelty to animals, see S.C. Code §§ 47-1-10 to 47-1-70
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 TOWN DECLARED BIRD SANCTUARY; BIRDS PROTECTED.
   The territory embraced within the corporate limits of the town, or the
police jurisdiction thereof, is declared a bird sanctuary. It shall be unlawful
for any person to kill, injure, harm or molest any bird within the police
jurisdiction of the town, or to destroy, injure, rob or molest the eggs or the
nests and breeding places of such birds, except domestic birds and fowl.
(Prior Code, § 3-1) (Ord. passed 3-13-1958) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.02 EQUINE AND CERTAIN OTHER ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall own, keep, shelter, feed, harbor, ride, use to pull, except
as provided by the Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways, being S.C. Code
§§ 56-5-10 et seq., or take care of any horse, mare, gelding, jack, jenny,
mule, pony, donkey, burro or other equine animal or any swine or cow within the
municipal limits of the town.
(Prior Code, § 3-2) (Ord. passed 7-20-2010) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.03 WILD ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or
have in his or her possession or control within the town any poisonous reptile
or any other dangerous or carnivorous wild animal or reptile, any vicious or
dangerous domesticated animal or any other animal or reptile of wild, vicious
or dangerous propensities.
   (B)   Classification. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain
or have in his or her possession or control within the town any of the
following animals:
      (1)   All poisonous animals including rear-fang snakes;
      (2)   Apes, chimpanzees, gibbons, gorillas, orangutans, and siamangs;
      (3)   Baboons;
      (4)   Bison;
      (5)   Cheetahs;
      (6)   Constrictor snakes, six feet in length or more;
      (7)   Coyotes;
      (8)   Crocodilians, 30 inches in length or more;
      (9)   Deer (includes all for example, white tailed deer, elk, antelope
and moose);
      (10)   Elephants;
      (11)   Gamecocks and other fighting birds;
      (12)   Hippopotami;
      (13)   Hyenas;
      (14)   Jaguars;
      (15)   Leopards;
      (16)   Lions;
      (17)   Lynxes;
      (18)   Monkeys, old world;
      (19)   Ostriches;
      (20)   Piranha fish;
      (21)   Pumas (also knows as cougars, mountain lions and panthers);
      (22)   Raccoons;
      (23)   Rhinoceroses;
      (24)   Sharks;
      (25)   Snow leopards;
      (26)   Swine;
      (27)   Tigers; and
      (28)   Wolves.
   (C)   Exceptions. The provisions of divisions (A) and (B) above do not apply
to menageries, zoological gardens, circuses, and recognized accredited, and
permitted public organizations or individuals established for educational
purposes or entertainment subject to the approval of Town Council, if:
      (1)   Their location conforms to the provisions of the zoning code of the
town;
      (2)   All animals and animal quarters are kept in a clean and sanitary
condition and so maintained as to eliminate objectionable odors;
      (3)   Animals are maintained in quarters so constructed as to prevent
their escape; and
      (4)   No person lives or resides within 200 feet of the quarters in which
the animals are kept.
(Prior Code, § 3-3) (Ord. passed 3-16-1999) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.04 IMPOUNDING; FINE; SALE WHEN WILD ANIMALS NOT REDEEMED.
   (A)   Any animal mentioned in the preceding section found going at large may
be taken up by the Chief of Police of the town, or by any person authorized by
him or her, and shall be impounded until the payment of a fine of $55, together
with all expenses for keeping such animal or animals; provided, that if same be
not paid within ten days, such animal so taken up shall be sold a public
outcry, one week’s notice of the time and place of such sale having first been
given by advertisement in the papers of the City of Charleston, South Carolina,
and copy of same having been posted for the span of one week at Town Hall.
   (B)   The proceeds of such sale be applied to the payment of such fine and
all cost and expenses connected with the keeping of such animal or animals
impounded as aforesaid, and for advertising the sale of same and the balance,
if any, shall be paid over to the owner.
(Prior Code, § 3-4) (Ord. passed 7-15-1986)
§ 90.05 OFFENSES FOR THE ILL TREATMENT OF DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful within the town for any person by any act or
omission to intentionally or knowingly ill treat any dog or animal. Evidence
that a person with custody or control of a dog or animal has intentionally or
knowingly deprived the dog or animal of necessary sustenance or shelter or
inflicted unnecessary pain or suffering upon the dog or animal shall be prima
facie evidence of a violation of this section.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful within the town for any person to intentionally,
knowingly, or recklessly cause a dog or animal to be unattended and confined in
a vehicle whereby physical injury to or death of the dog or animal is likely to
result. Evidence that the dog or animal is within a vehicle without adequate
ventilation when the atmospheric temperature, humidity, or sun rays can
reasonably be expected to cause suffering, disability, or death to the dog or
animal or evidence that the dog or animal is suffering from heat stress shall
be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
      (1)   Authorized town personnel may use reasonable force to break and
enter a vehicle to remove and seize a dog or animal where there is a good faith
belief that physical injury to or death of the dog or animal is likely to
result unless removed from the vehicle. The authorized town personnel shall
take reasonable steps to locate, identify, and notify the owner or custodian of
the dog or animal of the removal and seizure and location to which the dog or
animal is taken. If the dog or animal is removed and seized from a vehicle
pursuant to this subsection and the owner or custodian of the animal is not
present when the animal is seized and removed, the authorized town personnel
shall make a reasonable attempt to secure the vehicle and shall leave a written
notice giving their name and position and the address where the animal is to be
taken. The vehicle may be removed and impounded by a police officer. In the
event a vehicle is impounded pursuant to this subsection, a police officer
shall inventory the contents of the vehicle and the owner and operator of the
vehicle shall be jointly and severally responsible for any and all costs and
expenses involved in towing and impounding the vehicle. Neither the town, the
authorized town personnel, nor any police officer involved in removing the dog
or animal shall be liable for any resulting damage to the vehicle or its
contents.
      (2)   A dog or animal removed and seized pursuant to this subsection
shall be immediately taken to an animal impounding facility by an authorized
town employee. The owner or custodian of the dog or animal shall be responsible
for all costs and expenses incurred in impounding, boarding, and treating the
dog or animal, which shall be paid at the time of retrieval of the dog or
animal. Where a vehicle has been removed and impounded pursuant to this
subsection, the vehicle shall be surrendered to its duly identified owner only
after retrieval of the dog or animal and the payment of the costs of towing and
impounding the vehicle.
(Ord. 2021-13, passed 10-19-2021) Penalty, see §
90.99
DOGS
§ 90.15 DOG POUND AND DOG CONTROL PERSONNEL.
   (A)   The town’s Police Department is authorized to establish and maintain a
dog pound for the town, for the purpose of holding for redemption and/or
quarantining dogs, and may employ such personnel with the advice and consent of
the Town Council as may be necessary to administer the provisions of this
subchapter, including, but not limited to, a full- or part-time dog catcher.
   (B)   Funds to operate the pound and employ necessary personnel may be
provided in the yearly budget ordinance under the Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 3-5) (Ord. passed 5-19-1980)
§ 90.16 QUARANTINE OF DOGS AND RELEASE THEREFROM.
   For the purpose of protecting the health, safety and general welfare of the
people of the town, the personnel employed to operate and enforce this
subchapter shall pick up and quarantine any dog running at large off the
property owned, rented or otherwise controlled by the owner or keeper of the
dog, unless the dog is lawfully on the front beach area (RC-1) as provided in §
90.18(A). To obtain release of his or her dog, an owner or keeper must satisfy
the dog pound employees, or the Town Clerk or the Chief of Police, that the dog
is currently permitted/badged and inoculated against rabies and, in addition,
pay a quarantine fee of $50. The owner or keeper shall further be subject to
the penalties and fines as stated in §
90.99.
(Prior Code, § 3-6) (Ord. passed 5-19-1980; Ord. passed 12-21-2010)
§ 90.17 DOG PERMITS AND BADGES REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, resident or visitor, to own,
keep, harbor or allow a dog within the limits of the town, or exercise, walk or
allow a dog on public properties without a written permit/badge from the Town
Clerk.
   (B)   Before issuing a permit required by division (A) above, the Town Clerk
shall require the applicant to file with him or her a certificate in writing
signed by a licensed veterinarian that the dog designated in the permit has
been vaccinated against rabies within one year immediately preceding the date
of the application. Each permit shall be valid for the calendar year commencing
January 1 of each year, and no longer.
   (C)   The Town Clerk shall annually provide a sufficient number of metal
badges suitable for dogs to be fastened to the animal’s collar, numbered from
one upwards, stamped “Dog Permit” and year of issue. This badge and the written
permission required in division (A) above shall be delivered to the person
owning, keeping or harboring the dog upon the payment of the sum of $25 for
residents of the town and $35 for non-residents of the town. Said sum may be
increased from time to time by resolution of the Town Council in a meeting duly
assembled.
   (D)   With submittal of an American Kennel Club Canine Good Citizenship
Certificate at the time of application, applicant shall receive a $2 discount
off the applicable annual fee for each certified dog.
   (E)   The name and address of each party to whom such permit and badge have
been issued shall be kept on file in the town office for the purpose of
identification in case such badges would at any time be lost, stolen or
otherwise misappropriated. Violations of this section shall be prosecuted in
the same manner as those violations listed in §
90.18.
(Prior Code, § 3-7) (Ord. passed 5-19-1980; Ord. passed 11-16-2004; Ord. passed
2-15-2005; Ord. passed 11-17-2009; Ord. 2017-06, passed 2-20-2018) Penalty, see
§
90.99
Statutory reference:
   Rabies control generally, see S.C. Code §§ 44-1-8 and 47-5-210
§ 90.18 OFFENSES BY DOGS OR OWNERS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful within the town for any dog owner/keeper or other
person with custody and control of a dog to:
      (1)   Allow his or her dog to run at large off the property owned, rented
or controlled by him or her or allow his or her dog to run at large at any time
with the following exceptions:
         (a)   Dog owner/keeper or other person with custody and control may
allow his or her dog to run at large on the beach area and RC-1 from 5:00 a.m.
to 10:00 a.m. May 1 through September 30 and from 5:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon
October 1 through April 30; this would not include walkways or access paths and
owner/keeper or other person must have a leash in hand not to exceed ten feet
in length;
         (b)   No dogs may be allowed on the beach area, RC-1, adjacent waters,
beach paths or access points from 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. from May 1 through
September 30; and
         (c)   Dog owner/keeper or other person with custody and control may
allow his or her dog on the beach, beach paths, RC-1 and adjacent water if the
dog is attached to a leash, which is in the owner’s hands, and is never longer
than ten feet, from 6:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. from May 1 through September 30 and
from 12:00 noon to 5:00 a.m. from October 1 through April 30. Dogs on leash as
described here are also permitted on the beach, beach paths, RC-1 and adjacent
water when dogs are permitted to be off-leash in those locations;
      (2)   Keep a vicious or unruly dog unless restrained by a fence, chain or
other means so that such dog cannot reach persons not on land owned, leased or
controlled by him or her. A VICIOUS DOG shall be construed to mean any dog
evidencing an abnormal inclination to attack persons or animals without
provocation;
      (3)   Allow a female dog to run at large during estrus or the heat
period;
      (4)   Release or take out of quarantine without proper authority any dog,
or resist the town’s pound personnel or police officers engaging in the capture
and quarantine of a dog;
      (5)   Keep a dog or dogs which bark habitually or continuously so as to
constitute an annoyance to the neighborhood;
      (6)   Bring or keep within the town any dog which has not been inoculated
against rabies within the recognized period of immunity for such inoculations;
      (7)   Wrongfully remove the badge from a dog registered as required in §
90.17;
      (8)   Own, keep, harbor, or allow a dog within the town without a written
permit/badge from the Town Clerk as provided in §
90.17;
      (9)   Keep within the town any dog found by the Municipal Judge to have
bitten any person without justification;
      (10)   Allow a dog to disturb nesting sea turtles, turtle nests or turtle
hatchlings; and/or
      (11)   Allow a dog to enter a designated critical habitat area unless the
signs marking the critical habitat area permit pets, and unless the dog has a
chain, substantial thong or lease attached which is in the hand of some
responsible person.
   (B)   The owner/keeper or other person with custody and control of a dog
shall immediately collect, remove and dispose of all excrement deposited by
such animal on any beach, public property, street, right-of-way, sidewalk,
public way, playground, or upon private property owned by others. The owner or
custodian shall place the excrement in a plastic bag or other suitable
container and deposit the collection in an approved waste receptacle. The
owner/keeper, other person or custodian shall have in hand at all times a
plastic bag or suitable container.
(Prior Code, § 3-8) (Ord. passed 5-19-1980; Ord. passed 1-27-1992; Ord. passed
6-15-2004; Ord. passed 11-16-2004; Ord. passed 2-15-2005; Ord. passed 12-20-
2005; Ord. passed 11-17-2009) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.19 IMPOUNDED DOGS AND DISPOSITION THEREOF.
   (A)   Employees of the pound or Police Department shall notify the owner of
any quarantined dog when such owner can be determined from tags or other
sources of information.
   (B)   After any dog has been quarantined for a period of 48 hours and is
unclaimed by its owner, the pound employees or the Police Department may turn
such dog over to the Humane Society, ASPCA, county dog pound or any other
animal shelter. Complete records shall be kept by pound employees, police
officials, or the Town Clerk as to the disposition of impounded animals.
(Prior Code, § 3-9) (Ord. passed 5-19-1980)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)    Any person who violated any of the provisions of §
90.05 and/or §§
90.15 through 90.19 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, shall be fined not more than $500 and/or imprisoned for not more
than 30 days in jail. The Municipal Judge shall have authority to hear cases
made as a result of alleged violations of §§
90.15 through
90.19.
(Prior Code, § 3-8) (Ord. passed 7-15-1986; Ord. passed 9-23-1997; Ord. 2021-
13, passed 10-19-2021)
CHAPTER 91: GARBAGE, REFUSE AND WEEDS
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Definitions
   
91.02   Duty of owner or occupant to keep lot clean
Garbage and Refuse
   
91.15   Garbage receptacles
   
91.16   Placement of garbage receptacles
   
91.17   Prohibition of garbage on streets
   
91.18   Condition of garbage receptacles; replacement
   
91.19   Tree trimming, lawn cutting and the like
   
91.20   Removal of contractor’s refuse
High Grass and Rank Weeds
   
91.35   Duty to remove from adjacent sidewalk
   
91.36   Duty to remove from private premises
 
   
91.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARBAGE. Includes table and kitchen refuse, except dish water or waste
water, ashes, and the daily waste from private residences such as rags, pieces
of carpet, bottles, tin cans, broken glass and sweepings, excluding, however,
paper and scraps of paper.
   HIGH GRASS. Grass growing indiscriminately and being a height of 12 inches
or more from the ground.
   RANK WEEDS. Includes small plum trees growing in a plum thicket and any tree
or shrub which is not being tended with a view of growing the same for beauty,
shade or protection.
(Prior Code, § 9-1) (Ord. passed 9- -1952; Ord. passed 11-10-1955)
§ 91.02 DUTY OF OWNER OR OCCUPANT TO KEEP LOT CLEAN.
   It shall be the duty of every tenant, lessee or occupant of a lot and in the
event there is no tenant, lessee or occupant, then it shall be the duty of the
owner of the leasehold interest in such lot, to cause such lot and the building
thereon to be kept clean and sanitary.
(Prior Code, § 9-2) (Ord. passed 9- -1951)
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
§ 91.15 GARBAGE RECEPTACLES.
   It shall be the duty of every tenant, lessee or occupant of a lot, and if
there be none such, then it shall be the duty of the owner thereof to cause the
garbage therefrom to be placed in watertight receptacles, as many as may be
necessary, having a capacity not exceeding one-half barrel. Such receptacles
shall be provided with tight-fitting covers with handles.
(Prior Code, § 9-3) (Ord. passed 7-16-1984)
§ 91.16 PLACEMENT OF GARBAGE RECEPTACLES.
   Garbage receptacles containing garbage shall be placed at the street
entrance of a lot, just within the property line, for collection.
(Prior Code, § 9-4) (Ord. passed 9- -1951)
§ 91.17 PROHIBITION OF GARBAGE ON STREETS.
   No garbage shall be put on the streets of the town and no empty garbage
receptacle shall be allowed on the streets at any time.
(Prior Code, § 9-5) (Ord. passed 9- -1951) Penalty, see §
91.99
Cross-reference:
   Scattering or spilling materials on streets, see §
132.19
§ 91.18 CONDITION OF GARBAGE RECEPTACLES; REPLACEMENT.
   The character of garbage receptacles used by residents of the town and the
sanitary condition thereof from time to time shall be subject to the approval
of the Chief of Police, and in the event he or she orders any such receptacle
replaced on account of its unsanitary condition, the same shall be replaced by
the tenant, lessee or occupancy within five days of such order.
(Prior Code, § 9-6) (Ord. passed 9- -1951)
§ 91.19 TREE TRIMMING, LAWN CUTTING AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   Subject to the provisions contained in division (B) below, refuse,
trash, tree trimmings, lawn cuttings, or other landscaping materials, from
grounds adjoining private residences, may be placed on the edge of the streets
for removal by the town; provided that no tenant, lessee, occupant or
leaseholder shall put on the street for removal by the town any amount of
refuse that will impede the flow of traffic at any time. Loose refuse, such as
leaves, lawn cuttings and pine needles, must be placed in bags or containers.
Limbs must be placed in orderly piles and limbs must not exceed four feet in
length or four inches in diameter. Refuse, in addition to organic debris, may
include appliances and furniture. Nothing in this section shall require the
town forces to remove refuse from the streets unless so directed by the Chief
of Police.
   (B)   (1)   Any contractor, subcontractor, landscaper or hired worker, when
employed by any owner, tenant, or occupant of a premises located on the town,
shall be responsible and is required to remove all refuse, trash, tree and
shrubbery cuttings and trimmings, lawn cuttings and any waste of landscaping
materials from any premises where work was performed or provided.
      (2)   Contractors, subcontractors, landscaper and hired workers and any
owner, tenant, lessee or occupant who has so hired a contractor, subcontractor,
landscaper or hired worker is prohibited from placing refuse, trash, tree and
shrubbery cuttings and trimmings, lawn cuttings and any other waste of
landscaping materials on any right-of-way of the town or on any other lot or
premises owned by the town.
(Prior Code, § 9-7) (Ord. passed 7-16-1984; Ord. passed 5-15-2001) Penalty, see
§
91.99
§ 91.20 REMOVAL OF CONTRACTOR’S REFUSE.
   (A)   Contractors’ and builders’ refuse, such as old lumber, rotted wood,
brick bats, slats, old plastering, roofing, guttering, refuse sheet metal of
every description, saw dust and the like, shall not be classed as garbage or
refuse for removal by the town forces, but shall be removed by the contractors
or builders from whose work such refuse may have resulted. In case of inability
to locate such contractors or builders, then such refuse shall be removed by
and at the expense of the tenant, lessee, occupant or leasehold of premises in
front of which, or on which, such refuse may be found.
(Prior Code, § 9-8)
   (B)   (1)   Any contractor, subcontractor, or hired worker, when employed by
any owner, tenant, or occupant of a premises located in the town, shall be
responsible and is hereby required to remove from the work site all refuse and
building materials which was situated on the premises, and any building
materials brought to the property not actually used in the repair/
reconstruction/construction of the premises on the property. Such building
materials shall include, but not be limited to, old or new lumber, rotted wood,
brick backs, slats, old plastering, roofing, guttering, bricks, siding,
foundation, sheet metal, saw dust, building material containers, nails, or any
storage of construction materials. Such materials shall not be considered
garbage, and shall not be removed by town-hired employees or agents. In the
event the contractors, subcontractors or hired workers fail to remove any of
the above described building materials from the property, it shall be the
responsibility of the owner, tenant, lessee, occupant, and/or the actual person
hiring the contractors, subcontractors or hired workers to remove the building
materials from said property.
      (2)   Contractors, subcontractors and hired workers, and any owner,
tenant, lessee or occupant who has so hired a contractor, subcontractor or
hired worker is prohibited from placing said building materials on any right-
of-way of the town.
(Prior Code, § 9-8.0) (Ord. passed 9- -1951; Ord. passed 3-20-1990; Ord. passed
9-23-1997) Penalty, see §
91.99
HIGH GRASS AND RANK WEEDS
§ 91.35 DUTY TO REMOVE FROM ADJACENT SIDEWALK.
   It shall be the duty of the owner, agent of the owner, lessee, occupant or
any person in possession of any lot, parcel, tract or piece of land, improved
or unimproved, in the town to remove from the sidewalks abutting or adjoining
such lot, parcel, tract or piece of land, all high grass, rank weeds, rubbish,
refuse, and waste material of every kind, or other substance, object or
condition which may endanger or injure the public health, public safety or
public welfare, or obstruct such sidewalks and thereby endanger or injure
persons traveling thereon.
(Prior Code, § 9-9) (Ord. passed 11-10-1955)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of the town to remove or have removed nuisances, dangers or
menaces to health, see S.C. Code §§ 5-7-30 and 5-7-80
§ 91.36 DUTY TO REMOVE FROM PRIVATE PREMISES.
   It shall be the duty of the owner, agent of the owner, lessee, occupant or
any person in possession of any lot, parcel, tract or piece of land to keep
such lot, parcel, tract or pieces of land free from all high grass, rank weeds,
rubbish, refuse, and waste material of every kind, or other substance, object
or condition which may endanger or injure the public health, public safety, or
public welfare.
(Prior Code, § 9-10) (Ord. passed 11-10-1955)
Statutory reference:
   For similar state law, see S.C. Code § 5-7-80
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating the terms of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished as prescribed by §
10.99, and in addition or in the alternative, shall be required to remove at
his or her expense any threat to public health or safety or abate a nuisance,
as provided in
Chapter 92.
(Prior Code, § 9-11)
   (B)   Any contractor, subcontractor, landscaper or hired worker or any
owner, tenant, lessee or occupant who has so hired a contractor, subcontractor,
landscaper, or hired worker violating any term of §
91.19 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished by a fine not to
exceed $500 and/or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, and, in addition, shall
be required to remove at his or her expense all such refuse, trash, tree and
shrubbery cuttings and trimmings, lawn cuttings, and any other waste of
landscaping materials. Every day which the violation continues and the refuse,
trash, tree and shrubbery cuttings and trimmings, lawn cuttings, and any other
waste of landscaping materials is not removed shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be subject to a separate punishment.
(Prior Code, § 9-7)
   (C)   (1)   Any contractor, subcontractor, or hired worker violating terms
of §
91.20 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished by a fine not to
exceed $500, and/or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, and, in addition, shall
be required to remove at his or her expense all such building materials. Every
day which violation fails to remove the building materials shall constitute a
separate offense, and shall be subject to a separate punishment.
      (2)   Additionally, any contractor, subcontractor, or hired worker
convicted more than one time for violation of §
91.20 shall have his or her license to work in the town revoked for a period of
one year from the date of conviction of his or her second offense.
      (3)   Any owner, tenant, lessee or occupant who hires a contractor,
subcontractor or hired worker to do repairs, improvements or demolition to
property who violates the terms of §
91.20 shall also be guilty or a misdemeanor, and shall be subject to punishment
by a fine not to exceed $500 and/or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, and,
further, shall be required to remove at his or her expense all such building
material. Every day which a violator fails to remove the building materials
shall constitute a separate offense, and shall be subject to a separate
punishment.
(Prior Code, § 9-8.0) (Ord. passed 9- -1951; Ord. passed 11-10-1955; Ord.
passed 7-16-1984; Ord. passed 5-15-2001; Ord. passed 3-20-1990; Ord. passed 9-
23-1997)
CHAPTER 92: NUISANCES
Section
Public Nuisances
   
92.01   Definition
   
92.02   Public nuisances prohibited
   
92.03   Public nuisances affecting health
Abatement
   
92.15   Filing complaints; inspections
   
92.16   Notice to abate nuisance
   
92.17   Abatement by town
   
92.18   Abatement when great and immediate danger does not exist
   
92.19   Delivery of summons and hearing
   
92.20   Procedure on non-compliance with order
   
92.21   Remedies cumulative; court prosecutions
PUBLIC NUISANCES
§ 92.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE. Any act, thing, occupation, condition or use of property
which shall continue for such length of time as to:
      (1)   Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose
or safety of the public;
      (2)   In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of
property;
      (3)   Greatly offend the public morals or decency; and/or
      (4)   Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to
obstruct or render dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway, navigable
body of water or other public way.
(Prior Code, § 13-1)
§ 92.02 PUBLIC NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or permit to
exist any public nuisances within the town.
(Prior Code, § 13-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Public health nuisances, see S.C. Code §§ 44-1-140, 4-1-160, 5-7-30, 5-7-80
and Rules and Regulations H and ER, 61-46
§ 92.03 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH.
   Public nuisances affecting health shall include, but not be limited to, the
following acts, omissions, conditions or things:
   (A)   All decayed, harmfully adulterated or unwholesome food or drink sold
or offered for sale to the public;
   (B)   Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not buried or otherwise disposed
of in a sanitary manner within 24 hours after death;
   (C)   Accumulations of decayed animal or vegetable matter, trash, rubbish,
rotting lumber, bedding, packing material, scrap metal or any material
whatsoever in which flies, mosquitoes, disease-carrying insects, rats or other
vermin may breed;
   (D)   All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other insects can
multiply;
   (E)   Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not fly-tight;
   (F)   All noxious weeds and other rank growth or vegetation;
   (G)   The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes, gases, fly
ash or industrial dust within the town limits or within one mile therefrom in
such quantities as to endanger the health of persons’ ordinary sensibilities or
to threaten or cause substantial injury to property;
   (H)   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or
body of water by sewage, industrial wastes or other substances; or
   (I)   Any use of property, substances or things within the town emitting or
causing any foul, offensive, noisome, nauseous, noxious or disagreeable odors,
effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive to the physical senses of ordinary
persons which annoy, discomfort, injure or inconvenience the health of any
appreciable number of persons within the town.
(Prior Code, § 13-3)
ABATEMENT
§ 92.15 FILING COMPLAINTS; INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   All complaints alleging the existence of a public nuisance shall be
filed with the Town Clerk.
   (B)   (1)   The Clerk shall promptly notify the Chief of Police, the Fire
Chief, the Building Inspector and Zoning Administrator, the Superintendent of
Streets and Maintenance, or the Superintendent of Water and Sewerage, one or
more of them as may be appropriate, who shall inspect or cause to be inspected
the premises and make a written report of findings to the appropriate committee
chairperson. The inspecting officer shall take any necessary action on the
matter.
      (2)   When practicable, the inspecting officer shall cause photographs to
be made of the premises and shall retain the same in his or her office.
(Prior Code, § 13-4)
§ 92.16 NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCE.
   (A)   If the inspecting office determines that a public nuisance exists on
private property and that there is great immediate danger to the public health,
safety, peace, morals or decency, the appropriate committee chairperson and/or
town administrative assistant may direct the Chief of Police to serve notice on
the owner or, if the owner cannot be found, on the occupant or person causing,
permitting or maintaining such nuisance or to post a copy of the notice on the
premises.
   (B)   (1)   Such notice shall direct the owner, occupant or person causing,
permitting or maintaining such nuisance to abate or remove such nuisance within
24 hours.
      (2)   The notice shall state that unless such nuisance is so abated, the
town will cause it to be abated and will charge the costs to the owner,
occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 13-5)
§ 92.17 ABATEMENT BY TOWN.
   If the nuisance is not abated within the time provided or if the owner,
occupant or person causing the nuisance cannot be found, the inspecting officer
shall cause the abatement or removal of such public nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 13-6)
Statutory reference:
   Abatement of nuisances by the Department of Health and Environmental
Control, see S.C. Code §§ 44-1-140, 44-1-160, 48-1-280 and Rules and
Regulations, H and ER, 61-46
§ 92.18 ABATEMENT WHEN GREAT AND IMMEDIATE DANGER DOES NOT EXIST.
   If the inspecting officer shall determine that a public nuisance exists on
private premises but that such nuisance does not threaten great and immediate
danger to public health, safety, morals or decency, he or she shall file a
written report of his or her findings with the appropriate committee
chairperson and/or town administrative assistant, who shall cause the owner of
said premises to be summoned to appear before the Judge of the Municipal Court
to show cause why the town should not abate said nuisance and levy the cost
thereof against the said premises.
(Prior Code, § 13-7)
§ 92.19 DELIVERY OF SUMMONS AND HEARING.
   The summons provided for in §
92.18 shall require the owner to appear in person or by agent at a place and
time not less than seven days after the date of mailing or personal service of
said summons. At said hearing, the property owner may make any statement or
present any testimony in his or her behalf. If the owner fails to appear or if
the Judge of the Municipal Court shall find at the conclusion of the hearing
that a public nuisance does exist, the Judge of the Municipal Court shall issue
a written order directing and requiring the owner to abate the nuisance before
a specified day and thereafter to keep the premises free from said nuisance.
Any summons or notice to the owner herein required to be given shall be
sufficient if served in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested,
directed to the last known address of the owner, as shown on the records of the
County Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 13-8)
§ 92.20 PROCEDURE ON NON-COMPLIANCE WITH ORDER.
   Should the property owner fail to comply with said order within the time
thereby specified, the Town Clerk shall direct a town employee or any person
employed by the town for that purpose to enter said premises and to clear the
same or abate said nuisance. The Town Clerk shall maintain an accurate record
of the cost of the services rendered by the town or its contractors in abating
said nuisance, including the cost of any required notices, and shall certify
the same as a lien against the real estate, to be collected in the same manner
as town ad valorem taxes.
(Prior Code, § 13-9)
§ 92.21 REMEDIES CUMULATIVE; COURT PROSECUTIONS.
   The remedies provided in this chapter shall be cumulative, and nothing
herein contained shall prevent prosecution for violation of any other town
ordinance or section of this code, or proceedings as for debt or by injunction
or otherwise in the name of the town in a court of competent jurisdiction in
accordance with state statutes.
(Prior Code, § 13-10)
CHAPTER 93: FIRE PROTECTION
Section
General Provisions
   
93.01   False alarms; prohibited
   
93.02   Reward for information leading to conviction under preceding section
   
93.03   Generally
   
93.04   Duties
   
93.05   Burning of leaves, debris and the like
   
93.06   Beach fires
Fireworks
   
93.20   Possession and sale prohibited with certain exceptions
   
93.21   Public displays and exhibits
   
93.22   Transportation and use of certain signals for safe operation of buses,
trucks and boats
Cross-reference:
   Miscellaneous Provisions, see
Chapter 132
   Nuisances, see
Chapter 92
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 93.01 FALSE ALARMS; PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to give, or cause to be given, a false
fire alarm with intent to deceive.
(Prior Code, § 8-1) (Ord. passed 5-28-1938; Ord. passed 7-6-1938) Penalty, see
§
10.99
Cross-reference:
   Fire limits, see §
150.01
   Naming Police Chief as Assistant Fire Chief and Fire Chief as Assistant
Police Chief, see §§
32.028 and
32.041
   Removal of weeds and the like from private premises, see §
91.36
§ 93.02 REWARD FOR INFORMATION LEADING TO CONVICTION UNDER PRECEDING SECTION.
   A reward of $100 is hereby granted to any informer for information leading
to the conviction of a person violating any of the provisions of §
93.01; provided, that only one reward shall be paid in case of any one
violation and conviction; provided further, that no employee of the town nor
any Council member shall receive a reward for any information leading to the
conviction of a person violating such section.
(Prior Code, § 8-2) (Ord. passed 5-28-1938; Ord. passed 7-6-1938)
§ 93.03 GENERALLY.
   There is hereby created a board to be known as the Trustees of the Firemen’s
Insurance and Inspection Fund, to consist of three persons who are hereby
charged with the duties and responsibilities as set forth in the acts of the
General Assembly of the state relating to the fireman’s fund tax. The Board
shall consist of the Mayor, the Chairperson of the Fire Committee of Town
Council and the Chief of the Town Fire Department.
(Prior Code, § 8-6) (Ord. passed 8-15-1989)
Statutory reference:
   The Firemen’s Insurance and Inspection Fund, see S.C. Code §§ 38-57-10 et
seq.
§ 93.04 DUTIES.
   The duties of the Trustees of the Fireman’s Insurance and Inspection Fund
shall be such as are outlined in S.C. Code §§ 38-57-10 to 38-57-30.
(Prior Code, § 8-7)
§ 93.05 BURNING OF LEAVES, DEBRIS AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   No person shall burn any leaves, tree limbs, trash, refuse, debris or
any other matter outside of any house or other structure within the town except
during daylight hours and then only if such material is burned in a suitable
metal incinerator of a type meeting the approval of the Chief of the Fire
Department; provided, that whenever the material to be burned exceeds the
quantity that can be accommodated by such incinerator or is of such a nature
that cannot be accommodated by such incinerator, written permission to burn
such material shall be procured from the Chief of the Fire Department, and such
burning shall be done only under the direction and supervision of the Fire
Department during daylight hours and under such other conditions to site, time
and supervision as the Chief of the Fire Department shall direct.
   (B)   No building materials are to be burned at all per state and County
Department of Health and Environmental Control regulations. Permits are to be
issued to contractors or individuals acting in the capacity of contractors for
themselves for land clearing purposes. The maximum size materials to be burned
shall not exceed eight inches in diameter and shall not include stumps, tires,
or other material of a like nature. Fire size shall be easily manageable and
shall not exceed fifteen feet in diameter nor over approximately eight feet in
height. Chief of the Fire Department will have the right to set such conditions
as to the manner, time and site of burning on the permit to be issued. Failure
to comply with the regulations set forth herein and on the burning permit shall
constitute due cause for revocation of the permit or burning privileges in the
town and shall be a violation of this section.
(Prior Code, § 8-9) (Ord. passed 5-22-1985; Ord. passed 1-15-1988)
§ 93.06 BEACH FIRES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to start or maintain a fire on the
beaches of the town except under the following criteria.
   (A)   Application for a fire must be submitted at least 24 hours in advance
at the town’s Fire Department, payable and refundable during normal business
hours.
   (B)   The location must be approved by the Fire Chief or his or her
assistant and specifically stated on the application.
   (C)   Conditions of permitting:
      (1)   No treated wood of any kind is permitted for burning;
      (2)   No toxic materials, including trash or debris, of any kind will be
used for burning;
      (3)   No permits will be granted when a drought exists;
      (4)   No permits will be granted when a state red flag watch is declared;
      (5)   Beach fire permits will always be granted at the discretion of the
Fire Chief. He or she may deny or cancel a permit if conditions indicate a fire
danger to the RC-1 area and adjoining properties. Conditions may include, but
are not limited to, strong on-shore winds, flood tides, turtle nesting season,
and the like; and
      (6)   Failure to follow any of the conditions of the permit and the terms
of agreement will result in removal of the permit and the forfeiture of the
deposit.
   (D)   A deposit of $250 for resident/property owners and a deposit of $500
cash or cashiers check for non-resident/non-property owners must be submitted
to the Fire Department through Town Hall and will be refunded upon examination
of the area by the Fire Chief or his or her duly appointed representative. The
approved area must be clean of all debris, trash, unburned wood, coals, ashes
and litter within a 100-foot radius of the fire by 10:00 a.m. the following
day.
   (E)   The fire must be extinguished and the participants dispersed by 11:00
p.m.
   (F)   Failure to obtain a fire permit will result in a $500 fine.
   (G)   No vehicles will be used to transport items to the beach.
(Prior Code, § 8-10) (Ord. passed 10-15-1988; Ord. passed 11-20-2001; Ord.
passed 5-28-2002) Penalty, see §
10.99
FIREWORKS
§ 93.20 POSSESSION AND SALE PROHIBITED WITH CERTAIN EXCEPTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to use, fire, shoot, discharge, sell,
offer for sale, store, exchange, give away or possess any fireworks within the
town except for use in public display or exhibit under the provisions of §
93.21, and except as provided for by §
93.22 and except that the provisions of this subchapter shall not include nor
prevent the sale or possession of toy cap pistol paper caps which contain not
more than 0.20 grains of explosive mixture and fireworks known as “sparklers”.
The scale, use and possession of such toy cap pistols, toy pistol paper caps
and sparklers shall be permitted at all times.
(Prior Code, § 8-3) (Ord. passed 12-18-1958) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.21 PUBLIC DISPLAYS AND EXHIBITS.
   It shall be lawful for any person to use fireworks in public displays or
exhibits; provided, that such displays or exhibits of fireworks shall be lawful
only where the person desiring to give the same shall have first obtained
written approval therefor from the Fire Committee of the Town Council. The Fire
Committee of the Town Council may in its absolute discretion grant or refuse to
grant the permission so applied for, or may grant the same subject to such
restrictions and limitations as it may in its absolute discretion deem to be in
the interest of public safety in connection with such display or exhibit.
(Prior Code, § 8-4) (Ord. passed 12-18-1958)
Cross-reference:
   Noise generally, see §
132.15
§ 93.22 TRANSPORTATION AND USE OF CERTAIN SIGNALS FOR SAFE OPERATION OF BUSES,
TRUCKS AND BOATS.
   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall be construed as prohibiting the
use of signals necessary for the safe operation of buses, trucks or boats
within the town, nor shall the provisions of this subchapter apply to any
common carrier while acting as such, lawfully transporting or having custody of
fireworks in interstate commerce or for the delivery within the town for use as
provided in §
93.20, this section or in intrastate commerce for delivery to destination
beyond the limits of the town.
(Prior Code, § 8-5) (Ord. passed 12-18-1958)
CHAPTER 94: PARADES AND PROCESSIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
94.01   Driving in a funeral procession
   
94.02   Driving through funeral procession
Parades
   
94.15   Definitions
   
94.16   Driving through parades; single-file parades on sidewalk areas
   
94.17   Parking on route of parade
   
94.18   Obstructing parades
   
94.19   Permit required
   
94.20   Filing of application
   
94.21   Form and contents of application
   
94.22   When Chief of Police to act upon application; notice of denial of
permit
   
94.23   Issuance of permit and standards therefor
   
94.24   Limitation of hours
   
94.25   Appeal to Town Council from denial
   
94.26   Alternative permits
   
94.27   Contents of permit
   
94.28   Sending copies to Mayor, Council members and the like
   
94.29   Revocation
   
94.30   Possession of permit by parade chairperson
   
94.31   Compliance by permitee with permit directions
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 94.01 DRIVING IN A FUNERAL PROCESSION.
   Each driver in a funeral procession shall drive as near to the right-hand
edge of the roadway as practical and follow the vehicle ahead as close as is
practical and safe. The headlights of each vehicle in such funeral procession
shall be turned on.
(Prior Code, § 15-1) (Ord. passed 5-19-1969)
§ 94.02 DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL PROCESSION.
   No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral
procession.
(Prior Code, § 15-2) (Ord. passed 5-16-1969) Penalty, see §
10.99
PARADES
§ 94.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PARADE. Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or procession
of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street, including the
sidewalk area thereof, park or other public place in the town.
   PARADE PERMIT. A permit as required by this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 15-3) (Ord. passed 5-9-1969)
§ 94.16 DRIVING THROUGH PARADES; SINGLE-FILE PARADES ON SIDEWALK AREAS.
   No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons
comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion or
conspicuously designated as a parade; except, that this portion shall not apply
to single-file parades on the sidewalk areas of the town, where vehicular
traffic and those constituting the parade shall be required to obey all
traffic-control signals, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. This
section shall not be construed to apply to funeral processions.
(Prior Code, § 15-4) (Ord. passed 5-9-1969) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.17 PARKING ON ROUTE OF PARADE.
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall have the authority, when reasonably
necessary, to prohibit or restrict parking of vehicles along a street or part
thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. The Chief of Police shall
post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or
leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof.
   (B)   No person shall be liable for a violation of this section when parking
on an unposted street.
(Prior Code, § 15-5) (Ord. passed 5-9-1969) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.18 OBSTRUCTING PARADES.
   No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede or interfere with
any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal
participating or used in a parade.
(Prior Code, § 15-6) (Ord. passed 5-9-1969) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.19 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade
unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the Chief of Police, nor
shall any person engaging in any parade for which a parade permit has been
issued violate any of the conditions or provisions of such permit; provided,
that no such permit shall be required for the following:
   (A)   Funeral processions;
   (B)   Students going to and from school classes or participating in
educational activities, if such conduct is under the immediate direction and
supervision of the proper school authorities; or
   (C)   Governmental agencies acting within the scope of their functions.
(Prior Code, § 15-7) (Ord. passed 5-9-1969) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.20 FILING OF APPLICATION.
   A person seeking issuance of a parade permit as required in this subchapter
shall file an application with the Chief of Police not less than three days nor
more than 30 days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct a parade;
provided, that the Chief of Police, where good cause is shown therefor, shall
have the authority to consider any such application hereunder which is filed
less than three days before the date such parade is proposed to be conducted.
(Prior Code, § 15-8) (Ord. passed 5-9-1969)
§ 94.21 FORM AND CONTENTS OF APPLICATION.
   (A)   The application for a parade permit, filed as provided in §
94.20, shall be filed on forms furnished by the Chief of Police.
   (B)   Such application shall set forth the following information:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to
conduct the parade in question;
      (2)   If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by
an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of
the organization and of the authorized and reasonable head of such
organization;
      (3)   The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be
the parade chairperson and who will be responsible for its conduct;
      (4)   The date when the parade is to be conducted;
      (5)   The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination
point;
      (6)   The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles
which, will constitute such parade; the type of animals and description of the
vehicles;
      (7)   The hours when such parade will start and terminate;
      (8)   A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a
portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed;
      (9)   The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade;
      (10)   The time at which such units of the parade will begin to assemble
at any such area or areas;
      (11)   The interval or space to be maintained between units of such
parade;
      (12)   If the parade is designed to be held by and on behalf of, or for
any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file
with the Chief of Police a communication in writing from the person proposing
to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his or
her behalf; and
      (13)   Any additional information which the Chief of Police shall find
reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should be
issued.
(Prior Code, § 15-9) (Ord. passed 5-9-1969)
§ 94.22 WHEN CHIEF OF POLICE TO ACT UPON APPLICATION; NOTICE OF DENIAL OF
PERMIT.
   The Chief of Police shall act upon the application for a parade permit
within two days after the filing thereof. If the Chief of Police disapproves
the application, he or she shall mail to the applicant in question, within two
days after the date upon which the application was filed, a notice of his or
her action, stating the reasons for this denial of the parade permit applied
for.
(Prior Code, § 15-10) (Ord. passed 5-9-1969)
§ 94.23 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT AND STANDARDS THEREFOR.
   The Chief of Police shall issue a permit as required in this subchapter
when, from a consideration of the application therefor and from such other
information as may otherwise be obtained, he or she finds that:
   (A)   The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe
and orderly movement of the traffic, pedestrian and vehicular, contiguous to
its route;
   (B)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a
number of police officers of the town to properly police the line of movement
and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the
town;
   (C)   The concentration of person, animals and vehicles at assembly points
of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection
of areas contiguous to such assembly areas;
   (D)   The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of
firefighting equipment en route to a fire;
   (E)   The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to
persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance;
   (F)   The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point
of termination expeditiously, without unreasonable delays en route and without
passing by any location more than once; and
   (G)   If the parade is to be solely on the sidewalk areas of the town, such
parade shall be in single file only of persons participating, with no animals,
vehicles or other non-human objects, except reasonably-sized signs,
individually carried in the line of procession.
(Prior Code, § 15-11) (Ord. passed 5-9-1969)
§ 94.24 LIMITATION OF HOURS.
   No permit shall be granted under this subchapter for a parade to convene
before 8:00 a.m. or terminate after 8:00 p.m.
(Prior Code, § 15-12) (Ord. passed 5-9-1969)
§ 94.25 APPEAL TO TOWN COUNCIL FROM DENIAL.
   Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade
permit by the Chief of Police to the Town Council. The appeal shall be taken
within 48 hours after notice. The Town Council shall act upon the appeal at its
next regularly scheduled meeting, but no later than 20 days from the time of
receipt of the appeal.
(Prior Code, § 15-13) (Ord. passed 5-9-1969)
§ 94.26 ALTERNATIVE PERMITS.
   (A)   The Chief of Police, in denying an application for a parade permit,
may authorize the conduct of the parade on a day, at a time or over a route
different from that named by the applicant.
   (B)   An applicant deciding to accept an alternate permit shall, within two
days after notice of the action of the Chief of Police, file a written notice
of acceptance with the Chief of Police.
   (C)   An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of and
shall have the effect of a parade permit under this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 15-14) (Ord. passed 5-9-1969)
§ 94.27 CONTENTS OF PERMIT.
   Each parade permit issued pursuant to this subchapter shall state the
following information:
   (A)   Starting time;
   (B)   Minimum speed;
   (C)   Maximum speed;
   (D)   Maximum interval of space to be maintained between units of the
parade;
   (E)   The portion of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the
parade;
   (F)   The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof; and
   (G)   Such other information as the Chief of Police shall find necessary for
the enforcement of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 15-15) (Ord. passed 5-9-1969)
§ 94.28 SENDING COPIES TO MAYOR, COUNCIL MEMBERS AND THE LIKE.
   Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, the Chief of Police shall
send a copy thereof to the Mayor, Council members, the Fire Chief and the
general manager or responsible head of each public transportation utility, the
regular routes of the vehicles of which will be affected by the route of the
parade in question.
(Prior Code, § 15-16) (Ord. passed 5-9-1969)
§ 94.29 REVOCATION.
   The Chief of Police shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit
issued under this subchapter upon the violation of the standards for issuance,
as set forth in §
94.23.
(Prior Code, § 15-17) (Ord. passed 5-9-1969)
§ 94.30 POSSESSION OF PERMIT BY PARADE CHAIRPERSON.
   The parade chairperson or other person heading or leading the activity being
conducted pursuant to a permit issued pursuant to this subchapter shall carry
the parade permit in question upon his or her person during the conduct of the
parade.
(Prior Code, § 15-18) (Ord. passed 5-9-1969)
§ 94.31 COMPLIANCE BY PERMITEE WITH PERMIT DIRECTIONS.
   A permitee under this subchapter shall comply with all permit directions and
conditions and with all applicable laws, the provisions of this code and other
ordinances of the town.
(Prior Code, § 15-19) (Ord. passed 5-9-1969)
CHAPTER 95: WATERCRAFT REGULATIONS
Section
   
95.01   Permits
   
95.02   Regulations
   
95.03   Failure to comply
   
95.04   Liability
§ 95.01 PERMITS.
   Town resident watercraft owners shall purchase a green two-part, numbered
permit (sticker) valid for one year. Non-resident watercraft owners shall
purchase red two-part numbered permit (sticker) valid for one year. One part of
the sticker shall be affixed to the boat, the other part of the sticker shall
be affixed to trailer for watercraft transported onto the beach thereon. On a
boat, the permit shall be affixed at starboard gunwale near the stern (on right
side near rear). On a trailer, the permit shall be affixed on the tongue near
the hitch.
(Prior Code, § 4A-1)
§ 95.02 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Boats and trailers may be pulled through the dunes only at public
access paths. Trailers must be propelled manually through the access area and
must be pulled to the foot of the dunes after the launching of the watercraft.
Watercraft without green permits must be launched only within their designated
zones (as defined in division (C) below). No trailers or watercraft shall be
placed in the dunes at any time. No trailers or watercraft shall be left on the
beach from dusk to dawn. Except, however, that persons who are property owners
in the town, and are 55 years or older, shall be eligible to be issued one
special permit which shall allow said watercraft owners to keep one watercraft
on their property or in the area above the high water mark immediately seaward
of their property.
   (B)   From Memorial Day to Labor Day watercraft operators without green
permits must use areas designated by division (C) below for landing and
launching. From Memorial Day to Labor Day of each year, no watercraft shall be
operated within 100 yards of the beach waters edge outside these designated
areas.
   (C)   Designated areas are as follows:
      (1)   Area 1. For sailboarders only, between Stations 28 and 32;
      (2)   Area 2. For all watercraft, between the rocks near Station 19 and
the westernmost house (but not in front of) on Pettigrew (2061 Pettigrew) near
Station 21; and
      (3)   Area 3. For all watercraft, at Station 12 between the two upright,
white posts.
   (D)   Nothing contained herein shall prohibit watercraft travel within the
channel of Breach Inlet or Cove Inlet for the sole purpose of gaining access to
Charleston harbor or the Atlantic Ocean.
   (E)   Surfers are required to wear leashes.
(Prior Code, § 4A-2)
§ 95.03 FAILURE TO COMPLY.
   Trailers and watercraft left in dunes or on the beach overnight without
special permit will be towed at owner’s expense. Violations of this chapter
shall be punishable in accordance with §
34.99(A). Owner and operator will be held liable for violations of §
95.02(A). The operator and owner, if aboard the watercraft, will be held liable
for violations of §
95.02(B).
(Prior Code, § 4A-3)
§ 95.04 LIABILITY.
   The town will assume no liability for personal property within or without
designated areas. Watercraft owners will sign an affidavit attesting
understanding of regulations upon obtaining permit.
(Prior Code, § 4A-4)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   LICENSING
CHAPTER 110: LICENSING
Section
   
110.01   License required
   
110.02   Definitions
   
110.03   Purpose and duration
   
110.04   Business license tax
   
110.05   Registration required
   
110.06   Deductions, exemptions, and charitable organizations
   
110.07   False application unlawful
   
110.08   Display and transfer
   
110.09   Administration of ordinance
   
110.10   Inspection and audits
   
110.11   Assessments
   
110.12   Delinquent license
   
110.13   Notices
   
110.14   Denial of license
   
110.15   Suspension or revocation of license
   
110.16   Appeals to Town Council
   
110.17   Consent, franchise, or license required for use of streets
   
110.18   Confidentiality
   
110.19   Severability
   
110.20   Classification and rates
 
   
110.99   Penalty
   
Appendix A: Business License Rate Schedule
   
Appendix B: 2025 Business License Class Schedule by NAICS Code
Cross-reference:
   Administration, see
Chapter 30
   Cable television, see
Chapter 131
   Taxation, see
Chapter 38
   Zoning, see
Chapter 157
§ 110.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
    Every person engaged or intending to engage in any business, calling,
occupation, profession, or activity engaged in with the object of gain,
benefit, or advantage, in whole or in part within the town limits is required
to pay an annual license tax for the privilege of doing business and obtain a
business license as herein provided.
(Prior Code, § 10-1) (Ord. passed 11-17-1980; Ord. passed 12-15-1992; Ord.
2021-18, passed 12-21-2021)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of town to levy business license, S.C. Code § 5-7-30
§ 110.02 DEFINITIONS.
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. Any business, calling, occupation, profession or activity engaged
in with the object of gain, benefit or advantage, either directly or
indirectly.
   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION. An organization that is determined by the Internal
Revenue Service to be exempt from federal income taxes under 26 U.S.C. Section
501(c)(3), (4), (6), (7), (8), (10) or (19).
   CHARITABLE PURPOSE. A benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, or eleemosynary
purpose that does not result in personal gain to a sponsor, organizer, officer,
director, trustee, or person with ultimate control of the organization.
   CLASSIFICATION. The division of businesses by NAICS codes subject to the
same license rate as determined by a calculated index of ability to pay based
on national averages, benefits, equalization of tax burden, relationship of
services, or other basis deemed appropriate by Town Council.
   COUNCIL. The Town Council of the Town of Sullivan’s Island.
   DOMICILE. A principal place from which the trade or business of a licensee
is conducted, directed, or managed. For purposes of this chapter, a licensee
may be deemed to have more than one domicile.
   GROSS INCOME. The gross receipts or gross revenue of a business, received or
accrued, for one calendar or fiscal year collected or to be collected from
business done within the town. If the licensee has a domicile within the town,
business done within the town shall include all gross receipts or revenue
received or accrued by such licensee. If the licensee does not have a domicile
within the town, business done within the town shall include only gross
receipts or revenue received or accrued within the town. In all cases, if the
licensee pays a business license tax to another county or municipality, then
the licensee’s gross income for the purpose of computing the tax within the
town must be reduced by the amount of revenues or receipts taxed in the other
county or municipality and fully reported to the town. GROSS INCOME for
business license tax purposes shall not include taxes collected for a
governmental entity, escrow funds, or funds that are the property of a third
party. The value of bartered goods or  trade-in merchandise shall be included
in gross income. The gross receipts or gross revenues for business license
purposes may be verified by inspection of returns and reports filed with the
Internal Revenue Service, the South Carolina Department of Revenue, the South
Carolina Department of Insurance, or other government agencies. In calculating
gross income for certain businesses, the following rules shall apply:
      (1)   Gross income for agents shall be calculated on gross commissions
received or retained, unless otherwise specified. If commissions are divided
with other brokers or agents, then only the amount retained by the broker or
agent is considered gross income.
      (2)   Except as specifically required by S.C. Code § 38-7-20, gross
income for insurance companies shall be calculated on gross premiums written.
      (3)   Gross income for manufacturers of goods or materials with a
location in the town shall be calculated on the lesser of (i) gross revenues or
receipts received or accrued from business done at the location, (ii) the
amount of income allocated and apportioned to that location by the business for
purposes of the business’s state income tax return, or (iii) the amount of
expenses attributable to the location as a cost center of the business.
Licensees reporting gross income under this provision shall have the burden to
establish the amount and method of calculation by satisfactory records and
proof. Manufacturers include those taxpayers reporting a manufacturing
principal business activity code on their federal income tax returns.
   LICENSE OFFICIAL. A person designated to administer this chapter.
Notwithstanding the designation of a primary license official, the town may
designate one or more alternate license officials to administer particular
types of business licenses, including without limitation for business licenses
issued to businesses subject to business license taxes under Article 20,
Chapter 9, Title 58, and Chapters 7 and 45, Title 38, of the South Carolina
Code.
   LICENSEE. The business, the person applying for the license on behalf of the
business, an agent or legal representative of the business, a person who
receives any part of the net profit of the business, or a person who owns or
exercises control of the business.
   NAICS. The North American Industry Classification System for the United
States published under the auspices of the Federal Office of Management and
Budget.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, limited liability partnership,
limited liability company, cooperative non-profit membership, corporation,
joint venture, association, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate,
holding company, or other group or combination acting as a unit, in the
singular or plural, and the agent or employee having charge or control of a
business in the absence of the principal.
   TOWN. The Town of Sullivan’s Island.
(Prior Code, § 10-2) (Ord. passed 11-17-1980; Ord. passed 12-15-1992; Ord.
passed 12-16-2008; Ord. 2021-18, passed 12-21-2021)
§ 110.03 PURPOSE AND DURATION.
    The business license required by this chapter is for the purpose of
providing such regulation as may be required by the business subject thereto
and for the purpose of raising revenue for the General Fund through a privilege
tax. The license year ending on December 31, 2021, shall be extended until
April 30, 2022. Thereafter, the license periods shall be established as
follows. Except as set forth below for business licenses issued to contractors
with respect to specific construction projects, each yearly license shall be
issued for the 12-month period of May 1 to April 30. A business license issued
for a construction contract may, at the request of the licensee, be stated to
expire at the completion of the construction project; provided, any such
business license may require that the licensee file, by each April 30 during
the continuation of the construction project, a statement of compliance,
including but not limited to a revised estimate of the value of the contract.
If any revised estimate of the final value of such project exceeds the amount
for which the business license was issued, the licensee shall be required to
pay a license fee at the then-prevailing rate on the excess amount. The
provisions of this chapter and the rates herein shall remain in effect from
year to year as amended by Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 10-3) (Ord. passed 11-17-1980; Ord. passed 12-15-1992; Ord.
2021-18, passed 12-21-2021)
§ 110.04 BUSINESS LICENSE TAX.
   (A)   The required business license tax shall be paid for each business
subject hereto according to the applicable rate classification on or before the
due date of April 30 in each year, except for those businesses in Rate Class 8
for which a different due date is specified. Late payments shall be subject to
penalties as set forth in §
110.99, except that admitted insurance companies may pay before June 1 without
penalty.
   (B)   A separate license shall be required for each place of business and
for each classification or business conducted at one place. If gross income
cannot be separated for classifications at one location, the business license
tax shall be computed on the combined gross income for the classification
requiring the highest rate. The business license tax must be computed based on
the licensee’s gross income for the calendar year preceding the due date, for
the licensee’s 12-month fiscal year preceding the due date, or on a 12-month
projected income based on the monthly average for a business in operation for
less than one year. The business license tax for a new business must be
computed on the estimated probable gross income for the balance of the license
year. A business license related to construction contract projects may be
issued on a per-project basis, at the option of the taxpayer. No refund shall
be made for a business that is discontinued.
   (C)   A licensee that submits a payment greater than the amount owed may
request a refund. To be considered, a refund request must be submitted in
writing to the town before the June 1 immediately following the April 30 on
which the payment was due and must be supported by adequate documentation
supporting the refund request. The town shall approve or deny the refund
request, and if approved shall issue the refund to the business, within 30 days
after receipt of the request.
(Prior Code, § 10-4) (Ord. passed 11-17-1980; Ord. passed 12-15-1992; Ord.
2021-18, passed 12-21-2021)
§ 110.05 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   (A)    The owner, agent, or legal representative of every business subject
to this chapter, whether listed in the classification index or not, shall
register the business and make application for a business license on or before
the due date of each year; provided, a new business shall be required to have a
business license prior to operation within the town, and an annexed business
shall be required to have a business license within 30 days of the annexation.
A license for a bar (NAICS 722410) must be issued in the name of the individual
who has been issued the corresponding state alcohol, beer, or wine permit or
license and will have actual control and management of the business.
   (B)   Application shall be on the then-current standard business license
application as established and provided by the Director of the South Carolina
Revenue and Fiscal Affairs Office and shall be accompanied by all information
about the applicant, the licensee, and the business deemed appropriate to carry
out the purpose of this chapter by the license official. Applicants may be
required to submit copies of portions of state and federal income tax returns
reflecting gross receipts and gross revenue figures.
   (C)   The applicant shall certify under oath that the information given in
the application is true, that the gross income is accurately reported (or
estimated for a new business) without any unauthorized deductions, and that all
assessments, personal property taxes on business property, and other monies due
and payable to the town have been paid.
   (D)   The town shall allow application, reporting, calculation, and payment
of business license taxes through the business license tax portal hosted and
managed by the South Carolina Revenue and Fiscal Affairs Office, subject to the
availability and capability thereof. Any limitations in portal availability or
capability do not relieve the applicant or licensee from existing business
license or business license tax obligations.
(Prior Code, § 10-5) (Ord. passed 11-17-1980; Ord. passed 12-15-1992; Ord.
2021-18, passed 12-21-2021)
§ 110.06 DEDUCTIONS, EXEMPTIONS, AND CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS.
   (A)   No deductions from gross income shall be made except income earned
outside of the town on which a license tax is paid by the business to some
other municipality or county and fully reported to the town, taxes collected
for a governmental entity, or income which cannot be included for computation
of the tax pursuant to state or federal law. Properly apportioned income from
business in interstate commerce shall be included in the calculation of gross
income and is not exempted. The applicant shall have the burden to establish
the right to exempt income by satisfactory records and proof.
   (B)   No person shall be exempt from the requirements of the chapter by
reason of the lack of an established place of business within the town, unless
exempted by state or federal law. The license official shall determine the
appropriate classification for each business in accordance with the latest
issue of NAICS. No person shall be exempt from this chapter by reason of the
payment of any other tax, unless exempted by state law, and no person shall be
relieved of liability for payment of any other tax or fee by reason of
application of this chapter.
   (C)   Wholesalers are exempt from business license taxes unless they
maintain warehouses or distribution establishments within the town. A wholesale
transaction involves a sale to an individual who will resell the goods and
includes delivery of the goods to the reseller. It does not include a sale of
goods to a user or consumer.
   (D)   A charitable organization shall be exempt from the business license
tax on its gross income unless it is deemed a business subject to a business
license tax on all or part of its gross income as provided in this section. A
charitable organization, or any affiliate of a charitable organization, that
reports income from for-profit activities or unrelated business income for
federal income tax purposes to the Internal Revenue Service shall be deemed a
business subject to a business license tax on the part of its gross income from
such for-profit activities or unrelated business income.
   (E)   A charitable organization shall be deemed a business subject to a
business license tax on its total gross income if (1) any net proceeds of
operation, after necessary expenses of operation, inure to the benefit of any
individual or any entity that is not itself a charitable organization as
defined in this chapter, or (2) any net proceeds of operation, after necessary
expenses of operation, are used for a purpose other than a charitable purpose
as defined in this chapter. Excess benefits or compensation in any form beyond
fair market value to a sponsor, organizer, officer, director, trustee, or
person with ultimate control of the organization shall not be deemed a
necessary expense of operation.
(Prior Code, § 10-6) (Ord. passed 11-17-1980; Ord. passed 12-15-1992; Ord.
2021-18, passed 12-21-2021)
§ 110.07 FALSE APPLICATION UNLAWFUL.
    It shall be unlawful for any person subject to the provisions of this
chapter to make a false application for the business license, or to give or
file, or direct the giving or filing of, any false information with respect to
the license or tax required by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-7) (Ord. passed 11-17-1980; Ord. passed 12-15-1992; Ord.
2021-18, passed 12-21-2021)  Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.08 DISPLAY AND TRANSFER.
   (A)    All persons shall display the license issued to them on the original
form provided by the license official in a conspicuous place in the business
establishment at the address shown on the license. A transient or non-resident
shall carry the license upon his or her person or in a vehicle used in the
business, readily available for inspection by any authorized agent of the town.
A change of address must be reported to the license official within ten days
after removal of the business to a new location and the license will be valid
at the new address upon written notification by the license official and
compliance with zoning and building codes.
   (B)   Failure to obtain the approval of the license official for a change of
address shall invalidate the license and subject the licensee to prosecution
for doing business without a license. A business license shall not be
transferable and a transfer of controlling interest shall be considered a
termination of the old business and the establishment of a new business
requiring a new business license, based on the old business income.
(Prior Code, § 10-8) (Ord. passed 11-17-1980; Ord. passed 12-15-1992; Ord.
2021-18, passed 12-21-2021)
§ 110.09 ADMINISTRATION OF ORDINANCE.
    The license official shall administer the provisions of this chapter,
collect business license taxes, issue licenses, make or initiate investigations
and audits to ensure compliance, initiate denial or suspension and revocation
procedures, report violations to the municipal attorney, assist in prosecution
of violators, produce forms, undertake reasonable procedures relating to the
administration of this chapter, and perform such other duties as may be duly
assigned.
(Prior Code, § 10-9) (Ord. passed 11-17-1980; Ord. passed 12-15-1992; Ord.
2021-18, passed 12-21-2021)
§ 110.10 INSPECTION AND AUDITS.
   (A)   For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, the
license official or other authorized agent of the town is empowered to enter
upon the premises of any person subject to this chapter to make inspections and
to examine and audit books and records. It shall be unlawful for any such
person to fail or refuse to make available the necessary books and records. In
the event an audit or inspection reveals that the licensee has filed false
information, the costs of the audit shall be added to the correct business
license tax and late penalties in addition to other penalties provided herein.
Each day of failure to pay the proper amount of business license tax shall
constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   The license official shall have the authority to make inspections and
conduct audits of businesses to ensure compliance with the chapter. Financial
information obtained by inspections and audits shall not be deemed public
records, and the license official shall not release the amount of business
license taxes paid or the reported gross income of any person by name without
written permission of the licensee, except as authorized by this chapter, state
or federal law, or proper judicial order. Statistics compiled by
classifications are public records.
(Prior Code, § 10-10) (Ord. passed 12-15-1992; Ord. 2021-18, passed 12-21-2021)
§ 110.11 ASSESSMENTS.
   (A)    Assessments, payments under protest, and appeals of assessment shall
be allowed and conducted by the town pursuant to the provisions of S.C. Code §
6-1-410, as amended. In preparing an assessment, the license official may
examine such records of the business or any other available records as may be
appropriate and conduct such investigations and statistical surveys as the
license official may deem appropriate to assess a business license tax and
penalties as provided herein.
   (B)   The license official shall establish a uniform local procedure
consistent with S.C. Code § 6-1-410 for hearing an application for adjustment
of assessment and issuing a notice of final assessment; provided that for
particular types of business licenses, including without limitation for
business licenses issued to businesses subject to business license taxes under
Article 20, Chapter 9, Title 58, and Chapters 7 and 45, Title 38, of the South
Carolina Code, the town, by separate ordinance, may establish a different
procedure and may delegate one or more rights, duties, and functions hereunder
to the Municipal Association of South Carolina.
(Prior Code, § 10-11) (Ord. passed 12-15-1992; Ord. 2021-18, passed 12-21-2021)
§ 110.12 DELINQUENT LICENSE.
   (A)   For non-payment of all or any part of the correct business license
tax, the license official shall impose and collect a late penalty of 5% of the
unpaid tax for each month or portion thereof after the due date until paid.
Penalties shall not be waived. If any business license tax remains unpaid for
60 days after its due date, the license official shall report it to the town
attorney for appropriate legal action.
   (B)   Partial payment may be accepted by the license official to toll
imposition of penalties on the portion paid; provided, however, no business
license shall be issued or renewed until the full amount of the tax due, with
penalties, has been paid.
(Prior Code, § 10-12) (Ord. passed 12-15-1992; Ord. 2021-18, passed 12-21-2021)
§ 110.13 NOTICES.
    The license official may, but shall not be required to, mail written
notices that business license taxes are due. If notices are not mailed, there
shall be published a notice of the due date in a newspaper of general
circulation within the town three times prior to the due date in each year.
Failure to receive notice shall not constitute a defense to prosecution for
failure to pay the tax due or grounds for waiver of penalties.
(Prior Code, § 10-13) (Ord. passed 12-15-1992; Ord. 2021-18, passed 12-21-2021)
§ 110.14 DENIAL OF LICENSE.
    The license official may deny a license to an applicant when the license
official determines:
   (A)   The application is incomplete or contains a misrepresentation, false
or misleading statement, or evasion or suppression of a material fact;
   (B)   The activity for which a license is sought is unlawful or constitutes
a public nuisance per se or per accidens;
   (C)   The applicant, licensee, prior licensee, or the person in control of
the business has been convicted within the previous ten years of an offense
under a law or ordinance regulating business, a crime involving dishonest
conduct or moral turpitude related to a business or a subject of a business, or
an unlawful sale of merchandise or prohibited goods;
   (D)   The applicant, licensee, prior licensee, or the person in control of
the business has engaged in an unlawful activity or nuisance related to the
business or to a similar business in the town or in another jurisdiction;
   (E)   The applicant, licensee, prior licensee, or the person in control of
the business is delinquent in the payment to the town of any tax or fee;
   (F)   A licensee has actual knowledge or notice, or based on the
circumstances reasonably should have knowledge or notice, that any person or
employee of the licensee has committed a crime of moral turpitude on the
business premises, or has permitted any person or employee of the licensee to
engage in the unlawful sale of merchandise or prohibited goods on the business
premises and has not taken remedial measures necessary to correct such
activity; or
   (G)   The license for the business or for a similar business of the licensee
in the town or another jurisdiction has been denied, suspended, or revoked in
the previous license year.
   A decision of the license official shall be subject to appeal as herein
provided. Denial shall be written with reasons stated.
(Prior Code, § 10-14) (Ord. passed 11-17-1980; Ord. passed 12-15-1992; Ord.
2021-18, passed 12-21-2021)
§ 110.15 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)    When the license official determines:
      (1)   A license has been mistakenly or improperly issued or issued
contrary to law;
      (2)   A licensee has breached any condition upon which the license was
issued or has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter;
      (3)   A licensee has obtained a license through a fraud,
misrepresentation, a false or misleading statement, or evasion or suppression
of a material fact in the license application;
      (4)   A licensee has been convicted within the previous ten years of an
offense under a law or ordinance regulating business, a crime involving
dishonest conduct or moral turpitude related to a business or a subject of a
business, or an unlawful sale of merchandise or prohibited goods;
      (5)   A licensee has engaged in an unlawful activity or nuisance related
to the business; or
      (6)   A licensee is delinquent in the payment to the town of any tax or
fee, the license official may give written notice to the licensee or the person
in control of the business within the town by personal service or mail that the
license is suspended pending a single hearing before Council or its designee
for the purpose of determining whether the suspension should be upheld and the
license should be revoked.
   (B)   The written notice of suspension and proposed revocation shall state
the time and place at which the hearing is to be held, and shall contain a
brief statement of the reasons for the suspension and proposed revocation and a
copy of the applicable provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-15) (Ord. passed 11-19-1979; Ord. passed 12-15-1992; Ord.
2021-18, passed 12-21-2021)
§ 110.16 APPEALS TO TOWN COUNCIL.
   (A)    Except with respect to appeals of assessments under §
110.11 hereof, which are governed by S.C. Code § 6-1-410, any person aggrieved
by a determination, denial, or suspension and proposed revocation of a business
license by the license official may appeal the decision to the Council or its
designee by written request stating the reasons for appeal, filed with the
license official within ten days after service by mail or personal service of
the notice of determination, denial, or suspension and proposed revocation.
   (B)   A hearing on an appeal from a license denial or other determination of
the license official and a hearing on a suspension and proposed revocation
shall be held by the Council or its designee within ten business days after
receipt of a request for appeal or service of a notice of suspension and
proposed revocation. The hearing shall be held upon written notice at a regular
or special meeting of the Council, or, if by designee of the Council, at a
hearing to be scheduled by the designee. The hearing may be continued to
another date by agreement of all parties. At the hearing, all parties shall
have the right to be represented by counsel, to present testimony and evidence,
and to cross-examine witnesses. The proceedings shall be recorded and
transcribed at the expense of the party so requesting. The rules of evidence
and procedure prescribed by Council or its designee shall govern the hearing.
Following the hearing, the Council by majority vote of its members present, or
the designee of Council if the hearing is held by the designee, shall render a
written decision based on findings of fact and conclusions on application of
the standards herein. The written decision shall be served, by personal service
or by mail, upon all parties or their representatives and shall constitute the
final decision of the town.
   (C)   Timely appeal of a decision of Council or its designee does not
effectuate a stay of that decision. The decision of the Council or its designee
shall be binding and enforceable unless overturned by an applicable appellate
court after a due and timely appeal.
   (D)   For business licenses issued to businesses subject to business license
taxes under Article 20, Chapter 9, Title 58, and Chapters 7 and 45, Title 38,
of the South Carolina Code, the town may establish a different procedure by
ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 10-16) (Ord. passed 11- -1980; Ord. passed 12-15-1992; Ord.
2021-18, passed 12-21-2021)
§ 110.17 CONSENT, FRANCHISE, OR LICENSE REQUIRED FOR USE OF STREETS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install, maintain,
or operate in, on, above, or under any street or public place under control of
the town any line, pipe, cable, pole, structure, or facility for utilities,
communications, cablevision, or other purposes without a consent agreement or
franchise agreement issued by the Council by ordinance that prescribes the
term, fees, and conditions for use.
   (B)   The annual fee for use of streets or public places authorized by a
consent agreement or franchise agreement shall be set by the ordinance
approving the agreement and shall be consistent with limits set by state law.
Existing franchise agreements shall continue in effect until expiration dates
in the agreements. Franchise and consent fees shall not be in lieu of or be
credited against business license taxes unless specifically provided by the
franchise or consent agreement.
(Ord. 2021-18, passed 12-21-2021)
§ 110.18 CONFIDENTIALITY.
   Except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by
law, no official or employee of the town may divulge or make known in any
manner the amount of income or any financial particulars set forth or disclosed
in any report or return required under this chapter. Nothing in this section
shall be construed to prohibit the publication of statistics so classified as
to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns. Any license
data may be shared with other public officials or employees in the performance
of their duties, whether or not those duties relate to enforcement of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-17) (Ord. 2021-18, passed 12-21-2021) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.19 SEVERABILITY.
   A determination that any portion of this chapter is invalid or unenforceable
shall not affect the remaining portions. To the extent of any conflict between
the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of the South Carolina
Business License Tax Standardization Act, as codified at S.C. Code §§ 6-1-400
et seq., the standardization act shall control.
(Prior Code, § 10-19) (Ord. passed 11-17-1980; Ord. passed 12-15-1992; Ord.
2021-18, passed 12-21-2021)
§ 110.20 CLASSIFICATION AND RATES.
   (A)   The business license tax for each class of businesses subject to this
chapter shall be computed in accordance with the current business license rate
schedule, designated as
Appendix A to this chapter, which may be amended from time to time by the
Council.
   (B)   The current business license class schedule is attached hereto as
Appendix B. Hereafter, no later than December 31 of each odd year, the town
shall adopt, by ordinance, the latest standardized business license class
schedule as recommended by the Municipal Association of South Carolina and
adopted by the Director of the South Carolina Revenue and Fiscal Affairs
Office. Upon adoption by the town, the revised business license class schedule
shall then be appended to this chapter as a replacement
Appendix B.
   (C)   The classifications included in each rate class are listed with NAICS
codes, by sector, subsector, group, or industry. The business license class
schedule (
Appendix B) is a tool for classification and not a limitation on businesses
subject to a business license tax. The classification in the most recent
version of the business license class schedule adopted by the Council that most
specifically identifies the subject business shall be applied to the business.
The license official shall have the authority to make the determination of the
classification most specifically applicable to a subject business.
   (D)   A copy of the class schedule and rate schedule shall be filed in the
office of the town clerk.
(Ord. 2021-18, passed 12-21-2021)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty
of an offense and shall be subject to a fine of up to $500 or imprisonment for
not more than 30 days, or both, upon conviction. Each day of violation shall be
considered a separate offense. Punishment for violation shall not relieve the
offender of liability for delinquent taxes, penalties, and costs provided for
herein.
(Prior Code, § 10-18) (Ord. passed 11-17-1980; Ord. passed 12-15-1992; Ord.
2021-18, passed 12-21-2021)
APPENDIX A: BUSINESS LICENSE RATE SCHEDULE
           INCOME: $0 - $2,000             INCOME OVER $2,000
RATE CLASS BASE RATE                       RATE PER $1,000 OR FRACTION THEREOF
1          $ 70.00                         $ 2.75
2          $ 80.00                         $ 3.00
3          $ 90.00                         $ 3.25
4          $ 100.00                        $ 3.50
5          $ 110.00                        $ 3.75
6          $ 120.00                        $ 4.00
7          $ 130.00                        $ 4.25
8.1        $ 120.00                        $ 4.50
8.2        Set by state statute             
8.3        MASC Telecommunications          
8.4        MASC Insurance                   
8.51       $ 12.50 + $12.50 per machine     
8.52       $ 12.50 + $180.00 per machine    
8.6        $ 175.00 plus $5.00 -OR- $12.50 $ 3.40
           per table
9.91       $ 175.00                        $ 3.40
9.92       $ 1,000.00                      $ 9.00
 
NON-RESIDENT RATES
Unless otherwise specifically provided, all taxes and rates shall be doubled
for nonresidents and itinerants having no fixed principal place of business
within the town.
CLASS 8 RATES
Each NAICS number designates a separate subclassification. The businesses in
this section are treated as separate and individual subclasses due to
provisions of state law, regulatory requirements, service burdens, tax
equalization considerations, and other factors that are deemed sufficient to
require individually determined rates. In accordance with state law, the
Municipality also may provide for reasonable subclassifications for rates,
described by an NAICS sector, subsector, or industry, that are based on
particularized considerations as needed for economic stimulus or for the
enhanced or disproportionate demands on municipal services or infrastructure.
Non-resident rates do not apply except where indicated.
8.1 NAICS 230000 – Contractors, Construction, All Types [Non-resident rates
apply].
Resident rates, for contractors having a permanent place of business within the
Municipality:
   Minimum on first $2,000: $120.00 PLUS
   Each additional 1,000: $4.50
Non-resident rates apply to contractors that do not have a permanent place of
business within the Municipality. A trailer at the construction site or
structure in which the contractor temporarily resides is not a permanent place
of business under this ordinance.
No contractor shall be issued a business license until all state and municipal
qualification examination and trade license requirements have been met. Each
contractor shall post a sign in plain view on each job identifying the
contractor with the job.
Sub-contractors shall be licensed on the same basis as general or prime
contractors for the same job. No deductions shall be made by a general or prime
contractor for value of work performed by a sub-contractor.
No contractor shall be issued a business license until all performance and
indemnity bonds required by the Building Code have been filed and approved.
Zoning permits must be obtained when required by the Zoning Ordinance.
Each prime contractor shall file with the License Official a list of sub-
contractors furnishing labor or materials for each project.
For licenses issued on a per-job basis, the total tax for the full amount of
the contract shall be paid prior to commencement of work and shall entitle the
contractor to complete the job without regard to the normal license expiration
date. An amended report shall be filed for each new job and the appropriate
additional license fee per $1,000 of the contract amount shall be paid prior to
commencement of new work. Only one base tax shall be paid in a license year.
Licensees holding a per-job license shall file, by each April 30 during the
continuation of the construction project, a statement of compliance, including
but not limited to a revised estimate of the value of the contract. If any
revised estimate of the final value of such project exceeds the amount for
which the business license was issued, the licensee shall be required to pay a
license fee at the then-prevailing rate on the excess amount.
8.2 NAICS 482 – Railroad Companies (See S.C. Code § 12-23-210).
8.3 NAICS 517111, 517112, 517122 – Telephone Companies.
With respect to “retail telecommunications services” as defined in S. C. Code §
58-9-2200, the Municipality participates in a collections program administered
by the Municipal Association of South Carolina. The Municipality has approved
participation in the collections program by separate ordinance (the
“Telecommunications Collections Ordinance”). The rates, terms, conditions,
dates, penalties, appeals process, and other details of the business license
applicable to retail telecommunications services are set forth in the
Telecommunications Collections Ordinance.
8.4 NAICS 5241 and 5242 – Insurance Companies and Brokers:
Independent agents, brokers, and their employees are subject to a business
license tax based on their natural class. With respect to insurers subject to
license fees and taxes under Chapter 7 of Title 38 and to brokers under Chapter
45 of Title 38, the Municipality participates in a collections program
administered by the Municipal Association of South Carolina. The Municipality
has approved participation in the collections program by separate ordinance
(the “Insurers and Brokers Collections Ordinance”). The rates, terms,
conditions, dates, penalties, appeals process, and other details of the
business license applicable to insurers and brokers are set forth in the
Insurers and Brokers Collections Ordinance.
8.51 NAICS 713120 – Amusement Machines, coin operated (except gambling). 
Music machines, juke boxes, kiddy rides, video games, pin tables with levers,
and other amusement machines with or without free play feature licensed by SC
Department of Revenue pursuant to S.C. Code § 12-21-2720(A)(1) and (A)(2) [Type
I and Type II].
For operation of all machines (not on gross income), pursuant to S.C. Code §
12-21-2746:
   Per Machine: $12.50 PLUS
   Business license: $12.50
Distributors that sell or lease machines and are not licensed by the state as
an operator pursuant to § 12-21-2728 are not subject to Subclass 8.51.
8.52 NAICS 713290 – Amusement Machines, coin operated, non-payout.
Amusement machines of the non-payout type or in-line pin game licensed by SC
Department of Revenue pursuant to S.C. Code § 12-21-2720(A)(3) [Type III].
For operation of all machines (not on gross income), pursuant to S.C. Code §
12-21-2720(B):
   Per Machine: $180.00 PLUS
   Business license: $12.50
Distributors that sell or lease machines and are not licensed by the state as
an operator pursuant to § 12-21-2728 are not subject to Subclass 8.52.
8.6 NAICS Code Varies – Billiard or Pool Tables.
A business that offers the use of billiard or pool tables shall be subject to
business license taxation under its natural class for all gross income of the
business excluding the gross income attributable to the billiard or pool
tables. In addition, the billiard or pool tables shall require their own
separate business licenses pursuant to SC Code § 12-21-2746 and shall be
subject to a license tax of $5.00 per table measuring less than 3½ feet wide
and 7 feet long, and $12.50 per table longer than that.
CLASS 9 RATES
Under S.C. Code Section 6-1-400(G)(2), municipalities “may provide for
additional reasonable subclassifications … based upon particularized
considerations as needed for economic stimulus or the enhanced or
disproportionate demands by specific business subclassifications on taxing
jurisdiction services or infrastructure.”
9.91 NAICS 72251 – Food services, retail food businesses, convenience stores or
other similar establishments, which sell or serve alcoholic beverages or permit
the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises
   Minimum on first $2,000: $175.00 PLUS
   Per $1,000, or fraction, over $2,000: $3.40
9.92 NAICS 721199 – All Other Traveler Accommodation (Short Term Rental)
(Non-Resident Rates Apply)
   Minimum on first $2,000: $1,000 PLUS
   Per $1,000, or fraction, over $2,000: $9.00
(Ord. 2021-18, passed 12-21-2021; Ord. 2023-06, passed 12-19-2023)
Business License Class Schedule by NAICS Code
Appendix B
   2025 BUSINESS LICENSE CLASS SCHEDULE BY NAICS CODE
NAICS Sector/Subsector Industry Sector Class
NAICS Sector/Subsector Industry Sector                                  Class
11                     Agriculture, forestry, hunting and fishing       1
21                     Mining                                           3
22                     Utilities                                        1
31 - 33                Manufacturing                                    3
42                     Wholesale trade                                  1
44 - 45                Retail trade                                     1
48 - 49                Transportation and warehousing                   2
51                     Information                                      4
52                     Finance and insurance                            7
53                     Real estate and rental and leasing               6
54                     Professional, scientific, and technical services 4
55                     Management of companies                          7
56                     Administrative and support and waste management  3
                       and remediation services
61                     Educational services                             3
62                     Health care and social assistance                3
71                     Arts, entertainment, and recreation              3
721                    Accommodation                                    1
722                    Food services and drinking places                2
81                     Other services                                   3
 
NAICS Sector/Subsector Industry Sector Class
Class 8                Subclasses       
NAICS Sector/Subsector Industry Sector                                  Class
Class 8                Subclasses                                        
23                     Construction                                     8.1
482                    Rail Transportation                              8.2
517111                 Wired Telecommunications Carriers                8.3
517112                 Wireless Telecommunications Carriers (except     8.3
                       Satellite)
517122                 Agents for Wireless Telecommunications Services  8.3
5241                   Insurance Carriers                               8.4
5242                   Insurance Brokers for non-admitted Insurance     8.4
                       Carriers
713120                 Amusement Parks and Arcades                      8.51
713290                 Nonpayout Amusement Machines                     8.52
713990                 All Other Amusement and Recreational Industries  8.6
                       (pool tables)
 
Note: 2025 Class Schedule is based on a three-year average (2019 - 2021) of IRS
statistical data.
This appendix will be updated every odd year based on the latest available IRS
statistics.
(Ord. 2021-18, passed 12-21-2021; Ord. 2023-06, passed 12-19-2023; Ord. 2025-
06, passed 12-16-2025)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   SMOKING OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS
      
131.   CABLE TELEVISION
      
132.   MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 130: SMOKING OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS
Section
   
130.01   Purpose
   
130.02   Intent
   
130.03   Definitions
   
130.04   Prohibition
   
130.05   Smoking restrictions inapplicable
   
130.06   Exceptions
   
130.07   Posting signs
   
130.08   Reasonable distance
   
130.09   Jurisdiction and enforcement
   
130.10   Retaliation prohibited
   
130.11   Waivers
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 PURPOSE.
   Town Council has now determined that additional regulation of smoking in
areas beyond those addressed in the Clean Indoor Air Act of 1990, being S.C.
Code §§ 44-95-10 et seq., is appropriate in furtherance of its duty to protect
the health of its citizens and employees in the workplace and therefore enacts
this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 14-30) (Ord. passed 6-20-2006; Ord. passed 5-15-2007; Ord.
passed 5-20-2008; Ord. passed 11-18-2008; Ord. passed 7-21-2009)
§ 130.02 INTENT.
   Town Council finds that it is in the best interest of the people of this
town to protect nonsmokers from involuntary exposure to secondhand smoke and to
reduce the pollution of its beaches, public parks, access paths and other
public facilities. Therefore, Town Council declares that the purpose of this
chapter is to preserve and improve the health, comfort and environment of the
people of this town by limiting exposure to tobacco and vaping smoke, and
reducing the pollution caused by tobacco products, tobacco byproducts and
vaping products.
(Prior Code, § 14-30) (Ord. passed 6-20-2006; Ord. passed 5-15-2007; Ord.
passed 5-20-2008; Ord. passed 11-18-2008; Ord. passed 7-21-2009; Ord. 2019-07,
passed 1-21-2020)
§ 130.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person who performs services for an employer in return for
wages, profit or other valuable consideration.
   EMPLOYER. Any person, partnership, association, corporation, trust, school,
college, university or other educational institution, nonprofit entity or other
organization, including any public or private employer, any manager,
supervisor, and all other persons charged with control, supervision, and
operation of any work place, work space or work spaces as defined herein, that
employs one or more persons.
   ENCLOSED. A space bounded by walls (with or without windows), and enclosed
by doors, including but not limited to, offices, rooms, foyers, waiting areas
and halls.
   PERSON(S). A customer or other visitor on the premises regulated herein.
   POLICE DEPARTMENT. The Town of Sullivan’s Island Police Department.
   PUBLIC BUILDING. Any building owned, operated or leased by the town.
   PUBLIC PARK. Open land owned by the town set aside for active and passive
recreational use.
   SECONDHAND SMOKE. The complex mixture formed from the escaping smoke of a
burning tobacco product (termed as “side-stream smoke”) and smoke exhaled by
the smoker. Exposure to SECONDHAND SMOKE is also frequently referred to as
PASSIVE SMOKING, SECONDHAND SMOKING or INVOLUNTARY SMOKING.
   SMOKING. The inhaling, exhaling, burning, lighting or carrying of a lighted
cigarette, cigar, pipe, vaping device, or similar device or any other lighted
tobacco product.
   SMOKING MATERIALS. Includes cigars, cigarettes and all other manner of
smoking devices intended to be used for the purpose of inhaling, burning,
carrying or exhaling smoke.
   TOWN FACILITY. Any building or property owned, operated or leased by the
town for public use.
   WORKPLACE. Any enclosed indoor area, structure, building or facility or any
portion thereof at which one or more employee(s) perform services for their
employer including, but not limited to, retail food stores, retail stores,
restaurants, bars, cabarets, cafes, public or private clubs, pool halls and
bowling alleys.
   WORK SPACE or WORK SPACES. Any enclosed area occupied by an employee during
the course of his or her employment including, but not limited to, offices,
customer service areas, common areas, hallways, waiting areas, restrooms,
lounges and eating areas.
(Prior Code, § 14-30) (Ord. passed 6-20-2006; Ord. passed 5-15-2007; Ord.
passed 5-20-2008; Ord. passed 11-18-2008; Ord. passed 7-21-2009; Ord. 2019-07,
passed 1-21-2020)
§ 130.04 PROHIBITION.
   (A)   The employer shall provide a smoke-free environment for all employees
working in all work space, work spaces and work places as those terms are
defined herein. Further, the employer and all employees shall prohibit any
persons present in said work space, work spaces and work places from smoking
tobacco products therein.
   (B)   Smoking shall be prohibited in all work space, work spaces and work
places in a workplace. This includes all common work areas, auditoriums,
classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private offices, hallways, medical
facilities, cafeterias, employee lounges, staircases, restrooms and all other
enclosed areas in the workplace.
   (C)   Smoking any smoking materials shall be prohibited on/in the town’s
beaches, access paths, waterways, public parks and all other town facilities.
(Prior Code, § 14-30) (Ord. passed 6-20-2006; Ord. passed 5-15-2007; Ord.
passed 5-20-2008; Ord. passed 11-18-2008; Ord. passed 7-21-2009; Ord. 2019-07,
passed 1-21-2020)
§ 130.05 SMOKING RESTRICTIONS INAPPLICABLE.
   (A)   In providing for the inapplicability of this chapter to the following
divisions (B)(1) through (B)(7), it is specifically recognized that such
locations are addressed in the Clean Indoor Air Act, enacted by the General
Assembly of South Carolina and codified in S.C. Code §§ 44-95-10 et seq.
   (B)   Therefore, this chapter shall not apply to:
      (1)   Public schools and preschools where routine or regular
kindergarten, elementary, or secondary educational classes are held, including
libraries;
      (2)   All other indoor facilities providing children’s services to the
extent that smoking is prohibited in the facility by federal law and all other
child daycare facilities, as defined in S.C. Code § 20-7-2700, which are
licensed pursuant to S.C. Code § 20-7-13(11);
      (3)   Health care facilities as defined in S.C. Code § 44-7-130;
      (4)   Government buildings as defined in S.C. Code § 44-95-20(4), except
to the extent regulation by the town is authorized therein;
      (5)   Elevators;
      (6)   Public transportation vehicles, except for taxicabs; and
      (7)   Arenas and auditoriums of public theaters or public performing art
centers.
(Prior Code, § 14-30) (Ord. passed 6-20-2006; Ord. passed 5-15-2007; Ord.
passed 5-20-2008; Ord. passed 11-18-2008; Ord. passed 7-21-2009; Ord. 2019-07,
passed 1-21-2020)
§ 130.06 EXCEPTIONS.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of §
130.04, smoking may be permitted in the following places and/or circumstances:
   (A)   Private residences or privately-owned property;
   (B)   Hotel, motel, inn, bed and breakfast and lodging home rooms that are
rented to guests, designated as “smoking rooms” (“rooms”) provided that the
total percentage of such rooms does not exceed 25% in such establishment. A
room so designated shall have signs posted indicating that smoking is allowed
therein; and
   (C)   Religious ceremonies where smoking is part of the ritual.
(Prior Code, § 14-30) (Ord. passed 6-20-2006; Ord. passed 5-15-2007; Ord.
passed 5-20-2008; Ord. passed 11-18-2008; Ord. passed 7-21-2009; Ord. 2019-07,
passed 1-21-2020)
§ 130.07 POSTING SIGNS.
   The owner, manager or person in control of an establishment or area in which
smoking is prohibited pursuant to this chapter shall post a conspicuous sign at
the main entrance to the establishment or area. The sign shall contain the
words “No Smoking” and the universal symbol for no smoking.
(Prior Code, § 14-30) (Ord. passed 6-20-2006; Ord. passed 5-15-2007; Ord.
passed 5-20-2008; Ord. passed 11-18-2008; Ord. passed 7-21-2009)
§ 130.08 REASONABLE DISTANCE.
   Smoking outside a work space, work spaces and work places, and any other
indoor area where smoking is prohibited, shall be permitted, provided that
tobacco smoke does not enter the work space, work spaces and work places
through entrances, windows, ventilation systems or other means.
(Prior Code, § 14-30) (Ord. passed 6-20-2006; Ord. passed 5-15-2007; Ord.
passed 5-20-2008; Ord. passed 11-18-2008; Ord. passed 7-21-2009)
§ 130.09 JURISDICTION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Town Administrator or his or her designee shall hold such hearings
as are necessary, and upon a finding of an infraction collect the penalties due
hereunder.
   (B)   The Police and Fire Departments, as well as all code enforcement
personnel of the town, shall have the power to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
   (C)   A business license shall not be renewed if there are delinquent fines
owed hereunder by an employer.
(Prior Code, § 14-30) (Ord. passed 6-20-2006; Ord. passed 5-15-2007; Ord.
passed 5-20-2008; Ord. passed 11-18-2008; Ord. passed 7-21-2009)
§ 130.10 RETALIATION PROHIBITED.
   No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, refuse to serve or in
any manner retaliate or take any adverse personnel action against any employee,
applicant, customer or person because such employee, applicant, customer or
person takes any action in furtherance of the enforcement of this chapter or
exercises any right conferred by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 14-30) (Ord. passed 6-20-2006; Ord. passed 5-15-2007; Ord.
passed 5-20-2008; Ord. passed 11-18-2008; Ord. passed 7-21-2009) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.11 WAIVERS.
   (A)   Any employer, owner, manager or other person having control of a
workplace subject to this chapter may apply to the town’s Director of the
Department of Budget, Finance and Revenue Collection or his or her designee for
a waiver of any provision of this regulation for a period not to exceed 90
days.
   (B)   All waivers shall be submitted to the town’s Director of the
Department of Budget, Finance and Revenue Collection or his or her designee on
an application form provided by such Director along with a $100 non-refundable
filing fee.
   (C)   The decision to grant such a waiver shall be in the sole discretion of
the town’s Director of the Department of Budget, Finance and Revenue Collection
or his or her designee, based upon his or her determination that such waiver is
in the public interest. In so determining, the town’s Director of the
Department of Budget, Finance and Revenue Collection or his or her designee may
take into account, but is not limited to, the following:
      (1)   The efforts that the employer, owner, manager or other person
having control of a workplace has made toward compliance with this chapter;
      (2)   Whether or not the workplace will be in compliance with all terms
of this chapter within 90 days; and
      (3)   Whether or not the granting of the waiver will result in an
appreciable danger to the health of the public.
   (D)   No employer, owner, manager or other person having control of a
workplace shall be granted more than one waiver.
(Prior Code, § 14-30) (Ord. passed 6-20-2006; Ord. passed 5-15-2007; Ord.
passed 5-20-2008; Ord. passed 11-18-2008; Ord. passed 7-21-2009)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   A person, employee or employer who smokes in an area where smoking is
prohibited by the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction,
and be subject to a fine of $25.
   (B)   A person, employee or employer who owns, manages, operates or
otherwise controls a workplace or work space and who fails to comply with the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a
civil fine of not less than $10 or more than $25.
   (C)   In addition to the civil fines established by this section, repeated
violations of this chapter by a person, employee or employer who owns, manages,
operates or otherwise controls a workplace or work space, or the failure of a
person, employee or employer who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls
a workplace or work space to timely pay the civil fine for an infraction may
result in the suspension or revocation of any occupancy permit or business
license issued to the person, employee or employer for the premises on which
the violation occurred.
   (D)   Violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance,
which may be abated by the town by restraining order, preliminary and permanent
injunction, or other means provided for by law, and the town may take action to
recover the costs of the nuisance abatement.
   (E)   Each violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate and
distinct infraction.
   (F)   In addition to or in lieu of assessing a civil fine, the town may
institute an action in the Court of Common Pleas for Charleston County for an
injunction to require compliance with this chapter or pursue any other remedy
as may be permitted by law.
(Prior Code, § 14-30) (Ord. passed 6-20-2006; Ord. passed 5-15-2007; Ord.
passed 5-20-2008; Ord. passed 11-18-2008; Ord. passed 7-21-2009; Ord. 2019-07,
passed 1-21-2020)
CHAPTER 131: CABLE TELEVISION
Section
   
131.01   Definitions
   
131.02   Initial review of basic cable rates
   
131.03   Review or request for increase in basic cable rates
   
131.04   Cable operator information
   
131.05   Automatic rate adjustments
   
131.06   Enforcement
§ 131.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BASIC CABLE RATES. The monthly charges for a subscription to the basic
service tier and the associated equipment.
   BASIC SERVICE TIER. A separately available service tier to which
subscription is required for access to any other tier of service, including as
a minimum, but not limited to, all must-carry signals, all PEG channels, and
all domestic television signals other than superstations.
   BENCHMARK. A per channel rate of charge for cable service and associated
equipment which the FCC has determined is reasonable.
   CABLE ACT OF 1992. The Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition
Act of 1992, being 47 C.F.R. 76.
   CABLE OPERATOR. Any person or group of persons:
      (1)   Who provides cable service over a cable system and directly or
through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such a cable
system; or
      (2)   Who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any
arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system.
   CHANNEL. A unit of cable service identified and selected by a channel number
or similar designation.
   COST OF SERVICE SHOWING. A filing in which the cable operator attempts to
show that the benchmark rate of the price cap is not sufficient to allow the
cable operator to fully recover the costs of providing the basic service tier
and to continue to attract capital.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.
   INITIAL BASIC CABLE RATES. The rates that the cable operator is charging for
the basic service tier, including charges for associated equipment, at the time
the town notified the cable operator of the town’s qualification and intent to
regulate basic cable rates.
   MUST-CARRY SIGNAL. The signal of any local broadcast station (except
superstations) which is required to be carried on the basic service tier.
   PEG CHANNEL. The channel capacity designated for public, education or
governmental use, and facilities and equipment for the use of that channel
capacity.
   PRICE CAP. The ceiling set by the FCC on future increases in basic cable
rates regulated by the town, based on a formula using the GNP fixed weight
price index, reflecting general increase in the cost of doing business and
changes in overall inflation.
   REASONABLE RATE STANDARD. A per channel rate that is at, or below, the
benchmark or price cap level.
   SUPERSTATION. Any non-local broadcast signal secondarily transmitted by
satellite.
(Prior Code, § 14-26)
§ 131.02 INITIAL REVIEW OF BASIC CABLE RATES.
   (A)   Notice. Upon the adoption of this chapter and the certification of the
town by the FCC, the town shall immediately notify all cable operator in the
town by certified mail, return receipt requested, that the town intends to
regulate subscriber rates charged for the basic service tier and associated
equipment as authorized by the Cable Act of 1992, being 47 C.F.R. 76.
   (B)   Cable operator response. Within 30 days of receiving notice from the
town, the cable operator shall file with the town its current rates for basic
service tier and associated equipment and any supporting material concerning
the reasonableness of its rates.
   (C)   Expedited determination and public hearing.
      (1)   If the Town Council is able to expeditiously determine that the
cable operator’s rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment are
within the FCC’s reasonable rate standard, as determined by the applicable
benchmark, the Town Council shall:
         (a)   Hold a public hearing at which interested persons may express
their views; and
         (b)   Act to approve the rates within 30 days from the date the cable
operator filed its basic cable rates with the town.
      (2)   If the Town Council takes no action within 30 days from the date
the cable operator filed its basic rates with the town, the proposed rates will
continue in effect.
   (D)   Extended review period.
      (1)   If the Town Council is unable to determine whether the rates in
issue are within the FCC’s reasonable rate standard based on the material
before it, or if the cable operator submits a cost-of-service showing, the Town
Council shall, within 30 days from the date the cable operator filed its basic
cable rates with the town and by adoption of a formal resolution, invoke the
following additional periods of time, as applicable, to make a final
determination:
         (a)   Ninety days if the Town Council needs more time to ensure that a
rate is within the FCC’s reasonable rate standard; or
         (b)   One hundred and fifty days if the cable operator has submitted a
cost-of-service showing seeking to justify a rate above the applicable
benchmark.
      (2)   If the Town Council has not made a decision within the 90- or 150-
day period, the Town Council shall issue a brief written order at the end of
the period requesting the cable operator to keep accurate account of all
amounts received by reason of the proposed rate and on whose behalf the amounts
are paid.
   (E)   Public hearing. During the extended review period and before taking
action on the proposed rate, the Town Council shall hold at least one public
hearing at which interested persons may express their views and record
objections.
   (F)   Objections. An interested person who wishes to make an objection to
the proposed initial basic rate may submit the objection in writing any time
before the decision resolution is adopted. In order for an objection to be made
part of the record, the objector must provide the Town Clerk with the
objector’s name and address.
   (G)   Benchmark analysis. If a cable operator submits its current basic
cable rate schedule as being in compliance with the FCC’s reasonable rate
standard, the Town Council shall review the rates using the benchmark analysis
in accordance with the standard form authorized by the FCC. Based on the Town
Council’s findings, the initial basic cable rates shall be established as
follows:
      (1)   If the current basic cable rates are below the benchmark, those
rates shall become the initial basic cable rates and the cable operator’s rates
will be capped at that level;
      (2)   If the basic cable rates exceed the benchmark, the rates shall be
the greater of the cable operator’s per channel rate on September 30, 1992,
reduced by 10%, or the applicable benchmark, adjusted for inflation and any
change in the number occurring between September 30, 1992 and the initial date
of regulation; or
      (3)   If the current basic cable rates exceed the benchmark, but the
cable operator’s per channel rate was below the benchmark on September 30,
1992, the initial basic cable rate shall be the benchmark, adjusted for
inflation.
   (H)   Cost-of-service showings. If a cable operator does not wish to reduce
the rates to the permitted level, the cable operator shall have the opportunity
to submit a cost-of-service showing in an attempt to justify an initial basic
cable rates above the FCC’s reasonable rate standard. The Town Council will
review a cost-of-service submission pursuant to FCC standards for cost-of-
service review. The Town Council may approve initial basic rates above
benchmark if the cable operator makes the necessary showing; however, a cost-
of-service determination resulting in rates below the benchmark or below the
cable operator’s September 30, 1992 rates minus 10%, will prescribe the cable
operator’s new rates.
   (I)   Decision by formal resolution. After completion of its review of the
cable operator’s proposed rates, the Town Council shall adopt its decision by
formal resolution. The decision shall include one of the following:
      (1)   If the proposal is within the FCC’s reasonable rate standard or is
justified by a cost-of-service analysis, the Town Council shall approve the
initial basic cable rates proposed by the cable operator; or
      (2)   If the proposal is not within the FCC’s reasonable rate standard
and the cost-of-service analysis, if any, does not justify the proposed rates,
the Town Council shall establish initial basic cable rates that are within the
FCC’s reasonable rate standard or that are justified by a cost-of-service
analysis.
   (J)   Rollbacks and refunds. If the Town Council determines that the initial
basic cable rates are submitted exceed the reasonable rate standard or the
cable operator’s cost-of-service showing justifies lower rates, the Town
Council may order the rates reduced in accordance with division (G) or (H)
above, as applicable. In addition, the Town Council may order the cable
operator to pay subscribers refunds of the excessive portion of the rates with
interest (computed at applicable rates published by the Internal Revenue
Service for tax refunds and additional tax payments), retroactive to September
1, 1993. The method for paying any refund and the interest rate will be in
accordance with FCC regulations as directed in the Town Council’s decision
resolution.
   (K)   Statement of reasons for decision and public notice. If rates proposed
by cable operator are disapproved in whole or in part, or if there were
objectives made by other parties to the proposed rates, the resolution must
state the reasons for the decision and the Town Council must give the public
notice of its decision. Public notice will be given by advertisement once in a
newspaper of general circulation in the town.
   (L)   Appeal. The Town Council’s decision concerning rates for the basic
service tier or associated equipment may be appealed to the FCC in accordance
with applicable federal regulations.
(Prior Code, § 14-26)
§ 131.03 REVIEW OR REQUEST FOR INCREASE IN BASIC CABLE RATES.
   (A)   Notice. A cable operator in the town who wishes to increase the rates
for the basic service tier or associated equipment shall file a request with
the town and notify all subscribers at least 30 days before the cable operator
desires the increase to take effect. This notice may not be given more often
than annually and not until at least one year after the determination of the
initial basic cable rates.
   (B)   Expelled determination and public hearing.
      (1)   If the Town Council is able to expeditiously determine that the
cable operator’s rate increase request for basic cable service is within the
FCC’s reasonable rate standard, as determined by the applicable price cap, the
Town Council shall:
         (a)   Hold a public hearing at which interested persons may express
their views; and
         (b)   Act to approve the rate increase within 30 days from the date
the cable operator filed its request with the town.
      (2)   If the Town Council takes no action within 30 days from the date
the cable operator filed its request with the town, the proposed rates will go
into effect.
   (C)   Extended review period.
      (1)   If the Town Council is unable to determine whether the rate
increase is within the FCC’s reasonable rate standard based on the material
before it, or if the cable operator submits a cost-of-service showing, the Town
Council shall, by adoption of a formal resolution, invoke the following
additional periods of time, as applicable, to make a final determination:
         (a)   Ninety days if the Town Council needs more time to ensure that
the requested increase is within the FCC’s reasonable rate standard as
determined by the applicable price cap; and
         (b)   Ten days if the cable operator has submitted a cost-of-service
showing seeking to justify a rate increase above the applicable price cap.
      (2)   The proposed rate increase is tolled during the extended review
period.
      (3)   If the Town Council has not made a decision within the 90- or 150-
day period, the Town Council shall issue a brief written order at the end of
the period requesting the cable operator to keep accurate account of all
amounts received by reason of the proposed rate increase and on whose behalf
the amounts are paid.
   (D)   Public hearing. During the extended review period and before taking
action on the requested rate increase, the Town Council shall hold at least one
public hearing at which interested persons may express their views and record
objections.
   (E)   Objections. An interested person who wishes to make an objection to
the proposed rate increase may submit the objection in writing any time before
the decision resolution is adopted. In order for an objection to be made part
of the record, the objector must provide the Town Clerk with the objector’s
name and address.
   (F)   Delayed determination. If the Town Council is unable to make a final
determination concerning a requested rate increase within the extended time
period, the cable operator may put the increase into effect, subject to
subsequent refund if the Town Council after issues a decision disapproving any
portion of the increase.
   (G)   Price cap analysis. If a cable operator presents its request for a
rate increase as being in compliance with the FCC’s price cap, the Town Council
shall review the rate using the price cap analysis in accordance with the
standard form authorized by the FCC. Based on the Town Council’s findings, the
basic cable rates shall be established as follows:
      (1)   If the proposed basic cable rate increase is within the price cap
established by the FCC, the proposed rates shall become the new basic cable
rates; or
      (2)   If the proposed basic cable rate increase exceeds the price cap
established by the FCC, the Town Council shall disapprove the proposed rate
increase and order an increase that is in compliance with the price cap.
   (H)   Cost-of-service showings. If a cable operator submits a cost-of-
service showing in an attempt to justify a rate increase above the price cap,
the Town Council will review the submission pursuant to the FCC standards for
cost-of-service review. The Town Council may approve a rate increase above the
price cap if the cable operator makes the necessary showing; however, a cost-
of-service determination resting in rate below the price cap or below the cable
operator’s then current rate will prescribe the cable operator’s new rate.
   (I)   Decision. The Town Council’s decision concerning the requested rate
increase shall be adopted by formal resolution. If a rate increase proposed by
a cable operator is disapproved in whole or in part, or if objections were made
by other parties to the proposed rate increase, the resolution must state the
reasons for the decision. Objections may be made at the public hearing by a
person in writing at anytime before the decision resolution is adopted.
   (J)   Refunds.
      (1)   The Town Council may order refunds of subscribers’ rate payments
with interest if:
         (a)   The Town Council was unable to make a decision within the
extended time period as described in division (C) above;
         (b)   The cable operator implemented the rate increase at the end of
the extended review period; and
         (c)   The Town Council determines that the rate increase as submitted
exceeds the applicable price cap or that the cable operator failed to justify
the rate increase by a cost-of-service showing, and the Town Council
disapproves any portion of the rate increase.
      (2)   The method for paying any refund and the interest rate will be in
accordance with FCC regulations as directed in the Town Council’s decision
resolution.
   (K)   Appeal. The Town Council’s decision concerning rates for the basic
service tier or associated equipment may be appealed to the FCC in accordance
with applicable federal regulations.
(Prior Code, § 14-26)
§ 131.04 CABLE OPERATOR INFORMATION.
   (A)   Requirements. The town may require:
      (1)   In those cases when the cable operator has submitted initial rate
standard, the Town Council may require the cable operator to produce
information in addition to that submitted, including proprietary information,
if needed, to make a rate determination. In these cases, a cable operator may
request the information be kept confidential in accordance with this section;
or
      (2)   In cases where initial or proposed rates comply with the reasonable
rate standard, the Town Council may request additional information only in
order to document that the cable operator’s rates are in accord with the
standard.
   (B)   Request for confidentiality.
      (1)   A cable operator submitting information to the Town Council may
request in writing that the information not be made routinely available for
public inspection. A copy of the request shall be attached to and cover all of
the information and all copies of the information to which it applies.
      (2)   If feasible, the information to which the request applies shall be
physically separate from any information to which the request does not apply.
If this is not feasible, the portion of the information to which the request
applies shall be identified.
      (3)   Each request shall contain a statement of the reasons for
withholding inspection and a statement of the facts upon which those reasons
are based.
      (4)   Casual requests which do not comply with the requirements of this
division (B) shall not be considered.
   (C)   Town Council action. Requests which comply with the requirements of
division (B) above will be acted upon by the Town Council. The Town Council
will grant the request if the cable operator presents, by a preponderance of
the evidence, a case for nondisclosure consistent with applicable federal
regulations. If the request is granted, the ruling will be placed in a public
file in lieu of the information withheld from the public inspection. If the
request does not present a case for nondisclosure and the Town Council denies
the request, the Town Council shall take one of the following actions:
      (1)   If the information has been submitted voluntarily without any
direction from the town, the cable operator may request that the town return
the information without considering it. Ordinarily, the town will comply with
this request. Only in the unusual instance that the public interest so requires
will the information be made available for public inspection; or
      (2)   If the information was required to be submitted by the Town
Council, the information will be made available for public inspection.
   (D)   Appeal. If the town denies the request for confidentially, the cable
operator may seek review of that decision from the FCC within five working days
of the Town Council’s decision, and the release of the information will be
stayed pending review.
(Prior Code, § 14-26)
§ 131.05 AUTOMATIC RATE ADJUSTMENTS.
   (A)   Annual inflation adjustment. In accordance with FCC regulations, the
cable operator may adjust its capped base per channel rate for the basic
service tier annually with the final GNP-PI index.
   (B)   Other external costs.
      (1)   The FCC regulations also allow the cable operator to increase its
rate for the basic service tier automatically to reflect certain external cost
factors to the extent that the increase in cost of those factors exceed the
GNP-PI. The factors include retransmission’s consent fees, programming cost,
state and local taxes applicable to the provision of cable television service,
and costs of franchise requirements. The total cost of an increase in a
franchise fee may be automatically added to the base per channel rate, without
regard to its relation to the GNP-PI.
      (2)   For all categories of external costs other than retransmission’s
consent and franchise fees, the starting date for measuring changes in external
costs for which the basic service per channel rate may be adjusted will be the
date on which the basic service tier becomes subject to regulation or February
28, 1994, whichever occurs first. The permitted per channel charge may not be
adjusted for costs of retransmission’s consent fees or changes in those fees
incurred before October 6, 1994.
   (C)   Notification and review. The cable operator shall notify the town at
least 30 days in advance of a rate increase based on automatic adjustment
items. The town shall review the increase to determine whether the time or
items qualify as automatic adjustments. If the town makes no objection within
30 days of receiving notice of the increase, the increase may go into effect.
(Prior Code, § 14-26)
§ 131.06 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Refunds. The town may order the cable operator to refund to
subscribers a portion of previously paid rates under the following
circumstances:
      (1)   A portion of the previously paid rates have been determined to be
in excess of the permitted tier charge or above the actual cost of equipment;
or
      (2)   The cable operator has failed to comply with a valid rate order
issued by the town.
   (B)   Fines. If the cable operator fails to comply with a rate decision or
refund order, the cable operator shall be subject to a fine of $500 for each
day the cable operator fails to comply.
(Prior Code, § 14-26)
CHAPTER 132: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Section
   
132.01   Adoption of state criminal code
   
132.02   Assault
   
132.03   Assaulting, resisting or interfering with public official or police
officer
   
132.04   Prohibition of drinking on streets
   
132.05   Open containers on streets prohibited
   
132.06   Curfew of certain minors
   
132.07   Removing or damaging monuments or signs
   
132.08   Disorderly conduct prohibited
   
132.09   Discharging firearms
   
132.10   Gambling
   
132.11   Maintaining gambling house and the like
   
132.12   Betting horse races, games and the like
   
132.13   Loitering; police order to disperse
   
132.14   Mosquitoes
   
132.15   Noises disturbing the peace
   
132.16   Sound producing devices
   
132.17   Distributing, printing and selling obscene literature
   
132.18   Posting, advertising, signs or writing on public or private property
   
132.19   Scattering or spilling material on streets
   
132.20   Removing soil and the like
   
132.21   Trespassing
   
132.22   Weapons generally
   
132.23   Beach lighting
   
132.24   Franchise fee for filming
   
132.25   Alcohol defined
   
132.26   Commercial establishments that sell alcohol
   
132.27   Refusal to vacate
   
132.28   Sleeping, camping and settling in public places prohibited
   
132.29   Injuring, damaging or destroying property
   
132.30   Filming
   
132.31   Use and distribution of single-use plastic bags, plastic straws,
polystyrene coolers, polystyrene food containers or cups
 
   
132.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   CD and RC-1 Zoning Districts, see
Chapter 157, App. A
   Nuisances, see
Chapter 92
§ 132.01 ADOPTION OF STATE CRIMINAL CODE.
   All acts or conduct violating the common law and the statutory law of the
state, as set forth in the Code of Laws of South Carolina, which occur within
the territorial jurisdiction of the town and the punishment of which is within
the jurisdiction of the Municipal Court, are hereby declared unlawful.
(Prior Code, § 14-1) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.02 ASSAULT.
   No person shall attempt or offer with unlawful force or violence to do
bodily harm to another person, whether or not the attempt or offer is
consummated.
(Prior Code, § 14-2) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.03 ASSAULTING, RESISTING OR INTERFERING WITH PUBLIC OFFICIAL OR POLICE
OFFICER.
   No person shall assault, resist, hinder, oppose, molest or interfere with
any officer or employee of the town, of any department or board of the town or
of any officer or employee of the Police Department in the discharge of
official duties.
(Prior Code, § 14-3) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.04 PROHIBITION OF DRINKING ON STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drink beer, wine or alcoholic liquors
on the streets and sidewalks within the town.
(Prior Code, § 14-4) (Ord. passed 8-18-1975) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.05 OPEN CONTAINERS ON STREETS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to have open containers of beer, wine or
alcoholic liquors on the streets and sidewalks within the town.
(Prior Code, § 14-5) (Ord. passed 8-18-1975) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.06 CURFEW OF CERTAIN MINORS.
   (A)   Generally. It shall be unlawful for a minor under the age of 17 years
to remain, to stay unnecessarily upon or to loiter on the streets, beaches or
parks of the town between 11:00 p.m. and the following 5:00 a.m., unless he or
she is accompanied by a parent or other responsible person; provided that this
section shall not be held to restrict minors from using the streets and public
places during said hours while actually in the process of going to or coming
from places of business or amusement otherwise.
   (B)   Exceptions. That curfew established by this section does not apply to
a minor who is:
      (1)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;
      (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      (4)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
      (5)   Involved in an emergency;
      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
police department about the minor’s presence;
      (7)   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the town, a civic organization,
or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to
or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school,
religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by
the town, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor;
      (8)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or
      (9)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed
in accordance with state law.
(Prior Code, § 14-6) (Ord. passed 8-21-1972) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.07 REMOVING OR DAMAGING MONUMENTS OR SIGNS.
   No person shall willfully remove, destroy, mutilate, damage or deface in any
way or to any extent, any monument or sign in, on or upon any public park,
street or other public or private property of the town.
(Prior Code, § 14-7) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.08 DISORDERLY CONDUCT PROHIBITED.
   (A)   A person shall be guilty of disorderly conduct if, with the purpose of
causing public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, or if his or her conduct is
likely to cause public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, he or she willfully
does any of the following acts in a public place or within public view:
      (1)   Commits an act in a violent and tumultuous manner toward another
whereby that other is placed in danger of his or her life, limb or health;
      (2)   Commits an act in violent and tumultuous manner toward another
whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or
damaged;
      (3)   Causes, provokes or engages in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct
so as to endanger the life, health or property of another;
      (4)   Interferes with another’s pursuit of a lawful occupation by acts of
violence;
      (5)   Obstructs, either singly or together with other persons, the flow
of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear such public way when
ordered to do so by police or other lawful authority known to be such;
      (6)   Incites, attempts to incite or is involved in attempting to incite
a riot;
      (7)   Addresses abusive language or threats to any police officer, any
other authorized official of the town who is engaged in the lawful performance
of his or her duties, or any other person when such words have a direct
tendency to cause acts of violence. Words merely causing displeasure, annoyance
or resentment are not prohibited;
      (8)   Makes or causes to be made any loud, boisterous and unreasonable
noise or disturbance to the annoyance of any other persons nearby, or near to
any public highway, road, street, lane, alley, park, square or common, whereby
the public peace is broken or disturbed, or the public annoyed;
      (9)   Is in a public place under the influence of an intoxicating liquor
or drug in such a condition as to be unable to exercise care for his or her own
safety or the safety of others;
      (10)   Resists or obstructs the performance of duties by any police
officer or any other authorized official of the town, when known to be such an
official;
      (11)   Damages, befouls or disturbs public property or the property of
another so as to create a hazardous, unhealthy or physically offensive
condition;
      (12)   Makes or causes to be made any loud, boisterous or unreasonable
noise or disturbance to annoy other persons nearby, or near to any public
highway, road, street, lane, alley, park, square, or common, whereby the public
peace is broken or disturbed or the traveling public annoyed;
      (13)   Assembles or congregates with another or others for the purpose of
or with the intent to engage in gaming;
      (14)   Frequents any public place with intent to obtain money from other
persons by illegal and fraudulent schemes, tricks and artifices or devices;
      (15)   Assembles with any person for the purpose of engaging in any
fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain any valuable thing in any place or
from any person in the town, or who shall aid or abet therein;
      (16)   Is at any place where gaming or the illegal or possession of
alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs is practiced, allowed or
tolerated;
      (17)   Fails to obey a lawful order to disperse by a police officer, when
known to be such an official, where one or more persons are committing acts of
disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity, and the public health and safety
is imminently threatened; and/or
      (18)   Any person who shall use “fighting words or gestures” directed
towards any other person who becomes outraged and thus creates turmoil.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or excrete in a public
place or within public view and any person so doing shall be guilty of
disorderly conduct.
   (C)   This section shall not be construed to suppress the right to lawful
assembly, picketing, public speaking or other lawful means of expressing public
opinion not in contravention of other laws.
   (D)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      INCITE A RIOT. Includes, but is not limited to, urging or instigating
other persons to riot, but shall not be deemed to mean the mere oral or written
advocacy of ideas or expression of belief, not involving advocacy of any act or
acts of violence or assertion of the rightness of, or the right to commit, any
such act or acts.
      RIOT. A public disturbance involving an act or acts of violence by one or
more persons, part of an assemblage of three or more persons, which act or acts
shall constitute a clear and present danger of, or shall result in, damage or
injury to the property of any other person a threat or threats of the
commission of an act or acts of violence by one or more persons part of an
assemblage of three or more persons having, individually or collectively, the
ability of immediate execution of such threat or threats, when the performance
of the threatened act or acts of violence would constitute a clear and present
danger of, or would result in, damage or injury to the property of any other
person or to the person of any other individual.
(Prior Code, § 14-8) (Ord. passed 8-17-2010) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.09 DISCHARGING FIREARMS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to fire a gun or pistol or other firearm
within the town, unless the same be on occasion of some military parade or
celebration, and then only by order of some person having command.
(Prior Code, § 14-9) (Ord. passed 8-5-1936) Penalty, see §
132.99
Cross-reference:
   Carrying weapons and the like on person, see §
132.22
Statutory reference:
   Discharging firearms on or near street or highway, see S.C. Code § 23-13-70
§ 132.10 GAMBLING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to participate or engage in any device
of gaming whatever in any building, street, park, lot or public way within the
town.
(Prior Code, § 14-10) (Ord. passed 3-18-2007) Penalty, see §
132.99
Statutory reference:
   Gambling and lotteries generally, see S.C. Code §§ 16-19-10 to 16-19-200
§ 132.11 MAINTAINING GAMBLING HOUSE AND THE LIKE.
   No person shall open, keep or maintain any gaming house in any building or
structure within the town, or permit any description of gaming or playing any
game of chance or skill for money, goods, chattels or other things whatever.
(Prior Code, § 14-11) (Ord. passed 3-18-2007) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.12 BETTING HORSE RACES, GAMES AND THE LIKE.
   It shall be unlawful to bet in or sell a pool within the town upon any horse
races, boat races, foot races, baseball or other games.
(Prior Code, § 14-12) (Ord. passed 3-18-2007) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.13 LOITERING; POLICE ORDER TO DISPERSE.
   (A)   No person shall loiter, loaf, wander, stand or remain idle either
alone and/or consort with others in a public place in such manner so as to:
      (1)   Obstruct any public street, public highway or any other public
place or building by hindering or impeding or tend to hinder or impede the free
and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians; or
      (2)   Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public
sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing which is an
obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property or
with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting
on any such public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public
place or building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress,
egress and regress, therein, thereon and thereto.
   (B)   When any person causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated in
division (A) above, a police officer shall order that person to stop causing or
committing such conditions and to move on or disperse. Any person who fails or
refuses to obey such orders shall be guilty of a violation of this section.
(Prior Code, § 14-13) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.14 MOSQUITOES.
   It shall be unlawful for any lot owner or tenant thereof to have and keep
within the town any cistern, tank or other receptacle for holding rain water,
unless the same be covered or screened sufficiently to prevent mosquitoes from
entering or breeding therein or escaping therefrom.
(Prior Code, § 14-14) (Ord. passed 3-14-2010) Penalty, see §
132.99
Cross-reference:
   Filling and draining of low lots, see
Chapter 154
§ 132.15 NOISES DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to create, assist in creating,
permit, continue or permit the continuance of any unreasonably loud or
disturbing noise in the municipality except as expressly allowed pursuant to
division (E) below. The following are declared to be loud or disturbing noises
in violation of this section, but such acts shall not be deemed to be
exclusive.
      (1)   Except as required by law, no person shall blow or cause to be
blown within the municipality any steam whistle, electric horn, or other
signaling or warning device, except as alarm signals in case of fire or
collision or other imminent danger.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful to keep, stable, harbor or maintain any animal
or bird which disturbs the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity by
making continually or frequently loud noise.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful to use, maintain or operate loudspeakers,
sound trucks, amplifiers or other mechanical or electrical devices for
increasing the volume of sound upon the street, sidewalks, parks or other
public places of the town, except as permitted under division (E) below.
      (4)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make any noise on a public
street or in such proximity thereto as to be distinctly and loudly audible on
such street by any kind of crying, calling or shouting or by means of any
whistle, rattle, bell, gong, clapper, horn, hammer, drum, musical instrument or
other device for the purpose of attracting attention or of inviting patronage
of any persons to any business whatsoever. It is the express intention of this
division (A)(4) to prohibit hawking, peddling, soliciting or using other loud
noises to attract attention to a business and not to prohibit the spill-over
noise emanating from a lawfully operating business.
      (5)   It shall be unlawful to play any radio, hi-fi, stereo system,
phonograph, C.D. player, piccolo, television or any musical instrument in such
manner or with such unreasonably loud volume as to disturb any person, or to
play such instrument in such a manner as to disturb the quiet, comfort or
repose of any person in any dwelling or other residence.
      (6)   It shall be unlawful to use any automobile, motorcycle or other
vehicle in such a state of disrepair, or so loaded, or used or repaired in such
a manner as to create loud or disturbing noises, particularly grating,
grinding, rattling, riveting or other disturbing noises.
      (7)   It shall be unlawful to discharge into the open air the exhaust
from any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat
engine, motorcycle or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device
which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
      (8)   It shall be unlawful to create any excessive noise on any street
adjacent to any school, institution of learning, library, or court, while the
same is in session, or adjacent to any church during church services, which
interferes with the work or worship at any such place or institution.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, entity or establishment to play,
operate or cause to be played or operated, any radio, amplified musical
instrument (including, but not limited to, brass or drum instruments), or other
amplification device or apparatus making or reproducing musical or other sounds
after 10:00 p.m. and before 10:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and after 11:00
p.m. and before 10:00 a.m. Friday and Saturday in such a manner as to be
plainly audible in any street or right-of-way.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or use any piledrivers,
steam shovels, pneumatic hammers, derricks, steam or electric hoists, or other
apparatus, the use of which is attended with loud or disturbing noises, between
the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful to use, maintain or operate loudspeakers, sound
trucks, amplifiers or other mechanical or electrical devices for increasing the
volume of sound, upon the streets, sidewalks, parks or other public places of
the town except as provided under division (E) below; provided that nothing in
this section shall apply to the United States of America, the state, the county
nor the town, nor to public agencies.
   (E)   (1)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, on
application to, and approval by the Chief of Police, written permits may be
granted to broadcast programs of music, speeches, general entertainment or
announcements as a part of and incidental to community celebrations of
national, state or town occasions, public festivals or other public interest
events, upon the public parks, public right-of-ways or other public land of the
town, state or county, provided traffic on the streets is not obstructed by
reason thereof.
      (2)   In determining whether or not to issue such a permit, the Chief of
Police shall weigh the public interests in the event against the noise and
disturbance anticipated to be created by the event and must consider the
intensity and duration of the noise and the area that will likely be effected.
The language or content emanating from the event shall not be considered.
   (F)   None of the foregoing prohibitions shall apply to or be enforced
against:
      (1)   Any vehicle of the town while engaged in necessary public business;
      (2)   Excavations or repairs of bridges, streets or highways, by or on
behalf of the town, county or state during the night, when the public welfare
and convenience renders it impossible to perform that work during the day; nor
shall the same apply to work performed by public utility companies under like
conditions and circumstances, or when there is urgent necessity therefor; or
      (3)   The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of
public addresses which are noncommercial in character.
   (G)   It shall be unlawful for any person to yell, shout, hoot, whistle or
sing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:
00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or
repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, or other type of
residence, or of any persons in the vicinity.
(Prior Code, § 14-15) (Ord. passed 8-20-2002; Ord. passed 7-20-2010) Penalty,
see §
132.99
§ 132.16 SOUND PRODUCING DEVICES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to create, assist in creating,
permit, continue or permit the continuance of any unreasonably loud or
disturbing noises on any lands occupied by a retail establishment. RETAIL
ESTABLISHMENT is defined as a commercial business where food, drinks,
merchandise, apparel, drugs or food products are sold to the general public.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any real property where a retail
establishment exists: to create, assist in creating, permit, continue or permit
the continuance of the blowing of any steam whistles, electric horns or other
signaling or warning device; to operate loud speakers, sound trucks, amplifiers
or other mechanical or electrical devices for increasing the volume of sound;
to cause loud noises by way of a whistle, rattle, bell, gong, clapper, horn,
hammer, drum, musical instrument, the playing of any radio, hi-fi, stereo
system, phonograph, C.D. player, piccolo or amplified musical instruments or
any brass or drum instrument, or any other amplification device or apparatus
making or reproducing musical or other sounds.
   (C)   Provided, however, nothing herein shall prohibit any person or
establishment operating a retail business from playing any radio, television,
hi-fi, stereo system, phonograph, C.D. player, piccolo, or any musical
instruments with or without amplification within an enclosed building while the
doors and windows are closed, so long as the sounds generated by such playing
cannot be heard by the average person 100 yards from the retail establishment’s
property.
   (D)   Prohibitions contained in this section are in addition to the
prohibitions contained in §
132.15.
(Prior Code, § 14-16) (Ord. passed 8-20-2002) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.17 DISTRIBUTING, PRINTING AND SELLING OBSCENE LITERATURE.
   (A)   Whoever knowingly exhibits, prints, publishes, sells, offers for sale
or distributes any book, pamphlet, picture, printed paper or other thing
containing any obscene picture, figure or description, as defined by the laws
of this state, tending to the corruption of the morals of youth, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (B)   As used in this section OBSCENE means that to the average person,
applying contemporary standards, the predominant appeal of the matter, taken as
a whole, is to prurient interest among which is a shameful or morbid interest
in nudity, sex or excretion, and which goes substantially beyond customary
limits of candor in description or representation of such matters. If it
appears from the character of the material or the circumstances of its
dissemination that the subject matter is to be distributed to minors under 16
years of age, predominant appeal shall be judged with reference to such class
of minors.
(Prior Code, § 14-17) (Ord. passed 3-18-1968) Penalty, see §
132.99
Statutory reference:
   Obscenity, see S.C. Code §§ 16-15-150 et seq.
§ 132.18 POSTING, ADVERTISING, SIGNS OR WRITING ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No person shall post, placard, attach or in any manner place any poster,
bill, placard, sign or other advertising device or stamp, print or mark any
writing upon land, buildings, structure or property of any kind within the
town, for any purpose whatsoever, without the consent of the owner of such
land, buildings, structure or other property, or of the public authority in
charge of the same.
(Prior Code, § 14-18) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.19 SCATTERING OR SPILLING MATERIAL ON STREETS.
   Any person who shall scatter or spill, or shall permit any car, wagon or
truck which he or she is driving, or of which he or she has charge, to scatter
or spill material of any kind on any street or road of the town shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 14-19) (Ord. passed 9- -1951) Penalty, see §
132.99
Cross-reference:
   Putting garbage on street, see §
91.17
§ 132.20 REMOVING SOIL AND THE LIKE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to take or remove any sands, earth, or
soil from the streets, ways or beaches of the town without the permission of
the Committee on Streets and Maintenance of the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 14-20) (Ord. passed 4-27-2006) Penalty, see §
132.99
Cross-reference:
   Filling and draining low lots, see
Chapter 154
§ 132.21 TRESPASSING.
   (A)   No person shall enter upon any lot or premises in the town without the
consent of the owner or custodian of such lot or premises.
   (B)   All persons entering upon such lots or premises shall be presumed to
have entered without the consent of the owners or custodians of such lots or
premises unless the Chief of Police or Assistant Chief shall have been notified
by such owners or custodians regarding the rights of such persons to be upon
such lots or premises.
   (C)   No person shall neglect or refuse to depart from the property of
another when ordered to do so by the owner, occupant or any other person with
authority to order such departure.
(Prior Code, § 14-21) (Ord. passed 4-27-2006) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.22 WEAPONS GENERALLY.
   (A)   Any person having in his or her possession a pistol, rifle, shot gun,
dirk, slingshot, metal knuckles, razor or other deadly weapon usually used for
the infliction of personal injury, either concealed or unconcealed, about his
or her person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof,
shall forfeit to the town the weapon so possessed, concealed or unconcealed,
and be subject to the penalty provided by §
10.99.
   (B)   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to apply to
persons possessing or carrying weapons on their own premises, or carrying or
transporting unloaded weapons for hunting during the hunting season, designated
by law, or to peace officers in actual discharge of their duties as such, or to
persons possessing or carrying weapons on military duty, parade or celebration
by order of a commanding officer.
(Prior Code, § 14-22) (Ord. passed 8-5-1936)
Cross-reference:
   Discharge of firearms in town, see §
132.09
Statutory reference:
   Carrying concealed weapons, see S.C. Code § 16-23-460
§ 132.23 BEACH LIGHTING.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ARTIFICIAL LIGHT. Any source of light emanating from a human-made device
external to or outside of a house or structure that may be visible from the
beach area designated as a protected area for sea turtle nesting.
      BEACH. Area between the dune line or line of stable vegetation, whichever
is more landward, and the mean low water line.
      EXISTING DEVELOPMENT. Any structure for which a building permit has been
issued by the town prior to the effective date of this section.
      FLOODLIGHTS. Reflector type light fixture which is attached directly to a
building and which is unshielded.
      LOW PROFILE LUMINARIES. Light fixture set on a base which raises the
source of the light no higher than 48 inches off the ground, and designed in
such a way that light is directed downward from a hooded light source.
      NESTING SEASON. Nesting season will be observed from May 15 until October
31.
      NEW DEVELOPMENT. Any new construction and remodeling of existing
structures when such remodeling includes alteration of exterior lighting.
   (B)   Restrictions.
      (1)   New development. No artificial light shall be allowed to illuminate
the beach during nesting season between Station 12 the Breach Inlet Bridge,
unless such artificial light satisfies the following provisions:
         (a)   Floodlights shall be prohibited. Wall mounted light fixtures
shall be yellow bug lights or low pressure sodium bulbs fitted with hoods so
that no light illuminates the beach.
         (b)   Pole lighting shall be shielded in such a way that light will be
contained within an arc of three to 73 degrees on seaward side of the pole.
Outdoor lighting shall be held to the minimum necessary for security and
convenience.
         (c)   Low profile luminaries shall be used in parking lots and such
lighting shall be positioned so that no light illuminates the beach.
         (d)   Dune crosswalks shall utilize low profile shielded luminaries.
         (e)   Light on balconies shall be fitted with hoods so that lights
will not illuminate the beach.
         (f)   Tinted or filmed glass shall be used in windows facing the ocean
above the first floor of multi-story structures. Shade screens can be
substituted for this requirement.
      (2)   Existing development between Station 12 and Station 28-1/2. No
artificial light shall be allowed to illuminate the beach during nesting
season, unless such artificial light satisfies the following provisions.
         (a)   Lights illuminating building or associated grounds for
decorative or recreational purposes shall be shielded or screened such that
they are not visible from the beach, or turned off after 10:00 p.m. during the
period of May 15 to October 31 of each year.
         (b)   Lights illuminating dune crosswalks of any areas oceanward of
the dune line shall be turned off after 10:00 p.m. during the period of May 15
to October 31 of each year.
         (c)   Window treatments in windows facing the ocean above the first
floor of multi-story structures are encouraged so that interior lights do not
illuminate the beach. The use of black-out draperies or shade screens are
preferred. The addition of tint or film to windows or awnings is also
encouraged, as is turning off unnecessary lights if the light illuminates the
beach.
         (d)   Existing development must be brought into compliance with this
requirement within one year following the effective date of this section.
      (3)   Existing development between Station 28-1/2 and Breach Inlet.
Exterior lights must be equipped with motion detector sensors or changed to
yellow bug lights or low pressure sodium lights, as approved by SCCC and
SCWMRD. Existing development must be brought into compliance with this
requirement within one year following the effective date of this section. In
the event that the beach in this area is nourished or recovers naturally to the
extent that successful turtle nesting occurs, this provision shall be amended.
      (4)   Publicly owned lighting. Street lights and lighting at parks and
other publicly owned beach access areas shall be subject to the following.
         (a)   Whenever possible, street lights shall be located so that the
bulk of their illumination will travel away from the beach. These lights shall
be equipped with shades or shields that will prevent backlighting and render
them not visible from the beach.
         (b)   Lights at parks or other public beach access points shall be
shielded or shaded or shall not be utilized during the period of May 15 to
October 31 of each year.
      (5)   Lighthouse. Nothing herein shall prohibit the U.S. Coast Guard from
operating the lighthouse.
   (C)   Enforcement. Lighting restrictions shall be enforced during the
nesting season for sea turtles as defined:
      (1)   First offense: a warning shall be issued for a first offense of
this section; and
      (2)   Second offense: a second offense and any offense thereafter shall
be subject to the penalties prescribed by Chapter 157, Appendix A, § 21-57.
(Prior Code, § 14-23) (Ord. passed 12-20-1990; Ord. passed 1-21-1992; Ord.
passed 7-21-1992)
§ 132.24 FRANCHISE FEE FOR FILMING.
   The town imposes a permit fee of $500 per day for the filming of all, or
parts thereof, of major motion picture, made for television movies, and
national and regional commercials. All other types of filming, video taping and
still photography shall be subject to a permit fee of $250 per day. All
activities must be conducted within guidelines and requirements as set forth by
the town.
(Prior Code, § 14-25) (Ord. passed 1-19-1993; Ord. passed 9-23-1997)
§ 132.25 ALCOHOL DEFINED.
   Beer, ale, porter and wine shall be defined for the propose of this section
as stated in S.C. Code § 61-4-10, as amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 14-26.1) (Ord. passed 6-19-2001)
§ 132.26 COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS THAT SELL ALCOHOL.
   Commercial establishments which allow for the on-premise consumption of
beer, ale, porter and/or wine shall be prohibited from operating between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Mondays through Saturdays.
(Prior Code, § 14-26.2) (Ord. passed 6-19-2001)
§ 132.27 REFUSAL TO VACATE.
   Any person who is asked or told to vacate a commercial establishment as
defined in §
132.26 before 2:00 a.m. on Mondays through Saturdays and refuses to vacate,
such refusal shall constitute a violation of this section and shall constitute
a criminal offense and such person(s) shall be punishable by the Municipal
Court of the town or other court of competent jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 14-26.3) (Ord. passed 6-19-2001)
§ 132.28 SLEEPING, CAMPING AND SETTLING IN PUBLIC PLACES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall sleep, camp, settle, make preparations to sleep, camp
or settle on any publicly owned property within the town including, but not
limited to, beaches, sand dunes, parks, streets, rights-of-way, whether open or
unopened, or parking areas from sunset and sunrise.
   (B)   No person shall park any recreational vehicle or camper or any other
vehicle which was manufactured or converted for the purpose of allowing one to
camp or sleep on any public property within the town including, but not limited
to, beaches, sand dunes, parks, streets, rights-of-way, whether open or
unopened, or parking areas from sunset to sunrise.
(Prior Code, § 14-27) (Ord. passed 9-19-2000)
§ 132.29 INJURING, DAMAGING OR DESTROYING PROPERTY.
   (A)   The destruction, injuring, damaging, mutilation, unauthorized use,
trespass upon or removal of the property of another is hereby prohibited. It
shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, damage, mutilate or remove the
property of another.
   (B)   The following acts, among others, are declared to be in violation of
this section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
      (1)   Personal property. Any willful, unlawful and maliciously cutting,
shooting, maiming, wounding or other injuring of any personal property of
another person;
      (2)   Fixtures and real property. Any willful, unlawful and malicious
cutting, mutilating, defacing or other injuring of any tree, house, outside
fence or fixture of another, or the commission of any other trespass upon real
property in the possession of another;
      (3)   Municipal property. Unless authorized by town officials, the
removal, interference with, use, trespass upon or destruction of any town
property;
      (4)   Cemeteries. The damaging or defacing in any way whatever of any
well, pump, building, tombstone, seat, bench, chair, railing, enclosure, tree,
shrub, vine, bulb, flower or other thing placed, put or growing in any
cemetery;
      (5)   Grass plots, flowers and the like. Driving any animal or vehicle
along, on or across any grass plot in any street, public place or sidewalk, or
trampling, plucking, mutilating or injuring the grass, shrubs or flowers
planted or growing in such place; and
      (6)   Trees and shrubs. Cutting, scarring, mutilating, digging up or
otherwise injuring or destroying any trees or shrubs on the public streets or
in the parks of the town.
(Prior Code, § 14-33) (Ord. passed 7-20-2010) Penalty, see §
132.99
Statutory reference:
   Injuring property and the like, see S.C. Code §§ 16-11-510 et seq.
§ 132.30 FILMING.
   (A)   Use of public property for filming.
      (1)   Without an approved written permit from the town, it shall be
unlawful for any person or entity, to:
         (a)   Film, video-record, photograph or otherwise record any scenes,
sounds or actions while on any public property; or
         (b)   Use or obstruct any public property while filming on private
property.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to film, video-
record, photograph or otherwise record any scenes, sounds or actions in the RC-
1 Zoning District or on the beach.
   (B)   Exception. This section shall not apply to amateurs making
noncommercial films, videos or photographs where assisted by no more than one
other person; nor shall this section apply to the filming of news events by
accredited representatives of news agencies; nor shall this section apply to
film, video or photographic productions which are conducted or carried on
wholly for charitable purpose or from which no profit is derived, either
directly or indirectly.
   (C)   Business requirements.
      (1)   A film permit application is required for all commercial film
events.
      (2)   The film permit application fee is in addition to a business
license fee.
      (3)   The film permit application fee and business license fees are in
addition to any property use fees.
   (D)   Film permits.
      (1)   Request for permit. Any person or entity wishing to film, video-
record or photograph scenes or actions requiring a permit shall submit, in
writing, to the Town Administrator or his or her designee, not less than five
business days prior to filming, a request for a permit.
      (2)   Application review fee. The film permit application must be
accompanied by a non-refundable deposit of $50. Upon approval, an additional
$100 shall be paid to the town. The total $150 will compensate the town for
administrative and overhead costs to review the permit application and monitor
compliance with approved permits.
   (E)   Per-day permit fees. Review of the permit application will determine
the impact of the film operation on the town and consequent per-day permit
fees.
      (1)   Low impact film operation - cast, extras and crew up to 15: permit
fee $200 per day. Prep and strike days for film operation $100 per day.
      (2)   Medium impact film operation - cast, extras and crew 16 to 50:
permit fee $600 per day. Prep and strike days are $300 per day.
      (3)   High impact film operation - cast, extras and crew over 50: permit
fee $800 per day. Prep and strike days are $350 per day.
   (F)   Definitions.
      CHARITABLE FILMS. Any filming by a nonprofit organization, which
qualifies under § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code as a charitable
organization for which no person, directly or indirectly, shall receive a
profit from the marketing and production of the film or from showing the films,
tapes or photos.
      COMMERCIAL FILMS. Includes all activity attendant to filming any
entertainment or advertising programs for any media now known or hereafter
created.
      FILMING or FILM. Video-record, photograph or otherwise record any scenes
as used in this ordinance, means and includes all activity attendant to staging
or shooting motion pictures, television shows or programs, commercial still
photography, video recordings, computer-based programs or other visual
reproduction technology now known or hereafter created. The period of FILMING
includes the set-up, strike and time of photography.
      NEWS AGENCIES. Filming for the purpose of spontaneous, unplanned news
reporting by journalists, reporters, photographers or camera operators.
      PRIVATE PROPERTY. Any property not owned by the town on which filming
would not interfere with the public right-of-way, access or safety.
(Prior Code, § 14-34) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.31 USE AND DISTRIBUTION OF SINGLE-USE PLASTIC BAGS, PLASTIC STRAWS,
POLYSTYRENE COOLERS, POLYSTYRENE FOOD CONTAINERS OR CUPS.
   This section is adopted to improve the environment of the town by requiring
the use of reusable checkout bags and recyclable paper carryout bags and food
containers, banning the use of single-use plastic bags for retail checkout of
purchased goods, use of polystyrene food containers, polystyrene cups and
plastic straws. Further, to improve and maintain the pristine beach and ocean
environment of the town, single-use plastic bags, plastic straws, polystyrene
coolers and polystyrene food containers and cups will be prohibited in the CD
and RC-1 Zoning Districts.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires
otherwise.
      BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT. Any commercial enterprise that provides carryout
bags to its customers through its employees or independent contractors
associated with the business. The term includes sole proprietorships, joint
ventures, partnerships, corporations, or any other legal entity whether for
profit or not for profit. This term is inclusive of any store or business which
sells or offers goods or merchandise, located or operating within the town,
including those referenced as a food establishment or food provider.
      CARRYOUT BAG. A bag provided by a business establishment to a customer
typically at the point of sale for the purpose of transporting purchases.
      CUSTOMER. A person who purchases merchandise from a business
establishment.
      DISPOSABLE FOOD SERVICE WARE. Interchangeable with to go packaging and
food packaging material. Includes, but is not limited to: all containers,
clamshells, bowls, plates, trays, cartons, cups, straws, stirrers, napkins and
other items designed for onetime use associated with prepared foods, including
without limitation, service ware for takeout foods and/or leftovers from
partially consumed meals prepared by food providers.
      POLYSTYRENE/PLASTIC FOAM. Blown expanded and extruded polystyrene
(sometimes called Styrofoam) or other plastic foams which are processed by any
number of techniques including, but not limited to, fusion of monomer spheres
(expanded bead plastic), injection molding, foam molding, and extrusion-blown
molding (extruded foam plastic). POLYSTYRENE and other plastic foam is
generally used to make cups, bowls, plates, trays, clamshell containers, meat
trays, egg cartons, coolers, ice chests, shipping boxes, packing peanuts, and
beach or pool toys. The term POLYSTYRENE also includes clear or solid
polystyrene which is known as oriented polystyrene.
      REUSABLE CARRYOUT BAG. A carryout bag that is specifically designed and
manufactured for multiple reuse, and meets the following criteria:
         (a)   Displays in a highly visible manner on the bag exterior,
language describing the bag’s ability to be reused and recycled;
         (b)   Has a handle, except that handles are not required for carryout
bags constructed out of recyclable paper with a height of less than 14 inches
and width of less than eight inches; and
         (c)   Is constructed out of any of the following materials:
            1.   Cloth, other washable fabric, or other durable materials
whether woven or non-woven;
            2.   Recyclable plastic, with a minimum thickness of 2.25 mils; or
            3.   Recyclable paper.
      SINGLE-USE PLASTIC CARRYOUT BAG. A bag provided by a business
establishment to a customer typically at the point of sale for the purpose of
transporting purchases, which is made predominantly of plastic derived from
either petroleum or a biologically-based source. SINGLE-USE PLASTIC CARRYOUT
BAG includes compostable and biodegradable bags but does not include reusable
carryout bags.
      TOWN OF SULLIVAN’S ISLAND FACILITY (HEREAFTER “TOWN”). Any building,
structure, vehicle or property owned and operated or leased by the town, its
agents, agencies, departments or lessee.
   (B)   Regulations.
      (1)   No business establishment may provide single-use plastic carryout
bags or polystyrene products at any town facility, town-sponsored event, or any
event held on town property or on any town property;
      (2)   No business establishment within the town may provide single-use
carryout bags to its customers;
      (3)   Food providers within the town shall not provide food in any
disposable food service ware that contains polystyrene/plastic foam. All food
establishments within the town shall use recyclable or compostable products;
      (4)   Food providers within the town shall not use plastic straws;
      (5)   A business establishment within the town limits may provide or sell
reusable carryout bags to its customers or any person. Subject to hours of
operation and applicable regulations regarding the use of public property,
including those pertaining to solicitation and commercial activities on public
property, a person may provide or sell reusable carryout bags at any town
facility, town-sponsored event, or any event held on town property; and
      (6)   All single-use carry out plastic bags, plastic straws and
polystyrene/plastic foam products such as but not limited to cups, bowls,
plates, trays, clamshell containers, meat trays, egg cartons, coolers, ice
chests, are expressly prohibited from use on in the RC-1 Zoning District
commonly known as the beach or on any other town-owned properties.
   (C)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Products made from polystyrene/plastic foam which is wholly
encapsulated or encased by a more durable material are exempt from the
provisions of this section. Examples include surfboards, boats, life
preservers, and craft supplies which are wholly encapsulated or encased by a
more durable material, and durable coolers not principally composed of
polystyrene/plastic foam;
      (2)   Construction products made from polystyrene/plastic foam are
exempted from this section if the products are used in compliance with town
code and used in a manner preventing polystyrene/plastic foam from being
released into the environment;
      (3)   In an emergency situation and for the immediate preservation of the
public peace, health or safety, town facilities business establishments, food
vendors, contractors and other vendors doing business with and in the town
shall be exempt from the provisions of this section;
      (4)   Laundry dry cleaning bags, ice bags, door-hanger bags, newspaper
bags, or packages of multiple bags intended for use as garbage, pet waste, or
yard waste, although the town encourages the use of recyclable or compostable
products throughout;
      (5)   Bags provided by physicians, dentists, pharmacists, veterinarians
or other health care providers to contain prescription drugs or other medical
necessities;
      (6)   Bags used by a customer inside a business establishment to:
         (a)   Contain or wrap frozen foods, meat, or fish, whether or not
prepackaged;
         (b)    Contain or wrap flowers, potted plants or other items to
prevent moisture damage to other purchases; or
         (c)   Contain unwrapped prepared foods or bakery goods.
      (7)   Bags used by a non-profit corporation or other hunger relief
charity to distribute food, grocery products, clothing, or other household
items;
      (8)   Bags of any type that the customer brings to the store for their
own use for carrying away from the store goods that are not placed in a bag
provided by the store;
      (9)   Plastic drink lids and cutlery are exempt from the provisions of
this section; and
      (10)   Plastic straws are permitted for individuals with special needs.
   (D)   Requests for exemption.
         (1)   Town Council may exempt a food establishment or food provider
from the requirement set forth in this section for up to a one-year period upon
the provider showing, in writing, that this section would create an undue
hardship or practical difficulty not generally applicable to other business
establishments or persons in similar circumstances.
         (2)   Exemptions to allow for the provision of single-use carry out
bags or disposable food service ware may be granted by Town Council if the
business establishment or food provider can demonstrate in writing a public
health and safety requirement, medical necessity or that the product will not
damage the environment of the town.
         (3)   Town Council may approve the exemption application in whole or
in part, with or without conditions.
(Ord. 2018-06, passed 11-20-2018)
§ 132.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any owner, manager or employee of a commercial establishment which
allows for the on-premises consumption of beer, ale, porter and/or wine who
allows the commercial establishment to continue operations during the hours of
2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Mondays thorough Saturdays shall be in violation of
§
132.26 and the same shall constitute a criminal offense and such person(s)
shall be punishable by the Municipal Court of the town or other court of
competent jurisdiction. Each violation of §
132.26 shall subject the person so violating to a fine of $500 and/or 30 days
in jail.
(Prior Code, § 14-26.4)
   (C)   Any person violating any provision of §
132.21 shall be deemed a trespasser and, upon conviction, shall be punished as
provided by §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 14-21)
   (D)   Violators of the town’s permit required by §
132.24 shall be subject to the payment of required fees plus $500 per day, each
day being a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 14-25)
   (E)   Each violation of §
132.27 shall subject the person so violating to a fine of $500 and/or 30 days
in jail.
(Prior Code, § 14-26.3)
   (F)   Any persons violating any provision of §
132.28 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine
of up to $500 plus court costs or imprisonment for not more than 30 days or
both upon conviction.
(Prior Code, § 14-27)
   (G)   (1)   The Police Department has primary responsibility for enforcement
of §
132.31. The Police Department is authorized to take any and all other actions
reasonable and necessary to enforce §
132.31 including, but not limited to, investigating violations, issuing fines
and entering the premises of any business establishment during business hours.
However, any enforcement officer or official of the town, including Beach
Services Officers, and other Code Enforcement officials may enforce this
section.
         (2)   In addition to the penalties set forth in §
132.31, repeated violations of §
132.31 by a person who owns, manages, operates, is a business agent of, or
otherwise controls a business establishment may result in the suspension or
revocation of the business license issued to the premises on which the
violations occurred. No town business license shall be issued or renewed until
all fines outstanding against the applicant for violations of this section are
paid in full.
         (3)   Violation of §
132.31 is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated by the
town by restraining order, preliminary and permanent injunction, or other means
provided for by law, and the town may act to recover the costs of the nuisance
abatement.
         (4)   Any violation of the regulations provided in §
132.31 by any person or owner, manager, employee or representative of a
business establishment shall be punishable as a misdemeanor and by a fine of up
to $500, plus state assessments per day violation and/or a sentence of 30 days
in jail. Each day the violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ord. passed 1-19-1993; Ord. passed 9-23-1997; Ord. passed 9-19-2000; Ord.
passed 6-19-2001; Ord. passed 4-27-2006; Ord. 2018-06, passed 11-20-2018)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDINGS
      
151.   DWELLINGS AND DWELLING UNITS UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION
      
152.   STANDARDS FOR DWELLING UNITS FIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION
      
153.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
      
154.   FILLING AND DRAINING LOW LOTS
      
155.   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
      
156.   BEACHES
      
157.   ZONING
CHAPTER 150: BUILDINGS
Section
General Provisions
   
150.01   Fire limits
   
150.02   Prohibition of use of certain structures as living quarters
Official Codes
   
150.15   Building, plumbing and electrical codes adopted
   
150.16   Construction of certain terms of standard codes
   
150.17   Electrical installation; materials regulated
   
150.18   Fencing of pools required
   
150.19   Nonconforming pools; exceptions
   
150.20   Regulation of water-to-air heat pumps
Building Permits
   
150.35   Required
   
150.36   Application
   
150.37   New construction
   
150.38   Requirements
   
150.39   Fee for building and electrical permits
   
150.40   Display of permit
   
150.41   Business license fee to accompany application
   
150.42   Inspection of filling and drainage of building lots as prerequisite to
issuance of permit
Sign Permits
   
150.55   Sign or signboard defined
   
150.56   Applicability
   
150.57   Permit required to erect signs; prerequisite to issuance
 
   
150.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01 FIRE LIMITS.
   The fire limits of the town hereby are declared to include all office
commercial and general commercial districts, as defined in the town’s zoning
ordinance. Within the fire limits, structure shall be erected and maintained as
required by S.C. Code §§ 5-25-1110 through 5-25-1160, which hereby are adopted
by reference as a part of this section.
(Prior Code, § 5-1) (Ord. 2020-18, passed 11-17-2020)
Cross-reference:
   Fire protection generally, see
Chapter 93
Statutory reference:
   Authority of town to establish fire limits, see S.C. Code §§ 5-7-30, 5-25-20
and 5-25-1110
§ 150.02 PROHIBITION OF USE OF CERTAIN STRUCTURES AS LIVING QUARTERS.
   No camper, trailer, motor home, recreational or other vehicle, tent, shack,
garage, barn, outbuilding, basement or temporary structure of any kind shall be
occupied as living quarters in the town.
(Prior Code, § 5-2) (Ord. 2020-18, passed 11-17-2020) Penalty, see §
150.99
Cross-reference:
   Specific tanks being prohibited, see §
51.002
OFFICIAL CODES
§ 150.15 BUILDING, PLUMBING AND ELECTRICAL CODES ADOPTED.
   (A)   It is the desire of the Town Council to adopt, in all respects, the
various standard codes relating to building, fire prevention, gas, electrical,
housing, mechanical, plumbing and swimming pools.
   (B)   It is also the desire of the Town Council to adopt, for the purpose of
regulating the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving,
removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area or
maintenance of buildings, structures or their appurtenances in the town, the
following certain standard or technical codes, except such portions thereof as
conflict with or are deleted, modified or amended by this chapter or other
ordinances of the town.
   (C)   The adoption of these codes is done to facilitate proper inspection
activities by the town relating to construction and to maintenance of buildings
within the corporate limits of said town and relating to public safety, health
and general welfare.
   (D)   The following codes are hereby adopted by reference as though they
were copied herein fully:
      (1)   2018 South Carolina Code;
      (2)   2018 South Carolina Plumbing Code;
      (3)   2018 South Carolina Mechanical Code;
      (4)   2018 South Carolina Fuel Gas Code;
      (5)   2018 South Carolina Fire Code;
      (6)   2018 International Property Maintenance Code;
      (7)   2017 National Electric Code;
      (8)   2009 International Energy Code; and
      (9)   2018 South Carolina Residential Code.
   (E)   Certain documents, one copy of which is on file in the office of the
Building Official being marked and designated as International Residential
Code, including Appendix Chapters A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, J, K, and as may be
subsequently revised by the state’s Buildings Code Council as published by the
International Code Council and is hereby adopted as the code of the town for
regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection,
installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition
to, use or maintenance of one- and two-family dwellings not more than three
stories in height in the town and providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
conditions and terms of such International Residential Code, 2018 edition,
published by the International Code Council on file in the office of the
Building Official are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if
fully set out in this chapter.
   (F)   This chapter and the rules, regulations, provisions, requirements,
orders and matters established and adopted hereby shall take effect and be in
full force and effect July 1, 2002 from and after the date of its final passage
and ratification.
   (G)   The Town Clerk shall maintain in the Town Hall for inspection and use
by the interested public not less than one copy of each of said codes. Said
codes shall have the same force and effect as if fully set forth and adopted in
the general code of laws of the town, and all provisions thereof, except as
deleted, modified or amended by this chapter or other ordinances of the town
shall apply to new construction or any repairs or renovations hereafter made.
   (H)   Within said codes, when reference is made to the duties of certain
officials named therein, that designated official in the town who has duties
corresponding to those of the named official in said code shall be deemed to be
the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code are
concerned.
(Prior Code, § 5-4) (Ord. passed 1-16-1984; Ord. passed 11-7-1989; Ord. passed
12-19-1995; Ord. passed 7-17-2001; Ord. passed 7-18-2002; Ord. 2020-18, passed
11-17-2020)
State reference:
   Authority to adopt standard codes by reference, see S.C. Code § 5-7-280
§ 150.16 CONSTRUCTION OF CERTAIN TERMS OF STANDARD CODES.
   (A)   Whenever the term “municipality” is used in codes adopted pursuant to
this chapter, it shall be held to mean the Town of Sullivan’s Island.
   (B)   Whenever the words “applicable governing body” or “chief appointing
authority” are used in said codes, they shall be held to mean the Town Council
of Sullivan’s Island.
   (C)   Whenever the words “inspector” or “approving authority” are used in
said codes, they shall be held to mean the Building Inspector and where zoning
is involved, they also shall include the Zoning Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 5-5)
§ 150.17 ELECTRICAL INSTALLATION; MATERIALS REGULATED.
   The installation of aluminum wire, conductors or cables in the town is
hereby declared unlawful. In all installations of wiring and circuitry
hereafter, copper wiring and cabling shall be used.
(Prior Code, § 5-6) (Ord. passed 5-15-1972) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.18 FENCING OF POOLS REQUIRED.
   All pools, swimming or other, in the town shall henceforth be surrounded by
a cyclone or equivalent substantial fence no less than four feet in height,
which fence shall be on or within the boundary line of the lot wherein the pool
is located. Provided, however, that two or more sides of the pool may be
surrounded by the walls of a building or buildings in lieu of a fence if the
building is no less than eight feet in height.
(Prior Code, § 5-7) (Ord. passed 7-26-1973; Ord. passed 6-24-1994)
§ 150.19 NONCONFORMING POOLS; EXCEPTION.
   Any existing pool which does not conform to this subchapter at the time that
this subchapter becomes effective, but which heretofore has been approved by
the Town Council or its predecessor, shall be considered lawful. Any other
existing pool shall be lawful for 90 days after the enactment of this
subchapter and shall thereafter be brought into compliance with this
subchapter.
Prior Code, § 5-8) (Ord. passed 7-26-1973)
§ 150.20 REGULATION OF WATER-TO-AIR HEAT PUMPS.
   Owners of water-to-air heat pumps shall be required to return discharged
water to the town’s water table by means of a sprinkler system, a tile field or
a series of dry wells. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge such
water into the town’s drainage or sewer systems.
(Prior Code, § 5-8.1) Penalty, see §
150.99
BUILDING PERMITS
§ 150.35 REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to erect, construct, improve, alter or repair any
building, sign or other structure or any part thereof or alter any parcel of
land in preparation of such erection, construction, improvement or repair
without first having obtained from the Building Inspector a written permit for
such erection, construction, improvement, alteration or repair, pursuant to the
provisions of this subchapter. Additionally, no permit shall be issued unless
the property meets all requirements contained in
Chapter 155 of this code.
   (B)   It shall likewise be unlawful to maintain any erection, construction,
improvement, alteration, or repair of any building, structure, or part thereof
or alter any parcel of land in preparation of such erection, construction,
improvement or repair without first having obtained the written permit here
required.
(Prior Code, § 5-9) (Ord. passed 9-18-2007) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.36 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Application for a building permit shall be made in writing to the
Building Inspector or his or her designated representative at the Town Hall on
a form or forms approved and furnished by said Inspector. For the convenience
of the public and efficiency in administration, the Zoning Administrator may
combine said building permit application form with application forms for
zoning, use or other town permits, may provide spaces thereon for endorsement
or approval by other town officers or officials, and may require two or more
copies of said form to be filed by the applicant.
   (B)   Plans and specifications adequately describing the proposed erection,
construction, improvement, alteration or repair shall be submitted with the
application which shall set forth the approximate cost, supported by bids or
detailed estimates, if requested by the Inspector.
   (C)   For property that lies in whole or in part seaward of the SCCC 40-year
setback line, plans submitted with the application for a building permit must
show the location of the SCCC baseline, the SCCC 40-year setback line, and any
other SCCC jurisdictional lines established in the field by SCCC staff. Any
proposed erection, construction, improvement, alteration or repair seaward of
the SCCC 40-year setback line must be in compliance with SCCC regulations. The
applicant must include with the application written SCCC approval for the
activity, where such approval is required by SCCC regulations.
(Prior Code, § 5-10) (Ord. passed 4-6-1938; Ord. passed 1-21-1992)
§ 150.37 NEW CONSTRUCTION.
   When the Town Clerk received an application in writing for a building
permit, stating that a new building or structure is contemplated, she shall
immediately forward the application to the Building Inspector and Zoning
Administrator, together with a plot plan, to be furnished by the applicant,
showing the location of the proposed structure on the lot and the floor plan
and elevation of said structure, and full compliance with
Chapter 157, Appendix A, § 21-28 of this code.
(Prior Code, § 5-11) (Ord. passed 8-16-1988)
§ 150.38 REQUIREMENTS.
   The following are requirements for construction and improvements for which a
permit and/or a business license are required. A signed copy of this document
must accompany all applications for a business license.
   (A)   The contractor or owner acting as the contractor will be solely
responsible for the enforcement of these guidelines among all workers and
subcontractors on the job site and areas adjoining the job site.
   (B)   Construction hours apply to all contractors, sub-contractors,
landscapers, suppliers and vendors.
      (1)   8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday.
      (2)   10:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Saturday.
      (3)   No work will be allowed on Sundays and the following holidays:
         (a)   January 1 - New Year’s Day;
         (b)   Memorial Day (last Monday in May);
         (c)   July 4 - Independence Day;
         (d)   Labor Day (first Monday in September);
         (e)   Thanksgiving Day (fourth Thursday in November); and
         (f)   December 25 - Christmas Day.
      (4)   (Exception) Approval for performing emergency repairs may be
granted for working outside of the hours as stated above. A home owner or
members of their immediate family may perform maintenance or work on their own
property at any time provided all other town ordinances are being adhered to.
       (5)   (Exception) Notwithstanding the above, approval for work outside
of the construction hours set forth above may be granted by the Chair of the
Public Facilities Committee and the Town Administrator for construction by or
for the benefit of federal, state, county, town or governmental agencies to
promote public safety or the public interest.
   (C)   Silt fencing must be installed on all property lines for new
construction or substantial improvements. Only one break in the silt fencing
will be allowed at the property access point. Access to the property must be
limited to one access, maximum 16 feet in width, at the site of the proposed
driveway. Adequate protection must be provided for the water meter and sewer
clean outs. Hose bibs must be located a minimum of ten feet from the water
meter. Hose bib must be mounted to a four-inch by four-inch minimum post, three
feet in height above grade.
   (D)   Adequate litter receptacles (dumpsters) must be provided and used.
Dumpsters must be delivered and picked up during normal construction hours as
stated in division (B) above. Timely disposal must be made. Job sites must be
policed daily and any loose debris must be placed in a receptacle to prevent
debris from blowing onto the job site, neighboring properties or public
property.
   (E)   Construction materials, supplies, dumpsters and equipment must be
placed on the building site. The SCDOT right-of-way is for parking of vehicles
only. Any other use of the right-of-way or road must be approved in advance by
SCDOT and the town. The approval must be in writing and a copy of the approval
must be available for inspection at the construction site. Any damage done to
the road or rights-of-way will be the responsibility of the contractor and must
be repaired before a certificate of occupancy or a certificate of completion is
issued.
   (F)   Property corners must be clearly defined at all times during
construction. The markers may only be removed after a certificate of occupancy
is issued. Markers will extend a minimum of 12 inches above grade at all times
during construction.
   (G)   Fires will not be permitted.
   (H)   Loud and/or offensive language or music is not permitted.
   (I)   Firearms are not allowed.
   (J)   Litter/construction material disposal at roadside is not permitted.
Any construction site must dispose of all construction debris in an approved
landfill. Disposal of hazardous materials must be coordinated with SCDHEC. The
town must be notified immediately of the discovery of any hazardous materials.
   (K)   Parking for all construction personnel must be on the job site.
Adjoining properties may not be used for parking and/or access to the job site.
Streets where parking is prohibited may not be used for parking of construction
personnel or the storage of construction equipment or materials.
   (L)   The contractor is responsible, at the contractor’s expense, for the
repair/replacement of any property damages, public or private, by construction
equipment, personnel, subcontractors, suppliers or machinery to include
roadways, rights-of-way, water and sewer lines or meters and adjoining
properties surrounding the construction site. Construction personnel or
equipment must not block any street or impede the flow of traffic on any street
at any time.
   (M)   Portable toilets are required on all new construction or substantial
improvement sites. Portable toilets or adequate toilet facilities will be
required on site for all construction for which a permit is required. Portable
toilets will be located in an inconspicuous location and away from adjoining
homes.
   (N)   Contractor is prohibited from enclosing any water meter, sewer tap
clean out or fire hydrant by erecting a fence, wall or other barrier (including
vegetation) that would inhibit personnel from performing their duties. Clear
access must be provided to water, sewer and fire personnel at all times.
   (O)   Paint, cement, chemicals and silt are prohibited from entering any
stormwater drainage ditch, swale, culvert or inlet. No ditch, swale, culvert or
inlet maybe filled, blocked or destroyed without obtaining prior permission
from SCDOT and the town.
   (P)   Road right-of-way may be planted with grass only. Plants, shrubs,
trees, landscape berms, landscape irrigation and the like are strictly
prohibited in the right-of-way.
   (Q)   On all new construction or substantial improvement a sign stating the
address of the site, the contractor of record and contact phone number must be
erected so as to be visible from the street. The address must be displayed with
four-inch or larger letters. In addition to the sign board, a permit board/box
must be available for contractor permits and subcontractor permits. Permits
must be protected from weather and must be readily accessible. Total sign
square footage shall not exceed 32 square feet for all signs on the property as
stated in
Chapter 157, Appendix A, § 21-44.
   (R)   Signs are not allowed to be affixed to any tree in any manner. Trees
or limbs over six inches in diameter require a permit for removal. Trees over
16 inches in diameter and Palmettos are protected trees and must be treated as
such. An adequate barrier must be installed and maintained to protect the
canopy and root system. No equipment, materials or vehicles are allowed to be
inside the barrier at any time. No fill will be allowed inside the barrier
until a certified arborist has been consulted and permission for fill is
granted by the Zoning Administrator or his or her agent.
(Prior Code, § 5-12) (Ord. passed 10-19-2004; Ord. passed 9-17-2013; Ord.
passed 4-22-2014)
§ 150.39 FEE FOR BUILDING AND ELECTRICAL PERMITS.
   At the time of securing a building or electrical permit, an applicant shall
pay the fee for said permit, which has been established by the currently
effective resolution of Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 5-13) (Ord. passed 4-6-1938; Ord. passed 12-15-1975; Ord. passed
12-5-1977)
§ 150.40 DISPLAY OF PERMIT.
   A building permit, when issued, shall be kept at the building or place where
the erection, construction, improvement, alteration or repair is being done
and, on demand, shall be produced by the person in charge of the work for
inspection by any police officer or any Town Council member or officer. It
shall be unlawful to continue work without producing a permit for inspection,
when demanded.
(Prior Code, § 5-14) (Ord. passed 4-6-1938) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.41 BUSINESS LICENSE FEE TO ACCOMPANY APPLICATION.
   Where the application is for the use of existing improved or unimproved
property for commercial purposes, the application shall be accompanied by the
appropriate business license fee otherwise provided by town ordinance and other
reasonable information as the Town Council may require in the individual case.
(Prior Code, § 5-15) (Ord. passed 12-18-1961)
§ 150.42 INSPECTION OF FILLING AND DRAINAGE OF BUILDING LOTS AS PREREQUISITE TO
ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   The Building Inspector shall not issue a building permit until he or she
shall have inspected the lot upon which said building is proposed to be erected
and has determined that said lot is filled above the level of the pavement and
graded so as to be effectively drained.
   (A)   No fill will be allowed on any lot in the town without first having
obtained a permit approved by the Building Official.
   (B)   The Building Official shall not issue a building permit until he or
she shall have inspected the lot upon which said building is to be erected or
proposed fill is to be placed.
   (C)   Prior to inspecting the lot:
      (1)   Existing topographic survey must be submitted to the Building
Official at time of permit application;
      (2)   Proposed topographic site plan must be submitted to the Building
Official at time of permit application. An as built will be required for new
construction; and
      (3)   If a lot is below street grade and does not drain properly, a
drainage/fill plan must be submitted for approval by the Building Official. The
Building Official may at his or her discretion require the plan be submitted by
a licensed civil engineer to ensure the lot is effectively drained.
   (D)   Building pads or fill increased more than one foot above existing
grade are prohibited. EXISTING defined as the date of original application for
permit or date of existing topographic survey on file in the office of the
Building Official.
   (E)   Silt fencing is required to be placed on the property line of the lot
being filled and must be maintained until fill has been stabilized to prevent
fill from migrating to neighboring properties. Fill migration to other
properties and/or SCDOT right-of-way is prohibited.
Prior Code, § 5-16) (Ord. passed 9-20-1965; Ord. passed 10-21-2003; Ord. 2020-
18, passed 11-17-2020) Penalty, see §
150.99
SIGN PERMITS
§ 150.55 SIGN OR SIGNBOARD DEFINED.
   Whenever used and referred to in this subchapter, SIGN or SIGNBOARD shall
mean any writing, letter, word, numeral, picture, illustration, emblem, symbol,
trademark, flag, banner, pennant or other figure or similar character which:
   (A)   Is visible to public view from a public street or way; or
   (B)   Is used to announce, direct attention or advertise.
(Prior Code, § 5-17) (Ord. passed 12-16-1963)
§ 150.56 APPLICABILITY.
   No sign or signboard shall be constructed, erected, painted, altered,
rebuilt, enlarged, expended or relocated except in conformity with the
provisions of this subchapter and other provisions of
Chapter 157 and the Standard Building Code adopted by §
150.15.
(Prior Code, § 5-18) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.57 PERMIT REQUIRED TO ERECT SIGNS; PREREQUISITE TO ISSUANCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, erect, paint, alter or
relocate any sign or signboard, without first obtaining a permit therefor from
the Inspector and Zoning Administrator, which shall contain the following
information:
   (A)   The name, address and telephone number of the owner or tenant and of
the contractor;
   (B)   The location of the real estate to which such sign or signboard will
attach and its relative position with respect to buildings or structure on the
same lot;
   (C)   Such construction details shall clearly demonstrate compliance with
the Building Code, the Electrical Code and any other applicable provisions of
this code and of state law. Such details shall include, but shall not be
limited to, a drawing of the proposed sign or signboard, its dimensions and
area, maintenance from which constructed, method of construction and attachment
to real estate, character and method of illumination and the minimum vertical
clearance above grade; and
   (D)   The size, location and description of all other signs or signboards
located on the same zoning lot.
(Prior Code, § 5-19) (Ord. passed 12-16-1963) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who erects, constructs, enlarges, alters,
repairs, moves, improves, removes, converts, demolishes or occupies any
building or structure in the town or causes the same to be done in violation of
this chapter shall be punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code. The Town Council, in addition thereto, may enter upon the
said premises by its lawful agents and remove structures or portions thereof
erected in violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-3) (Ord. passed 12-18-1961; Ord. passed 4-22-1974)
CHAPTER 151: DWELLINGS AND DWELLING UNITS UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Authority for enactment; remedies cumulative
   
151.02   Legislative findings as to unfit dwellings; declaration of intent to
repair, close or demolish such buildings
   
151.03   Definitions
   
151.04   Creation and appointment of Public Safety and Housing Officer
   
151.05   Funds for examination and investigation; examinations, investigations
and enforcement; appropriations, grants and donations
   
151.06   Construction of chapter generally
   
151.07   Failure to comply with authorized notice or order
   
151.08   Injuring posted notices
   
151.09   Receipt of rentals after expiration of time limit in notice or order
   
151.10   Interference with enforcement of chapter
   
151.11   Damaging facilities in dwelling units
   
151.12   Violation of chapter
Procedure, Powers and Duties of Public Safety and Housing Officer
   
151.25   Complaint of dwelling unfit for human habitation; notice of hearing
thereon; right to answer complaint; rules of evidence
   
151.26   Order for repair, alteration, improvement or demolition of building
upon determination of unfitness for human habitation
   
151.27   Repair or vacation and closing of building; posting of placard
indicating that building is closed
   
151.28   Removal or demolition of building when owner fails to comply with
order
   
151.29   Cost of repairs or demolition as lien; sale of materials and
distribution of proceeds when dwelling is demolished or removed by public
officer; powers of Council as to nuisance
   
151.30   Service of complaints and orders; posting of copy of complaint of
order, copy of complaint or order to be filed with Town Clerk; effect of such
filing as lis pendens
   
151.31   Appeals to Town Council
   
151.32   Powers and duties of public officer generally
 
   
151.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 AUTHORITY FOR ENACTMENT; REMEDIES CUMULATIVE.
   In accordance with the provisions of S.C. Code §§ 5-7-30 et seq., there are
hereby established standards for dwelling units fit and unfit for human
habitation, all as hereinafter provided. The remedies herein provided are
cumulative to those provided in the Standard Building Code, heretofore adopted
pursuant to the Code of Laws of South Carolina, 1976, as amended, being S.C.
Code § 6-9-5.
(Prior Code, § 5-21) (Ord. passed 5-19-1975)
§ 151.02 LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS AS TO UNFIT DWELLINGS; DECLARATION OF INTENT TO
REPAIR, CLOSE OR DEMOLISH SUCH BUILDINGS.
   The Town Council hereby finds that there exists within the town, dwellings
which are unfit for human habitation due to dilapidation, defects increasing
the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities, lack of ventilation, light
or sanitary facilities, or due to other conditions rendering such dwellings
unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety or
morals, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the town. The
Town Council declares its intent to exercise its police powers to repair, close
or demolish such dwellings.
(Prior Code, § 5-22) (Ord. passed 5-29-1975)
§ 151.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARD OF HEALTH. The County Board of Health of Charleston County, South
Carolina.
   DWELLING. Any building or structure, or part thereof, used and occupied for
human habitation or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses and
appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith.
   DWELLING UNIT. Any separate aggregation of rooms within any building or
structure used and occupied for human habitation, or intended to be so used,
and includes any part thereof and outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto
or usually enjoyed therewith.
   GOVERNING BODY. The Town Council of Sullivan’s Island.
   LIVING ROOM. A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for
living, sleeping or cooking purposes, excluding bathroom, toilet room,
laundries, pantries, foyers or community corridors, closets and storage spaces.
   MUNICIPALITY. The Town of Sullivan’s Island.
   MULTIPLE DWELLING. A dwelling designed or occupied other than as a one-
family or two-family dwelling. The term MULTIPLE DWELLING shall be understood
to include apartment houses, tenement houses and all other family dwellings of
similar character, except row houses and town houses, where apartments or
suites are occupied and used as separate complete housekeeping units, but not
to include hotels or apartment hotels. The term also includes boarding houses,
rooming houses and any other dwelling or dwelling unit occupied by three or
more persons who are not related by blood or marriage.
   OCCUPANT. Any persons living and sleeping, either or both, in a dwelling or
rooming unit.
   OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a building or part
thereof in which dwelling unit and/or rooming units are let.
   OWNER. The holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee on record.
   PARTIES IN INTEREST. All individuals, associations, corporations and others
who have interest of record in a dwelling and any who are in possession
thereof.
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Any housing authority or any officer who is in charge of
any department or branch of the government of the town or the state relating to
health, fire, building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings
in the town.
   PUBLIC SAFETY AND HOUSING OFFICER. The Fire Chief, who is authorized by this
chapter to exercise the powers prescribed in this chapter.
   ROOMING HOUSE. Any dwelling or that part of any dwelling containing three or
more rooming units in which space is let by the owner or operator to three of
more persons who are not husband or wife, son or daughter, mother or father, or
sister or brother of the owner or operator.
   ROOMING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms forming a single unit used or
intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating
purposes.
(Prior Code, § 5-23) (Ord. passed 5-19-1975; Ord. passed 11-21-1983)
§ 151.04 CREATION AND APPOINTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY AND HOUSING OFFICER.
   The Fire Chief of the town shall be the Public Safety and Housing Officer
and shall perform the duties outlined in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-24) (Ord. passed 11-21-1983)
§ 151.05 FUNDS FOR EXAMINATION AND INVESTIGATION; EXAMINATIONS, INVESTIGATIONS
AND ENFORCEMENT; APPROPRIATIONS, GRANTS AND DONATIONS.
   (A)   The Town Council shall, as soon as possible after the ratification of
this chapter, prepare an estimate of the annual expenses or costs to provide
the equipment, personnel and supplies necessary for periodic examinations and
investigations of the dwellings in the town for the purpose of determining the
fitness of such dwellings for human habitation, and for the enforcement and
administration of its ordinances.
   (B)   The Town Council is authorized to make such appropriations from its
revenues as it may deem necessary for this purpose and may accept and apply
grants or donations to assist it in carrying out the provisions of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-25) (Ord. passed 5-19-1975)
§ 151.06 CONSTRUCTION OF CHAPTER GENERALLY.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers
of the court or of any department of the town to enforce any provisions of its
character or its ordinances or regulations, nor to prevent or to punish
violations thereof; and the powers authorized by this chapter shall be in
addition and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other ordinance or
law.
(Prior Code, § 5-26) (Ord. passed 5-19-1975)
§ 151.07 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH AUTHORIZED NOTICE OR ORDER.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling or dwelling unit unfit
for human habitation under the provisions of this chapter to fail to comply
with any notice or order to repair, vacate or demolish such dwelling unit
issued by any person authorized by this chapter to issue such notice or order.
(Prior Code, § 5-27) (Ord. passed 5-19-1975) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.08 INJURING POSTED NOTICES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or deface any notice posted on
any dwelling or dwelling unit by any authorized officer under the term of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-28) (Ord. passed 5-19-1975) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.09 RECEIPT OF RENTALS AFTER EXPIRATION OF TIME LIMIT IN NOTICE OR ORDER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, individually or as the representative
of any person, firm or corporation, to receive rentals after the expiration of
the time limit set forth in any notice or order issued by the Public Safety and
Housing Officer.
(Prior Code, § 5-29) (Ord. passed 5-19-1975) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.10 INTERFERENCE WITH ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, individually or as the representative
of any person, firm or corporation, to interfere in any way with the
enforcement of any of the terms or provision of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-30) (Ord. passed 5-19-1975) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.11 DAMAGING FACILITIES IN DWELLING UNITS.
   It shall be unlawful for any persons, individually or as the representative
of any person, firm or corporation, to damage, mutilate or remove, or cause to
be damaged, mutilated or removed, any of the facilities in a dwelling unit, as
referred to in Chapter 152.
(Prior Code, § 5-31) (Ord. passed 5-19-1975) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.12 VIOLATION OF CHAPTER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, individually or as the representative
of any person, firm or corporation, to violate any of the terms or provisions
of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-32) (Ord. passed 5-19-1975) Penalty, see §
10.99
PROCEDURE, POWERS AND DUTIES OF PUBLIC SAFETY AND HOUSING OFFICER
§ 151.25 COMPLAINT OF DWELLING UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION; NOTICE OF HEARING
THEREON; RIGHT TO ANSWER COMPLAINT; RULES OF EVIDENCE.
   Whenever a petition is filed with the Public Safety and Housing Officer by a
public authority or by at least five residents of the town charging that any
dwelling is unfit for human habitation or whenever it appears to the Public
Safety and Housing Officer, on his or her own motion, that any dwelling is
unfit for human habitation, the Public Safety and Housing Officer shall, if his
or her preliminary investigation disclosed a basis for such charges: issue and
cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest in such dwelling a
complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a
hearing will be held before the Public Safety and Housing Officer, or his or
her designated agent, a place therein fixed not less than ten days nor more
than 30 days after the serving of such complaint; that the owner and parties in
interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to
appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed
in the complaint; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or
equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the Public Safety and
Housing Officer.
(Prior Code, § 5-33) (Ord. passed 5-19-1975)
§ 151.26 ORDER FOR REPAIR, ALTERATION, IMPROVEMENT OR DEMOLITION OF BUILDING
UPON DETERMINATION OF UNFITNESS FOR HUMAN HABITATION.
   If, after notice and hearing, as provided for in §
151.25, the Public Safety and Housing Officer determines that the dwelling
under consideration is unfit for human habitation, he or she shall state in
writing his or her findings of fact in support of such determination and shall
issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof and order:
   (A)   If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling can be made
at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, requiring the
owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter or improve such
dwelling to render it fit for human habitation or to vacate and close the
dwelling as a human habitation; or
   (B)   If the repair, alteration or improvement of the said dwelling cannot
be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling,
requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to remove or
demolish such dwelling.
(Prior Code, § 5-34) (Ord. passed 5-19-1975)
§ 151.27 REPAIR OR VACATION AND CLOSING OF BUILDING; POSTING OF PLACARD
INDICATING THAT BUILDING IS CLOSED.
   If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve or to
vacate and close the dwelling, as provided in §
151.26, the Public Safety and Housing Officer may cause such dwelling to be
repaired, altered or improved or to be vacated and closed; and the Public
Safety and Housing Officer may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any
dwelling so closed, a placard with the following words: “This building is unfit
for human habitation; the use and occupation of this building for human
habitation is prohibited and unlawful.”
(Prior Code, § 5-35) (Ord. passed 5-19-1975)
§ 151.28 REMOVAL OR DEMOLITION OF BUILDING WHEN OWNER FAILS TO COMPLY WITH
ORDER.
   If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
dwelling, as provided in §
151.26, the Public Safety and Housing Officer may cause such dwelling to be
removed or demolished.
(Prior Code, § 5-36) (Ord. passed 5-19-1975)
§ 151.29 COST OF REPAIRS OR DEMOLITION AS LIEN; SALE OF MATERIALS AND
DISTRIBUTION OF PROCEEDS WHEN DWELLING IS DEMOLISHED OR REMOVED BY PUBLIC
OFFICER; POWERS OF COUNCIL AS TO NUISANCE.
   (A)   The amount of the cost of repairs, alterations or improvements, or
vacating and closing, or removal and demolition by the Public Safety and
Housing Officer under §§
151.27 and
151.28 shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was
incurred.
   (B)   If the dwelling is removed or demolished by the Public Safety and
Housing Officer, he or she shall sell the materials of such dwelling and shall
credit the proceeds of such sale against the cost of removal and demolition and
any balance remaining shall be deposited in the Circuit Court by the Public
Safety and Housing Officer, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed
by such Court, and shall be disbursed by such Court to the person found to be
entitled thereto by final order of decree of such court; provided, however,
that nothing in this division shall be construed to impair or limit in any way
the power of the Town Council to define and declare nuisances and to cause
their removal or abatement, by summary proceedings or otherwise.
(Prior Code, § 5-37) (Ord. passed 5-19-1975)
§ 151.30 SERVICE OF COMPLAINTS AND ORDERS; POSTING OF COPY OF COMPLAINT OF
ORDER, COPY OF COMPLAINT OR ORDER TO BE FILED WITH TOWN CLERK; EFFECT OF SUCH
FILING AS LIS PENDENS.
   (A)   Complaints or orders issued by the Public Safety and Housing Officer
pursuant to this chapter shall be served upon persons either personally or by
registered mail, but if the whereabouts of such persons is unknown and the same
cannot be ascertained by the Public Safety and Housing Office in the exercise
of reasonable diligence, and the Public Safety and Housing Officer shall make
an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of such complaint or order upon
such persons may be made by publishing the same once each week for two
consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the town.
   (B)   A copy of such complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous
place on the premises affected by the complaint or order. A copy of such
compliant or order shall also be filed with the Clerk of the county and such
filing of the complaint or order shall have the same force and effect as other
lis pendens notices provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 5-38) (Ord. passed 5-19-1975)
§ 151.31 APPEALS TO TOWN COUNCIL.
   (A)   Whenever it is claimed that the true intent and meaning of this
chapter, as amended, or any of the regulations thereunder, have been
misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the owner or the duly authorized agent may
appeal from the decision of the Public Safety and Housing Officer to the Town
Council. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within 30 days after
the Public Safety and Housing Officer renders his or her decision.
   (B)   Whenever, in the opinion of the Public Safety and Housing Officer, a
building or structure is unsafe or dangerous, he or she may in his or her order
limit the time for appeal to a period less than 30 days but not less than seven
days.
   (C)   Appeals hereunder shall be on forms provided by the Public Safety and
Housing Officer.
   (D)   The Town Council, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary
the application of any provision of this chapter in any particular case
whenever the literal enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice or would
be contrary to the public interest. In the event the Town Council should modify
the decision of the Public Safety and Housing Officer, it shall specify the
particulars wherein such decision has been modified. Whenever the Town Council
shall reverse the decision of the Public Safety and Housing Officer, its
decision need not specify any particulars.
   (E)   Every decision of the Town Council on any appeal from any decision of
the Public Safety and Housing Officer shall be final subject only to the right
of any party aggrieved by such decision of the Town Council to appeal to, or
seek certiorari from the Court of Common Pleas for the county. The term PARTY
AGGRIEVED shall include the Public Safety and Housing Officer as well as the
owner, agent or occupant of the affected premises.
(Prior Code, § 5-39) (Ord. passed 5-19-1975)
§ 151.32 POWERS AND DUTIES OF PUBLIC OFFICER GENERALLY.
   The Public Safety and Housing Officer is hereby authorized to exercise such
powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the
purposes and provisions of this chapter, including the following powers in
addition to others hereinbefore and hereinaafter granted:
   (A)   To investigate the dwelling conditions of the town in order to
determine which dwellings therein are unfit for human habitation;
   (B)   To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence;
   (C)   To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations,
provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least
possible inconvenience to the persons in possession;
   (D)   To fix the duties of such agents and employees as he or she deems
necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter; and
   (E)   To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under this chapter
to such officers and agents as he or she may designate.
(Prior Code, § 5-40) (Ord. passed 5-19-1975)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Every day of failure or refusal to comply with any order of the Public
Safety and Housing Officer issued pursuant to §
151.26, on and after the effective date of such order (except when such order
has been stayed by an appeal to Town Council under the provisions of § 151.31)
and every day of failure or refusal to comply with any order of the Town
Council issued pursuant to §
151.31 (except when such order has been stayed by appeal to or certiorari from
the Court of Common Pleas for the county) shall constitute a separate violation
and each such separate violation shall be punishable by imprisonment for not
more than 30 days, or a fine of not more than $500.
(Prior Code, § 5-61)
   (B)   Every other violation of this chapter or any part thereof shall be
punishable by imprisonment of not more than 30 days or a fine of not more than
$500.
(Prior Code, § 5-62) (Ord. passed 5-19-1975; Ord. passed 9-23-1997)
CHAPTER 152: STANDARDS FOR DWELLING UNITS FIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION
Section
General Provisions
   
152.01   Essential conditions
   
152.02   Sink, toilet and the like connected to water and sewer
   
152.03   Panes
   
152.04   Fireplaces for heating
   
152.05   Windows
   
152.06   Electrical wiring system
   
152.07   Privacy and ventilation for toilet and the like
   
152.08   Roof, exterior walls and the like to be weather-tight
   
152.09   Condition of dwelling
   
152.10   Minimum of living room floor space
   
152.11   Use of sleeping room for preparation of food
Multiple Dwellings
   
152.25   Additional essential conditions
   
152.26   Access of occupied stories to first floor
   
152.27   Lighting on public hallways/stairways
Rooming Houses
   
152.40   Additional essential conditions
   
152.41   Toilet and the like connected to water and sewer
   
152.42   Accessibility of bath and toilet rooms
   
152.43   Water heating facilities
Application
   
152.55   Matters covered
   
152.56   Existing buildings
 
   
152.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.01 ESSENTIAL CONDITIONS.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the conditions set out in this
chapter are hereby declared essential to make a dwelling unit fit for human
habitation.
(Prior Code, § 5-41) (Ord. passed 5-19-1975)
§ 152.02 SINK, TOILET AND THE LIKE CONNECTED TO WATER AND SEWER.
   There shall be repaired inside running water connected to a kitchen sink and
to a lavatory or laundry sink and to a bathtub or shower and to a toilet, all
connected to a public sewer.
(Prior Code, § 5-42) (Ord. passed 5-19-1975)
§ 152.03 PANES.
   In the event that doors or windows shall have a transparent opening or
openings, panes of glass, safety glass or other suitable material as approved
by applicable statutes and regulations shall be required for use in such doors
or windows.
(Prior Code, § 5-43) (Ord. passed 5-19-1975)
§ 152.04 FIREPLACES FOR HEATING.
   Fireplaces, flues or other provisions for heating shall be required to
afford reasonable comfort.
(Prior Code, § 5-44) (Ord. passed 5-19-1975)
§ 152.05 WINDOWS.
   A window shall be required in each living room and bedroom which window
opens and can be effectively opened and closed as a means of ventilation and
shall provide fire egress with an opening of no less than five and seven-tenths
square feet with a minimum net clear height opening of 24 inches and a net
clear width opening of 20 inches.
(Prior Code, § 5-45) (Ord. passed 5-19-1975; Ord. passed 8-16-1988)
§ 152.06 ELECTRICAL WIRING SYSTEM.
   The electrical wiring system shall be connected and installed in accordance
with §§
150.15 and
150.17.
(Prior Code, § 5-46) (Ord. passed 5-19-1975)
§ 152.07 PRIVACY AND VENTILATION FOR TOILET AND THE LIKE.
   Privacy for toilet and tub or shower shall be provided and the toilet and
tub or shower shall be effectively ventilated.
(Prior Code, § 5-47) (Ord. passed 5-19-1975)
§ 152.08 ROOF, EXTERIOR WALLS AND THE LIKE TO BE WEATHER-TIGHT.
   The roof, flashing, exterior walls, basement walls, floors and all doors and
windows exposed to the weather shall be constructed and maintained so as to be
reasonably weather-tight and water-tight, sound and safe and capable of
affording privacy.
(Prior Code, § 5-48) (Ord. passed 5-19-1975)
§ 152.09 CONDITION OF DWELLING.
   The entire dwelling shall be in a safe and sanitary condition.
(Prior Code, § 5-49) (Ord. passed 5-19-1975)
§ 152.10 MINIMUM OF LIVING ROOM FLOOR SPACE.
   There shall be a minimum of 72 square feet of living room floor space for a
single occupant or, if more than a single occupant, at least 50 square feet for
each occupant over 12 years old and 36 square feet for each occupant under 12
years old.
(Prior Code, § 5-50) (Ord. passed 5-19-1975)
§ 152.11 USE OF SLEEPING ROOM FOR PREPARATION OF FOOD.
   Where more than two persons over one year of age occupy the same dwelling
unit, the preparation and cooking of food shall not take place in any room used
for sleeping purposes.
(Prior Code, § 5-51) (Ord. passed 5-19-1975)
MULTIPLE DWELLINGS
§ 152.25 ADDITIONAL ESSENTIAL CONDITIONS.
   In addition to those conditions set forth in §§
152.01 through
152.11, the conditions set out in this subchapter are hereby declared essential
to make a multiple dwelling fit for human habitation.
(Prior Code, § 5-52) (Ord. passed 5-19-1975)
§ 152.26 ACCESS OF OCCUPIED STORIES TO FIRST FLOOR.
   There shall be a safe, adequate and unobstructed exitway to serve every
occupied story above the first floor.
(Prior Code, § 5-53) (Ord. passed 5-19-1975)
§ 152.27 LIGHTING ON PUBLIC HALLWAYS/STAIRWAYS.
   An adequate lighting system shall be provided in every public hallway and
stairway.
(Prior Code, § 5-54) (Ord. passed 5-19-1975)
ROOMING HOUSES
§ 152.40 ADDITIONAL ESSENTIAL CONDITIONS.
   In addition to those conditions set forth in §§
152.01 through
152.11,
152.26 and
152.27, the conditions set out in this subchapter are hereby declared essential
to make a rooming house fit for human habitation. As used herein, the term
ROOMING HOUSE includes a boarding house, a fraternity or sorority house and any
dwelling unit occupied by three or more persons not related by blood or
marriage.
(Prior Code, § 5-55) (Ord. passed 5-19-1975)
§ 152.41 TOILET AND THE LIKE CONNECTED TO WATER AND SEWER.
   There shall be inside running water properly connected to at least one
toilet, lavatory, and bathtub or shower for each eight persons or fraction
thereof or for each three rooming units or fraction thereof, whichever is more
restrictive, including the dwelling unit of the operator’s family. Where rooms
are let only to males, flush urinals may be substituted for not more than one-
half of the required number of toilets. All fixtures shall be connected to the
pubic sewer.
(Prior Code, § 5-56) (Ord. passed 5-19-1975)
§ 152.42 ACCESSIBILITY OF BATH AND TOILET ROOMS.
   All required bath and toilet rooms shall be directly accessible from a
common hall or passageway within the dwelling.
(Prior Code, § 5-57) (Ord. passed 5-19-1975)
§ 152.43 WATER HEATING FACILITIES.
   Adequate installed water heating facilities in working condition connected
to all required lavatories and tubs or showers shall be provided.
(Prior Code, § 5-58) (Ord. passed 5-19-1975)
APPLICATION
§ 152.55 MATTERS COVERED.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all structures used for human
habitation which are now or which may hereafter become substandard with respect
to structure, fire hazards, inadequate equipment or maintenance, inadequate
provisions for light and air, lack of power heating, inadequate water or
sewerage, unsanitary conditions or overcrowding.
(Prior Code, § 5-59) (Ord. passed 5-19-1975)
§ 152.56 EXISTING BUILDINGS.
   This chapter establishes minimum requirements for the initial and continued
occupancy of all buildings used or intended to be used for human habitation and
does not replace or modify requirements otherwise established for the
construction, repair, alteration or use of buildings, equipment or facilities.
(Prior Code, § 5-60) (Ord. passed 5-19-1975)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   Every other violation of this chapter or any part thereof shall be
punishable by imprisonment of not more than 30 days or a fine of not more than
$500.
(Prior Code, § 5-62) (Ord. passed 5-19-1975; Ord. passed 9-23-1997)
CHAPTER 153: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
153.01   Statutory authorization
   
153.02   Finding of fact
   
153.03   Statement of purpose
   
153.04   Objectives
   
153.05   Definitions
   
153.06   Application
   
153.07   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard
   
153.08   Establishment of building/development permit
   
153.09   Compliance
   
153.10   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
153.11   Interpretation
   
153.12   Warning and disclaimer of liability
Administration
   
153.25   Designation of Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance Administrator
   
153.26   Permit procedures
   
153.27   Duties and responsibilities of the Administrator
   
153.28   Variance procedures
Flood Hazard Districts
   
153.40   General standards
   
153.41   Specific standards
   
153.42   Standards for subdivision proposals
   
153.43   Standards for accessory structures
 
   
153.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Sewer and sewage disposal, see
Chapter 51
   Stormwater management, see
Chapter 155
   Zoning, see
Chapter 157
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The state legislature has delegated the responsibility to local governmental
units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Town Council does ordain as
follows.
(Prior Code, § 5-63)
§ 153.02 FINDING OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the town are subject to periodic inundation
which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary pubic
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
   (B)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the
occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to
other lands which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise
unprotected from flood damages.
(Prior Code, § 5-64)
§ 153.03 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and
property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases
in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
   (D)   Control filing, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damage; and
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
(Prior Code, § 5-65)
§ 153.04 OBJECTIVES.
   The objectives of this chapter are:
   (A)   To protect human life and health;
   (B)   To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (E)   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in floodplains;
   (F)   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight
areas; and
   (G)   To ensure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in
a flood area.
(Prior Code, § 5-66)
§ 153.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURES. Structures that are typically located on the same
parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure. ACCESSORY STRUCTURES should
be designed to have minimal flood damage potential. An ACCESSORY STRUCTURE may
be allowed without a principal building on the property if the ACCESSORY
STRUCTURE meets the requirements of
Chapter 157, Appendix A, § 21-138 or other sections of the zoning ordinance.
Examples of ACCESSORY STRUCTURES are storage sheds, garages, gazebos, pole
sheds, and open dock structures.
   ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING BUILDING). Any walled and roofed expansion to the
perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-
bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is
connected by a fire wall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing
walls is new construction.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Zoning Administrator’s interpretation
of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or VO Zone on a community’s flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet where a
clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   BASEMENT. The portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   BREAKAWAY WALL. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the
building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under
specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion
of the building or the supporting foundation system.
   BUILDING. Any structure built for support, shelter or enclosure for any
occupancy or storage.
   COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA. The area subject to high velocity waters caused
by, but not limited to, hurricane wave wash. The area is designated on a FIRM
as Zone V1-30, VE or V.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations or permanent storage
of materials or equipment.
   ELEVATED BUILDING. A non-basement building built to have the lowest floor
elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter
walls, pilings, columns (posts or piers), shear walls or breakaway walls.
   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. Any structure for which the “start of construction”
commenced before the effective date of the first floodplain management code,
ordinance or standard based upon specific technical base flood elevation data
which establishes the area of special flood hazard.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed including at a minimum the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads, is completed before the effective date
of the floodplain in management regulations adopted by a community (before the
effective date of the first floodplain management code, ordinance or standard
based upon specific technical base flood elevation date which established the
area of special flood hazard).
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or run-off of surface waters
from any source.
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). An official map of a community, issued by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the areas of
special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of
special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the Flood
Boundary Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
   FLOOD-RESISTANT MATERIAL. Any building material capable of withstanding
direct and prolonged contact (minimum 72 hours) with floodwaters without
sustaining damage that requires more than low-cost cosmetic repair. Any
material that is water-soluble or is not resistant to alkali or acid in water,
including normal adhesives for above-grade use, is not flood-resistant.
Pressure-treated lumber or naturally decay-resistant lumbers are acceptable
flooring materials. Sheet-type flooring coverings that restrict evaporation
from below and materials that are impervious, but dimensionally unstable are
not acceptable. Materials that absorb or retain water excessively after
submergence are not flood-resistant. Please refer to Technical Bulletin 2,
Flood Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements, dated August 2008, and available
from the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Class 4 and 5 materials,
referenced therein, are acceptable flood-resistant materials.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
   FLOOR. The top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including
basement), in other words, top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of
wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor
of a garage used solely for parking vehicles.
   FREEBOARD. A safety factor usually expressed in feet above flood level or
base flood elevation to minimize flood damage.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT FACILITY. A facility which cannot be used for its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair, or seafood
processing facilities. The term does not include long-term storage,
manufacture, sales, or service facilities.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface,
prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a building.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminary determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of registered historic
district or a district preliminary determined by the Secretary to qualify as a
registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE (ICC). Applies to all new and renewed flood
insurance policies effective on and after June 1, 1997. The NFIP shall enable
the purchase of insurance to cover the cost of compliance with land use and
control measures established. It provides coverage for the payment of a claim
to help pay for the cost to comply with state or community floodplain
management laws or ordinances after a flood event in which a building has been
declared substantially or repetitively damaged.
   LIMITED STORAGE. An area used for storage and intended to be limited to
incidental items that can withstand exposure to the elements and have low flood
damage potential. Such an area must be flood resistant or breakaway material
and void of utilities except for essential lighting.
   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE (LAG). An elevation of the lowest ground surface that
touches any deck support, exterior walls of a building, or proposed building
walls.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area. Any unfinished
or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building
access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a
building’s LOWEST FLOOR, provided that such an enclosure is built so as to
render the structure in violation of other provisions of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A building, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also
includes park trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures
placed on a site approximately six months and intended to be improved property.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel or contiguous parcels of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. For the purpose of this chapter, the Nations Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or
other datum, to which the base flood elevations show on a community’s Flood
Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) are shown.
   NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD). As corrected in 1929, elevation
reference points set by National Geodetic Survey based on mean sea level.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Any structure for which the “start of construction”
commenced after the effective date of the first floodplain management code,
ordinance or standard based upon specific technical base flood elevation data
which establishes the area of special flood hazard. The term also includes any
subsequent improvements to such structure.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
   PRIMARY FRONTAL DUNE. A continuous or nearly continuous mound or ridge of
sand with relatively steep seaward and landward slopes immediately landward of
and adjacent to the beach, and subject to erosion and overtopping from high
tides and waves during coastal storms. The inland limit of the PRIMARY FRONTAL
DUNE occurs at the point when there is a distinct change from a relatively
steep slope to a relatively mild slope.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, construction, camping, travel or
seasonal use.
   SAND DUNES. Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds
landward of the beach.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION (FOR OTHER THAN NEW CONSTRUCTION OR SUBSTANTIAL
IMPROVEMENTS UNDER THE COASTAL BARRIER RESOURCES ACT (PUB. LAW 97-348, BEING 16
U.S.C. §§ 3501 ET SEQ.)). Includes substantial improvement, and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date.
The actual START means the first placement of permanent construction of a
building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slab
or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond
the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filing; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main building. For a
substantial improvement, the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a
manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank or other human-made facilities
or infrastructures.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. 
      (1)   Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration or
improvements to a building, taking place during a three-year period, in which
the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the building.
The market value of the building should be:
         (a)   The appraised value of the building prior to the start of the
initial repair or improvement; or
         (b)   In the case of damage, the value of the building prior to the
damage occurring.
      (2)   This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial
damage”, regardless of the actual repair work performed. For the purposes of
this definition, SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement
of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the Code Enforcement Official and
which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions.
   SUBSTANTIALLY IMPROVED EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS OR SUBDIVISIONS.
Where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets,
utilities and pads equals or exceed 50% of the value of the streets, utilities
and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter where
specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with these regulations.
(Prior Code, § 5-67) (Ord. passed 12-5-1977; Ord. passed 10-18-1988; Ord.
passed 2-21-1995; Ord. passed 8-21-2007; Ord. 2020-18, passed 11-17-2020)
§ 153.06 APPLICATION.
   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the town.
(Prior Code, § 5-68)
§ 153.07 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the town as identified by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) in its Flood Insurance Study, dated January 29, 2021, with the
accompanying maps and other supporting data that are hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-69) (Ord. passed 8-21-2007; Ord. 2020-18, passed 11-17-2020)
§ 153.08 ESTABLISHMENT OF BUILDING/DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A building/development permit shall be required in conformance with the
provision of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development
activities.
(Prior Code, § 5-70) (Ord. 2020-18, passed 11-17-2020)
§ 153.09 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or
structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and
other applicable regulations.
(Prior Code, § 5-71) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.10 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, convenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another section of the code conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 5-72)
§ 153.11 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Prior Code, § 5-73)
§ 153.12 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
consideration. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the town or by any officer or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(Prior Code, § 5-74)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 153.25 DESIGNATION OF FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION ORDINANCE ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Chief Building Inspector or his or her designee is hereby appointed to
administer and implement the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-76) (Ord. 2020-18, passed 11-17-2020)
§ 153.26 PERMIT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Application for a building permit shall be made to the Administrator
on forms furnished by him or her prior to any development activities, and may
include, but not be limited to, the following plans in duplicate drawn to scale
showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in
question; existing or proposed structures, earthen fill, storage of materials
or equipment, drainage facilities and the location of the foregoing.
   (B)   Specifically, the following information is required:
      (1)   Application stage.
         (a)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest
floor (including basement) of all buildings;
         (b)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-
residential building will be flood-proofed;
         (c)   Certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect
that the non-residential flood-proofed building will meet the flood-proofing
criteria in §
153.41(B); and
         (d)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be
altered or relocated as result of proposed development.
      (2)   Construction stage.
         (a)   Provide a floor elevation or flood-proofing certification after
the lowest floor is completed, or instances where the building is subject to
the regulations applicable to coastal high hazard areas, after placement of the
horizontal structural members of the lowest floor. Upon placement of the lowest
floor, or flood-proofing by whatever construction means, or upon placement of
the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor, whichever is applicable,
it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the Zoning Administrator
a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor, flood-proofed elevation,
or the elevation of the lowest portion of the horizontal structural members of
the lowest floor, whichever is applicable, as built, in relation to mean sea
level. Said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision
of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same.
When flood-proofing is utilized for a particular building, said certification
shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer
or architect and certified by same. Any work undertaken prior to submission of
the certification shall be at the permit holder’s risk. The Zoning
Administrator shall review the floor elevation survey data submitted.
Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder
immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed.
Failure to submit the survey or failure to make said corrections required
hereby shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.
         (b)   At the end of construction and prior to issuance of a
certificate of occupancy an as-built elevation certificate and/or flood
proofing certificate, an as-built design certificate and an as-built breakaway
wall certificate must be provided. Said certification shall be prepared by or
under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor and/or professional
engineer and certified by same. When flood-proofing is utilized for a
particular building, said certification shall be prepared by or under the
direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by
same. Any work undertaken prior to submission of the certification shall be at
the permit holder’s risk. The Administrator shall review the floor elevation
survey data and all design certificates submitted. Deficiencies detected shall
be corrected immediately by the owner or contractor prior to occupancy of the
structure.
         (c)   Also prior to occupancy of a dwelling unit a non-conversion
agreement must be signed, notarized and submitted to the Administrator for
recording with the deed to the property. This agreement will allow yearly
inspection of the area below base flood for compliance with the Flood Damage
Prevention Ordinance of the town
            1.   V-Zone certification. When a structure is located in Zones V,
VE, or VI-30, certification shall be provided from a registered professional
engineer or architect, separate from submitted plans, that new construction and
substantial improvement meets the criteria for the coastal high hazard areas.
            2.   A-Zone certification. When a structure is located in Zones A,
AE, or AO, certification shall be provided from a registered professional
engineer or architect, separate from submitted plans, that new construction and
substantial improvement meets the criteria for the coastal high hazard areas.
            3.   As-built certification. Upon completion of the development a
registered professional engineer, land surveyor or architect, in accordance
with state law, shall certify that the development is built in accordance with
the submitted plans and previous pre-development certifications.
            4.   Adoption of Letter of Map Revisions (LOMR). All LOMRs that are
issued in the areas identified in §
153.07 of this chapter are hereby adopted.
(Prior Code, § 5-77) (Ord. 2020-18, passed 11-17-2020)
§ 153.27 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE ADMINISTRATOR.
   Duties of the Administrator shall include, but not be limited to:
   (A)   Review all building permit applications to assure that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;
   (B)   Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have
been received from those government agencies from which approval is required by
federal or state law including § 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1334;
   (C)   Notify adjacent communities and the SCDNR-Land, Water and Conservation
Division prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit
evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency;
   (D)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not
diminished;
   (E)   Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level)
of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved
buildings, in accordance with §
153.26(B)(2);
   (F)   Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level)
to which the new or substantially improved buildings have been flood-proofed,
in accordance with §
153.26(B)(2);
   (G)   In coastal hazard areas, certification shall be obtained from a
registered professional engineer or architect that the building is designed and
securely anchored to adequately anchored pilings or columns in order to
withstand velocity waters and hurricane wave wash;
   (H)   In coastal high hazard areas, the Zoning Administrator shall review
plans for adequacy of breakaway walls in accordance with §
153.41(E)(8);
   (I)   When flood-proofing is utilized for a particular building, the Zoning
Administrator shall obtain certification from a registered professional
engineer or architect, in accordance with §
153.41(B);
   (J)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries
of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a
conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), the Zoning
Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting
the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal
the interpretation as provided in this chapter;
   (K)   When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided
in accordance with §
153.07, then the Zoning Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal,
state or other source, in order to administer the provisions §§
153.40 through
153.42; and
   (L)   All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be
maintained in the office of the Town Hall and shall be open for public
inspection.
(Prior Code, § 5-78) (Ord. passed 11-16-2010)
§ 153.28 VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Zoning Board of Adjustments, as established by the town, shall
hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of
this chapter.
   (B)   The Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an
error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the local
administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
   (C)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board or any taxpayer, or
officer, department, board or bureau of the municipality may appeal such
decision to a court of record, as provided in S.C. Code § 5-23-150.
   (D)   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures (see definition) upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
   (E)   In passing upon such applications, the Board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other
sections of this chapter and:
      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      (5)   The necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, in the case
of a functionally dependent facility;
      (6)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
      (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
   (F)   Upon consideration of the factors listed above, and the purposes of
this chapter, the Board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances
as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
   (G)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
   (H)   Conditions for variances.
      (1)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief; and in the instance of a historical building, a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character
and design of the building;
      (2)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship; and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public,
or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
      (3)   Any application to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and
the elevation to which the building is to be built and stating that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the
reduced lowest floor elevation.
      (4)   The Zoning Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency
upon request.
(Prior Code, § 5-79)
FLOOD HAZARD DISTRICTS
§ 153.40 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required
to ensure structures are reasonably safe from flooding.
   (A)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
   (B)   Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or
lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in
addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting
wind forces.
   (C)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
   (D)   New construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by
methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
   (E)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
   (F)   New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
   (G)   News and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
   (H)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   (I)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building
which is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall meet the
requirements of “new construction” as contained in this chapter.
   (J)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building
which is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be
undertaken only if said nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced.
   (K)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building
seaward of SCDHEC/OCRM 40-year setback line or within SCDHEC/OCRM regulations
governing such activities. An addition to a structure that is located in an AE
or AO zone is allowed below BFE provided the addition does not constitute a
substantial improvement.
(Prior Code, § 5-80) (Ord. passed 1-21-1992; Ord. 2020-18, passed 11-17-2020;
Ord. 2021-01, passed 1-19-2021)
§ 153.41 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data have
been provided, as set forth in §§
153.07 or
153.27(K), the following provisions are required.
   (A)   Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement
of any structure (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated not lower than one foot above the minimum base flood
elevation requirement. Historical structures individually listed on the town
Historical Resources List as a Traditional Island Resource or a Landmark
Structure that has not been substantially improved after December 1977 is
exempt from the one-foot freeboard requirement.
      (1)   In A, AE, or AO Zones an enclosed storage area not to exceed 200
square feet in area is allowed below the base flood elevation, provided the
walls forming the enclosure is certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect as breakaway construction and contain vents to equalize
hydrostatic flood forces as described in this division (A) and divisions (B)
and (C) below.
      (2)   All other space below the regulatory flood elevation shall be open
lattice or mesh screening. Open lattice may incorporate a lightweight
transparent material on the inside of the lattice panel provided the walls
forming the enclosure is certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect as breakaway construction and contain vents to equalize hydrostatic
flood forces as described in division (C) below. A non-conversion agreement
must be signed, notarized, recorded with the deed to the property and submitted
to the Administrator. This agreement will allow yearly inspection of the area
below base flood for compliance with the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance of
the town.
   (B)   Non-residential construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial, or non-residential building (or
manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no
lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Buildings located in all A
Zones may be flood-proofed in lieu of being elevated, provided that all areas
of the building below the required elevation are water-tight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and use structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or
architect shall certify that the standards of this division (B) are satisfied.
Such certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in §
153.27(I).
   (C)   Elevated buildings. New construction of elevated buildings shall meet
the requirements as set forth in division (A) above. Substantial improvements
of elevated buildings that include existing fully enclosed areas formed by
foundation and other exterior walls below the base flood elevation shall be
designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry
and exit of floodwater to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls.
      (1)   Designs for complying with this requirement must either be
certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum
criteria:
         (a)   Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding;
         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade; and
         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in
both directions.
      (2)   Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow
for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance
equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or
entry to the living area (stairway or elevator); and
      (3)   The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned
or finished into separate rooms.
   (D)   Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO Zones).Located within the
areas of special flood hazard established in this chapter, are areas designated
as shallow flooding. The following provisions shall apply within such areas.
      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures shall have the lowest floor elevated to at least as high as the
depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, in feet, above the
highest adjacent grade. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor shall
be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade; and
      (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements of non-
residential structures shall:
         (a)   Have the lowest floor elevated to at least as high as the depth
number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, in feet, above the highest
adjacent grade. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor shall be
elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade.
         (b)   Be completely flood-proofed together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities to or above that level so that any space below that level
is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Certification is required as stated
in this chapter.
   (E)   Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
      (1)   All manufactured homes placed, or substantially improved, on
individual lots or parcels, must meet all the requirements for new
construction, including elevation and anchoring.
         (a)   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower
than the base flood elevation, or the manufactured home chassis is supported by
reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent
strength, of no less than 36 inches in height above grade.
         (b)   The manufactured home must be securely anchored to the
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral
movement.
         (c)   When existing manufactured home has incurred “substantial
damage” as the result of a flood, any manufactured home placed or substantially
improved must meet the standards of divisions (D)(2)(a) and (D)(2)(c) below.
      (2)   All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either:
         (a)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational
vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is
attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security
devices and has no permanently attached structures); or
         (b)   The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for new
construction, including anchoring and elevation requirements of this division
(D)(2) or division (D)(1) above.
   (F)   Coastal high hazard areas (V Zones). Located within the areas of
special flood hazard established in §
153.07, are areas designated as coastal high hazard areas. These areas have
special flood hazards associated with wave wash, therefore, the following
provisions shall apply.
      (1)   All buildings shall be located landward of the reach of the mean
high tide.
      (2)   All buildings shall be elevated so that the bottom of the lowest
supporting horizontal member (excluding pilings or columns) is located no lower
than the base flood elevation level. An enclosed storage area not to exceed 200
square feet in area is allowed below the base flood elevation, provided the
walls forming the enclosure are certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect as breakaway construction and contain vents to equalize
hydrostatic flood forces as described in division (C) above. Further enclosure
consisting of open lattice work or decorative screening may be permitted for
aesthetic purposes only and must be designed to wash away in the event of
abnormal wave action and in accordance with division (E)(8) below.
      (3)   All buildings or structures shall be securely anchored on pilings
or columns.
      (4)   All pile and column foundations and structures attached thereto
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement due to the
effect of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building
components. Water loading values shall equal or exceed the base flood. Wind
loading values shall be in accordance with the most current edition of
International Building Code.
      (5)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that
the design, specifications and plans for construction are in compliance with
the provisions contained in divisions (E)(2), (E)(3) and (E)(4) above.
      (6)   There shall be no fill used as structural support. Non-compacted
fill may be used around the perimeter of a building for landscaping/aesthetic
purposes, provided the fill will wash out from storm surge, (thereby rendering
the building free from obstruction) prior to generating excessive loading
forces, ramping effects or wave deflection. The Zoning Administrator shall
approve design plans for landscaping/aesthetic fill only after the applicant
has provided a analysis by an engineer, architect and/or soil scientist, which
demonstrates that the following factors have been fully considered:
         (a)   Particle composition of fill material does not have a tendency
for excessive natural compaction;
         (b)   Volume and distribution of fill will not cause wave defection to
adjacent properties; and
         (c)   Slope of fill will not cause wave run-off or ramping.
      (7)   There shall be no alteration of sand dunes which would increase
potential flood damage.
      (8)   In addition to the enclosed storage area mentioned in division (E)
(2) above, open lattice work or mesh screening shall be allowed below the base
flood elevation, provided they are not part of the structural support of the
building and are designed to breakaway under abnormally high tides or wave
action without damage to the structural integrity of the building on which they
are to be used, and provided the following design specifications are met:
         (a)   No additional solid walls shall be allowed; and
         (b)   Material shall consist of lattice or mesh screening only.
      (9)   If aesthetic lattice work or screening is utilized, such enclosed
space shall not be designed to be used for human habitation, but shall be
designed to be used only for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited
storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises.
      (10)   Prior to construction, plans for any buildings that will have
lattice work or decorative screening must be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator for approval.
      (11)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a
structure shall not enclose the space below the lowest floor except with
lattice work or decorative screening, as provided for in divisions (E)(8) and
(E)(9) above.
      (12)   Prohibit the placement of manufactured homes (mobile homes),
except in an existing manufactured homes (mobile homes) park or subdivision. A
replacement manufactured home may be placed on a lot in an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision, provided the anchoring standards of
division (E)(5) above and the elevation standards of division (E)(2) above are
met.
      (13)   All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either:
         (a)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational
vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system is
attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security
devices and has no permanently attached structures); or
         (b)   The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for new
construction, including anchoring and elevation requirements of divisions (D)
(1) or (D)(2) above.
(Prior Code, § 5-81) (Ord. passed 11-16-2010)
§ 153.42 STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.
   (A)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
   (B)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage.
   (C)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood hazards.
   (D)   Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development (including manufactured home parks and
subdivisions) which is greater than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres.
(Prior Code, § 5-82)
§ 153.43 STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.
   (A)   A detached accessory structure of $3,000 or less is allowed to be
placed in the Zone A, AE, or AO if the following criteria is met:
      (1)   Accessory structures are to be completely open structures or must
be limited to 200 square feet of enclosed space;
      (2)   Accessory structures shall be designed to have a minimal flood
damage potential;
      (3)   Accessory structures shall be constructed and places on the site so
as to offer the minimum resistance to flood waters;
      (4)   Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse and lateral movement of the structure. Tie down systems must be
designed to meet the requirements of the currently adopted International
Building Code;
      (5)   Service equipment such as electrical or water supply must be
minimal and designed to prohibit the accumulation of flood waters from entering
or accumulating in the equipment. Sanitary sewer lines are prohibited from
entering the structure;
      (6)   Openings to relieve hydrostatic pressure during a flood shall be
provided one foot above grade and the entire vent must be located below the
base flood elevation. Venting shall comply with §
153.41; and
      (7)   Accessory structures shall be built with flood resistant materials
in accordance with FEMA Technical Bulletin 2 with a rating of class 4 or 5.
   (B)   A detached accessory structure or garage of more than $3,000 to be
placed in Zone A, AE, or AO must comply with the requirements as outlined in
FEMA’s Technical Bulletin 7-93 wet flood proofing requirements or be elevated
or dry flood-proofed.
   (C)   A detached accessory structure or garage placed in the VE flood zone
must be built with the lowest horizontal structural member placed one foot
above base flood elevation. The structure must be designed and finished
construction certified, by a design professional. All walls below lowest
horizontal structural member must be of a breakaway design and have hydrostatic
vents installed as required by §
153.41. An elevation certificate must be provided at the placement of the
lowest structural member and at the end of construction. All materials below
base flood must be Class 4 or 5 as defined in FEMA Technical Bulletin 2.
(Ord. 2020-18, passed 11-17-2020)
§ 153.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with
grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any
person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $500 or
imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all
costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues
shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent
the town from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or
remedy any violation.
(Prior Code, § 5-75)
   (B)   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with
any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grant of variance or special exceptions, shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined
not more than $500 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, and in addition
shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violations
continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained
shall prevent the town from taking such other lawful action as it is necessary
to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Prior Code, § 5-83) (Ord. passed 10-4-1976; Ord. passed 12-5-1977; Ord. passed
9-23-1991; Ord. passed 9-23-1997)
CHAPTER 154: FILLING AND DRAINING LOW LOTS
Section
   
154.01   Duty of Superintendent of Streets and Maintenance
   
154.02   Notice to owner to fill, drain and the like; effect of failure to
comply with notice
   
154.03   Refusing to allow lot to be examined; obstructing officers in
discharge of duties under this chapter
 
   
154.99   Penalty
§ 154.01 DUTY OF SUPERINTENDENT OF STREETS AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   When it shall appear to the Superintendent of Streets and Maintenance
that any low lots or vacant grounds are in a condition to injure or endanger
the public health, it shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Streets and
Maintenance to enter upon and thoroughly examine such lots or vacant grounds,
and determine whether such lots or vacant grounds shall be drained, filled up,
leveled or otherwise so improved to remove any nuisance complained of.
   (B)   Should the Superintendent be of the opinion that such lots or vacant
ground ought to be filled up, leveled or drained, he or she shall submit a
detailed report to the Town Council, setting forth the actual condition
thereof, and suggesting the mode, materials and extent of such low lot or
vacant grounds to be filled up, leveled or drained, upon which report the Town
Council shall take such action as it may deem expedient.
(Prior Code, § 7-1) (Ord. passed 8-12-2012)
Statutory reference:
   Town’s authority to remove nuisances, see S.C. Code § 5-7-30
§ 154.02 NOTICE TO OWNER TO FILL, DRAIN AND THE LIKE; EFFECT OF FAILURE TO
COMPLY WITH NOTICE.
   In case the Town Council shall order the report of the Superintendent of
Streets and Maintenance, made pursuant to §
154.01, to be carried into effect, or shall direct any lot lots to be filled
up, leveled or drained. It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to serve a
notice in writing on the owner of such lot lots or vacant grounds directing
such owner to have such low lots or vacant places filled up, leveled or drained
as the Town Council may require, to such an extent, in such manner, with such
materials and within such reasonable time as may be prescribed by such order.
(Prior Code, § 7-2) (Ord. passed 8-12-2012) Penalty, see §
154.99
Cross-reference:
   Beaches generally, see
Chapter 156
   Permitting breeding of mosquitoes, see §§
92.03 and
132.14
   Removing soil generally, see §
132.20
§ 154.03 REFUSING TO ALLOW LOT TO BE EXAMINED; OBSTRUCTING OFFICERS IN
DISCHARGE OF DUTIES UNDER THIS CHAPTER.
   If the owner or occupant of any lot or enclosure shall refuse to open the
same and suffer it to be examined by the Superintendent of Streets and
Maintenance, acting under the provisions of this chapter, or shall in anyway,
molest, hinder, interrupt, obstruct or oppose the Superintendent of Streets and
Maintenance in the discharge of any of the duties prescribed in this chapter,
or of the workmen, laborers or agents employed by the Town Council or by the
Town Clerk in the performance of any work ordered by such Council or by the
Clerk, in the execution of the duties required by this chapter, such owner or
occupant or other person so offending shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 7-3) (Ord. passed 8-12-2012)
§ 154.99 PENALTY.
   Any owner who neglects or refuses to obey said order (provided by § 154.02)
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in §
10.99. In addition thereto, any such owner shall be subject to the procedures
provided in Chapter 92 for the abatement of nuisances and threats to public
health.
(Prior Code, § 7-2) (Ord. passed 8-12-2012)
CHAPTER 155: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
155.001   Designation and authority
   
155.002   General chapter definitions
   
155.003   Establishment of utility; administration
   
155.004   Boundaries and jurisdiction
   
155.005   Regulation of land disturbing activity
   
155.006   Stormwater utility fees
   
155.007   Investment and reinvestment of funds and borrowing
   
155.008   Billing of fee; delinquency
   
155.009   Written notice of objection
   
155.010   Petition for relief
   
155.011   Enforcement
   
155.012   Liability
Utility Fee
   
155.025   Stormwater management utility fee; classification of property
   
155.026   Determination of amount of stormwater management utility fee
   
155.027   Adjustment of utility fee
   
155.028   Duration of fee
   
155.029   Billing of stormwater management utility fee; late charges
Stormwater Management Program
   
155.040   Stormwater Management Program definitions
   
155.041   Title
   
155.042   Authority
   
155.043   Jurisdiction
   
155.044   Purposes
   
155.045   Construction and scope
   
155.046   Relationship with other laws, regulations and ordinances
   
155.047   Amendments
   
155.048   Town’s Stormwater Management Program (SWMP)
   
155.049   Coordination with other agencies
   
155.050   Right-of-entry
   
155.051   Regulations
   
155.052   Prohibitions and exemptions
   
155.053   Design and engineering standards
   
155.054   Construction activity approval process
   
155.055   Town’s Stormwater Program Permitting Standards and Procedures Manual
   
155.056   Maintenance, construction, inspection and notice of termination
   
155.057   Watercourse protection
   
155.058   Notification of spills
   
155.059   Illicit connections, illicit discharges and improper disposal
   
155.060   Detection of illicit connections and improper disposal
   
155.061   Waste disposal prohibitions
   
155.062   Discharges in violation of NPDES general permit for stowrmwater
discharges associated with industrial activity permit
   
155.063   Monitoring
   
155.064   Inspections
   
155.065   Enforcement
   
155.066   Additional legal measures
   
155.067   Corrective action
   
155.068   Stop-work order
   
155.069   Approval suspension and revocation
   
155.070   Design criteria
   
155.071   Appeals process
   
155.072   Funding
   
155.073   Connection to conveyances
   
155.074   Plan review
   
155.075   Field inspection
 
   
155.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.001 DESIGNATION AND AUTHORITY.
   This chapter may be cited as the Stormwater Management Utility Chapter and
is adopted pursuant to S.C. Code §§ 48-14-10 et seq. and 5-7-30; and S.C. Code
Regulations §§ 72-300 et seq. and 5-31-10 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 25-1) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.002 GENERAL CHAPTER DEFINITIONS.
   Unless otherwise stated herein or the context specifically indicates
otherwise, the meaning of words and terms used in this chapter shall be as set
forth in S.C. Code § 48-10-20 and S.C. Code Regulation § 72-301. The following
words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meaning
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning.
   CHIEF BUILDING INSPECTOR. The Chief Building Inspector of the town.
   EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT. A unit of measure which relates a typical
single-family residential property to all other properties.
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS AND FACILITIES. Those natural and human-made
channels, swales, ditches, swamps, rivers, streams, creeks, branches,
reservoirs, ponds, drainage ways, inlets, catch basins, pipes, head walls,
storm sewers, lakes and other physical works, properties, and improvements
which transfer, control, convey, or otherwise influence the movement of
stormwater run-off.
   TOWN. The Town of Sullivan’s Island, South Carolina.
   TOWN ADMINISTRATOR. The Town Administrator of the town.
   TOWN COUNCIL. The elected officials of the Town of Sullivan’s Island, South
Carolina.
   UTILITY CUSTOMER. The owner of record of real property.
(Prior Code, § 25-2) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.003 ESTABLISHMENT OF UTILITY; ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Town Council hereby establishes a Stormwater Management Utility (the
“Utility”) to carry out the purposes, functions and responsibilities set forth
herein. The governing body of the Utility shall be Town Council. The Town
Administrator shall administer the Utility under the town’s Department of
Building, Planning and Licensing; provided, however, that Town Council may
delegate some or all of the Town Administrator’s or the Chief Building
Inspector’s duties hereunder to the county or its duly authorized
representatives pursuant to an inter-governmental agreement providing for same.
   (B)   The Utility shall have the powers and duties set forth below, which
powers are not necessarily exclusive to the Utility, to wit:
      (1)   Stormwater management planning and preparation of comprehensive
watershed master plans for stormwater management;
      (2)   Regular inspections of public and private stormwater management
facilities and measures and the construction thereof;
      (3)   Maintenance and improvements of stormwater management facilities
that have been accepted by the town for that purpose;
      (4)   Plan review and inspection for sediment control and stormwater
management plans, measures and practices;
      (5)   Retrofitting designated watersheds to reduce existing flooding
problems or to improve water quality;
      (6)   Acquisition of interests in land, including easements;
      (7)   Design and construction of stormwater management facilities and
measures and acquisition of equipment;
      (8)   Water quantity and water quality management, including monitoring
and surveillance;
      (9)   Billing and collecting a stormwater management utility fee shall be
pursuant to §§
155.025 through
155.029;
      (10)   Make reasonable regulations relating to the administration of this
chapter;
      (11)   Any and all powers and duties delegated or granted to it as a
local government implementing agency under the laws and regulations of the
state and the ordinances of the town; and
      (12)   Entering into inter-governmental agreements with the county to
provide for the county and its duly authorized representatives to assist the
town in the implementation and administration of the Utility, enforcement of
the ordinances or other regulations governed by the Utility, and the
implementation, billing, collection and expenditure of the town’s stormwater
management fees.
(Prior Code, § 25-3) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.004 BOUNDARIES AND JURISDICTION.
   The boundaries and jurisdiction of the Stormwater Management Utility shall
encompass all area contained within the corporate boundaries of the town, as
they may exist from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 25-4) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.005 REGULATION OF LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY.
   Town Council shall establish by ordinance a program regulating land
disturbing activities, including, but not limited to, provisions for reviewing
and approving stormwater management and sediment control plans, creating design
requirements for such plans and land disturbing activities; and providing
operational maintenance requirements for stormwater management facilities and
measures.
(Prior Code, § 25-5) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.006 STORMWATER UTILITY FEES.
   (A)   Town Council shall establish by ordinance the amounts and
classifications of stormwater management utility fees to be implemented to help
fund the Utility and its programs and projects.
   (B)   Town Council shall consider, among other things, the following
criteria in establishing fees:
      (1)   The fee system shall be reasonable and equitable so that users pay
to the extent they contribute to the need from the Utility, and the fee shall
be apportioned with approximate equality and upon a reasonable basis of
equality with due regards for the benefits conferred. Town Council recognizes
that these benefits, while substantial, in many cases cannot be measured
directly;
      (2)   The components of the calculations used to establish fees shall
include, but shall not be limited to, the following cost factors:
         (a)   Stormwater management planning and preparation of comprehensive
watershed master plans for stormwater management;
         (b)   Regular inspections of public and private stormwater management
facilities and measures and the construction thereof;
         (c)   Maintenance and improvements of stormwater management facilities
that have been accepted by the town for that purpose;
         (d)   Plan review and inspection for sediment control and stormwater
management plans, measures and practices;
         (e)   Retrofitting designated watersheds to reduce exiting flooding
problems or to improve water quality;
         (f)   Acquisition of interest of land, including easements;
         (g)   Design and construction of stormwater management facilities and
measures and acquisition of equipment;
         (h)   Administration of enforcement;
         (i)   Water quantity and water quality management, including
monitoring and surveillance; and
         (j)   Debt service and financing costs.
      (3)   The practical difficulties and limitations related to establishing,
calculating and administering such fees; and
      (4)   The components of the calculations used to establish fees shall be
based on an “equivalent residential unit”, to be determined and approved by
Town Council with reasonable general adjustments being made for, but not
limited to, the following factors:
         (a)   Land use;
         (b)   Lot or tract size;
         (c)   The amount of site that is impervious; and
         (d)   Other generally accepted factors relevant to such calculations
based upon the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Pending the adoption of a permanent fee system and rate structure,
Town Council may adopt an interim fee system and rate structure to help fund
the establishment of the Utility, pending the completion and adoption of a
stormwater utility rate study.
(Prior Code, § 25-6) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.007 INVESTMENT AND REINVESTMENT OF FUNDS AND BORROWING.
   Funds generated for the Stormwater Management Utility from fees, bond
issues, other borrowing, and other sources shall be utilized only for those
purposes for which the utility has been established, including, but not limited
to: planning; acquisition of interests in land including easements; design and
construction of facilities; maintenance of the stormwater system, billing and
administration; and water quality and water quantity management, including
monitoring, surveillance, private maintenance inspection, construction
inspection and other activities which are reasonably required. Such funds may
be invested and reinvested pursuant to the same procedures and practices
established by the town for investment and reinvestment of funds. Town Council
may use any form of borrowing authorized by the laws of the state to fund
capital acquisitions or expenditures for the Stormwater Management Utility.
(Prior Code, § 25-7) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.008 BILLING OF FEE; DELINQUENCY.
   Town Council shall establish by ordinance the method of billing for the fee,
any late payment fees, and the manner of collecting unpaid fees.
(Prior Code, § 25-8) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.009 WRITTEN NOTICE OF OBJECTION.
   (A)   (1)   A utility customer may request a reconsideration of any
determination or interpretation by the Chief Building Inspector or his or her
designee in the operation of the Stormwater Management Utility. Such request
must be in writing specifically explaining the grounds for the request
including the following:
         (a)   TMS # for the property;
         (b)   Utility customer information: name, address and telephone
number;
         (c)   A statement outlining the reasons for the appeal, including any
law or authority, upon which the utility customer relies;
         (d)   A statement of facts supporting the utility customer’s position;
and
         (e)   The amount which the utility customer considers the fair amount
of the fee.
      (2)   The written request is a notice of objection for purposes of the
section. The failure to serve written request within the time period
constitutes a waiver of the utility customer’s right of protest for that year.
   (B)   Request for reconsideration of the annual fee amounts shall be
submitted within 30 days after the date the fee shall be due and payable.
   (C)   In cases where the applicant believes the fee to be inappropriate
based on the actual impervious area of the property in which he or she has
interest, the applicant should submit technical data such as a site survey of
said property to assist in the evaluation. The survey should be prepared by a
licensed land surveyor in accordance with the minimum state survey standards.
The survey should include the following:
      (1)   Property boundary;
      (2)   Parking areas;
      (3)   Driveway(s);
      (4)   Building(s);
      (5)   Storm drainage facilities;
      (6)   Any other surface improvements;
      (7)   Calculation of total impervious area;
      (8)   Calculation of total pervious area; and
      (9)   Date when the field survey was conducted.
   (D)   The Chief Building Inspector or his or her designee shall render a
written decision on the request within 30 business days of the receipt of the
written request for reconsideration.
   (E)   The utility customer may appeal the decision to the town’s Board of
Zoning Appeals within 30 days after the date of the decision. The Chief
Building Inspector shall provide the petition form to the utility customer.
(Prior Code, § 25-9) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.010 PETITION FOR RELIEF.
   (A)   The petition must be accompanied with a $25 fee that will be used to
partially defray the costs incurred in connection with the administration of
petitions filed pursuant to this section.
   (B)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear the petition to determine if
the annual stormwater management utility fee does not apportion the fee with
approximate equality, based upon a reasonable basis of classification and with
due regard to the benefits conferred by providing stormwater management
services to the utility customer and the requirements of public health, safety
or welfare. The determination of the annual fee by the Board of Zoning Appeals
is entitled to a presumption of correctness, and the petitioner has the burden
of rebutting the presumption of correctness.
   (C)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall render a written decision on each
petition that is heard, and such written decision shall be issued within 20
calendar days from the day the Board heard the petition. The decision of the
Board of Zoning Appeals shall contain findings of fact and conclusions of law,
and the decision shall be sent to the petitioner by first class mail.
   (D)   The decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be final unless the
petitioner appeals the decision to the Circuit Court in the county within 30
days after the date of the decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals. Prior to
bringing an action to contest an annual fee, the petitioner shall pay to the
Treasurer not less than the amount of the annual fee which he or she admits in
good faith is owing. Payment of the fee shall not be deemed an admission that
the annual fee was due and shall not prejudice the petitioner in bringing an
action as provided herein.
(Prior Code, § 25-10) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.011 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Chief Building Inspector and such other officials as the Town
Administrator shall designate, which may be a county employee or authorized
agent under the inter-governmental agreement entered into between the town and
the county, shall be the enforcement officers to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 25-11) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.012 LIABILITY.
   Nothing in this chapter and any action or failure to act under this chapter
shall or may be construed to:
   (A)   Impose any liability on the town, or its departments, agencies,
offices or employees for the recovery of damages; or
   (B)   Relieve any person engaged in a land disturbing activity of duties,
obligations, responsibilities or liabilities arising from or incident to
operations associated with such activity, or imposed by provisions of this
chapter or the laws and regulations pursuant to which it was adopted.
(Prior Code, § 25-12) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
UTILITY FEE
§ 155.025 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY FEE; CLASSIFICATION OF PROPERTY.
   (A)   Classification. For purposes of determining the fee, all real property
in the town is classified as follows:
      (1)   Single-family residential;
      (2)   Vacant; or
      (3)   Commercial.
   (B)   Base rate. The base rate shall be $72 annually. In no case shall a
Utility customer be billed a fee for less than one-half the base rate.
   (C)   Equivalent residential unit (ERU). One commonly accepted rate unit for
stormwater utilities is the Equivalent Residential Unit (ERU). This is a
descriptive value based on the land classification type and the amount of
impervious surface. The ERU is used to relate a rate charged for a typical
residential property and this becomes the common denominator by which
Commercial properties are evaluated. The ERU for the county has been determined
to be 3,000 square feet.
   (D)   Annual fees. Annual fees for all property shall be as follows.
      (1)   Single-family residential property. Single-family residential
property shall be charged a fee equal to the base rate times one equivalent
residential unit (ERU), regardless of the size of the parcel or improvements
(impervious area).
      (2)   Vacant property. Vacant property shall be charged a fee equal to
the base rate times one-half equivalent residential unit (ERU), regardless of
the size of the parcel.
      (3)   Commercial property. Commercial property shall be charged the base
rate multiplied by the numerical factor obtained by dividing the total
impervious area of the property, as determined by the Director of Public Works
or an authorized designee, by one ERU (3,000 square feet). The numerical factor
will be rounded to the nearest tenth of a unit. The minimum fee for any
commercial property shall be the base rate times one-half ERU. Those commercial
properties with impervious area greater than one-half ERU (1,500 square feet)
and less than one (3,000 square feet) shall be charged the base rate times one
ERU.
(Prior Code, § 25-13) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007; Ord. 2016-05, passed 8-1-
2016)
§ 155.026 DETERMINATION OF AMOUNT OF STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY FEE.
   (A)   Computation of stormwater management utility fee.
      (1)   Determine base rate to assign ERU;
      (2)   Determine the impervious area on the property;
      (3)   Calculate the numerical factor for the property in question by
dividing the impervious area by one ERU (3,000 square feet); and
      (4)   Calculate the annual stormwater management utility fee by
multiplying the numerical factor by the base rate, if the factor is greater
than one.
   (B)   Example calculation. Calculation of monthly fee for a one and one-half
acre commercial property with a determined impervious area of 32,500 square
feet.
      (1)   One ERU = 3,000 square feet.
      (2)   Property impervious area = 32,500 square feet.
      (3)   ERUs for example property = 32,500 square feet of impervious/one
ERU of 3,000 square feet = 10.8 ERUs
      (4)   Utility fee = ERUs x Base Rate (10.8 ERUs x Example Base Rate of
$72 = $777.60/year.
   (C) Classification of property.
      (1)   The classification of real property and the identification of the
utility customer for the purpose of determining fees shall be determined from
the records of the County Tax Assessor’s. The utility customer or person
charged the fee is based on the classification of the real property as of
January 1 of the year of billing and each year subsequently thereafter.
      (2)   Where the tax records are incomplete or ambiguous, a physical
inspection of the real property shall be made to determine the use of the
property. Upon development of the county’s database and review of the real
properties on a case-by-case basis, the classifications from the records of the
County Tax Assessor’s do not preclude an adjustment to the data that the county
uses to determine the fee.
(Prior Code, § 25-14) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007; Ord. 2016-05, passed 8-1-
2016)
§ 155.027 ADJUSTMENT OF UTILITY FEE.
   (A)   In cases where the Utility customer disputes the fee based on the
actual impervious area of the real property in which he or she has interest, a
notice of objection may be filed with the Chief Building Inspector as outlined
in §
155.009, written notice of objection; provided, however, that Town Council many
delegate the Chief Building Inspector’s responsibilities hereunder to the
county or its duly authorized representatives pursuant to an inter-governmental
agreement providing for same.
   (B)   Where an adjustment of the fee is warranted, the Chief Building
Inspector shall recalculate and re-determine the fee using equivalent ERUs that
is based on the total impervious area of the real property at issue.
(Prior Code, § 25-15) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007; Ord. 2016-05, passed 8-1-
2016)
§ 155.028 DURATION OF FEE.
   The fees established by this chapter have been adopted by Town Council. This
fee will be reviewed, evaluated and amended as necessary in order to address
the town’s stormwater program needs/deficiencies and small municipal separate
storm sewer system (SMS4) general permit requirements.
(Prior Code, § 25-16) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007; Ord. 2016-05, passed 8-1-
2016)
§ 155.029 BILLING OF STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY FEE; LATE CHARGES.
   (A)   The fee shall not be prorated. No refunds of the fee shall be made
except as set forth in this chapter. The fee shall be billed annually and
mailed to each owner of record of real property, based on the classification of
the property, to the owner of record of the real property as of January 1 of
each year subsequently thereafter. For non-payment of all or any part of the
utility fee, the monetary penalty shall be the same penalty set forth in S.C.
Code § 12-45-180.
   (B)   If any fee shall remain 60 days after the due date, the county may
issue a lien upon the parcel for the stormwater utility fee, penalties and
costs of collection, and shall proceed to collect in the same manner as
prescribed by law for the collection of other fees and taxes. The town may
delegate collection of the fees, including any required legal action, to the
county or its representatives pursuant to an inter-governmental agreement
providing for same.
(Prior Code, § 25-17) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007; Ord. 2016-05, passed 8-1-
2016)
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
§ 155.040 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM DEFINITIONS.
   Unless otherwise stated herein or the context specifically indicates
otherwise, the meaning of the words and terms used in this chapter shall be as
set forth in S.C. Code § 48-10-20, and S.C. Code Regulation § 72-301. The
following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. A person, firm, corporation, limited liability company,
governmental agency, partnership or any other entity who seeks to obtain
approval under the requirements of this chapter and who will be responsible for
the land disturbing activity and related maintenance thereof.
   AS-BUILT DRAWINGS. Revised construction drawings that depict the final,
installed location of the new facilities on a project, including the stormwater
system. This term and RECORD DRAWINGS shall be synonymous.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). Any structural or non-structural measures
or facilities used for the control of stormwater run-off, whether for quantity
or quality control. BMPs also include schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, maintenance procedures, treatment requirements, operating procedures
and other management practices to control site run-off, spillage or leaks,
sludge or waste disposal, drainage from raw material storage, or otherwise
prevent or reduce the pollution of waters of the state.
   CONSTRUCTION or CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Activity involving clearing, grading,
transporting, filling, or any other activity which causes land to be exposed to
the danger of erosion, or which might create an alteration to any existing
drainage way or other component of the town’s stormwater system or facility.
   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY APPLICATION. The application, set of drawings,
specifications, design calculations, SWPPP and other documents necessary to
demonstrate compliance with this chapter.
   DEVELOPER. Any person, or others who act in his or her behalf, who is
required to submit an application for approval to disturb land or encroachment
and is thereafter responsible for maintaining compliance with this chapter and
conditions of the approved application.
   EASEMENT. An authorization by a property owner to the general public or a
person or persons for the use of any designated part of his or her property for
a specific purpose.
   EROSION. The general process by which soils or rock fragments are detached
and moved by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity.
   FLOOD/FLOODING. A temporary rise in the level of water which results in the
inundation of areas not ordinarily covered by water.
   ILLICIT CONNECTION. A connection to a town stormwater management system or
facility which results in a discharge that is not composed entirely of
stormwater run-off except discharges pursuant to an NPDES permit (other than
the NPDES MS4 permit for the town).
   ILLICIT DISCHARGE or ILLEGAL DISCHARGE. Any activity which results in a
discharge into a town stormwater management system or facility or receiving
waters that is not composed entirely of stormwater except:
      (1)   Discharges pursuant to an NPDES permit (other than the NPDES permit
for the town); and
      (2)   Discharges resulting from firefighting activities.
   IMPROPER DISPOSAL. Any disposal other than through an illicit connection
that results in an illicit discharge, including, but not limited to, the
disposal of used oil and toxic materials resulting from the improper management
of such substances.
   MAINTENANCE. Any action necessary to preserve any stormwater system
component, including conveyances, facilities and BMPs in proper working
condition, in order to serve the intended purposes set forth in this chapter
and to prevent structural failure of such components.
   MS4. A municipal separate storm sewer system and includes all conveyances or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, highways, right-
of-way, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, human-made
channels, storm drains, detention ponds and other stormwater facilities) which
inlets, transports, stores or treats stormwater run-off and which is:
      (1)   Owned or operated by the town;
      (2)   Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
      (3)   Not a combined sewer system; and
      (4)   Not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW).
   NEW DEVELOPMENT or RE-DEVELOPMENT. Any of the following actions undertaken
by any person, including, without limitation, any public or private individual
or entity:
      (1)   Division or combination of lots, tracts or parcels, or other
divisions by plat or deed;
      (2)   The construction, installation or alteration of land, a structure,
impervious surface or drainage facility;
      (3)   Clearing, scraping, grubbing or otherwise significantly disturbing
the soil, vegetation, mud, sand or rock of a site, or changing the physical
drainage characteristics of the site; or
      (4)   Adding, removing, exposing, excavating, leveling, grading, digging,
burrowing, dumping, piling, dredging or otherwise disturbing the soil,
vegetation, mud, sand or rock of a site.
   NPDES. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
   NPDES PERMIT. The NPDES permit for stormwater discharges issued by SCDHEC
pursuant to the Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq., and the
federal stormwater discharge regulations that allows for restricting pollutant
loads as necessary to meet water quality standards.
   OPERATOR. The person who has operational control of the real property,
including an operator or person who is in charge of any activity related to
land disturbance, construction or post- construction stormwater quality or
quantity.
   OUTFALL or DISCHARGE POINT. The point where a town stormwater management
system or facility, or other municipal and private system, discharges into
waters of the state or United States.
   OWNER. A property owner, or any person who acts in his or her behalf, who
submits an application for approval to disturb land or vegetation or for
encroachment, and the person, if so designated by default or on legal
documents, who is the responsible party for maintenance of a stormwater system
(s) or facility(s).
   PERSON. Any and all persons, natural or artificial, and includes any
individual, association, firm, corporation, limited liability company, business
trust, estate, trust, partnership, two or more persons having a joint or common
interest, state or federal agency or an agent or employee thereof, or any other
legal entity.
   POLLUTANT. Anything which may cause or contribute to violation of water
quality standards, including, but not limited to, sediment, bacteria,
nutrients, dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological
materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock,
sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged
into water.
   PROPERTY OWNER. The record owner of the real property.
   RECEIVING WATERS. Any lakes, bays, sounds, ponds, impounding reservoirs,
springs, wells, rivers, streams, creeks, estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals,
the Atlantic Ocean within the territorial limits of the State of South
Carolina, and all other bodies of surface or underground water, whether natural
or artificial, public or private, inland or coastal, fresh or salt.
   REGULATION. Any regulation, rule or requirement prepared by or adopted by
Town Council pursuant to this chapter.
   SPILL. Any accidental or intentional discharge of any pollutants, hazardous
materials, or other substances which are potentially detrimental to the
designated use of a receiving water.
   SWMP. The Town of Sullivan’s Island Stormwater Management Program, which may
describe the components to be used by the town to control stormwater
discharges, address flooding and meet water quality standards.
   STORMWATER. Stormwater run-off, snowmelt run-off, and surface run-off and
drainage.
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT. The collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and
disposal of stormwater run-off in a manner to meet the objectives of this
chapter and its terms, including, but not limited to, measures that control the
increased volume and rate of stormwater run-off and water quality impacts
caused by human-made changes to the land.
   STORMWATER SYSTEMS AND FACILITIES. Those natural and human-made channels,
swales, ditches, swamps, rivers, streams, creeks, branches, reservoirs, ponds,
drainage ways, inlets, catch basins, pipes, head walls, storm sewers, lakes and
other physical works, properties, and improvements which transfer, control,
convey, or otherwise influence the movement of stormwater run-off, whether for
quantity or quality control.
   TMDL. The total maximum daily load which is the regulatory value developed
to represent the amount of a pollutant that a water body can incorporate while
maintaining water quality standards. TMDL is further defined as the pollutant
load developed by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and SCDHEC that
designates the permitted amount of discharge allowed to flow into a water body
of this state or the United States.
   VARIANCE. The modification of the minimum stormwater management requirements
contained in this chapter and the SWMP for specific circumstances where strict
adherence to the requirements would result in unnecessary hardship and not
fulfill the intent of this chapter.
   WATERCOURSE. A conveyance used to transport run-off from one location to
another.
   WATERSHED. A drainage area or drainage basin contributing to the flow of
stormwater into a receiving watercourse or water body.
   WATER QUALITY. Those characteristics of stormwater run-off that relate to
the physical, chemical, biological or radiological integrity of water.
   WATER QUANTITY. Those characteristics of stormwater run-off that relate to
the rate and volume of the stormwater run-off.
(Prior Code, § 25-18) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.041 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Town of Sullivan’s Island Stormwater
Management Chapter”.
(Prior Code, § 25-19) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.042 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred upon the town by
applicable federal and state laws and regulations.
(Prior Code, § 25-20) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.043 JURISDICTION.
   The boundaries and jurisdiction of this chapter shall encompass the
incorporated area of the town, as it may exist from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 25-21) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.044 PURPOSES.
   (A)   A primary purpose of this chapter to protect, maintain and enhance
water quality and the environment of the town and the short-term and long-term
public health, safety and general welfare of the town’s residents. This chapter
is also designed to minimize property damage by establishing requirements and
procedures to control the potential adverse effects of increased stormwater
run-off and related pollutant loads associated with both future development and
existing developed land. Proper management of stormwater run-off will further
the purpose of this chapter to ensure a functional drainage system, reduce the
effects of development on land and stream channel erosion, attain and maintain
water quality standards, enhance the local environment associated with the
drainage system, reduce local flooding, maintain where necessary pre-developed
run-off characteristics of the area in terms of flow rate, volume and pollutant
concentration, and facilitate economic development while mitigating associated
pollutant, flooding, erosion and drainage impacts.
   (B)   Another primary purpose of this chapter is to direct the development
and implementation of a stormwater management program (“SWMP”) and to establish
authority which authorizes or enables the town at a minimum to:
      (1)   Comply with state and federal requirements related to stormwater
management developed pursuant to the Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251
et seq.;
      (2)   Prohibit illicit discharges into the town’s stormwater systems and
facilities and receiving waters;
      (3)   Control to the maximum extent practicable the discharge into the
town’s stormwater systems and facilities and receiving waters of spills,
dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater;
      (4)   Address specific categories of non-stormwater discharges and
similar other incidental non-stormwater discharges listed in the SWMP;
      (5)   Require erosion and sediment controls to protect water quality on
all applicable new and re-development projects both during and after
construction;
      (6)   Where necessary, require stormwater discharge rate and volume
control during and following development, redevelopment or construction;
      (7)   Define and implement procedures of site plan review and site
inspection of all applicable construction projects within the town;
      (8)   Control the discharge from the town’s stormwater systems and
facilities and receiving waters of pollutants in such quantity that water
quality standards are met or to otherwise address post-construction, long-term
water quality. This includes the necessary means needed to comply with state
and federal regulations regarding stormwater management quantity and quality;
      (9)   Define procedures for addressing resident complaints of stormwater-
related issues within the town;
      (10)   Provide for adequate long-term operation and maintenance of
existing stormwater systems and facilities;
      (11)   Carry out inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures
necessary to determine compliance and noncompliance with permit conditions,
including the prohibition on illicit discharges to the town’s stormwater system
and receiving waters;
      (12)   Encourage the creation of stream buffers and preservation of
natural spaces to provide areas that may be used for flood storage, stormwater
treatment and control, and recreation. Such areas may be required in special
protection areas needed to protect, maintain or enhance water quality and
protect property from flooding problems;
      (13)   Develop, implement and enforce action plans to address pollutant
load reductions required in impaired water bodies and to work towards
compliance with total maximum daily loads (TMDLs) established by EPA or SCDHEC
and to work toward meeting water quality standards; and
      (14)   Enable enforcement of all of the authorizations stated herein.
   (C)   Another purpose of this chapter to establish review authority for the
town’s Chief Building Inspector to provide consistency of construction projects
with the SWMP.
(Prior Code, § 25-22) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.045 CONSTRUCTION AND SCOPE.
   (A)   The town’s Chief Building Inspector shall be primarily responsible for
the coordination and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and the
SWMP; provided, however, that Town Council may, from time to time, delegate
some or all of the rights and duties of the Chief Building Inspector to the
county or its duly authorized representatives pursuant to an inter-governmental
agreement for same.
   (B)   All powers and authority given to the Chief Building Inspector or any
reference to the Chief Building Inspector throughout this chapter shall apply
to any designee of the Chief Building Inspector or to any county agent or duly
authorized representative designated by the Town Council.
   (C)   The application of this chapter and the provisions and references
expressed herein shall be the minimum stormwater management requirements and
shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other ordinances of the town
or powers granted to the town by the state statutes, including, without
limitation, the power to require additional stormwater management requirements.
If site characteristics on new development, redevelopment and existing
developments indicate that complying with these minimum requirements will not
provide adequate designs or protection for real property, residents, or the
environment, the property owner, operator or person responsible for land
disturbing activities is required to provide additional and appropriate
management practices, control techniques, system design and engineering methods
to attain an adequate level of protection, in accordance with the town’s
Stormwater Program Permitting Standards and Procedures Manual (the “Manual”).
(Prior Code, § 25-23) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.046 RELATIONSHIP WITH OTHER LAWS, REGULATIONS, AND ORDINANCES.
   Whenever the provisions of this chapter impose more restrictive standards
than are required in or under any other law, regulation or ordinance, the
requirements contained in the provisions of this chapter shall prevail.
Whenever the provisions of any other law, regulation or ordinance impose more
restrictive standards than are required in the provisions of this chapter, the
requirements of such law, regulation or ordinance shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 25-24) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.047 AMENDMENTS.
   Town Council may adopt additional regulations or resolutions to implement
this chapter, implement the SWMP, or to otherwise further the goal of
protecting the quality of the waters which the town’s stormwater system drains
into.
(Prior Code, § 25-25) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.048 TOWN’S STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM (SWMP).
   The SWMP which has been developed by the town to implement the purposes of
this chapter shall serve as the basis for directing the town’s efforts to
control stormwater run-off and discharge. The SWMP is incorporated by reference
and is hereby a part of this chapter. The SWMP requirements are to be complied
with and shall be enforced in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 25-26) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.049 COORDINATION WITH OTHER AGENCIES.
   (A)   Town Council may coordinate the town’s activities with other federal,
state and local agencies which manage and perform functions relating to the
protection of receiving waters, through a written agreement with those other
agencies.
   (B)   Authority not expressly reserved for other agencies or restricted by
statute is placed with the Chief Building Inspector for the protection and
preservation of receiving waters. The Chief Building Inspector should
coordinate with federal, state and local agencies having jurisdiction of those
receiving waters.
(Prior Code, § 25-27) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.050 RIGHT-OF-ENTRY.
   (A)   The Chief Building Inspector may, with the consent of the property
owner, enter upon the real property of any person subject to this chapter. The
Chief Building Inspector shall be provided immediate access to the necessary
portion of the real property for the purposes of inspecting, monitoring,
sampling, inventorying, examining and copying of records, and performing any
other duties necessary to determine compliance with this chapter.
   (B)   Where the property owner or operator has security measures in place
requiring proper identification and consent before entry upon the real
property, the property owner, operator or person shall make the necessary
arrangements with the necessary parties so that the Chief Building Inspector
will be permitted to enter the property without delay for the purposes of
performing such responsibilities identified in division (A) above.
   (C)   The Chief Building Inspector shall seek the consent of the owner
before entry upon the real property. If such consent is denied or unable to be
obtained from the owner, then in addition to any other remedies allowed by law,
the Chief Building Inspector shall by affidavit based upon the reasonable
suspicion that a violation exists, obtain an ex-parte order from a court of
competent jurisdiction to enter upon the property for the limited purposes
stated in division (A) above.
(Prior Code, § 25-28) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.051 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The Chief Building Inspector shall be responsible for the
coordination, implementation and enforcement of this chapter and the SWMP, in
addition to the long-term management of the town’s drainage systems.
   (B)   Without limitation, the Chief Building Inspector shall have the
following authority:
      (1)   To issue any approval, certification or license that may be
required to comply with this chapter;
      (2)   To deny a facility connection to the town’s stormwater systems or
facilities or discharge to waters of the state if state requirements and this
chapter are not met;
      (3)   To create the town’s Stormwater Program Permitting Standards and
Procedures Manual. The Manual may be used to convey design and engineering
standards, construction management processes and procedures, and other aspects
necessary for compliance with this chapter. The Town Administrator is
authorized to approve the adoption and subsequent revisions of the Manual;
      (4)   To require the submittal of an application for all applicable
construction activities that alter any portion of land for development or alter
the storm drainage characteristics of the land. The application shall include
the information required to control stormwater pollutants and other components
in accordance with the Manual;
      (5)   To require the development and enforcement of a stormwater
pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) for all new and re-development projects;
      (6)   To require proper long-term maintenance of stormwater management
systems and facilities through the use of an operating permit or other
applicable measures in accordance with the Manual;
      (7)   To approve construction activities and to require as a condition of
such approval, structural or non-structural controls, practices, devices,
operating procedures, or other mechanisms to protect public and private
property from flooding and erosion and attain TMDL pollutant load reductions
and water quality standards;
      (8)   To require performance bonds as necessary of any owner to secure
the owner’s compliance with approvals, certificates, licenses or authorizations
issued by the Chief Building Inspector pursuant to this chapter, the SWMP and
federal and state laws. The Chief Building Inspector shall develop a process
that organizes the closure of bonds and construction projects to accommodate
phases of development and the transfer of the ownership of real property;
      (9)   To conduct all activities necessary to carry out the SWMP and other
requirements included in this chapter and to pursue the necessary means and
resources required to properly fulfill this responsibility;
      (10)   To require appropriate post construction best management practices
and appropriate continued maintenance of those best management practices;
      (11)   To determine appropriate fees, to impose penalties and to take
necessary and appropriate actions to enforce this chapter; and
      (12)   To require encroachment permits as necessary.
(Prior Code, § 25-29) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.052 PROHIBITIONS AND EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall:
      (1)   Develop any land;
      (2)   Engage in any industry or enterprise;
      (3)   Construct, operate or maintain any landfill, hazardous waste
treatment disposal, or recovery facility, or any other industrial or related
facility;
      (4)   Dispose of any hazardous material or toxic substance or other
pollutant; or
      (5)   Prevent the transport of sediment and other pollutants associated
with stormwater run-off beyond the real property boundary lines other than in
full compliance with this chapter.
   (B)   In instances where an imminent threat to the health, safety or general
welfare of the public or the environment is suspected, the Chief Building
Inspector shall determine if immediate action is necessary. Such action may be
taken with or without the consent of the owner, operator or other responsible
person. If such consent is denied, the Chief Building Inspector shall follow
the provisions in §§
155.047 through
155.050 for entry upon the real property to remove such threat. In such
instances, the owner, operator or other responsible person shall reimburse the
town for any and all expenses associated with removal of such threat. If the
owner or operator fails to reimburse the town for such expenses, the town may
recover the expenses from the owner, operator or other responsible person
through any remedies available at law or in equity. Any fees or costs
associated with any collection effort by the town are in addition to the
recovery of the expenses.
   (C)   The following development activities are exempt from the provisions of
this chapter:
      (1)   Land disturbing activities undertaken on forest land for the
production and harvesting of timber and timber products and conducted in
accordance with best management practices and minimum erosion protection
measures established by the state’s Forestry Commission pursuant to S.C. Code §
48-18-70;
      (2)   Activities undertaken by persons who are otherwise regulated by the
provisions of Chapter 20 of Title 48, the state’s Mining Act; and
      (3)   Land disturbing activities on agricultural land for production of
plants and animals, including, but not limited to: forages and sod crops,
grains and feed crops, tobacco, cotton, and peanuts; dairy animals and dairy
products; poultry and poultry products; livestock, including beef cattle,
sheep, swine, horses, ponies, mules, or goats, including the breeding and
grazing of these animals; bees, fur animals, and aquaculture. The construction
of an agricultural structure that requires the disturbance of one or more
acres, such as, but not limited to, broiler houses, machine sheds, repair
shops, coops, barns, and other major buildings shall require the submittal and
approval of a land disturbance application prior to the start of the land
disturbing activity.
(Prior Code, § 25-30) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.053 DESIGN AND ENGINEERING STANDARDS.
   (A)   Design and engineering standards must define the desired level of
quality and performance for stormwater management systems on all applicable
construction activities in order to meet the purpose of this chapter. The
standards establish the minimum technical requirements needed to demonstrate
compliance.
   (B)   The Chief Building Inspector is authorized to develop and adopt
policies, criteria, specifications and standards for the proper implementation
of the requirements of this chapter, federal and state laws and the SWMP; and
to provide a sound technical basis for the achievement of stormwater
management, including water quality and quantity objectives. These standards
may be provided in the Manual.
   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of the property owner, operator or
other person responsible for land disturbing activities to provide adequate
controls to meet the design and engineering standards provided in the Manual.
(Prior Code, § 25-31) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.054 CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY APPROVAL PROCESS.
   An application for review and approval shall be made for all applicable
construction activities. Applications required under this chapter shall be
submitted in a format and in such numbers as required by the Chief Building
Inspector. Applications may be initiated by the property owner, operator or
person responsible for construction activities. Applications that meet the
requirements of this chapter, the SWMP and state and federal regulations are
considered complete. The application process and requirements to establish a
complete application will be provided in the Manual.
(Prior Code, § 25-32) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.055 TOWN’S STORMWATER PROGRAM PERMITTING STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES MANUAL.
   (A)   The Manual may include design standards, procedures and criteria for
conducting hydrologic, hydraulic, pollutant load evaluations, and downstream
impact for all components of the stormwater management system. It is the
intention of the Manual to establish uniform design practices; however, it
neither replaces the need for engineering judgment nor precludes the use of
information not submitted. Other accepted engineering procedures may be used to
conduct hydrologic, hydraulic and pollutant load studies if approved by the
Chief Building Inspector.
   (B)   The Manual will contain at a minimum the following components:
      (1)   Construction activity application contents and approval procedures;
      (2)   Construction completion and closeout processes;
      (3)   Hydrologic, hydraulic and water quality design criteria (in other
words, design standards) for the purposes of controlling the run-off rate,
volume, and pollutant load. Suggested reference material shall be included for
guidance in computations needed to meet the design standards;
      (4)   Information and requirements for new and re-development projects in
special protection areas necessary to address TMDLs, known problem areas and
other areas necessary to protect, maintain and enhance water quality and the
environment of the town and the public health, safety and general welfare of
the town’s residents;
      (5)   Construction document requirements;
      (6)   Long-term maintenance and maintenance plan;
      (7)   Minimum easement requirements; and
      (8)   Required and recommended inspection schedules and activities for
all components of the stormwater management system, including construction-
related BMPs.
   (C)   The Manual will be updated periodically to reflect advances in
technology and experience.
(Prior Code, § 25-33) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.056 MAINTENANCE, CONSTRUCTION, INSPECTION AND NOTICE OF TERMINATION.
   (A)   Maintenance of the stormwater management system is critical for the
achievement of its purpose of controlling stormwater run-off quantity and
quality and providing for the public health, safety and general welfare of the
residents of the town.
   (B)   In accordance with the Manual, a maintenance plan for the stormwater
management system shall be included in an application to perform a construction
activity to cover activities to be conducted during and after construction. As
part of the maintenance plan, the property owner, operator or person of such
system or facility shall agree to be responsible for keeping the system and
facility in working order. The Chief Building Inspector shall develop
procedures to provide reasonable assurances that maintenance activities are
performed in accordance with the Manual for both town and privately maintained
stormwater systems and facilities. The Chief Building Inspector will provide
the procedures for transferring maintenance responsibilities to another entity.
   (C)   The Chief Building Inspector will define procedures for conducting
site inspections.
   (D)   As part of any application to perform a construction activity, the
applicant shall submit construction and BMP maintenance and inspection
schedules, and long-term maintenance plan shall be covered by an operating
permit for new stormwater management systems and facilities. Required and
recommended schedules for BMP maintenance and inspection and long-term plans
are provided in the Manual.
   (E)   If the construction is to be phased, no phase of the work related to
the construction of stormwater management facilities shall commence until the
preceding phase of the work is completed in accordance with an approved
application to perform a construction activity. The procedure for construction
phases beginning and ending and what constitutes such conditions shall be
submitted with the application.
   (F)   The applicant shall notify the Chief Building Inspector before
commencing any work, in accordance with the Manual, and upon completion of any
phase or designated component of the site. Notification schedules shall be
provided for in the Manual. All self-inspections, maintenance actions, BMP
replacements, and changes to the approved application shall be documented and
presented upon request to the Chief Building Inspector.
   (G)   The NOT process, as identified in the Manual, must be completed by the
Chief Building Inspector prior to any of the following actions, as applicable:
      (1)   The use or occupancy of any newly constructed components of the
site;
      (2)   Final acceptance of any road into a public road maintenance system
or designation of road owner and associated stormwater management system;
      (3)   Release of any bond held by the town, if applicable; or
      (4)   Approval or acceptance for recording of map, plat or drawing, the
intent of which is to cause a division of a single parcel of land into two or
more parcels.
(Prior Code, § 25-34) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.057 WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.
   (A)   Every owner, operator or person responsible for any land disturbance
activity on property through which a watercourse passes shall keep and maintain
that portion of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris and
other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate or retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner, operator or person shall
maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a
watercourse, so that such structures will not interfere with the use, function
or physical integrity of the watercourse.
   (B)   To assist in the compliance with state and federal laws and
regulations, the Chief Building Inspector may develop special protection areas
which require additional control of stormwater quality and quantity than
provided by minimum design standards. Such areas may consist of watersheds
corresponding to adopted TMDLs, known flooding problems and pollution
impairments, or other areas necessary to protect, maintain and enhance water
quality and the environment of the town and the public health, safety and
general welfare of the town’s residents. These areas may change with time as
development continues and as federal and state law demands.
   (C)   New stormwater systems created as the result of any new and re-
development project shall be connected in a manner so as not to degrade the
integrity of any existing stormwater system, whether natural or human-made, and
shall have demonstrated this to the Chief Building Inspector, in accordance
with the Manual. Discharge points shall be confined to connections with an
existing stormwater system. When stormwater discharges are to flow into
collection systems not owned and maintained by the town, the owners of these
systems shall maintain the right to disapprove new connections to their
systems.
(Prior Code, § 25-36) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.058 NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS.
   The owner, operator or person responsible for any land disturbance activity
shall immediately notify the Chief Building Inspector of any known or suspected
release of materials or discharges that are currently resulting in or may
result in any illegal discharges of pollutants to an existing stormwater
system.
(Prior Code, § 25-37) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.059 ILLICIT CONNECTIONS, ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND IMPROPER DISPOSAL.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any owner, operator or person to connect any pipe,
open channel or any other conveyance system that discharges anything, except
stormwater or other approved discharges into the town’s stormwater system or
facility, or waters of the state.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any owner, operator or person to continue the
operation of any illicit connection regardless of whether the connection was
permissible when constructed. Improper connections in violation of this chapter
must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to the satisfaction of the
Chief Building Inspector in compliance with federal, state or local agencies or
departments regulating the discharge.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any owner, operator or person to throw, drain or
otherwise discharge to any existing stormwater system, the waters of the state
or to cause, permit or allow a discharge that is composed of anything except
stormwater or other discharges authorized by the Chief Building Inspector.
   (D)   The Chief Building Inspector will develop procedures for detecting,
tracking and eliminating illicit discharges and improper disposals to the
stormwater system.
   (E)   After a reasonable determination is made by the Chief Building
Inspector that the discharge is not a significant source of pollution, the
Chief Building Inspector may require controls for, or exempt from, the
prohibition divisions in (A), (B), and (C) above the following:
      (1)   Unpolluted industrial cooling water, but only under the
authorization and direction of the Chief Building Inspector and if appropriate
industrial NPDES permit is in place;
      (2)   Water line flushing, diverted stream flows, rising ground waters,
and uncontaminated pumped ground waters, and uncontaminated ground water
infiltration;
      (3)   Discharges from potable water sources, foundation drains, air
conditioning condensation, landscape irrigation, springs, water from crawl
space pumps, footing drains, lawn watering, individual car washing,
dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, flows from riparian habitats and
wetlands, and street wash water; and/or
      (4)   Discharges or flows from firefighting.
   (F)   The Chief Building Inspector may develop procedures for allowing other
non-stormwater discharges.
(Prior Code, § 25-38) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.060 DETECTION OF ILLICIT CONNECTIONS AND IMPROPER DISPOSAL.
   (A)   The Chief Building Inspector will take appropriate steps to detect and
eliminate illicit connections to the town’s stormwater system, including the
adoption of a program to screen illicit discharges and identify their source or
sources, perform inspections, and levy fines if not removed.
   (B)   The Chief Building Inspector will take appropriate steps to detect and
eliminate improper discharges. These steps may include programs to screen for
disposal, programs to provide for public education and public information,
inspection, levying fines and other appropriate activities to facilitate the
proper management and elimination of illicit discharges.
(Prior Code, § 25-39) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.061 WASTE DISPOSAL PROHIBITIONS.
   This chapter prohibits non-authorized discharges, illicit dumping or
disposal of waste into any stormwater system or waters of this state.
(Prior Code, § 25-40) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.062 DISCHARGES IN VIOLATION OF NPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STOWRMWATER
DISCHARGES ASSOCIATED WITH INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY PERMIT.
   Any owner, operator or person subject to a violation of the NPDES general
permit for stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity permit
(except construction activities) shall comply with all provisions of the
permit. Proof of compliance with the permit will be required in a form
acceptable to the Chief Building Inspector prior to or as a condition of the
issuance of approval of an application or a building permit.
(Prior Code, § 25-41) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.063 MONITORING.
   The Chief Building Inspector may monitor the quantity and concentration of
pollutants in stormwater discharges from the areas or locations designated in
the town’s SWMP.
(Prior Code, § 25-42) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.064 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The Chief Building Inspector, subject to the provisions of §§
155.047 through
155.050, may enter upon and inspect all properties for regular inspections,
periodic investigations, monitoring, observation measurement, enforcement,
sampling and testing to effectuate the provisions of this chapter and the SWMP
programs.
   (B)   Upon refusal by any property owner, operator or person to permit an
inspector to enter upon the property or continue an inspection on the property,
the inspector shall terminate the inspection or confine the inspection to
portions of the property to which no objection is raised. The Chief Building
Inspector will document the refusal and proceed according to the provisions of
§§
155.047 through
155.050.
   (C)   In the event that the Chief Building Inspector reasonably believes
that discharges from the property into a stormwater system may cause an
imminent and substantial threat to the health, safety or welfare of the public
or the environment, an inspection may be conducted.
   (D)   Inspection reports will be maintained in a permanent file located in
the town’s Building Department.
   (E)   At any time during an inspection or at such other times as the Chief
Building Inspector may request information from an owner, operator or other
responsible person, that owner, operator or other responsible person may
identify areas of his or her system or facility, any material, processes or
information that contain or might reveal a trade secret. If the Chief Building
Inspector has no reason to question such identification, all material,
processes and information obtained within such areas shall be conspicuously
labeled “CONFIDENTIAL - TRADE SECRET.” The trade secret designation shall be
freely granted to any material claimed to be such by the owner or
representative unless there is clear and convincing evidence for denying such
designation. In the event the Chief Building Inspector does not agree with the
trade secret designation, the material shall be temporarily designated a trade
secret and the owner or representative may appeal the Chief Building
Inspector’s decision in the manner in which all such appeals are handled in
this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 25-43) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.065 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   (1)   If the Chief Building Inspector determines that work performed
for new development and re-development fails to conform to the approved
application, or that the work has not been performed, the Chief Building
Inspector may direct conformity by sending written notice of violation (NOV) to
the property owner, operator or other responsible person. Such notice of
violation will be in accordance with the Manual. The actions of the Chief
Building Inspector may include:
         (a)   Issuing a written order to comply, to suspend work, or to revoke
the approval issued;
         (b)   Withholding or revoking other permits related to the site;
         (c)   Withholding the release of permanent electric power to the site
or certificate of occupancy; and/or
         (d)   Seeking redress through legal action.
      (2)   The NOV shall serve as notice to remove the violation(s). The NOV
shall be provided to the owner, operator or person responsible for the land
disturbing activities stating the nature of the violation, the amount of time
to correct deficiencies, the date on which an inspection will be made to ensure
that corrective action has been performed, and the applicable penalty or fine
if corrective action is not taken by the inspection date. After the issuance of
the NOV, the Chief Building Inspector may issue a uniform summons citation in
accordance with the Manual.
   (B)   When the Chief Building Inspector determines that an owner, operator
or other responsible person has failed to maintain a stormwater system or
facility, the NOV shall be provided to the owner, operator or other responsible
person stating the nature of the violation, the amount of time in which to
correct deficiencies, the date on which an inspection will be made to ensure
that corrective action has been performed, and the applicable penalty or fine
if corrective action is not taken. It shall be sufficient notification to
deliver the notice in accordance with the Manual.
   (C)   When the Chief Building Inspector determines that an owner, operator
or other responsible person of any property is causing or partially causing
flooding, erosion or is in non-compliance with water quality standards or this
chapter, the Chief Building Inspector may require the owner, operator or other
responsible person to remedy the violation and restore the impacted property. A
NOV will be issued in accordance with the Manual.
   (D)   This chapter may be enforced by any remedy at law or in equity
available to the Chief Building Inspector under any federal and state laws and
regulations. The penalties and remedies provided in this chapter are cumulative
and not exclusive, and may be independently and separately pursued against the
same person for the activity constituting a violation.
(Prior Code, § 25-44) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.066 ADDITIONAL LEGAL MEASURES.
   If the town is fined or subjected to a compliance schedule by the state or
federal government for a violation of its NPDES permit by any owner, operator
or other person, the owner, operator or other person shall be liable to the
town for any and all penalties, expenses, fees and costs of compliance
associated therewith.
(Prior Code, § 25-46) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.067 CORRECTIVE ACTION.
   In the event a violation of this chapter has not been corrected within the
applicable time period for correction, the town may, subject to the provisions
of §
155.050, enter upon the real property and correct the violation. Any penalties,
expenses, fees and costs incurred as a result of such action, including, but
not limited to, the inspection, administration, labor and equipment costs,
shall be forfeited from any bond issued for the project.
(Prior Code, § 25-47) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.068 STOP-WORK ORDER.
   The Chief Building Inspector may issue a stop work order if any construction
activity is conducted in violation of this chapter. The stop work order shall
require correction of the NOV. Any owner, operator or other person in violation
of a stop work order is subject to payment of all fees, bonds and penalties
prior to the lifting of the stop work order.
(Prior Code, § 25-48) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.069 APPROVAL SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   An approved application may be suspended or revoked if one or more of the
following violations have been committed:
   (A)   Violations of the conditions of the approved application;
   (B)   Construction is not in accordance with the letter or intent of the
approved plans;
   (C)   Non-compliance with correction notice(s) or stop work order(s); or
   (D)   The existence of an immediate danger to a downstream area.
(Prior Code, § 25-49) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.070 DESIGN CRITERIA.
   (A)   The Chief Building Inspector may grant a variance from the
requirements of this chapter if exceptional circumstances exist such that
strict adherence to the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary
hardship to the owner, operator or other person and will not fulfill the intent
of the chapter.
   (B)   A written request for a variance shall be required and shall be
submitted in accordance with the Manual.
(Prior Code, § 25-50) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.071 APPEALS PROCESS.
   (A)   An applicant may appeal the decision of the Chief Building Inspector
to the town’s Board of Zoning Appeals within 30 days after the date of the
Chief Building Inspector’s response. The Chief Building Inspector shall provide
the petition form to the applicant/petitioner.
   (B)   The petition must be accompanied with a $25 fee that will be used to
partially defray the costs incurred in connection with the administration of
petitions filed pursuant to this section.
   (C)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear the petition to determine if
the decision of the Chief Building Inspector or his or her designated agent was
based on a reasonable interpretation of the ordinance.
   (D)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall render a written decision on each
petition that is heard, and such written decision shall be issued within 20
calendar days from the day the Board heard the petition. The decision of the
Board of Zoning Appeals shall contain findings of fact and conclusions of law
and the decision shall be sent to the petitioner by first class mail.
   (E)   The decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be final unless the
petitioner appeals the decision to the Circuit Court in the county within 30
days after the date of the decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals is delivered
to the petitioner.
(Prior Code, § 25-51) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.072 FUNDING.
   In addition to all other charges, fees and penalties, the town shall have
the right to develop and impose a stormwater service fee to fund implementation
of this chapter and its associated programs and plans.
(Prior Code, § 25-52) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.073 CONNECTION TO CONVEYANCES.
   The Chief Building Inspector shall have the right to establish a schedule of
appropriate fees for any owner, operator or person establishing a new discharge
to waters of the state within the town. Such fees shall be payable as part of
any application related to the discharge of stormwater run-off. Application
fees shall be established on the basis of facility classes relating to the
quantity and quality of approved discharge. Establishment and revision of such
fees shall be approved by Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 25-53) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.074 PLAN REVIEW.
   A fee associated with the plan review of land development construction
documents may be assessed. Establishment and revision of such fees shall be
approved by Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 25-54) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.075 FIELD INSPECTION.
   A fee associated with the field inspection and re-inspections of land
development or construction activities may be assessed. Establishment and
revision of such fees shall be approved by Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 25-55) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
§ 155.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   In addition to any other penalties provided in this chapter, the
town may assess a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000 against any person
violating any provision of this chapter. Each day a violation continues
constitutes a separate violation that may be the subject of such a penalty. The
Enforcement Officer shall make a written demand for payment upon the person
responsible for the violation and set forth in detail the violation for when
the penalty has been invoked. If full payment of the penalty is not made within
30 days after such demand is made, a civil action may be filed in the Circuit
Court of the county to recover the amount of the penalty.
      (2)   When the town has reasonable cause to believe that any person is
violating or is threatening to violate the requirements of this chapter, it
may, either before or after the institution of any other action or proceeding
authorized by this chapter, institute a civil action in circuit court for
injunctive relief to restrain the violation or threatened violation. The
institution of an action for injunctive relief under this division (A) does not
relieve any party to the proceeding from any civil penalty prescribed for
violations of this chapter.
      (3)   The amount of the fee shall be pursuant to this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 25-11)
   (B)   (1)   Civil. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall
be subject to a civil penalty of up to $1,000 for each violation. Each separate
day of a violation constitutes a new and separate violation.
      (2)   Criminal. In addition to any applicable civil penalties, any owner,
operator or other person who willfully, with wanton disregard, or intentionally
violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be punished within the jurisdictional limits of the town’s Municipal
Court. The Chief Building Inspector may issue a uniform summons citation for a
violation of this chapter. Fines imposed under the NOV may not exceed $500 per
violation or 30 days in jail, or both. Each day a violation remains constitutes
a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 25-45) (Ord. 2007, passed 9-18-2007)
CHAPTER 156: BEACHES
Section
   
156.01   Adoption of prior code chapter
   
Appendix A:   Beaches
§ 156.01 ADOPTION OF PRIOR CODE CHAPTER.
   Chapter 4 of the prior code entitled “Beaches” is hereby adopted by this
code and included as-written in
Appendix A of this chapter.
(Prior Code, Chapter 4)
APPENDIX A: BEACHES 1
 
Notes
1    As to filling and draining of low lots, see
  Chapter 154 of this Code.
Article I. Conservation and Preservation.
Sec. 4-1. Definitions for article.
A.   The words “retained and preserved” in Section
4-2 mean that the property subject to this article shall not be subdivided in
any manner into lots or recreation areas and that the Town will utilize all
legal means to guarantee that this natural habitat will be undisturbed.
B.   The word “trust” in Section
4-2 shall mean that the Town of Sullivan’s Island will act as the custodian of
this natural habitat in an effort to maintain it in its present state as
protection against erosion caused by the sea, and for the health, safety and
welfare of the Island.
C.   The words “area of conservation” in Section
4-2 shall mean that the land shall remain in its natural state (except as
provided in Section
4-4 below) with no man-made, artificial changes other than seawalls or other
erosion control devices constructed with the consent of the Town of Sullivan’s
Island. (1-21-92)
D.   The words “maintained and preserved” in Section
4-3 shall mean that the Town of Sullivan’s Island will utilize its police
powers to prevent altering of this area in any way other than providing all
necessary emergency ingress and egress in the beach area or as provided in
Section
4-4 below.
(Ord. 1-19-76, S4; 10-20-80, S5)
Sec. 4-2. Establishment of conservation area.
   All portions of Sullivan’s Island extending from the mean low water mark to
the landward boundaries of the RC-1 and RC-2 Recreation and Conservation Areas
(established in the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Sullivan’s Island and
adopted August 1, 1977 and readopted August 21, 1978), and owned by the Town of
Sullivan’s Island, the State of South Carolina, the United States Government,
or by persons, shall be retained and preserved by the Town of Sullivan’s Island
in trust as an area of conservation for the purpose of protecting the ecology
of such property, of the adjoining property and of the beaches of Sullivan’s
Island; for enhancing the environment, and for the health, safety and welfare
of the residents and property owners of Sullivan’s Island. (1-27-92)
Sec. 4-3. Prohibition of subdivision; maintenance and preservation.
   The properties above defined shall henceforth and hereinafter be subject to
the administration and police power of the municipal government of Sullivan’s
Island shall not be subdivided into building lots. Subject only to the limited
exception provided for in Section
4-4 below, the above-defined properties and areas shall be maintained and
preserved in their natural state for the benefit of all people for the purpose
of protecting the ecology, environment, and health, safety and welfare of the
Town, property owners and residents of Sullivan’s Island. (Ord. 1-19-76, S2;
10-20-80, S2)
Sec. 4-4. Restrictions on trimming, pruning and removing vegetation in RC-
1 area.
   In certain areas of the aforesaid RC-1 Recreation and Conservation Area as
established by the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Sullivan’s Island adopted
August 1, 1977 and readopted August 21, 1978, there may be bushes and trees
which grow to a size sufficient to prevent effective operation of mosquito
abatement programs, or otherwise adversely affect the health, safety and
welfare of the Town. It, therefore, shall not be a violation of this article
for the Town Council of Sullivan’s Island to establish a program pursuant to
which citizens may apply to the Town for permission to trim and prune bushes
and trees in the RC-1 Area as follows:
A.   When the Zoning Administrator finds as a fact that bushes and trees in a
particular area create a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the Town
due to density, mosquito breeding, or standing water, then upon application of
a citizen, or on his own initiative, the Zoning Administrator may issue a
permit to a citizen or to the Town to prune or trim the bushes or trees in the
RC-1 Area, provided, however, that:
   1.   the program shall include a numbered permit system under the
supervision of the Town Zoning Administrator, and
   2.   in the area when, fresh water collects naturally and contributes to the
breeding of mosquitoes, the vegetation may be cut and maintained to facilitate
the work of the mosquito abatement program, and
   3.   these areas may be joined by cleared paths up to eight (8) feet wide to
facilitate access by mosquito abatement personnel and to serve as a fire break,
and
   4.   in the areas where the density of the vegetation shall be found to be a
hazard to the safety, welfare, or health, the vegetation may be thinned to one
substantial tree, bush or shrub for each six (6) square yard areas, more or
less, and
   5.   in those areas where the height of trees or bushes are deemed
objectionable, the trees or bushes may be pruned to a height of no less than
three (3) feet, provided that the cumulative effect of the trimming, cutting or
pruning shall not be detrimental to the safety, welfare, and health of the
people of the Town.
B.   The Zoning Administrator shall grant a permit upon the proper application
of the adjacent property owner with due regard for existing climatic
conditions, the season of the year and the effect of the cumulative trimming,
pruning and cutting, and upon the condition that the permittee shall remove the
debris to the intersection of a paved road and a beach access or, upon specific
approval and direction, may feed the debris to a chipper and deposit the
accumulation of vegetation in the fresh water basins, and shall complete all
within fifteen (15) days of the issuance of the permit.
C.   Town Council may direct Town employees to trim the bushes and trees to
such an extent that access to the beach for emergency vehicles and visitors on
foot may continue. The town may continue to keep present public walkways open;
however, in no case shall these access ways be artificially leveled. No
drainage of water to the beach other than natural drainage shall be allowed.
(1-20-80)
D.   Nothing in this section shall permit alteration, destruction or removal of
vegetation seaward of the SCCC 40-year setback line, without permission of the
Town and SCCC. (1-21-92)
Sec. 4-4.1 Construction prohibited in RC-2 area, excepting certain docks and
piers.
   There shall be no construction of any type, no destruction of vegetation,
except trimming, cutting and pruning of back beach bushes and trees as provided
in Section 21-39 and no man-made changes of topography in RC-2 area, except
that the construction of private docks by owners of lots adjoining this area
may be permitted, provided approval of the U.S. Corps of Engineers, the South
Carolina Coastal Council, the Town of Sullivan’s Island and other applicable
agencies is obtained. (10-20-80, S4)
Sec. 4-4.2 Specification for permitted docks and piers.
   The “head” of permanent dock or pier structure shall be no greater in size
than ten (10’) feet by ten (10’) feet. There shall be no more than one (1)
floating dock attached to the fixed dock, the dimensions of which shall be no
greater than eight (8’) feet by twenty (20’) feet. An attached structure may be
placed on a dock or floating dock, provided, 1) it is included in the above one
hundred (100) square foot area of the dock or the one hundred sixty (160)
square foot area of the floating dock, 2) it does not exceed three (3’) feet in
height, and 3) it does not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in floor area.
The dock or pier shall be constructed within the projected property lines of
the lot and within the setback requirements of the Town Zoning Ordinance. The
maximum width of the walkway between the land and the head of the pier shall be
four (4’) feet. There shall be no boat houses or similar structures in the RC-
2 area. (10-20-80, S4)
Sec. 4-4.3 The Conveyance of certain real property bordering the Atlantic Ocean
to the Lowcountry Open Land Trust for the purposes of preserving and conserving
the natural area located therein.
   Whereas, the Town of Sullivan’s Island is the owner of certain real
property, which is more specifically described on Exhibit A attached hereto and
incorporated herein, which real property generally borders the Atlantic Ocean,
and
   Whereas, said real property has certain aesthetic, scientific, educational,
ecological, and environmental value in its present state as a natural area
which has not been subject to development or exploitation, and
   Whereas, the Open Land Trust intends and has agreed that upon the conveyance
of said property to the Lowcountry Open Land Trust it will place certain
restrictions thereon, and convey the real property back to the Town of
Sullivan’s Island, giving the Town of Sullivan’s Island the right to revoke or
remove such restrictions upon an unanimous vote of Council, and a referendum
duly passed by seventy-five (75%) percent of the votes by Town of Sullivan’s
Island citizens. A copy of the Deed with the Deed restrictions thereon which
will convey the property from the Lowcountry Open Land Trust to the Town of
Sullivan’s Island has been marked Exhibit B and is attached hereto and
incorporated herein by reference, and
   Whereas, the Town Council referred this matter to the Planning and Zoning
Committee, who held Public Hearings on the 9th day of March, 1988 and the 27th
day of April, 1988, and made their recommendations to the Town Council. Town
Council in essence accepted the recommendations of the Planning and Zoning
Committee with modifications and are not mindful of so preserving and
conserving the natural areas of the above referenced real property.
   Now, therefore, be it ordained by the Town Council of Sullivan’s Island in
meeting duly assembled, that the Town of Sullivan’s Island convey to the
Lowcountry Open Land Trust all that real property herein before described on
Exhibit A for and in consideration of the sum of Ten thousand seven hundred
forty five and 00/100 ($10,745.00) Dollars, and the agreement to convey said
real property back to the Town of Sullivan’s Island by Deed heretofore referred
to as Exhibit B.
   Be it further ordained that the Mayor of the Town of Sullivan’s Island and
the Town Clerk are hereby directed and authorized to execute the Deed of
Conveyance to the Lowcountry Open Land Trust upon receipt of the sum of Ten
thousand seven hundred forty five and 00/100 ($10,745.00) Dollars, and to
execute any and all other documents necessary for said conveyance.
   Whereas if any part or parts of this Ordinance shall be held to be
unconstitutional such unconstitutionality’s shall not effect the validity of
the remaining parts of this Ordinance.
Sec. 4-4.3 (B) The Conveyance of Certain Real Property to the Lowcountry Open
Land Trust for the Purposes of Preserving and Conserving the Natural Area
Located Therein.
WHEREAS, the Town of Sullivan’s Island is the owner of certain real property,
which is more specifically described on Exhibit A attached hereto and
incorporated herein, which real property borders certain real property owned by
the Town of Sullivan’s Island but previously restricted in use by a deed of
conveyance from the Lowcountry Open Land Trust; and
WHEREAS, said real property has certain aesthetic, scientific, educational,
ecological and environmental value in its present state as a natural area which
has not been subject to development or exploitation; and
WHEREAS, the Town of Sullivan’s Island has asked the Lowcountry Open Land Trust
to assist the Town in preserving its natural state by agreeing to accept
ownership of the real property; and
WHEREAS, the Lowcountry Open Land Trust intends and has agreed that upon the
conveyance of said property to the Lowcounty Open Land Trust it will place
certain restrictions thereof similar to the restrictions placed on the
bordering lands, and convey the real property back to the Town of Sullivan’s
Island, giving the Town of Sullivan’s Island the right to revoke or remove such
restrictions upon an unanimous vote of Council, and a referendum duly passed by
seventy-five (75%) percent of the votes by Town of Sullivan’s Island citizens.
A copy of the Deed with the Deed restrictions thereon which will convey the
property from the Lowcountry Open Land Trust to the Town of Sullivan’s Island
has been marked Exhibit B and is attached hereto and incorporated herein by
reference; and
   NOW, THEREFORE
   BE IT ORDAINED by the Town Council of Sullivan’s Island in meeting duly
assembled, that the Town of Sullivan’s Island convey to the Lowcountry Open
Land Trust all that real property herein before described on Exhibit A for and
in consideration of the sum of Ten and No/100 ($10.00) Dollars, and the
agreement to assist the Town in preserving the real property’s natural state
and the further agreement to convey said real property back to the Town of
Sullivan’s Island by Deed heretofore referred to as Exhibit B.
   BE IT FURTHER ORDAINED that the Mayor of the Town of Sullivan’s Island and
the Town Clerk are hereby directed and authorized to execute the Deed of
Conveyance to the Lowcountry Open Land Trust and to execute any and all other
documents necessary for said conveyance.
   If any part or parts of this Ordinance shall be held to be unconstitutional
such unconstitutionality’s shall not affect the validity of the remaining parts
of this Ordinance.
   This Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon its ratification. (12-20-
05)
Sec. 4-4.4 Regulation for landscaping and dune vegetation.
   Property owners along the oceanfront are encouraged to install and maintain
native dune grasses, ground covers and shrubs. Vegetation on the seaward and
landward sides of the primary oceanfront sand dunes shall be selected,
installed and maintained in accordance with the Town’s Local Comprehensive
Beach management Plan. Non-native vegetation shall not be allowed seaward of
the RS/RC-1 boundary line. In instances where the 40-year setback line is
landward of the RS/RC-1 boundary, the Town may allow non-native vegetation
between the 40-year setback line and the RS/RC-1 boundary, provided however,
that mitigation for any landscaping with non-native vegetation seaward of the
40-year setback line may be required by the Town. Mitigation requirements are
set forth in Section 2-10 of the Town’s Local Comprehensive Beachfront
Management Plan. (1-21-92)
Sec. 4-5. Penalty for littering, destruction of vegetation or sand dune
movement.
   Any persons altering the area that is the subject of this article by
littering, destruction of vegetation (except as provided in section
4-4 above), or the artificial movement of the existing sand dunes shall be
subject to a five hundred ($500) Dollar fine, and each day such shall exist
shall constitute a separate office; in addition, violators will be require to
replace disturbed sand dunes and replant the natural vegetation of this area.
(1-9-76, S5; 10-20-80, S6; 9-23-97)
Sec. 4-5.1 Critical habitat areas.
   Pedestrian, vehicle and other traffic in critical habitat areas designated
along the ocean shoreline by the South Carolina Wildlife and Marine Resources
Department shall be subject to certain restrictions. When critical habitat
areas are designated, the Town shall post appropriate signs, as recommended by
the SCWMRD, and enforce traffic restrictions. (1-21-92)
Sec. 4-5.2 Consistency of article with Zoning Chapter.
   This article shall be read in conjunction with and in harmony with the
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Sullivan’s Island adopted August 1, 1977 and
readopted August 21, 1978, and the amendments thereto. (1-21-92)
Sec. 4-5.3 The Conveyance of Certain Real Property Located at Station 19 and at
Station 9.
   Adjacent to the Back Beach to the Mount Pleasant Land Conservancy for the
Purposes of Preserving and Conserving the Undeveloped Areas Located Therein.
(5-15-2012) This section is located at the end of Section 4.
Article II. Picnics and Outings.
Sec. 4-6. Definitions for article.
   The term “beach” or “beaches” as used in this article shall mean the areas
on both the oceanward and the back side of Sullivan’s Island covered by the ebb
and flow of the tide as well as the underdeveloped or dune areas inland from
the tide reach when said areas have not been developed or conveyed to private
ownership, and including the projection outward of the rights-of-way and
streets of the Town leading to the water beyond the point where public
maintenance of such streets and rights-of-way ends.
   “Outings or picnics on the beach” shall be defined as a gathering of more
than ten (10) persons in one place for the purpose of entertaining themselves
or providing food as refreshment or meals. (9-51, SI; 11-16-70)
Sec. 4-7. Applicability of article to private family, etc.
   Nothing in this article shall prevent a private family, together with its
house guests, from having its regular meal or meals on the beach. (9-51, S1)
Sec. 4-8. Notification of Chief of Police.
   The Chief of Police shall be notified of any picnic or outing to be held on
any beach of the Town by the person holding such picnic or outing, so that the
Chief may provide the proper police protection therefor. (9-51, S1)
Sec. 4-9. Violations of article.
   Any person holding a picnic or outing on any beach of the Town without first
having obtained a permit provided for by this article or in violation of the
conditions of such permit shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (9-51, S3; 7-8-68,
Art. 1)
Sec. 4-10. Permit required; from whom obtained.
   Outings and picnics on the beaches of the Town are hereby prohibited unless
a permit therefor is first obtained from the Fire Department. (9-51, SI)
Sec. 4-11. Application.
   Permits for outings or picnics on the beaches of the Town may be had upon
written application to the Fire Department at least twenty-four hours before
the date and hour set for the holding of the outing and picnic. Such
application shall be submitted to the Fire Department at the Fire Station. All
applications should be made by the person responsible for the conduct of the
proposed picnic and no permit shall be issued to any applicant less than
eighteen years old. (9-51, S2; 7-8-68, art. 2)
Sec. 4-12. Contents of permit and disposition thereof.
   Permits for picnics and outings on the beaches of the Town, shall be given
to an applicant therefor in duplicate, showing the date, place and hour of such
picnic or outing. No permit shall be issued for picnics which shall continue
after 11:00 PM. It shall be incumbent on the applicant to give one copy of the
same to the Chief of Police and retain the other copy in his possession before
and during the outing or picnic; the copy that he retained to be exhibited to
the Police Chief or his duly authorized representative or assistant, if and
when requested to do so. (9-51, S2; 7-8-68, art. 3; 11-15-88)
(Article III - Sections 4-13 through 4-22 repealed 10/15/13).
Article IV. Miscellaneous Restrictions.
Sec. 4-23. Motor-driven vehicles on beaches prohibited; exceptions.
   Except as provided in this chapter, no motor-driven vehicle shall be allowed
on beaches of the Town of Sullivan’s Island for any purpose whatsoever;
provided that this shall not apply to police and emergency vehicles. The Town
Council upon written request, may waive this section upon a showing by the
party so requesting that to allow a vehicle on the beach for a specific purpose
will not be injurious to the public health, safety and welfare or injurious to
natural resources and habitats. (Ors. 8-18-75, S2; 1-21-92)
Sec. 4-23.1 Wind driven vehicles on beaches prohibited.
   No wind-driven vehicle shall be allowed on beaches of the Town of Sullivan’s
Island for any purpose. (6-17-86)
Sec. 4-24. Restriction of beverage containers on beaches.
   A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession any beer,
or wine, or other alcoholic beverages as defined by the laws of the State of
South Carolina, whether in an opened or closed and sealed container, on any of
the beaches of the Town of Sullivan’s Island, including those unpaved right-of-
ways which traverse the sand dunes and beaches of the Town of Sullivan’s
Island.
   B)   No person shall carry upon the beaches of Sullivan’s Island, including
the right-of-ways which traverse the sand dunes and beaches of the Town of
Sullivan’s Island, any bottles, glasses, or any other glass beverage container
(s). (5-15-90)
   C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession
any beer, wine, or other alcoholic beverages, whether in an opened or closed
and sealed container, on any of the beaches of the town, including those
unpaved rights-of-way which traverse the sand dunes and beaches of the town.
(Ord. 2018-09, passed 1-15-2018)
Sec. 4-25. Prohibited area adjacent to Breach Inlet.
   No person shall enter the waters adjacent to Sullivan’s Island whether entry
be made from Sullivan’s Island, the Isle of Palms, a boat, the inland waterway,
a raft, or any conveyance whatsoever, at Breach Inlet within two hundred (200)
yards to the north and five hundred (500) yards to the south of the center line
of South Carolina Highway 703 where it crosses Breach Inlet. (Ord. 8-5-74, SI)
Sec. 4-26. Prohibited area near Station 12.
   No person shall enter the waters adjacent to Sullivan’s Island at that point
where the center line of Station 12 Street would intersect the waters if said
center line were extended southwardly to meet said waters nor within five
hundred (500) yards to the east of the point where the center line of Station
12 Street would meet said waters. No person shall enter five hundred (500)
yards of the first rock east of Station 12 (approximately the red buoy). No
entry shall be made into said waters from Sullivan’s Island itself or from any
conveyance whatsoever. (Ord. 8-5-74, S2; 9-15-92)
Sec. 4-27. Aircraft defined.
   For the purpose of this section, aircraft shall be defined as including, but
not limited to airplanes, gliders, ultra-lights, helicopters, parasails, or any
other craft capable of sustained flight. (7-21-92)
Sec. 4-28. Commencement and landing of aircraft prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful to commence flight of any aircraft from the land or the
waters within the boundaries of the Town of Sullivan’s Island, or to land any
aircraft on the land or the waters within the boundaries of the Town of
Sullivan’s Island or to fly any aircraft on the land or waters within the
boundaries of the Town of Sullivan’s Island or to fly any aircraft within fifty
feet (50’) feet of the lands or water within the boundaries of the Town of
Sullivan’s Island without a permit from the Town of Sullivan’s Island. The Town
of Sullivan’s Island may issue special permits for isolated aircraft activities
within the boundaries of the Town of Sullivan’s Island when adequate safety
measures are provided and the time and date of the activities are known in
advance. Such permits shall be issued only be resolution of the Town Council.
(7-21-92)
Sec. 4-29. Unlawful to fly aircraft within 50 feet of land or water.
   It shall further be unlawful to authorize, direct or hire any person to
commence flight of any aircraft from the land or the waters within the
boundaries of the Town of Sullivan’s Island or to fly any aircraft within fifty
feet (50’) of the lands or water within the boundaries of the Town of
Sullivan’s Island except as stated in Sec. 4-28. (7-21-92)
Sec. 4-30. Validity of Ordinance.
   If any part or parts of this ordinance shall be held to be unconstitutional,
such unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity of the remaining parts
of this ordinance.
Sec. 4-31. Appeal of Ordinances.
   Any ordinance or ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are
hereby appealed. (6-18-85)
Sec. 4-32.
   There shall be no commercial activity of any kind on the Beaches, including,
but not limited to, the sales of goods, food or drink and the providing of
services, regardless of the amount or kind of consideration paid or exchanged.
The areas included within the Beaches are defined in Section 4-6 herein. (10-
15-2013)
ORDINANCE No. 2012 - 03
SECTION 45(3) THE CONVEYANCE OF CERTAIN REAL PROPERTY LOCATED AT STATION 19 AND
AT STATION 9 ADJACENT TO THE BACK BEACH TO THE MOUNT PLEASANT LAND CONSERVANCY
FOR THE PURPOSES OF PRESERVING AND CONSERVING THE UNDEVELOPED AREAS LOCATED
THEREIN.
   WHEREAS, the Town of Sullivan’s Island is the owner of certain real
property, which is more specifically described on Exhibit “A” attached hereto
and incorporated herein, which real property generally borders the back beach
and marshes of Sullivan’s Island, and
   WHEREAS, said real property has certain aesthetic, educational, ecological,
and environmental value in its present state as a natural area which has not
been subject to development or exploitation, and
   WHEREAS, protected access by the Town’s residents and visitors to the
property in an undeveloped state permits enjoyment and appreciation of the back
beach and marsh portion of the Island as well as access to creek and wetlands,
all of which is considered by the Town to be a public good of vast and enduring
value: and
   WHEREAS, the Town Council of Sullivan’s Island desires to maintain and
preserve the aesthetic, educational, ecological, and environmental value of
said properties, and seeks to do so by conveying the property to the Mount
Pleasant Land Conservancy, which is a South Carolina non-profit corporation
whose main purpose is to preserve and conserve natural and undeveloped areas,
and
   WHEREAS, the Mount Pleasant Land Conservancy intends and has agreed that
upon the conveyance of said property to the Mount Pleasant Land Conservancy it
will place certain restrictions thereon, and convey the real property back to
the Town of Sullivan’s Island, giving the Town of Sullivan’s Island the right
to revoke or remove such restrictions upon a unanimous vote of Council, and a
referendum duly passed by seventy-five (75%) percent of the votes by Town of
Sullivan’s Island citizens. A copy of the Deed with the Deed Restrictions
thereon which will convey the property from the Mount Pleasant Land Conservancy
to the Town of Sullivan’s Island has been marked Exhibit “B” and is attached
hereto and incorporated herein by reference, and
   WHEREAS, the Town Council referred this matter to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for plat approval of the two parcels and a held Public Hearing was
held on the 13 day of July, 2011, and the Planning and Zoning Commission made
their recommendations to the Town Council as stated in its minutes of the
meeting. Town Council is now mindful of so preserving and conserving the
natural areas of the above referenced real property.
NOW, THEREFORE
   BE IT ORDAINED by the Town Council of Sullivan’s Island in meeting duly
assembled, that the Town of Sullivan’s Island convey to the Mount Pleasant Land
Conservancy all that real property hereinbefore described on Exhibit “A” for an
in consideration of the sum of Ten ($10.00) Dollars, and the agreement to
convey said real property back to the Town of Sullivan’s Island by Deed
heretofore referred to as Exhibit “B”.
   BE IT FURTHER ORDAINED that the Mayor of the Town of Sullivan’s Island and
the Town Clerk are hereby directed and authorized to execute the Deed of
Conveyance to the Mount Pleasant Land Conservancy upon receipt of the sum of
Ten ($10.00) Dollars, and to execute any and all other documents necessary for
said conveyance.
   If any part of parts of this Ordinance shall be held to be unconstitutional
such unconstitutional ties shall not effect the validity of the remaining parts
of this Ordinance,
   WHEREAS, this Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon its ratification.
   RATIFIED this 15th day of May, 2012.
                                       TOWN COUNCIL OF SULLIVAN’S
                                       ISLAND, SOUTH CAROLINA
                                                                                              
                                       By: Carl J. Smith, Mayor
 
ATTEST:
                           
Ellen Miller, Clerk
 
First Reading: March 20, 2012
Second Reading: April 17,2012
Third Reading: April 17,2012
EXHIBIT “A”
PARCEL I
ALL that certain piece, parcel or lot of land, located, lying and being in the
Town of Sullivan’s Island, Charleston County, South Carolina, being shown and
designated as 0.48 Acres, on a plat entitled, “0.48 ACRES, FORMERLY THE OLD
COVE STREET R/W OWNED BY THE TOWN OF SULLIVAN’S ISLAND, IN THE TOWN OF
SULLIVAN’S ISLAND, CHARLESTON COUNTY, SOUTH CAROLINA”, dated June 9, 2010.
prepared by Charles F. Dawley, Jr., RLS, and recorded in Book            , at
Page                 , in the RMC Office for Charleston County, South Carolina.
SAID lot having such size, shape, dimensions, buttings and boundings, more or
less, as are shown on said plat, which is specifically incorporated herein by
reference.
TMS No.:
 
PARCEL II
ALL that certain piece, parcel or lot of land, located, lying and being in the
Town of Sullivan’s Island, Charleston County, South Carolina, being shown and
designated as 3.09 Acres, on a plat entitled, “3.09 ACRES AT STATION 19 STREET,
BACK STREET AND STATION 20 STREET OWNED BY THE TOWN OF SULLIVAN’S ISLAND, IN
THE TOWN OF SULLIVAN’S ISLAND, CHARLESTON COUNTY, SOUTH CAROLINA”, dated June
9, 2010, prepared by Charles F. Dawley, Jr., RLS, and recorded in Book
              , at Page            , in the RMC Office for Charleston County,
South Carolina. SAID lot having such size, shape, dimensions, buttings and
boundings, more or less, as are shown on said plat, which is specifically
incorporated herein by reference.
TMS No.:
Exhibit “B”
Deed Restrictions
   THIS DEED RESTRICTION (“Deed Restriction”) entered into as of this
           day of           , 2012, by and between THE TOWN OF SULLIVAN’S
ISLAND, a South Carolina municipal corporation (“TOWN” or “OWNER”), and MOUNT
PLEASANT LAND CONSERVANCY, a South Carolina non-profit corporation (“MPLC” or
“HOLDER”).
   WHEREAS, MPLC is the present owner of the real property made particularly
described in the foregoing Exhibit “A” (the “Property”); and
   WHEREAS, the Property is a significant natural area that represents
undeveloped space of significant value to the residents of the Town of
Sullivan’s Island; and
   WHEREAS, preservation of the Property as undeveloped space will yield a
significant public benefit, and allow traditional recreational uses; and
   WHEREAS, the Property described in Exhibit “A” currently consists of two
separate parcels referred to herein as “Station 9” and “Station 19”; and
   WHEREAS, [recitation of Town Council approval].
   NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the mutual covenants set forth herein,
the parties hereby agree as follows:
   1.   Imposition of Deed Restrictions. The MPLC, as owner of the Property,
does hereby impose the following covenants and restrictions upon the Property,
and the Town does hereby accept the Property with the following restrictions
and grant to the Holder certain enforcement rights as more particularly set
forth herein.
   2.   Purpose. The purpose of this Deed Restriction is to ensure that the
Property will be retained forever predominantly in its naturally evolving
undeveloped condition; to prevent any use of the Property that will
significantly impair or interfere with the conservation values of the Property
described herein, while allowing the availability of the Property for use as a
public nature-based park for passive and active recreational uses compatible
with maintaining the conservation values of the Property and surrounding
ecosystems. Owner will not perform, nor knowingly allow others to perform, any
act on or affecting the Property that is inconsistent with the purposes of this
Deed Restriction. However unless otherwise specified below, nothing in this
Deed Restriction shall require the Owner to take any action to restore the
condition of the Property after any act of God or other event over with Owner
had no control. Owner understands that nothing in this Deed Restriction
relieves it of any obligation or restriction on the use of the Property imposed
by law.
   3.   Property Uses. The Property shall be reserved by the Town for public
purposes including a public nature-based park for passive and active
recreational uses compatible with maintaining the conservation values of the
Property and surrounding ecosystem.
      (a.)   Required Notices. Thirty (30) days prior to construction of any
permitted improvements. Owner will submit plans to Holder for review. The plans
shall be sufficiently detailed to allow Grantee to fully evaluate the impact of
the construction of the improvements on the Conservation Values of the
Property.
      (b.)   Transfer. Owner shall have the right to sel, give, mortgage,
lease, or otherwise convey the Property subject to the terms of this Deed
Restriction.
      (c.)   Prohibited Uses on the Property. The following activities,
improvements, and structures shall be prohibited on the Property:
         (i.)   Any building or structure with a roof, with the exception of
open shelters
         (ii.)   Asphalt pavement, concrete pavement or pavement of a non-
porous material
         (iii.)   Clear-cutting of the vegetation on the property or harvesting
any timber for profit. Provided, however, nothing herein shall prohibit the
town from landscaping, trimming, pruning or cutting the vegetation for
aesthetic purposes, varmint control, or scenic enhancement.
   4.   Retained Uses by Owner. Notwithstanding any provision set forth in this
Deed Restriction, Owner expressly reserves the following rights:
      (a.)   Following any natural disaster, declared state of emergency or
other exigent circumstances, Owner may use the Property for the temporary
storage of storm debris, and may further use the Property as a burn site for
organic storm debris, provided that the Property is returned to its prior
condition within 180 days after the temporary uses described above.
      (b.)   Regarding Station 19, the Owner may take any such action as may be
required pursuant to any environmental mitigation plan imposed or approved by
any State or Federal regulatory agency.
      (c.)   Owner further retains the right to construct and maintain
stormwater outfalls, and wastewater, water and other utilities so long as they
do not significantly impede use or view.
   5.   Miscellaneous. Except as expressly allowed by this Deed Restriction or
as necessary to accommodate the activities allowed by this Deed Restriction,
the following activities are prohibited on the Property.
      (a.)   Mining or drilling;
      (b.)   Depositing soil, gravel or other materials except for temporary
storage for Town projects;
      (c.)   Significantly altering the topography;
      (d.)   Storage or dumping of trash, garbage, or other unsightly or
offensive materials, hazardous waste or toxic substances;
      (e.)   Polluting surface waters, natural water courses, lakes, ponds,
marshes, subsurface water or any other water body;
      (f.)   Introduction of non-native plants and animals; and
      (g.)   Any continuing commercial or industrial use.
   7.   Holder’s Rights. To accomplish the purpose of this Deed Restriction,
the following rights are granted to Holder by this Deed Restriction:
      (a.)   Right to Enforce. The right to preserve and protect the
conservation values of the Property and enforce the terms of this Deed
Restriction as provided in Section 10.
      (b.)   Right of Entry. The right of Holder’s staff (including contractors
and associated natural resource management professional as needed) to enter the
Property at reasonable times after prior written notice to Owner, for the
purpose of inspecting the Property to determine if Owner is complying with the
covenants and purposes of this Deed Restriction. Prior written notice is not
required if Holder is entering upon the Property because of an ongoing or
imminent violation that could, in the sole discretion of Holder, substantially
diminish or impair the conservation values of the Property, as described in
Section 2 herein.
   8.   Responsibilities of Owner And Holder Not Affected. Other than as
specified herein, this Deed Restriction is not intended to impose any legal or
other responsibility on the Owner, or in any way to affect any existing
obligation of the Owner as owners of the Property. Owner retains all
responsibilities and shall bear all costs and liabilities of any kind related
to the ownership, operation, upkeep and maintenance of the Property. Among
other things, this shall apply to:
      (a.)   Taxes. The Owner shall be solely responsible for payment for all
taxes and assessments levied against the Property, if any.
      (b.)   Upkeep and Maintenance. The Owner shall be solely responsible for
the general upkeep and maintenance of the Property, to the extent it may be
required by law. The Holder shall have no obligation for the general upkeep or
maintenance of the Property, Owner shall keep the Holder’s interest in the
Property free of any liens arising out of any work performed for, materials
furnished to or obligations incurred by Owner.
   9.   Access. Owner and Holder agree that subject to reasonable rules and
regulations, the Property will be open to the general public as a passive use
park for the purposes of outdoor recreation and education involving the
Conservation Values and historic and cultural aspects of the Property as well
as scientific research consistent with the maintenance and management of the
Property’s ecological, historic and cultural values. This provision shall not
be interpreted to in any way to impair the Owner’s right to prevent access to
the Property by the general public when necessary for the health, safety or
welfare of the public or property.
   10.   Enforcement. To enforce the terms of this Deed Restriction, Holder
shall give notice of the violation of the Deed Restriction to the Owner by
certified mail, return receipt requested. In such notice the Holder shall
request the Owner to correct the violation, to take action to stop ongoing or
future violations, and to restore the Property to its condition at the time of
the conveyance of this Deed Restriction. Owner agrees that the Baseline Report
(also known as an Easement Documentation Report) shall be deemed to provide
objective information concerning the Property’s condition at the time of this
grant. Failure by the Owner to abate the violation and take such other
corrective action as may be requested by the Holder within sixty (60) days
after receipt of such notice (the “cure period”) shall entitle the Holder to
bring an action at law or equity in a court of competent jurisdiction to
enforce the terms of this Deed Restriction; to require the restoration of the
Property to its condition at the time of the conveyance of this Deed
Restriction; to enjoin the non-compliance by ex parte temporary or permanent
injunction in a court of competent jurisdiction. If the court determines that
the Owner has failed to comply with this Deed Restriction, the Owner shall
reimburse the Holder for any reasonable costs of enforcement, including costs
of restoration, court costs and reasonable attorney fees, in addition to any
other payments ordered by such court.
   11.   Emergency Enforcement. If the Holder, in its sole discretion,
determines that circumstances require immediate action to prevent or mitigate
significant damage to the conservation values of the Property, the Holder may
pursue its remedies under this paragraph without prior notice to the Owner or
without waiting for the cured period to expire.
   12.   Failure to Act or Delay. The Holder does not waive or forfeit the
right to take action as may be necessary to insure compliance with this Deed
Restriction by any prior failure to act and the Owner hereby waives any
defenses of waiver, estoppel or laches with respect to any failure to act or
delay by the Holder, its successors or assigns, in acting to enforce any
restriction or exercise any rights under this Deed Restriction.
   13.   Violations Due to Causes Beyond Owner’s Control. Nothing herein shall
be construed to entitle the Holder to institute any enforcement proceedings
against the Owner for any changes to the Property due to causes beyond the
Owner’s control, such as changes caused by fire, flood, storm, earthquake or
the unauthorized wrongful acts of third persons. In the event of violations of
this Deed Restriction caused by the unauthorized wrongful acts of third
persons, the owner agrees, upon request by the Holder, to assign its right of
action to the Holder, to join in any suit, or to appoint the Holder its
attorney-in-fact for the purposes of pursing enforcement action, all at the
election of the Holder.
   14.   Standing . By virtue of Holder’s acquisition of rights under this Deed
Restriction, it shall be entitled, at its option, to standing before
appropriate courts of law to pursue remedies of other matters which are
necessary or incidental to the protection of the property which is subject to
this Deed Restriction.
   15.   Transfer of Property . Any time the Property, or any interest therein,
is transferred by the Owner to any third parry, the Owner shall notify the
Holder in writing within thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of the
Property, and the document of conveyance shall expressly refer to this Deed
Restriction. The failure of Owner to perform any act required by this Paragraph
shall not impair the validity of this Deed Restriction or of the transferor
limit their enforceability in any way.
   16.   Amendment of Easement. This Deed Restriction may be amended only with
the written consent of both the Owner and Holder.
   17.   Interpretation. This Deed Restriction shall be interpreted under the
laws of South Carolina, resolving any ambiguities and questions of the validity
of specific provisions so as to give maximum effect to its conservation
purposes.
   18.   Notices. Any notices required by this Deed Restriction shall be in
writing and shall be personally delivered or sent by first class mail or by
facsimile, to Owner and Holder, respectively, at the following addresses or fax
numbers, unless a party has been notified by the other of a change of address.
To the Owner:   Town of Sullivan’s Island
         P.O. Box 427
         Sullivan’s Island, SC 29482
         Attn: Town Administrator
To the Holder:   Mount Pleasant Land Conservancy
         P.O. Box 2495
         Mt. Peasant, SC 29454
         Attn: Executive Director
   19.   Severability . In any provisions of this Deed Restriction is found to
be invalid, the remaining provisions shall not be altered thereby.
   20.   Parties. Every provision of this Deed Restriction that applies to the
Owner or Holder shall also apply to their respective heirs, executors,
administrators, assigns, and all other successors as their interest may appear.
   21.   Re-Recording. To ensure the perpetual enforceability of the Deed
Restriction, the Holder is authorized to re-record this instrument or any other
appropriate notice or instrument.
   22.   Merger. The parties agree that the terms of this Deed Restriction
shall survive any merger of the fee and easement interest in the Property.
   23.   Subsequent Liens on Property. No provisions of this Deed Restriction
should be construed as impairing the ability of Owner to use this Property as
collateral for subsequent borrowing, provided that any mortgage or lien arising
from such a borrowing would be subordinate to this Deed Restriction.
   24.   Termination. The provisions of this Deed Restriction may be repealed
only upon an affirmative vote of both (a) seventy-five percent (75%) of the
registered voters of the Town who vote in a referendum held pursuant to the
rules and regulations promulgated in the Code of Laws of the State of South
Carolina, and (b) one hundred percent (100%) of the members of Town Council.
   25.   Acceptance & Effective Date. As attested by the Seal of The Mount
Pleasant Land Conservancy and the signature of its authorized representative
affixed hereto, the Holder hereby accepts without reservation the rights and
responsibilities conveyed by this Deed Restriction. This Deed Restriction is to
be effective the date recorded in the Charleston County Registry of Deeds,
South Carolina.
STATE OF SOUTH CAROLINA            )
                        )   ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
COUNTY OF CHARLESTON            )
PERSONALLY appeared before me the undersigned, who being duly sworn, deposes
and says:
1. I have read the information on this Affidavit and I understand such
information.
2. The property is being transferred from TOWN OF SULLIVAN’S ISLAND to MOUNT
PLEASANT LAND CONSERVANCY on                           , 2012.
3. Check one of the following: The DEED is
(a)            subject to the deed recording fee as a transfer for
consideration paid or to be paid in money or money s worth.
(b)            subject to the deed recording fee as a transfer between a
corporation, a partnership, or other entity and a stockholder, partner, or
owner of the entity, or is a transfer to a trust or as distribution to a trust
beneficiary.
(c)  X  EXEMPT from the deed recording fee because (exemption #)  12  - Quit
Claim Deed (Explanation If required) (If exempt, please skip items 4-6, and go
to item 7 of this affidavit.)
4. Check one of the following if either item 3(a) or item 3(b) above has been
checked.
(a)           The fee is computed on the consideration paid or to be paid in
money or money’s worth in the amount of $5.00*.
(b)           The fee is computed on the fair market value of the realty which
is $.
(c)          The fee is computed on the fair market value of the realty as
established for property tax purposes which is $.
5. Check YES           or NO           to the following: A lien or encumbrance
existed on the land, tenement, or realty before the transfer and remained on
the land, tenement, or realty after the transfer. If YES, the amount of the
outstanding balance of this lien or encumbrance is $.
6. The DEED Recording Fee is computed as follows:
   (a)          the amount listed in item 4 above
   (b)          the amount listed in item 5 above (no amount place zero)
   (c)          Subtract Line 6(b) from Line 6(a) and place the result.
7. As required by Code Section 12-24-70, I state that I am a responsible person
who was connected with the transaction as : Legal Representative of Grantee
8. Check if Property other than Real Property is being transferred on this
Deed, (a)          Mobile Home (b)          Other
9.          DEED OF DISTRIBUTION - ATTORNEYS AFFIDAVIT: Estate of
                 deceased CASE NUMBER                 . Personally appeared
before me the undersigned attorney who, being duly sworn, certified that (s)he
is licensed to practice law in the State of South Carolina; that (s)he has
prepared the Deed of Distribution for the Personal Rep. in the Estate of
                 deceased and that the grantee(s) therein are correct and
conform to the estate file for he above named decedent.
10. I understand that a person required to furnish this affidavit who willfully
furnishes a false or fraudulent affidavit is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, must be fined not more than one thousand dollars or imprisoned not
more than one year, or both.
                              Grantor, Grantee, or Attorney that prepared this
form
                                                                                                           
                              Gray B.Taylor
 
Sworn to before me this           
day of                          , 2012.
                                                   
Notary Public for South Carolina
My Commission Expires:
 
TITLE SEARCH NOT PERFORMED IN THE PREPARATION OF THIS DEED. GRANTEE, BY
ACCEPTING AND RECORDING THIS DEED, SPECIFICALLY ACKNOWLEDGES THE SAME.
STATE OF SOUTH CAROLINA         )         TITLE TO REAL ESTATE
                     )            (Quit Claim Deed)
COUNTY CHARLESTON            )
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that MOUNT PLEASANT LAND CONSERVANCY, a South
Carolina non-profit corporation (the “Grantor”), for and in consideration of
the sum of TEN AND NO/100 DOLLARS ($10.00), being the true and complete
consideration, to it in hand paid at and before the sealing of these presents
by the TOWN OF SULLIVAN’S ISLAND (the “Grantee”) in the State aforesaid, the
receipt and sufficiency of which is hereby acknowledged, has, subject only to
the Deed Restrictions set forth in Exhibit “B” (the “Deed Restrictions”)
remised, released and forever quitclaimed, and by these presents does remise,
release and forever quitclaim unto the TOWN OF SULLIVAN’S ISLAND, all of its
interest in and to the following described property, to-wit (the “Premises”):
SEE EXHIBIT “A” ATTACHED HERETO AND INCORPORATED HEREIN BY REFERENCE
FOR A FULL AND COMPLETE LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPERTY
BEING CONVEYED (THE “PROPERTY” OR “PREMISES”)
Address of Grantee:
 
P.O. Box 427
Sullivan’s Island, SC 29482
   TOGETHER with all and singular, the rights, members, hereditaments and
appurtenances to the said Premises belonging or in anywise incident or
appertaining.
   TO HAVE AND TO HOLD, all and singular, the Premises unto the TOWN OF
SULLIVAN’S ISLAND, its successors and assigns, forever.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, MOUNT PLEASANT LAND CONSERVANCY, has caused these presents
to be executed in its name by                             , its this
              day of                           , in the year of our Lord Two
Thousand Twelve and in the Two Hundred and Thirty-Sixth year of the Sovereignty
and Independence of the United States of America.
                                    MOUNT PLEASANT LAND CONSERVANCY, a South
Carolina nonprofit corporation
 
                                                                                                                                                                 
WITNESS #1                                 By:
                                                     
                                    Its:
                                                     
                                                  
                                                         
WITNESS #2
STATE OF SOUTH CAROLINA               )
                           )   ACKNOWLEDGMENT
COUNTY OF CHARLESTON               )
The foregoing instrument was acknowledged before me by MOUNT PLEASANT LAND
CONSERVANCY, by                                    , its
                              this day of                              , 2012
 
                                                     (SEAL)
Notary Public for South Carolina
My Commission Expires:                           
EXHIBIT “A”
PARCEL I
ALL that certain piece, parcel or lot of land, located, lying and being in the
Town of Sullivan’s Island, Charleston County, South Carolina, being shown and
designated as 0.48 Acres, on a plat entitled, “0.48 ACRES, FORMERLY THE OLD
COVE STREET R/W OWNED BY THE TOWN OF SULLIVAN’S ISLAND, IN THE TOWN OF
SULLIVAN’S ISLAND, CHARLESTON COUNTY, SOUTH CAROLINA”, dated June 9, 2010,
prepared by Charles F. Dawley, Jr., RLS, and recorded in Book                ,
at Page                       , in the RMC Office for Charleston County, South
Carolina. SAID lot having such size, shape, dimensions, buttings and boundings,
more or less, as are shown on said plat, which is specifically incorporated
herein by reference.
TMS No.:
PARCEL II
ALL that certain piece, parcel or lot of land, located, lying and being in the
Town of Sullivan’s Island, Charleston County, South Carolina, being shown and
designated as 3.09 Acres, on a plat entitled, “3.09 ACRES AT STATION 19 STREET,
BACK STREET AND STATION 20 STREET OWNED BY THE TOWN OF SULLIVAN’S ISLAND, IN
THE TOWN OF SULLIVAN’S ISLAND, CHARLESTON COUNTY, SOUTH CAROLINA”, dated June
9, 2010, prepared by Charles F. Dawley, Jr., RLS, and recorded in Book
                    , at Page                        , in the RMC Office for
Charleston County, South Carolina. SAID lot having such size, shape,
dimensions, buttings and boundings, more or less, as are shown on said plat,
which is specifically incorporated herein by reference.
BEING the same property conveyed to the Grantor by Deed of Town of Sullivan’s
Island, dated                            , and recorded
                       , in the RMC Office for Charleston County, South
Carolina in Book                            , at Page
                         .
TMS No.:
 
GRANTEES’ ADDRESS:
 
STATE OF SOUTH CAROLINA               )
                           )   QUIT-CLAIM DEED
COUNTY OF CHARLESTON               )
   WHEREAS, the Town of Sullivan’s Island is the owner in fee simple of certain
real property, which has aesthetic, scientific, educational, and ecological
value in its present state as a natural area, which has not been subject to
development or exploitation, which property is described more specifically on
Exhibit “A” attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference thereto.
   WHEREAS, the Town of Sullivan’s Island desires to convey said property to
the Mount Pleasant Land Conservancy, which is a South Carolina non-profit
corporation whose purpose is to preserve and conserve natural areas.
   WHEREAS, the Town Council and the Town of Sullivan’s Island, in meetings
duly assembled, enacted an Ordinance, ratified on the 15th day of May, 2012,
which authorized the Town of Sullivan’s Island to convey to the Mount Pleasant
Land Conservancy the below described property and, further authorized and
directed the Mayor and the Town Clerk to so execute the Deed of Conveyance on
behalf of the Town Council and the Town of Sullivan’s Island.
   NOW KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS that the Town of Sullivan’s Island in
consideration of Ten and 00/100 ($10.00) Dollars, and other valuable
consideration to it in hand paid at and before the sealing of these presents by
the Mount Pleasant Land Conservancy in the County and State aforesaid, the
receipt whereof is hereby acknowledged have granted, bargained, sold, and
released, and by these presents does grant, bargain, sell, and release unto the
said Mount Pleasant Land Conservancy, its successors and assigns, the following
described property:
FOR DESCRIPTION OF PROPERTY SEE EXHIBIT “A” ATTACHED HERETO AND INCORPORATED
HEREIN BY REFERENCE
   Together with all and singular the rights, members, hereditaments, and
appurtenances to the said Premises belonging, or in anywise, incident, or
appertaining.
   TO HAVE AND TO HOLD, all and singular, the said premises before mentioned
unto the said Mount Pleasant Land Conservancy, its successors and assigns,
forever.
   WITNESS Its hand and seal this 15th day of May, 2012 in the year of our lord
two thousand and twelve.
In the Presence of:                           TOWN OF SULLIVAN’S ISLAND
                                                                                                                                 
(WITNESS #1)                           BY: CARL J. SMITH, MAYOR
                                                                      ATTEST:
(WITNESS #2)                           By: Ellen Miller
                                 Town Clerk
STATE OF SOUTH CAROLINA               )
                           )   ACKNOWLEDGMENT
COUNTY OF CHARLESTON               )
   Personally appeared before me the undersigned witness and made oath that he/
she saw the within named Town of Sullivan’s Island by Carl J. Smith, Mayor, and
Attested to by Ellen Miller, Town Clerk, sign, seal and as the act and deed of
the Town of Sullivan’s Island and of the said Council deliver the foregoing
written deed, and that he/she with the other witness witnessed the execution
thereof.
                                                                              
                                 (WITNESS # 1 or 2)
Sworn to before me this 15th
day of May, 2012.
                                     
Notary Public for South Carolina
My Commission Expires: 4-19-2015
 
STATE OF SOUTH CAROLINA               )   AFFIDAVIT
COUNTY OF CHARLESTON               )
PERSONALLY appeared before me the undersigned, who being duly sworn, deposes
and says:
1.   I have read the information on this Affidavit and I understand such
information.
2.   The property being transferred BY TOWN OF SULLIVAN’S ISLAND TO MOUNT
PLEASANT LAND CONSERVANCY ON                               , 2012.
3.   Check one of the following: The DEED is
   (a)           subject to the deed recording fee as a transfer for
consideration paid or to be paid in money or money’s worth.
   (b)           subject to the deed recording fee as a transfer between a
corporation, a partnership, or other entity and a stockholder, partner, or
owner of the entity, or is a transfer to a trust or as a distribution to a
trust beneficiary.
   (c)  X  EXEMPT from the deed recording fee because (exemptions 1-12) (If
exempt, please skip item 4-6, and go to item 7 of this affidavit. ) #1 - VALUE
LESS THAN $100.00
4.   Check one of the following if either item 3(a) or item 3(b) above has been
checked.
   (a)           The fee is computed on the consideration paid or to be paid in
money or money’s worth in the amount of $5.00
   (b)          The fee is computed on the fair market value of the realty
which is $             .
   (c)          The fee is computed on the fair market value of the realty as
established for property tax purposes which is $
                               .
5.   Check YES          or NO  X  to the following: A lien or encumbrance
existed on the land, tenement, or realty before the transfer and remained on
the land, tenement, or realty after the transfer. If “YES,” the amount of the
outstanding balance of this lien or encumbrance is $              .
6.   The DEED Recording Fee is computed as follows:
      (a)   $5.00   the amount listed in item 4 above.
LESS      (b)   $          the amount listed in item 5 above (no amount place
zero).
TOTAL   (c)   $5.00   Subtract Line 6(b) from Line 6(a) and place the result.
7.   As required by Code Section 12-24-70, I state that I am a responsible
person who was connected with the transaction as: ATTORNEY
8.   Check if Property other than Real Property is being transferred on this
Deed.
   (a)              Mobile Home
   (b)              Other
9.   I understand that a person required to furnish this affidavit who
willfully furnishes a false or fraudulent affidavit is guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction, must be fined not more than one thousand dollars or
imprisoned not more than one year, or both.
Sworn to before me this                                                SIGNED:
                                                     
day of                             , 2012                        LAWRENCE A.
DODDS, JR., ATTORNEY
 
                                                               
Notary Public for SOUTH CAROLINA
My Commission Expires:                           
EXHIBIT “A”
PARCEL I
ALL that certain piece, parcel or lot of land, located, lying and being in the
Town of Sullivan’s Island, Charleston County, South Carolina, being shown and
designated as 0.48 Acres, on a plat entitled, “0.48 ACRES, FORMERLY THE OLD
COVE STREET R/W OWNED BY THE TOWN OF SULLIVAN’S ISLAND, IN THE TOWN OF
SULLIVAN’S ISLAND, CHARLESTON COUNTY, SOUTH CAROLINA”, dated June 9, 2010,
prepared by Charles F. Dawley, Jr., RLS, and recorded in Book               ,
at Page                     , in the RMC Office for Charleston County, South
Carolina. SAID lot having such size, shape, dimensions, buttings and boundings,
more or less, as are shown on said plat, which is specifically incorporated
herein by reference.
Reserving unto The Town of Sullivan’s Island, its successors and assigns, as
easement of right of way for existing public utilities and the right to enter
on said premises for the purpose of removal, maintenance, repair or replacement
of the same.
TMS No.:
PARCEL II
ALL that certain piece, parcel or lot of land, located, lying and being in the
Town of Sullivan’s Island, Charleston County, South Carolina, being shown and
designated as 3.09 Acres, on a plat entitled, “3.09 ACRES AT STATION 19 STREET,
BACK STREET AND STATION 20 STREET OWNED BY THE TOWN OF SULLIVAN’S ISLAND, IN
THE TOWN OF SULLIVAN’S ISLAND, CHARLESTON COUNTY, SOUTH CAROLINA”, dated June
9, 2010, prepared by Charles F. Dawley, Jr., RLS, and recorded in Book
                             , at Page                , in the RMC Office for
Charleston County, South Carolina. SAID lot having such size, shape,
dimensions, buttings and boundings, more or less, as are shown on said plat,
which is specifically incorporated herein by reference.
SUBJECT to a 12’ Ingress-Egress Easement as shown on the above referenced plat
as shown in that instrument recorded in the RMC Office for Charleston County,
South Carolina in Plat Book AY, at Page 087.
Reserving unto The Town of Sullivan’s Island, its successors and assigns, as
easement of right of way for existing public utilities and the right to enter
on said premises for the purpose of removal, maintenance, repair or replacement
of the same.
TMS No.
 
CHAPTER 157: ZONING
Section
   
157.01   Adoption of prior code chapter
   
Appendix A:   Zoning
§ 157.01 ADOPTION OF PRIOR CODE CHAPTER.
   Chapter 21 of the prior code entitled “Zoning” is hereby adopted by this
code and included as-written in
Appendix A of this chapter.
(Prior Code, Chapter 21)
Cross-reference:
   CD and RC-1 Zoning Districts, see §
132.31
APPENDIX A: ZONING
ORDINANCE TO AMEND CHAPTER 21 OF THE ZONING ORDINANCES FOR THE TOWN OF
SULLIVAN’S ISLAND
WHEREAS, Chapter 21 of the Town of Sullivan’s Island Ordinance which is cited
as “The Zoning Ordinance” was originally enacted in 1977; and
WHEREAS, the Town of Sullivan’s Island has, from time to time, amended certain
sections of The Zoning Ordinance; and
WHEREAS, the Town of Sullivan’s Island was mindful to make comprehensive
revisions to The Zoning Ordinance and sought plans and procedures whereby
professional zoning consultation, citizen input and Town staff would come
together to make the comprehensive revisions needed to The Zoning Ordinance;
and
WHEREAS, the Town of Sullivan’s Island retained the services of Cooper
Consulting, Inc. who are known as Planning and Zoning experts; and
WHEREAS, Cooper Consulting, Inc. held three (3) public workshops whereby
citizen input was invited and accepted and after reviewing the existing Zoning
Ordinances together with the citizens input at public meetings and further
citizen and Town staff input by way of written and verbal communications,
Cooper Consulting, Inc. produced a proposed draft of a comprehensive amendment
to the Town of Sullivan’s Island Zoning Ordinances; and
WHEREAS, upon receipt of the proposed draft, the Town Council directed the
Planning Commission to hold public hearings and to make further review and
recommendations; and
WHEREAS, the Planning Commission held numerous public hearings and after review
it rendered its recommendations to the Town Council; and
WHEREAS, the Town Council for the Town of Sullivan’s Island has reviewed the
proposed draft by Cooper Consulting, Inc. and the proposed recommendations and
revisions of the Planning Commission and now are mindful of adopting the
following comprehensive revisions to the Town Zoning Ordinance and are of the
opinion that the following comprehensive amendments are in the best interest of
the Town.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND TOWN COUNCIL IN MEETING DULY
ASSEMBLED,
   that Chapter 21 The Ordinances for the Town of Sullivan’s Island be amended
to read as follows:
ARTICLE I: IN GENERAL
Sec. 21-1.   Authority, enactment and intent.
   A.   Intent.    In pursuance of authority conferred by the South Carolina
Code, Title 6, Chapter 29 and in accordance with the Town of Sullivan’s
Island’s Comprehensive Plan, the Town Council of Sullivan’s Island, South
Carolina, does ordain and enact into law this Zoning Ordinance to:
      (1)   Prevent the overcrowding of land;
      (2)   Protect the low-density and residential character of the Island;
      (3)   Ensure that the mass and scale of new development is compatible
with the Island’s existing character, neighborhoods and historical buildings;
      (4)   Lessen congestion in the streets;
      (5)   Secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers;
      (6)   Promote public health and general welfare;
      (7)   Promote adequate light and air;
      (8)   Promote the protection of the Island’s historical character and
natural environment;
      (9)   Avoid undue concentration of population;
      (10)   Protect scenic areas; to facilitate the adequate provisions of
transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements;
and,
      (11)   Protect areas subject to periodic flooding against development
   B.   Relationship to comprehensive plan. It is intended that the Zoning
Ordinance implement the Town’s Comprehensive Plan, as amended and periodically
updated, including all supplements and attachments.
   C.   Conformity with zoning ordinance. No building, structure, or premises
shall be used, and no building, structure, or part thereof shall be erected,
moved, remodeled, extended, enlarged, or altered, except in conformity with
this Ordinance. In addition, no other activity, including land clearing or tree
removal, regulated by this Ordinance shall be authorized unless in conformity
with this Ordinance.
   D.   Original zoning ordinance. Prior to 1977, Sullivan’s Island was
entirely owned by the State of South Carolina with the exception of the
military reservation. In 1977, with the transfer of property into private
ownership, the South Carolina’s General Assembly provided for the creation of a
Zoning Ordinance that set forth zoning districts that insured the Island would
be predominantly single family residential with a small amount of supportive
office and commercial. The Zoning Ordinance set forth a plan whereby the lots
would be one-half (1/2) acre and there would be only one single family dwelling
on each lot. The zoning plan confined the office and commercial area generally
to either side of Middle Street between Station 22 1/2 and Station 20 1/2.
   E.   Revision to zoning ordinance.
      Since 1977, the Zoning Ordinance of Sullivan’s Island has undergone a
substantial number of intermediate revisions. However, in 2002, in response to
residents’ growing concerns over the increasing amount of residential
construction that was incompatible in scale and mass with existing Island
development, Sullivan’s Island took decisive steps to fully update the Zoning
Ordinance.
      The Zoning Ordinance of Sullivan’s Island is herein revised based on a
substantial process of public involvement during 2002 - 2004. As a part of the
Ordinance’s revision, the public was asked to craft a vision statement that
captured the essence of Sullivan’s Island. The following is the vision
statement:
      A comfortable home at the beach, safe and friendly, where individuality
and diversity are celebrated, neighborhoods are respected, island resources are
appreciated, history is intertwined, and families and neighbors seek to thrive.
      These revisions limit the mass and scale of new development: provide
incentives for retaining the Island’s historical homes; encourage architecture
and landscaping that respects the Island’s history and climate; and provide a
commitment to resource conservation.
Sec. 21-2. Short title.
   This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the “Zoning Ordinance.”
Sec. 21-3. General rules of construction.
   A.   Construction of language, meanings and intent. All provisions, terms,
phrases and expressions contained in this Zoning Ordinance shall be construed
according to the stated purpose and intent of this Ordinance.
   B.   Headings, illustrations and text. In case of any difference of meaning
or implication between the text and any heading, drawing, table or figure, the
text will control.
   C.   Computations of time and advertisement. The time within which an act is
to be completed will be computed by including the first day and excluding the
last day. If the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, that day
shall be excluded. In the computation of time for public hearing notice, the
day of the advertisement will be counted and the day of the hearing will be
excluded.
   D.   References to laws, publications, other ordinances and documents.
Whenever reference is made to a state or federal law, another regulation,
document or publication, it will be construed as a reference to the most recent
edition of such law, regulation (as amended), document or publication, unless
otherwise specifically stated. Where there is a reference in this Ordinance to
a specific Article, section or subsection that is not identified as being part
of any other document, the reference is to an Article, section, or subsection
of this Zoning Ordinance.
   E.   Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the
department head or officer of the Town to perform an act or duty, that
provision will be construed as authorizing department head or officer to
delegate the responsibility to subordinates.
   F.   Technical and non-technical terms. Words and phrases will be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words
and phrases that may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law
will be construed and understood according to such meaning.
   G.   Mandatory and discretionary terms. The words “shall,” “will,” and
“must” are always mandatory. The words “may” and “should” are discretionary
terms.
   H.   Conjunctions. Unless the context clearly suggests the contrary,
conjunctions will be interpreted as follows: “and” indicates that all connected
items, conditions, provisions or events apply; and “or” indicates that one or
more of the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply.
   I.   Tenses and usage. Words used in one tense (past, present or future)
include all other tenses, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.
The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular.
Sec. 21-4. Official zoning map.
   A.   The Official Zoning Map is the official map depicting the boundaries of
the above zoning districts of Sullivan’s Island, South Carolina. The Official
Zoning Map, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be a part of this Zoning Ordinance.
   B.   The Official Zoning Map for the Town of Sullivan’s Island shall be
identified by the signature of the mayor of Sullivan’s Island, attested by the
Town Clerk, and bear the town seal under the words “Official Zoning Map,
Sullivan’s Island, Charleston County, South Carolina” together with the date of
the adoption of this Zoning Ordinance. If, amendments are made to the district
boundaries or other matters in accordance with the provisions of this Zoning
Ordinance and the South Carolina Code of Laws, such amendments shall be
portrayed on the Official Zoning Map within seven (7) days after the amendment
has been adopted by the Town Council.
   C.   No changes shall be made on the Official Zoning Map or matter shown
thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this Zoning
Ordinance. Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person or persons
shall be considered a violation of this Zoning Ordinance and punishable as
provided by law.
   D.   Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Official Zoning
Map, the Official Zoning Map, signed and attested, shall be located in the Town
Hall and shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land
and water areas, buildings and other structures in the Town.
Sec. 21-5. Interpretation of district boundaries.
   Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the
Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
   A.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of
streets, alleys, or public utility easements shall be construed to follow such
centerlines;
   B.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following approved and recorded
platted lot or tract lines shall be construed as following such lines, whether
public or private;
   C.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following town limits shall be
construed as following such town limits;
   D.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of
streams, rivers, waterways and other bodies of water shall be construed to
follow such centerlines; and,
   E.   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated
in subsection A through D above shall be so construed. Where distances are not
specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map, or in other circumstances
not covered by subsections A through D above, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall
interpret the district boundaries.
Sec. 21-6. Zoning of new land area.
   A.   When land area is added into the Town of Sullivan’s Island, by virtue
of annexation or some other means, the following provisions shall apply:
      (1)   The new land area annexed or incorporated into Sullivan’s Island’s
jurisdiction shall be classified RS Single Family Residential. Within sixty
(60) days following the effective date of such annexation or incorporation, the
Town Council shall direct the Planning Commission to review and make
recommendations pertaining to the zoning of the newly incorporated areas. The
Planning Commission shall, after holding a public hearing, have thirty (30)
days to make its recommendations of any zoning amendments. The Town Council
shall then process and act upon the Planning Commission’s recommendations
following the necessary public hearing as required by this Zoning Ordinance.
      (2)   In all cases, where annexations or other incorporations of land
area to Sullivan’s Island’s total land area require zoning district boundaries
adjustments, said adjustments shall be also be reflected as amendments to the
Official Zoning Map.
Sec. 21-7. Impact on pending construction.
   Nothing in this Ordinance shall require any change in the plans,
construction, size, or designated use of any building, structure, or part
thereof, for which a Building Permit request has been accepted by Town Staff
prior to the ratification of any amendments to the Zoning Ordinance, provided
construction shall commence consistent with the terms and conditions of the
Building Permit and the Zoning Ordinance in force at the time the permit
request is accepted for review. However, if the Building Permit is allowed to
expire, then the proposed plans will require a new review and building permit
issuance under the current Zoning Ordinance language at the time of
resubmittal.
(Ord. 2024-08, passed 10-15-2024)
Sec. 21-8. Reserved.
ARTICLE II: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 21-9. Establishment of districts.
   For the purpose of this Zoning Ordinance, the Town of Sullivan’s Island is
hereby divided into the following Zoning Districts:
   A.   RS - Single Family Residential District;
   B.   CC - Community Commercial District;
   C.   CCOD 1 and 2 - Community Commercial Overlay Districts 1 and 2; and (3/
20/12)
   D.    R & C Recreation & Conservation Area Districts 1 and 2;
   E.   HP - Historic Preservation Overlay District; and
   F.   PF - Public Facilities District.
(Ord. 2021-21, passed 2-15-2022)
Sec. 21-10. Minimum standards shall be met.
   A.   The regulations set by this Zoning Ordinance within each district shall
be minimum standards and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of
structure or land, except as hereinafter provided.
   B.   No land or structure shall hereinafter be used or occupied, and no
structure or parts shall hereinafter be constructed, erected, altered or moved
unless in conformity with all the regulations herein specified for the district
in which it is located, or unless the Board of Zoning Appeals has granted a
Variance to permit an exception to the Zoning Standards; or unless specific
latitude is granted by the Zoning Ordinance to the Design Review Board to allow
flexibility in the application or interpretation of the Zoning Standards.
   C.   Unless otherwise provided for, no structure shall hereafter be erected
or altered
      (1)   with greater height, size, bulk or other dimension;
      (2)   to house or accommodate a greater number of families;
      (3)   to occupy a greater percentage of Lot Area; or
      (4)   to have narrower or smaller front, side or rear yards or other open
spaces than herein required, or in any other manner contrary to the provisions
of this Zoning Ordinance.
Sec. 21-11. Definitions and application of zoning standards, design standards
and design guidelines.
   A.   Zoning standards.
      (1)   Definition: Zoning Standards are regulations governing land uses,
lot area and dimensions, setbacks, lot coverage, size and height. These
regulations address a structure’s location on the lot and the permitted
building envelope.
      (2)   Application: Zoning Standards apply to all lots, structures, and
uses. A Zoning Standard shall be satisfied unless there is specific
authorization in this Ordinance for the Design Review Board to modify such
standard within specified parameters. Otherwise, the only form of relief from a
Zoning Standard is a Variance granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
      (3)   Examples of zoning standards:
         (a)   Land use;
         (b)   Lot area and width;
         (c)   Front, side and rear setbacks;
         (d)   Setbacks from RC-1 & RC-2 Districts;
         (e)   Building height;
         (f)   Principal building coverage area;
         (g)   Impervious coverage area;
         (h)   Principal building square footage;
         (i)   Third story; and,
         (j)   Standards related to the RC-Districts, Vacation Rentals, Signs,
Trees, Accessory Uses and Structures.
   B.   Design standards.
      (1)   Definition: Design Standards are regulation governing the design,
orientation, and elevation of buildings and the treatment of site lighting.
      (2)    Application: Design Standards apply to all construction or any
enlargement or extension of an existing structure; however, Design Standards
shall not apply to routine maintenance or interior renovation that does not add
square footage based on a determination by the Zoning Administrator. A Design
Standard shall be satisfied unless there is specific authorization in this
Ordinance for the Design Review Board to modify such standard within specified
parameters. Otherwise, the only form of relief from a Design Standard is a
Variance granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
      (3)   Examples of Design Standards:
         (a)   Principal building front and side facade;
         (b)   Orientation of principal building;
         (c)   Foundation height;
         (d)   Foundation enclosure;
         (e)   Site lighting.
   C.   Design guidelines.
      (1)   Definition: Preferred design features or approaches recommended as
guidelines only and not imposed as requirements.
      (2)   Application: A Design Guideline may used to enhance the
compatibility of a proposed structure or improvement by applicants, the Design
Review Board, the Board of Zoning Appeals or the Zoning Administrator.
      (3)   Examples of Design Guidelines:
         (a)   Massing ratio;
         (b)   Eave height;
         (c)   Porches and decks;
         (d)   Roof shape;
         (e)   Roof decks and roof gazebos;
         (f)   Front-oriented stairs;
         (g)    Landscaping;
         (h)   Driveways;
         (i)   Windows and doors.
Sec. 21-12. Lot subdivision, use location and calculation and measurement of
areas (5/15/12)
   A.   Lot subdivision. Except as otherwise provided in Section 21-49, lots
may not be subdivided in any manner that would (5/15/12)
      (1)   Create an additional lot, or eliminate an existing lot; (5/15/12)
      (2)   Reduce the size of a lot below one-half (1/2) acre; or if the
existing lot is smaller than one-half (1/2) acre, diminish the size of the
existing lot; (5/15/12)
      (3)   Reduce the street frontage of any lot to less than fifty feet
(50’); (5/15/12)
      (4)   Change any lot lines in such a manner as to adversely affect
availability of, or accessibility to, water and sewer taps; (5/15/12)
      (5)   Create a lot that is not generally rectangular in shape. (5/15/12)
   B.   Location of uses.
      (1)   Every building or use shall be located on an approved lot of record
approved by the Town of Sullivan’s Island and shall not infringe beyond the
building lines into the respective Front, Side, Rear Yards or other Setbacks
required for the district in which the lot is located. (3/20/12)
      (2)   No structure or part of a structure shall be erected or allowed to
remain within applicable minimum yard Setbacks unless specifically provided
hereafter. A structure or part of a structure shall include buildings,
overhanging eaves, covered structures such as steps, porches, patios, carports,
and any other extension of a building beyond its foundation line.
   C.   Calculating lot area.
      (1)   For the purposes of calculating Lot Area, only that portion of the
lot lying outside the area designated as marsh or that portion above the
ocean’s high water mark shall be included in the Lot Area.
      (2)   Lots adjacent to RC-1. The Lot Area utilized to determine said
minimum size shall include only land area located above and landward of the
landward RC-1 Area District boundary line.
      (3)   Lots adjacent to RC-2. The Lot Area utilized to determine said
minimum size shall include only land area located above and landward of the SC
DHEC-OCRM “Critical Area Line” as determined in the field by OCRM staff.
      (4)   Right-of-way easements for streets or roads shall not be considered
a part of the Lot Area.
   D.   Measuring buildable area.
      (1)   The required front, side, and rear yards for individual lots shall
be measured inward toward the center of said lot from all points along the
respective front, side, and rear property lines of the lot.
      (2)   Once the yard areas of a given lot have been established, the
remaining area of the lot that is not included in any required front, side, or
rear lot shall be known as the “Buildable Area” unless otherwise defined.
Sec. 21-13. Increase or decrease in natural elevation prohibited.
      (1)   Any importation of materials of any type or re-contouring of a
lot’s existing contours that increased a lot’s existing ground elevation more
than one (1) foot above existing grade and results or may result in elevating
an existing or proposed structure is strictly prohibited.
      (2)   Any decrease in a lot’s existing ground elevation is strictly
prohibited.
Sec. 21-14. Street frontage and visibility.
   A.   Frontage on a street. All lots shall have frontage on a publicly
dedicated, publicly accepted or publicly maintained street. Alleys are not
considered as providing frontage.
   B.   Street intersection visibility. No fence, wall, sign, vegetation or
other structure or object capable of obstructing driver vision shall be
permitted between the heights of three (3) feet and ten (10) feet above the
finished street level on a corner lot within fifteen (15) feet of the point
formed by the intersection of the street right-of-way lines (or such lines
extended in case of a rounded corner) which abut said lot.
   C.   Private drive visibility. No fence, wall, sign, vegetation, or other
structure shall create an impediment to visibility at the intersection of any
private drive or entrance or exit with a public street.
Sec. 21-15. Driveways.
   A.   All improved ingress/egress access to all lots shall meet the following
requirements. Improved Access shall mean all driveways except natural grass or
lawn areas.
      (1)   Number, width and location.
         (a)   Driveway access shall be limited to one (1) per lot in RS
District provided, however, such non-residential uses such as schools,
churches, daycare facilities, cemeteries, government uses and the like may have
no more than two (2) per lot.
         (b)   Width shall be limited to twelve feet (12.0’) at the street-
front lot line in the RS District. Distance between the curved radius taper
measured at the edge of street pavement shall not exceed twenty feet (20.0’) at
the widest point. Radius taper at edge of street pavement may not exceed a ten
foot (10.0’) curved radius taper. (08-15-06)
         (c)   Driveways shall be placed on the street frontage in which no
parking is allowed as a first alternative, and shall not displace public
parking spaces if at all possible. If the displacement of public parking spaces
is unavoidable, the driveway shall be sited to minimize displacement to the
fullest extent possible.
      (2)   Plans required.
         (a)   Driveway plans shall be required for review and approval prior
to driveway construction.
         (b)   Proposed driveway location will be shown on construction plans.
Alteration of driveway location as shown on approved plans shall be re-approved
prior to construction. A Building Permit shall not be issued until it is
confirmed that the proposed driveway meets the above driveway standards.
         (c)   A SCDOT encroachment permit is required prior to construction of
a driveway.
Sec. 21-16. Water and air pollution.
   All uses shall comply with the requirements of the Charleston County Health
Department, regarding the protection of waterways from pollution by waste
materials and the protection of the atmosphere from pollution by dust, smoke,
or other waste materials.
Sec. 21-17. Stormwater management.
   (A)   No lot shall be built upon, graded or filled without the Building
Official’s or Zoning Administrator’s prior approval of a stormwater management
plan. The stormwater management plan and construction specifications must be
stamped and signed by a professional engineer or landscape architect actively
licensed in the state. All stormwater plans must include a scaled site plan and
survey illustrating all existing and proposed topographical features of the
lot, existing and proposed drainage flow patterns, with a site narrative
describing the means and methods of preventing adverse impacts to adjacent and/
or downstream properties. The following site changes shall require the
submittal of a stormwater management plan:
      (1)   Any new building construction, new impervious surface, or
replacement of impervious surfaces, which cumulatively exceed 625 square feet
in area (All development shall be cumulative over time when considering the
square footage threshold for requiring a stormwater management plan); and
      (2)   Adding fill or re-contouring of 20% or more of the existing lot
area in accordance with Section 21-13.
   (B)   Additional submittal materials, design specifications and maintenance
schedules may be requested at the discretion of the Building Official and/or
Zoning Administrator to ensure compliance with the County Stormwater Management
Program.
(Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-20-2016)
Sec. 21-18. Reserved.
ARTICLE III: RS-SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Sec. 21-19. Intent, application and split zoned lots of RS-Single Family
District.
   A. Intent. It is the intent of the RS-Single Family Residential District to
be developed and reserved for low-density residential purposes built in a
manner that is respectful of the Island’s building mass and scale, historic
structures, and compatible with neighborhood character. The regulations that
apply within this district are designed to encourage the formation and
continuance of a stable, healthy, environment for one single family, primarily
owner-occupied dwelling per lot with each lot having an area of at least one-
half (1/2) acre and to discourage any encroachment by commercial, or other uses
capable of adversely affecting the residential character of the district. (3-
20-12)
   B. Application of zoning and design standards and design guidelines. Unless
otherwise specifically identified as a Design Standard or Design Guideline, all
of the standards under this Article shall be considered as Zoning Standards.
   C. Split zoned lots within the CCOD 1 and 2 Overlay Districts that are not
subdivided. (3/20/12) In an effort to have the property owner(s) self-police
the extent and intensity of the commercial use where it is located on the same
lot as a structure used for residential purpose, the following conditions will
attach if the owner(s) elect to locate a commercial use as described in Sec.
2l-50 on the same lot that a structure for residential purpose is also located:
      (1)   The lot shall remain in single ownership; more specifically,
regardless of the type of ownership every owner, member, partner, shareholder,
or unit owner must have the same percentage of ownership in the structure(s)
where a commercial use is located as in the structures(s) where a residential
use is located;
      (2)   Every owner, member, partner, shareholder or unit owner must have
the same amount of control over the use in the structure(s) where any
commercial use is located as over any structure(s) where a residential use is
located;
      (3)   These conditions shall be placed on any building permit for a
commercial structure or alteration of a structure to accommodate a commercial
use and shall be placed on any business license for a commercial use; and
      (4)   Furthermore, these conditions shall become covenants running with
the property and shall be placed on the real estate title to the property by
the owner of the lot by recording deed restrictions for the benefit of the Town
of Sullivan’s Island on the owner(s) title and recording the same in the RMC
Office for Charleston County, before a building permit or business license is
issued.
   D. Design Review Board authority with respect to single family residential
structures on CCOD 1 and 2 Overlay District lots. (3/20/12) None of the
allowances described in Article III for modifications to zoning or design
standards by the Design Review Board shall be permitted for single family
residential structures on CCOD 1 and 2 Overlay District lots except as provided
in Sections 21-49. Approval by the Design Review Board on the basis of
neighborhood compatibility shall be required for any building permit for a
single family residential structure on CCOD 1 and 2 Overlay District lots as
defined and described in Sec. 21-19 (C). (6-19-07) (3/20/12)
Sec. 21-20. Permitted, conditional, special exceptions and prohibited uses.
   A.   Permitted uses in the RS-District.
      (1)   One single family detached dwelling per lot, designed for and
occupied exclusively as a residence by one family, either owner or renter
occupied.
      (2)   Publicly owned facility or land.
      (3)   Non-commercial horticulture or agriculture.
   B.   Conditional uses in the RS-District.
      (1)   Accessory use in compliance with the provisions in Article XV.
      (2)   Customary home occupation established under the provisions in
Article XV.
      (3)   Modular building unit as a single family detached dwelling provided
it meets all requirements of the South Carolina Modular Building Construction
Act being S.C. Code § 23-43-10 et seq.
      (4)   Lots containing two occupied dwellings:
         (a)   Documentation that since August 1, 1977, both dwellings have
been continually occupied by a family member or under a long-term rental
agreement;
         (b)   If one or both buildings remain unoccupied or not rented for a
period of more than one (1) year, then the right to occupy one of the two
buildings shall be terminated; and,
         (c)   If rented, a current rental agreement must be on file with the
Town.
      (5)   Electrical and water meters:
         (a)   Only one electrical and/or water meter shall be allowed per
residentially zoned lot.
         (b)   An owner shall be permitted to maintain additional meters if the
additional meters were lawfully installed on a legally authorized dwelling for
which a Certificate of Occupancy was duly issued at the time of the original
ratification of the Zoning Ordinance in 1977; provided, such additional meter's
use has not been discontinued as evidenced by a lack of use for a period of at
least one (1) year. In the event any additional meter is removed, no additional
electrical and/or water meter shall be reinstalled in place thereof.
      (6)   Attached additions that do not share heated space with the
principal dwelling provided
         (a)   No kitchen facilities are allowed, and
         (b)   Deed restrictions are placed on the property prohibiting rental
as a separate dwelling, and
         (c)   Any attached addition with an established connection to the
principal building, shall be located under one roof and retain a permanent
floor constructed above grade. The length to width ratio of the proposed
connection may not exceed a two to one (2:1) dimension ratio, with a minimum
width of four (4) feet, a maximum length of twenty (20) feet, and shall be
visually and architecturally integrated with the existing principal building;
said structures, as conditional uses, being reviewed and aesthetically approved
by the Design Review Board. (9/17/2013)
   C.   Special exceptions in the RS-District.
      (1)   Definition and approval.
         (a)   A use permitted in a zoning district that possesses
characteristics that require certain controls in order to ensure compatibility
with other uses in the district within which they are proposed for location and
therefore shall be approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
         (b)   In addition to requiring the approval of the Board of Zoning
Appeals, special exceptions in the RS-Single Family District are subject to
specific conditions that are enumerated by type of use.
      (2)   Historic structure used as accessory dwelling unit. As an incentive
to preserve historic structures and avoid their demolition, a second dwelling
may be constructed on the same lot as an historic structure, and the historic
structure may be used as an accessory dwelling, when all of the following
conditions are met:
         (a)   Prior use shall have been used as a dwelling; and
         (b)   The size of the historic structure is less than twelve hundred
(1200) square feet of heated space at the time of its designation as historic
and is listed as an historic property as described in Section
21-94 Historic Property Designation Criteria; provided, however, that a
structure reduced to less than 1200 square feet of heated space after its
designation as historic may qualify for special exception approval for an
additional dwelling on the same lot, but only if the Design Review Board review
determines and specifies in findings, that: (5-15-07)
            a.   Special circumstances justify such reduction in square feet
based on the criteria listed in Section
21-94D. (1-8); and (5-15-07)
            b.   The portions removed from the historic property were added
less than fifty (50) years ago and/or obscured an earlier feature of the
historic house which contributed substantially to the most important elements
of its historic character, definition and integrity. Examples of the latter
instance include the removal of an enclosure of a porch when the open porch had
been characteristic of a particular type of Island structure, or removal of an
addition which covered a distinctive feature of the structure that is shared by
neighboring structures. (5-15-07)
            These provisions shall supersede any inconsistent provisions
contained in other portions of Chapter 21 relating to the use of historic
structures as accessory dwellings, including but not limited to Section
21-140. (5-15-07)
         (c)   In the event the historic structure does not meet current FEMA
elevation requirements, the Design Review Board finds that bringing it into
compliance would significantly impair the historic and architectural character
of the structure; and
         (d)   In the event the historic structure meets current FEMA
elevations requirements, the Design Review Board finds that there is no
feasible design solution for an addition to the historic structure that would
not significantly impair the historic and architectural character of the
structure; and
         (e)   No separate utility service meters shall be permitted; and
         (f)   The Design Review Board must find that the height, scale, mass
and placement of the second structure are appropriate to and compatible with
the lot on which it is sited, the character of the historic structure and
surrounding neighborhood. When necessary to achieve such appropriateness and
compatibility, the Design Review Board may impose stricter limits on height,
setback, size and coverage than those of the zoning standards; and
         (g)   Permission to build a second structure and to use the historic
structure as an accessory dwelling is approved as a special exception by the
Board of Zoning Appeals; and
         (h)   The following conditions as covenants running with the property
shall be placed on the real estate title to the property by the owner of the
lot by recording deed restrictions for the benefit of the Town of Sullivan's
Island on the owner(s) title and recording the same in the RMC office for
Charleston County before a building permit is issued:
            (i)   The lot shall remain in single ownership; more specifically,
regardless of the type of ownership every owner, member, partner, shareholder,
or unit owner, must have the same percentage of ownership in the historic
structure as in any additional structure(s); and
            (ii)   Every owner, member, partner, shareholder or unit owner must
have the same amount of control over the use of the historic structure as over
any additional structure(s); and
         (i)   If the historic structure used as an accessory dwelling is
damaged or destroyed, by natural disaster, civil strife or uncontrollable
accident, by more than fifty percent (50%) of its assessed value based on the
most recent property assessment, the structure may be repaired in accordance
with its preexisting footprint, square footage, setbacks, and lot coverage. The
Zoning Administrator shall rely on all credible information provided by the
owner and/or available from the Town, to establish the damaged or destroyed
structure's pre-existing condition and lot location. A Certificate of Zoning
Compliance and a Building Permit shall be obtained within twelve (12) months of
the date of occurrence of such damage, and once issued, construction shall be
diligently pursued and completed within two (2) years from the date of the
occurrence of such damage. If FEMA regulations require the structure's
foundation to be elevated over fifty percent (50%) above its original
elevation, the Design Review Board shall determine whether or not the
reconstruction shall be required to meet the current Zoning Ordinance's Setback
requirements.
(Ord. 2018-07, passed 11-20-2018) (2-20-24)
         (j)   The historic structure used as an accessory dwelling may be used
as a long-term rental, but only so long as the principal structure is occupied
by an owner of the property as primary residence and a current business license
is held on the same property. Primary residence is defined as a dwelling where
the owner or owners reside on a permanent basis and are assessed at the four
percent (4%) assessment rate on their ad valorem property tax.
      (3)   Religious institution:
         (a)   Limited to one building per lot;
         (b)   Housed in a permanent building;
         (c)   Located on a lot not less than one-half (1/2) acre in area;
         (d)   Provides off-street location for picking-up and dropping-off
adults and children;
         (e)   Provides adequate off-street parking, in accordance with Article
XVI; and,
         (f)   Meets the Setback and lot coverage standards of the RS District.
      (4)   Public utility substation:
         (a)   Shall be fenced or enclosed to provide adequate safety with a
plan approved by the Design Review Board;
         (b)   Does not provide office, operational functions or storage of
vehicles or equipment beyond the required utility equipment to provide service
at that location;
         (c)   Meets the Setback and lot coverage standards of the RS District.
      (5)   Conservation Easement Uses as defined in Section
21-203 Definitions.
         (a)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to recognize that all
properties on Sullivan's Island are part of a dynamic and ever-changing barrier
island environment, vulnerable to erosion and catastrophic flooding events.
Whereas all Island properties in close proximity to marshes, beaches and
waterways are predisposed to erosion, loss of critical dune vegetation and
structural damage during large storm events, the Town recognizes a need to
develop innovative methods to incentivize the protection of open space,
preserve view-shed corridors, and reduce the intensity of residential land
uses. (11-17-15)
         (b)   Applicability. As an incentive to preserving environmentally
sensitive properties zoned for residential purposes (RS District), property
owners (grantor) may establish certain recreational uses and structures as part
of a permanent conservation easement. These non-residential uses must include
retaining or protecting natural or open-space values of real property, assuring
its availability for noncommercial agricultural, forestall, recreational, or
open-space use, protecting natural resources, maintaining or enhancing air or
water quality, or preserving the historical, architectural or archeological
aspects of real property. The Board of Zoning Appeals may authorize a
conservation easement structure or use upon a finding that establishment of the
use or structure will not be of a substantial detriment to an adjacent property
or to the public good, and the granting of the use or structure will not harm
the character of the district. (11-17-15)
         (c)   General Conditions.
            i.   Prior to issuance of a building permit the property owner must
remove any previously constructed structures, driveways, recreational
structures (pools, courts, sheds, etc.), pervious or impervious surfaces, and
utilities associated with any previous residential or commercial development.
(11-17-15)
            ii.   Use of the property for commercial or rental activity is
expressly prohibited. (11-17-15)
            iii.   The use of the property shall be limited to owners and
guests, not to exceed twenty-four (24) individuals at any given time. (11-17-
15)
         (d)   Structures.
            i.   Size. One open-air structure (gazebo, cabana, pergola, arbor,
or other open-air structure) not exceeding in square footage, five (5) percent
of the parcel's total upland area, or two hundred fifty (250) square feet,
whichever is less. A potential increase of two (2) percent will be allowed to
the structure's square footage, with a 450 square foot maximum, if an existing
residential structure has been removed from the parcel. (11-17-15)
            ii.   Height. Structure may not exceed a maximum height of ten (10)
feet from the natural grade as measured from the center point of the proposed
structure to the highest point of the roof. Height may be extended to thirteen
(13) feet where the majority pitch of the structure's roof is 4/12 or more. An
increase in height may be allowed if the roof’s lowest horizontal structural
member must be constructed above the Base Flood Elevation (BFE), however, under
no circumstances may roof height exceed 3 feet over BFE. (11-17-15)
            iii.   Storage. The structure may contain no more than thirty (30)
percent of the total allowed square footage as enclosed area designated for
storage space. Enclosed area may include one shower stall and must be
constructed with breakaway walls and designed in accordance with FEMA National
Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) regulations and the Town of Sullivan's Island
Flood Prevention Ordinance. (11-17-15)
            iv.   No rooftop seating or use will be permitted. (11-17-15)
            v.   Structure may not contain sewer facilities or portable sewage
collection or disposal devices. Following the removal of any existing sewer
facilities, all the requirements of Town Code of Ordinance Chapters 50 and 51
shall be met (Water and Sewer Utility Regulations.) (11-17-15)
            vi.   Lighting. There shall be no exterior site or structural
lighting. Interior lighting shall be designed and arranged to prevent glare on
adjoining properties, adjacent Recreation and Conservation Area Districts, or
any other area of the beach or marsh. (11-17-15)
            vii.   Building setback. Fifteen (15) foot setbacks are required
from all property lines and must meet the approval of the South Carolina
Department of Health and Environmental Control and Ocean and Coastal Resource
Management (DHEC-OCRM) agencies prior to submitting an application for Special
Exception consideration. The Board of Zoning Appeals may adjust the setback
requirement in instances where severe erosion, historic structures, natural
topography, or trees and vegetation poses an unnecessary hardship for meeting
the required fifteen (15) foot setback. (11-17-15)
         (e)   Parking.
            i.   A maximum of two vehicles will be permitted on the subject
property. (11-17-15)
            ii.   All parking surfaces must remain in its natural state or turf
grass. No additional impervious or engineered surfaces will be permitted. (11-
17-15)
            iii.   No temporary outdoor storage of vehicles, recreational
vehicles, boats, camping facilities, temporary event structures, machinery, or
beach equipment shall be permitted except during the daytime use of the
property. (11-17-15)
         (f)   Open Storage. No permanent outdoor storage permitted. Outdoor
storage is defined as the keeping within an unroofed and unenclosed area any
foods, material, merchandise, or vehicles. (11-17-15)
         (g)   Neighborhood Compatibility. The Design Review Board must review
all proposed conservation easement structures to ensure design compatibility
with the surrounding neighborhood and ensure an environmentally sensitive, low
scale design, which maximizes public view corridors. No structure height,
square footage, or massing increases will be permitted by the Design Review
Board. (11-17-15)
         (h)   Legal Instrument for Permanent Protection. The instrument of
permanent protection shall be a permanent conservation easement recorded by the
Charleston County Register of Mesne Conveyance Office (RMC), concurrent with
the issuance of a Town of Sullivan's Island Building Permit and land
disturbance permit: (11-17-15)
            i.   A land trust or similar conservation-oriented non-profit
organization (grantee) with legal authority to accept such easements. The
organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence and the conveyance
instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for retransfer in the event
the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions, and; (11-17-15)
            ii.   The Town shall receive a copy of the Annual Conservation
Easement Inspection Report, and; (11-17-15)
            iii.   The Town of Sullivan's Island shall reserve a third-party
right of enforcement in the conservation easement agreement. (11-17-15)
   D.   Prohibited uses in the RS-District.
      (1)   Residences that contain less than one thousand (1,000) square feet
of enclosed living area;
      (2)   Erosion control structures.
      (3)   Guest bedroom or dwelling unit for a person or persons not meeting
the Zoning Ordinance's definition of "family" or not lawfully occupied in
accordance with (6) below.
      (4)   Mobile homes or manufactured homes.
      (5)   Non-commercial horticulture or agriculture that includes poultry,
bovine or swine or any other type of non-traditional animal or reptile.
      (6)   Vacation Rentals other than those permitted in accordance with
ARTICLE XIII.
(Ord. 2023-07, passed 2-20-2024)
Sec. 21-21. Lot area and width.  1
   A.   The minimum Lot Area is one-half (1/2) acre.
   B.   The minimum lot width as measured at the building line is one hundred
five (105) feet.
 
Notes
1 1   Please note the impact of Sec. 21-49 with respect to lots designated CCOD.
  (3/20/12)
Sec. 21-22. Front, side and rear setbacks.  2
   A.   Encroachments into yard setbacks.
      (1)   For the purpose of determining the Setbacks required for Principal
Buildings, it shall not include encroachments by
         (a)   Roof eave overhangs to thirty (30) inches;
         (b)   Step treads below a height of six (6) feet with combined width
no greater than 12 feet;
         (c)   HVAC stands within five feet (5’) of the Principal Building
located in the side or rear yards as long as no part of the HVAC stand is
within ten feet (10’) of the side property line. (08-15-06)
         (d)   Chimneys.
      (2)   In no case shall there be any other type of encroachment into the
required Setbacks by any type of structure unless expressly permitted
hereafter.
   B.   Minimum front yard setback.
      (1)   Front Yard Setback. The minimum required Front Yard Setback shall
be twenty-five (25) feet.
      (2)   Corner lot. The required Front Yard Setback for a Corner Lot shall
be fifteen (15) feet from that portion of the lot running parallel to the side
of the Principal Building. If the Principal Building is sited in a manner that
neither side runs parallel to the lot line, then the Principal Building shall
be set back from both lot lines the required twenty-five (25) feet.
      (3)   Shallow lot.
         (a)   A shallow lot is a lot with less depth than width as measured at
the building line.
         (b)   The required Front Yard Setback may be reduced by one-third (1/
3) foot for each foot by which the lot depth is less than eighty (80) feet
rounded up or down to the nearest whole foot; provided, however, the Front Yard
Setback shall never be less than fifteen (15) feet.
      (4)   Additional Front Yard Setback:
         (a)   For any portion of a Principal Building’s height exceeding
twenty (20) feet, that portion in excess of twenty (20) feet shall be set back
from the Front Yard Setback an additional one (1) foot for every one (1) foot
of increased height above twenty (20) feet as measured at the Front Yard
Setback.
         (b)   Explanation.
            a.   This requirement creates a Front Yard Setback “building
envelope” within which the Principal Building’s front facade shall fit.
            b.   The additional front setback line shall be measured as a
straight line from the Front Lot Line to the required setback line, then
turning at a 90 degree angle and extended twenty (20) feet vertically, and then
angled at a 45-degree slope to infinity (1-foot of run to 1-foot of rise).
            c.   Design Review Board. The Design Review Board may grant up to a
fifteen percent (15%) modification in this Zoning Standard if the modification
or other modifications achieve greater Neighborhood Compatibility as described
in Article XII.
      (5)   Principal building front facade.
         (a)   Purpose.
            a.   The overall width and depth of a Principal Building has a
substantial impact on the Principal Building’s mass and scale and how well the
Principal Building blends with existing development of the island.
         (b)   Definitions.
            a.   Primary Front Facade. The largest front facing surface of the
Principal Building that is parallel or nearly parallel to the front yard street
frontage and is considered to be the front of the structure.
         (c)   Design standards for primary front facade.
            a.   The width of a Principal Building’s Primary Front Facade shall
not exceed the lesser of fifty (50) feet or two-thirds (2/3) of the lot’s
buildable width (width of lot at the building line less that portion required
to meet the side yard Setbacks). All other front facing facades shall be set
back at least eight (8) feet from the Principal Building’s Primary Front
Facade.
            b.   A Principal Building having a porch or porches with a depth of
eight (8) feet extending across forty percent (40%) of the Principal Building’s
Primary Front Facade 1st floor shall be exempt from meeting the requirement of
(a) above.
      (6)   Principal building constructed adjacent to post-FEMA elevated
Principal Buildings.
         (a)   If the foundations of the Principal Buildings on either side of
a proposed Principal Building are elevated to meet FEMA’s current flood
standards, the proposed Principal Building is permitted to have the same Front
Yard Setback as the Principal Building having the greater Front Yard Setback,
but in no case shall the Front Yard Setback of the Principal Building be less
than fifteen (15) feet.
         (b)   If the proposed Principal Building is located on a corner lot,
the Principal Buildings sharing a common side lot line with the corner lot
shall govern the permitted front setback.
         (c)   This provision to the Front Yard Setback applies only to the
Principal Building (no accessory structures).
         (d)   Design Review Board.
The Design Review Board may grant up to a fifteen percent (15%) modification in
this Zoning Standard if the modification or other modifications achieve greater
Neighborhood Compatibility as described in Article XII.
   C.   Minimum side yard setback.
      (1)   Lots equal to or greater than one hundred five (105) feet wide as
measured at the required Front Yard Setback Line:
         (a)   The combined Side Yard Setback for both sides shall be equal to
a minimum of forty (40) feet with a minimum average setback for any one side of
fifteen (15) feet, with the minimum distance from the property line of ten (10)
feet on one side and twenty (20) feet on the other.
         (b)   Encroachments within fifteen (15) feet of the side property line
are not permitted within twenty (20) feet of the front facade of the home.
      (2)   Lots less than one hundred five (105) feet wide as measured at the
required Front Yard Setback Line:
         (a)   The required Side Yard Setback may be reduced by one-third (1/3)
foot for each foot by which the lot width is less than one hundred five (105)
feet rounded up or down to the nearest whole foot; provided, however, the Side
Yard Setback shall never be less than ten (10) feet.
         (b)   Encroachments within fifteen (15) feet of the side property line
are not permitted within twenty (20) feet of the front facade of the home,
unless the lot width is less than seventy-five (75) feet wide.
      (3)   Secondary side yard setback requirements:
         (a)   Ground level and first floor elements shall not exceed thirty-
eight (38) feet in length along the side facade without an articulation.
         (b)   Second floor elements shall not exceed thirty-two (32) feet in
length along the side facade without an articulation. This application shall
not apply to second floor elements whose knee wall is less than six (6) feet
high.
         (c)   No side facade shall exceed sixteen (16) feet in length when
located within fifteen (15) feet of the side property line, and a total of no
more thirty-two (32) linear feet of side facade may be located within fifteen
(15) feet of the side property lines on the lot.
         (d)   Articulations shall be a minimum of sixteen (16) inches (1.25
feet) in depth and a minimum of nine (9) feet in length; the length may be
reduced by a foot for every sixteen (16) inches of increased depth, but a
minimum of a 2:1 length to depth ratio must be maintained.
         (e)   A porch or deck with a minimum depth of six (6) feet, meeting
the 2:1 length to depth ratio, may be substituted for the articulation
requirement.
         (f)   Second floor elements shall be subject to an additional five-
(5-) foot setback on each side, with a minimum average setback on one side of
twenty (20) feet and a minimum distance from the property line of at least
fifteen (15) feet, and minimum average setback on the other side of at least
thirty (30) feet with a minimum distance to the property line of at least
twenty (20) feet. This application shall not apply to second floor elements
whose knee wall is less than six (6) feet high.
      (4)   Accessory structures Side Yard Setbacks.
         (a)   See Article XV for Setbacks required for accessory structures.
      (5)   Design Review Board. The Design Review Board may grant up to a
twenty-five percent (25%) modification to any of these zoning standards, except
that no portion of the Principal Building or attached porches or decks may be
closer than ten (10) feet to a side property line, if the modification or other
modifications achieve greater Neighborhood Compatibility as described in
Article XII.
   D.   Minimum rear yard setback.
      (1)   Unless otherwise provided, no structure or part of a structure
shall be erected or allowed to remain nearer than twenty-five (25) feet to a
Rear Lot Line.
      (2)   Shallow lot:
         (a)   A Shallow Lot is a lot with less depth than width at the
Building Line.
         (b)   The required Rear Yard Setback may be reduced by one-third (1/3)
foot for each foot by which the lot depth is less than eighty (80) feet rounded
up or down to the nearest whole foot; provided, however, the Rear Yard Setback
shall never be less than ten (10) feet.
         (c)   This provision does not eliminate the required Setbacks from the
RC-1 and RC-2 Districts stipulated in Article III 21-23.
      (3)   See required Setbacks from RC-1 and RC-2 Districts in Article III
21-23.
      (4)   See required Setbacks for Accessory Structures in ARTICLE XV.
(Ord. 2024-04, passed 6-18-2024)
 
Notes
2    2Please note the impact of Sec. 21-49 with respect to lots designated CCOD.
  (3/20/12)
Sec. 21-23. Setbacks from RC-1 & RC-2 Districts.
   A.   Purpose. The purpose of the Setbacks from the RC-1 and RC-2 Area
Districts is to create a buffer zone that allows passive treatment of
stormwater run-off before entering the waters surrounding Sullivan’s Island and
to provide a buffer zone from floodwater and erosion caused by storms, sea
level rise and other natural conditions.
   B.   Structure defined. For the purpose of this section a structure shall
include any man made construction, including but not limited to, sheds,
garages, gazebos, and houses (excluding stairs without landing areas or with
landing areas not greater than one hundred (100) square feet, docks and
boathouses).
   C.   Exceptions to setback. For the purpose of determining Setbacks from
front, side and rear yards, a structure or part of a structure shall not
include
      (1)   Roof eave overhangs to thirty (30) inches;
      (2)   Step treads below a height of six (6) feet with combined width no
greater than 12 feet;
      (3)   HVAC stands within five (5) feet of the outside wall of the
Principal Building located in the side or rear yards, or
      (4)   Chimneys.
   D.   Setbacks from RC-1 District.
      (1)   The following Setback requirements shall apply to structures
constructed or placed on lots bordering the RC-1 District:
         (a)   Thirty (30) foot Setback from the lot line bordering the RC-
1 District boundary line or the RC-1 District boundary line established as of
the date a Certificate of Zoning Compliance and a Building Permit are issued,
whichever is further landward.
         (b)   No structure greater than four and one-half (4 l/2) feet tall
shall be constructed or moved on a lot so that the seaward most point of the
structure is further from the centerline of the right-of-way forming the
landward boundary of the Lot and running generally parallel with the ocean
shoreline than the greatest distance between the centerline of said right-of-
way to the most seaward point of any other dwelling on the block on which the
Lot is located.
         (c)   Any Certificate of Zoning Compliance and Building Permit issued
for construction governed by this section shall be valid for twelve (12)
months. If construction has not commenced within said twelve (12) months, new
applications for a Certificate of Zoning Compliance in accordance with ARTICLE
XIX. Sec. 21-185 and a Building Permit shall be submitted accompanied by a plat
showing the RC-1 boundary line and all lot line distances as of the date the
application is submitted.
   E.   Setbacks from RC-2 District.
      (1)   The following Setback requirements shall apply to structures
constructed or placed on lots bordering the RC-2 District:
         (a)   Thirty (30) foot Setback from the lot line bordering the RC-
2 Zoning District boundary line or the South Carolina Department of Health and
Environmental Control, Office of Ocean and Coastal Resource Management (SCHEC
OCRM) “Critical Area Line” established as of the date the Certificate of Zoning
Compliance and the Building Permit are issued, whichever is further landward
from the RC-2 Zoning District.
         (b)   No structure greater than four and one-half (4 ½) feet shall be
constructed or moved on a lot so that any portion of the structure closest to
the Rear Lot Line is further from the center of the right-of-way forming the
landward boundary of the Lot and running generally parallel with the marshlands
then the greatest distance between the center of the said right-of-way to the
furthest point of any dwelling on the block on which the lot is located.
         (c)   Any Certificate of Zoning Compliance and Building Permit issued
for construction governed by this section shall be valid for twelve (12)
months, and if construction has not commenced within said twelve (12) months,
new applications for a Certificate of Zoning Compliance in accordance with
ARTICLE XIX. Sec. 21-185 and a Building Permit shall be submitted and
accompanied by a plat showing the “Critical Area Line” and all lot line
distances as of the date the application is submitted.
Sec. 21-24. Building height.
   A.   No Principal Building shall be erected, altered or moved so as to
exceed thirty-eight (38) feet in overall height.
   B.   Building height shall be measured in a straight line from the highest
point of the Principal Building, excepting any chimney but including any other
vertical improvement, to the natural ground elevation at the center point of
the Building.
   C.   Elevated Lot: In no case shall the highest point of a Principal
Building be higher than forty (40) feet above the crown of the street nearest
to the center of the foundation.
      (1)   Example: Foundation grade is three (3) feet above street crown;
maximum Principal Building height = 37 feet.
   D.   Religious institutions: The height of sixty feet (60’) shall apply to
spires, belfries, cupolas and domes not intended for human occupancy located on
the Principal Building.
   E.   The Design Review Board may consider any reduction of the principal
building height below the maximum of thirty-eight feet (38) in its assessment
of overall neighborhood compatibility.
   F.   Notwithstanding any of the requirements in
Sec. 21-24 A-C above, single family residential structures on lots within the
CCOD 1 and 2 Overlay Districts may be permitted only if the principal building
height will not exceed 80% of the maximum height otherwise permitted in
Sec. 21-24 A-C; provided however that buildings in such Overlay Districts may
be eligible for bonuses as set forth in Section
21-49 E and F. (3/20/12)
Sec. 21-25. Principal building coverage area.
   A.   Definitions.
      (1)   Principal Building Coverage Area. The Lot Area covered by the
Principal Building measured vertically downward from the Principal Building's
exterior walls to the ground (also known as the building footprint area), but
excludes areas covered only by:
         (a)   accessory structures not readily useable as living space;
         (b)   exterior porches and decks; and,
         (c)   exterior stairs.
      (2)   Principal Building. A building or buildings in which the principal
use of the lot is conducted. The term also specifically applies to multiple
dwellings located on the same lot, including an historic structure used as an
accessory dwelling unit. (5-15-07)
   B.   Permitted principal building coverage area.
      (1)   Lot Area equal, to or greater than fifteen thousand (15,000) square
feet:
         (a)   Principal Building Coverage Area shall be no greater than
fifteen percent (15%) of the Lot Area.
         (b)   Example (18,000 sf Lot Area): 18,000 sf lot x 15% = 2700 sf
Principal Building Coverage Area permitted (15% of Lot Area).
      (2)   Lot Area less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet:
         (a)   Principal Building Coverage Area shall be no greater than
fifteen percent (15%) times Lot Area plus fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet
minus the Lot Area times five percent (5%).
         (b)   Example (12,000 sf Lot Area): (15% x 12,000 sf) + [(15,000 sf -
12,000 sf) x 5%] = 1950 sf Principal Building Coverage Area permitted (16.3% of
Lot Area).
      (3)   Examples. 1/2 acre Lot 21,780 sf= 3267 sf Coverage (15%).
         (a)   1/3 acre Lot 14,505 sf- 2176 sf Coverage (15%).
         (b)   1-4 acre Lot 10,890 sf - 1634 sf Coverage (20%).
         (c)   Lot 5,000 sf= 1250 sf Coverage (25%).
   C.   Design Review Board.
      (1)   The Design Review Board may increase by no more than twenty percent
(20%) the maximum permitted Principal Building Coverage Area if this or other
modifications achieve greater Neighborhood Compatibility as described in
ARTICLE XII. (5-15-07) (2-20-24)
      (2)   In cases of interpretation of Enclosed Principal Building Coverage
Area, the Design Review Board shall determine what portion of the Enclosed
Principal Building Coverage Area shall be included or excluded in the
calculations.
(Ord. 2023-07, passed 2-20-2024)
Sec. 21-26. Impervious coverage area.
   A.   Definitions.
      (1)   Impervious Coverage Area. That portion of the Lot Area covered by
an impervious surface.
      (2)   Impervious Surface: Any material or structure through which water
cannot be absorbed or passed, including but not limited to roofed structures,
compacted soil or stone, pavement consisting of asphalt, concrete, oil and
stone, tar, or asphalt. Impervious surfaces also include building foundations,
porches, decks, patios, sidewalks, play courts (tennis, basketball, etc.),
pools, and other improvements that impede the absorption of water. Grassed or
mulched areas are not considered impervious materials.
      (3)   Pervious Surface: Any material through which water can be easily
absorbed or passed, at a minimum infiltration rate of 2.0 inches per hour, such
as, but not limited to, grass and uncompacted gravel, shell and crushed stone.
(1/20/09)
   B.   Permitted impervious coverage area.
      (1)   Lot Area equal to or greater than fifteen thousand (15,000) square
feet:
         (a)   Impervious Coverage shall be no greater than thirty percent
(30%) of the Lot Area.
         (b)   Example (18,000 sf Lot Area): 18,000 sf lot x 30% = 5400 sf
Impervious Coverage permitted (30%).
      (2)   Lot Area less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet:
         (a)   Impervious Coverage shall be no greater than (30% times Lot
Area) plus [(15,000 sf minus the Lot Area) times 5 percent).
         (b)   Example (12,000 sf Lot Area): (30% x 12,000 sf) + [(15,000 sf -
12,000 sf) x 5%] = 3750 sf Impervious Coverage permitted (31.3%).
      (3)   Garage exception to impervious coverage area. Where the finished
first floor elevation in compliance with ARTICLE III. Sec. 21-31 (Foundation
Height), limits the finished first floor elevation to six and a half (6.5) feet
or less, an accessory garage shall be permitted in accordance with ARTICLE XV.
Sec. 21-138 (Accessory Structures) without penalty toward the impervious
surface coverage limits. In this case, the area beneath the dwelling shall not
be used for parking of vehicles or equipment of any type.
      (4)   Examples:
         (a)   1/2 acre Lot 21,780 sf = 6534 sf Impervious Coverage (30%).
         (b)   1/3 acre Lot 14,505 sf = 4352 sf Impervious Coverage (30%).
         (c)   1/4 acre Lot 10890 sf = 3267 sf Impervious Coverage (33.3%).
         (d)   Lot 5,000 sf = 2000 sf Impervious Coverage (40%).
      (5)   At least fifty percent (50%) of the Lot Area shall remain naturally
vegetated or landscaped with grass and/or other vegetation.
   C.   Design Review Board.
      (1)   The Design Review Board may increase by no more than 25% the
maximum permitted Impervious Coverage if the increased impervious coverage
consists solely of materials such as grass pavers are employed that allow
vegetative materials such as grass to permeate the surface giving the
appearance of grassed areas.
      (2)   In cases of interpretation of Impervious Coverage, the Design
Review Board shall determine what portion of the Impervious Coverage area shall
be included or excluded in the calculations.
Sec. 21-27. Principal building square footage.
   A.   Purpose and definition.
      (1)   Purpose: The overall size of a Principal Building in relation to
lot size affects the impact of the Principal Building's scale and mass on
adjacent buildings and the Island as a whole. Improving the relationship
between lot size and the Principal Building by limiting the Principal
Building's maximum size promotes greater compatibility of new construction with
existing development and contributes to overall neighborhood compatibility.
      (2)   Principal Building Square Footage: The entire square footage of the
Principal Building or Buildings measured from the outside of the exterior
walls, specifically including more than one dwelling on the same lot and
historic structures used as accessory dwelling units, but not including (5-15-
07) (12-17-13)
         (a)   interior space not readily useable as living space (attic used
only for storage or parking area beneath dwelling);
         (b)   structures that are not used as living space;
         (c)   exterior porches and decks; and,
         (d)   exterior stairs.
   B.   Permitted principal building square footage.
      (1)   Lot Area of five thousand (5,000) square feet or less: Principal
Building Square Footage limited to twenty four hundred (2400) square feet.
      (2)   Lot Area exceeding five thousand (5,000) square feet: maximum
Principal Building Square Footage of twenty four hundred (2400) square feet may
be increased 10 sf for every additional 100 square feet of Lot Area.
      (3)   Equation: [(Lot Area - 5000 sf) / 100 sf] x (10) + 2400 = Principal
Building Square Footage.
Examples:
         (a)   1/2 acre Lot 21,780 sf= 4078 Principal Building Square Footage.
         (b)   1/3 acre Lot 14,505 sf= 3351 Principal Building Square Footage.
         (c)   1/4 acre Lot 10890 sf= 2989 Principal Building Square Footage.
         (d)   Lot 5,000 sf= 2400 Principal Building Square Footage.
      (4)   The maximum permitted Principal Building Square Footage is fifty
six hundred (5600) square feet for any newly constructed single-family home.
Existing buildings shall be exempt from the 5600 square foot requirement and
able to utilize their total principal building square footage for single-family
use. (12-17-13)
   C.   Design Review Board.
      (1)   The Design Review Board may increase by no more than fifteen
percent (15%) and not to exceed five hundred (500) square feet added to the
maximum permitted Principal Building Square Footage if this or other
modifications achieve greater Neighborhood Compatibility as described in
ARTICLE XII except:
         (i)   In cases of the special exception, Section
21-20C.(2), allowing a second residential structure on a lot with the historic
structure used as an accessory dwelling unit, wherein the Design Review Board
may permit increases in the Principal Building Square Footage by no more than
twenty-five percent (25%), or
         (ii)   In cases where the subject property has been designated
historic, per Section
21-94, wherein the Design Review Board may permit increases in the Principal
Building Square Footage by no more than twenty percent (20%). (5-15-07) (2-20-
24)
      (2)   However, in no case shall any Principal Building Square Footage
exceed 5,600 square feet or, when applicable, the principal square footage
permitted in
Sec. 21-27B.(4). (5-15-07) (12-17-13)
   D.   Notwithstanding any of the requirements in Sec.
Sec. 21-27A.-C. above, single family residential structures in the CCOD 1
District may be permitted only if the principal building coverage area shall
not exceed 80% of the maximum principal building square footage otherwise
permitted in Sec.
Sec. 21-27A.-C. The Design Review Board shall not have the authority to
increase the principal building square footage as set forth in
Sec. 21-27C. for single family residential structures on CCOD 1 or 2 Overlay
District lots; provided, however, the Design Review Board may exercise the
discretion described in
Sec. 21-49. (6/19/07) (3/20/12)
(Ord. 2023-07, passed 2-20-2024)
Sec. 21-28. Third story.
   A.   The Enclosed Portion of any third Story of any Principal Building shall
be no greater than four hundred (400) square feet and shall only have fifty
percent (50%) of its wall area projecting outside the roof area as measured
from the outside of the wall studs.
   B.   The Design Review Board may grant up to a fifteen percent (15%)
modification in this Zoning Standard if the modification or other modifications
achieve greater Neighborhood Compatibility as described in Article XII.
Sec. 21-29. Reserved.
Sec. 21-30. Orientation of Principal Building
   A.   Purpose. Principal Buildings with street oriented “front doors”
contribute to the sense of “neighborliness” of the Island; having a consistent
front yard orientation, reduces the possibility of accessory structures being
located inconsistent with the pattern of development.
   B.   Design standards.
      (1)   The Principal Building’s Primary Facade (front door) shall be
oriented toward a public street, excluding Principal Buildings on lots adjacent
to the ocean or marsh.
      (2)   Double Frontage Lots: the Principal Building’s Primary Facade shall
be oriented toward the ocean unless the Principal Building is replacing one
oriented otherwise.
      (3)   Corner lots: the Principal Building’s Primary Facade shall be
oriented toward the ocean or marsh, unless the Principal Building is replacing
one oriented otherwise.
   C.   Design Review Board. In determining orientation of the Principal
Building, the Design Review Board may modify this Design Standard to achieve
greater Neighborhood Compatibility as described in ARTICLE XII.
Sec. 21-31. Foundation height.
   A.   Purpose. The first-floor height of new Principal Buildings are
regulated by FEMA's base flood elevation (BFE) and the town's local freeboard
requirements to minimize flood risk and protect against storm surge. However,
the overall foundation height should be limited to ensure Neighborhood
Compatibility with historic structures and non-elevated homes located
throughout the town.
   B.   Design standards.
      (1)   The bottom elevation of the Principal Building's lowest horizontal
structural member shall be no more than eight (8) feet above finished grade.
      (2)   The finished floor shall be no more than nine (9) feet four (4)
inches above finished grade.
      (3)   If the base flood elevation (BFE) conflicts with the maximum height
limitations noted above in Sections
21-31B.(1)-(2), the lowest horizontal structural member shall be no higher than
the design flood elevation (DFE) with a finished floor elevation (FFE) no
higher than two (2) feet above DFE elevation.
      (4)   The standards outlined in B.(1)-(3) do not apply to designated
historic buildings. Designated historic building must comply with the standards
set forth in Section
21-44.
(Ord. 2020-17, passed 11-17-2020) (2-20-24)
   C.   Design Review Board. The Design Review Board may grant up to a one foot
(1') modification in this Design Standard if the modification or other
modifications achieve greater Neighborhood Compatibility as described in
ARTICLE XII.
   D.   CCOD Lots. (3/20/12) Structures located on lots within the CCOD Overlay
Districts shall not have their foundation heights set by reference to
Sec. 21-31, but rather shall be governed by the foundation height requirements
set forth specifically within the Overlay ordinance. See
Sec. 21-49. (3/20/12)
(Ord. 2023-07, passed 2-20-2024)
Sec. 21-32. Foundation enclosure.
   A.   Purpose. The treatment of a Principal Building’s foundation has a large
impact on the mass and scale of the structure. Foundations more open by design
diminish a structure’s mass.
   B.   Design standards.
      (1)   A Principal Building’s foundation exceeding three (3) feet in
height shall be enclosed by open lattice or slats having a minimum of one half
(1/2) inch between lattice or slats.
      (2)   Solid enclosure materials such as brick or stucco may only be used
as building materials for supporting the foundation and are limited to four (4)
feet in width and depth and occurring no more often than every eight (8) feet
on the exterior portions of the foundation.
   C.   Design Review Board. The Design Review Board may grant a modification
in this Design Standard if this or other modifications achieve greater
Neighborhood Compatibility as described in ARTICLE XII, except where National
Flood Insurance Program regulations prohibit.
Sec. 21-33. Deleted
Sec. 21-34. Site lighting.
   A.   Purpose. Highly illuminated structures on lots are not compatible with
the character of Sullivan’s Island and encroach upon the enjoyment of the night
skies and beaches.
   B.   Design standards
      (1)   A Principal Building’s exterior site lighting shall be arranged to
prevent glare on adjoining properties, in the public right-of-way, on the
Recreation and Conservation Area District, or any other area of the beach or
marsh.
      (2)   A Principal Building’s exterior site lighting shall be designed and
arranged to prevent the light source (lens and bulb) from being visible from
adjoining properties, in the public right-of-way, on the Recreation and
Conservation Area District, or any other area of the beach or marsh.
      (3)   Exterior site lighting plans shall indicate appropriate provisions
have been made to prevent “sky and neighborhood glow.”
      (4)   High pressure sodium lamps or other lamps producing unnatural color
shall be prohibited.
The following sections 21-35 through 21-32 are Design Guidelines.
Sec. 21-35. Massing ratio.
   A.   Purpose. Architecturally, there is an ideal ratio between a rectangle’s
width and its length; this aspect ratio is 5:3. As it relates to a Principal
Building, a building having a front width of fifty (50) feet would ideally have
a depth of thirty (30) feet or vice versa.
   B.   Design guideline.
      (1)   A Principal Building’s building aspect ratio of 5:3 (width to
length or vice versa) should be considered for new construction, including
additions.
   C.   Design Review Board. This is a Design Guideline not binding on the
applicant. The Design Review Board may encourage the use of this guideline for
achieving greater Neighborhood Compatibility as described in Article XII.
Sec. 21-36. Eave height.
   A.   Purpose. A Principal Building’s front eave height increases the impact
of the building’s mass. As a Principal Building increases in foundation
elevation and the addition of stories, the corresponding increase in the height
of the front roof eave or parapet increases, thus creating a larger, more
massive building.
   B.   Design guideline.
      (1)   The height of the Primary Front Facade’s eaves or parapets should
not exceed thirteen (13) feet above the FEMA base flood elevation or ground
elevation whichever is greater.
      (2)   Alternative: If the Primary Front Facade has a eight (8) foot deep
porch having an eave or parapet across at least sixty percent (60%) of the
Primary Front Facade, and the porch’s eave or parapet is elevated no more than
ten (10) feet above the FEMA base flood elevation, then the height of the
Primary Front Facade’s other eaves or parapets may exceed the recommended
thirteen (13) foot height limit for that portion of the Primary Facade fronted
by the porch.
   C.   Design Review Board. This is a Design Guideline not binding on the
applicant. The Design Review Board may encourage the use of this guideline for
achieving greater Neighborhood Compatibility as described in Article XII.
Sec. 21-37. Porches and decks.
   A.   Purpose. Porches are an integral part of the architecture of Sullivan’s
Island and should be strongly encouraged. However, decks are not a part of the
historical Island’s character
   B.   Design guidelines.
      (1)   At least forty percent (40%) of the Principal Building’s primary
front facade on the 1st floor should be devoted to porches having a minimum
depth of eight (8) feet.
      (2)   Square footage of porches and decks should not exceed forty percent
(40%) of Principal Building’s enclosed square footage.
      (3)   Use of decks in the front yard of the Principal Building should be
avoided.
      (4)   Decks should be limited to a maximum of twenty (20) feet in any
direction (except ground level pool decking).
      (5)   Decks should be avoided on the 1st floor Front Facade.
   C.   Design Review Board. This is a Design Guideline not binding on the
applicant. The Design Review Board may encourage the use of this guideline for
achieving greater Neighborhood Compatibility as described in Article XII.
Sec. 21-38. Roof shape.
   A.   Purpose. Roof shape has an impact on how compatible a new structure is
with Principal Buildings on Sullivan’s Island; traditionally, roof shapes on
the island are fairly simple and most Principal Buildings have one (1) roof
that covers a majority of the building.
   B.   Design guideline.
      (1)   The Principal Building should have a primary roof covering at least
fifty percent (50%) of the Principal Building’s footprint.
      (2)   Complex-sloping roofs (multiple valleys) should be avoided.
      (3)   Roof slopes should not exceed forty-five (45) degrees.
      (4)   Roofs sloping less than fifteen (15) degrees are considered flat
roofs and should be concealed behind a raised parapet at least as high as the
peak of the roof.
   C.   Design Review Board. This is a Design Guideline not binding on the
applicant. The Design Review Board may encourage the use of this guideline for
achieving greater Neighborhood Compatibility as described in Article XII.
Sec. 21-39. Roof decks and roof gazebos.
   A.   Purpose. Roof decks and roof gazebos increase a Principal Building’s
mass and scale and are often an incompatible design feature.
   B.   Design guideline.
      (1)   Roof decks and roof gazebos should be designed to be an integral
part of roof structure in order to diminish their impact.
   C.   Design Review Board. This is a Design Guideline not binding on the
applicant. The Design Review Board may encourage the use of this guideline for
achieving greater Neighborhood Compatibility as described in Article XII.
Sec. 21-40. Front-oriented stairs.
   A.   Purpose. Principal Buildings with visible access from the front yard to
the Principal Building’s “front door” are more compatible with the Island
architecture.
   B.   Design guideline.
      (1)   A Principal Building should have stairs that provide access
directly from the Principal Building’s front facade to the front yard; other
exterior stairs should be on the side or rear of Principal Building.
   C.   Design Review Board. This is a Design Guideline not binding on the
applicant. The Design Review Board may encourage the use of this guideline for
achieving greater Neighborhood Compatibility as described in Article XII.
Sec. 21-41. Landscaping.
   A.   Purpose. A significant contribution to the informality of Sullivan’s
Island is the manner in which landscape materials are used. Highly stylized
plantings and plantings used to create a strong sense of lot privacy are not
approaches that work well with the Island’s open and informal landscape
character.
   B.   Design guideline.
      (1)   Landscaping should be arranged to allow visual access through the
site by using grasses, low shrubs, and high-canopy trees.
      (2)   Use of native species and other traditional ornamental species is
encouraged.
      (3)   Front yard berms should be avoided.
   C.   Design Review Board. This is a Design Guideline not binding on the
applicant. The Design Review Board may encourage the use of this guideline for
achieving greater Neighborhood Compatibility as described in Article XII.
Sec. 21-42. Driveways.
   A.   Purpose. The impact of drives and parking can be considerable in a
residential district particularly if the front yard area is developed as the
primary location for access and parking.
   B.   Design guidelines.
      (1)   Double Frontage or Corner Lots should provide vehicle access via
the rear or side of the Principal Building unless these access points are along
heavily traveled streets.
      (2)   Excessive paved parking areas, particularly within the Front Yard
should be avoided.
   C.   Design Review Board. This is a Design Guideline not binding on the
applicant. The Design Review Board may encourage the use of this guideline for
achieving greater Neighborhood Compatibility as described in Article XII.
Sec. 21-43. Preservation of historic properties.
   A.   Purpose. Sullivan's Island has a rich architectural and cultural
history as reflected in the Historic Sites Survey, 2003 that inventoried over
three hundred (300) Principal Buildings that are part of the Island's
historical roots. Increases in land values and more restrictive buildable area
standards have increased the rate at which many of these historically
significant or contributing structures have been demolished.
   B.   Exceptions to standards. If efforts are made to retain a Principal
Building because it is an historically significant or contributing building (an
historic property as described in
Sec. 21-94. Historic property designation criteria) that is compatible with
existing development, the Design Review Board may:
      (1)   Exempt the Principal Building's pre-existing nonconforming Setbacks
in order to permit additions in keeping with the Principal Building's historic
character; and,
      (2)   Permit the Principal Building to be used as accessory dwelling unit
only specified in previous section
21-20C., occupied by persons meeting the Zoning Ordinance's definition of
"family." (2-20-24)
   C.   Design Review Board. The Design Review Board shall make case-by-case
determinations to decide to what extent the above exemptions shall be granted
if the Principal Building is listed as an historic property as described in
Sec. 21-94. Historic property designation.
(Ord. 2023-07, passed 2-20-2024)
Sec. 21-44. Elevating historic buildings.
   A.   Purpose. To preserve the character of designated historic properties
and surrounding neighborhoods, an integrated design approach shall be taken
when elevating Sullivan's Island Landmarks and Traditional Island Resources.
   B.   Design Standards. Any proposed elevation or site relocation of an
historic structure shall carefully consider site conditions (site elevations
and topography), parcel access, typology of architecture, building composition
and scale, and its context with adjoining historic properties while employing
the following standards:
      (1)   Height: To minimize the height of elevating historic structures,
the finished floor elevation (FFE) shall exceed no more than three (3) feet
above finished grade.
      (2)   Composition and Scale: To maintain an historic building's visual
character and design compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood, an
elevation design plan shall be submitted to illustrate the composition and
scale of the building's principal architectural features are being maintained
and will remain proportional to the elevated foundation.
      (3)   Perspective and Orientation: Any proposed elevation or relocation
should maintain the building's historic perspective from the principal right-
of-way. All historic architectural elements should be maintained after
elevation or relocation.
      (4)   Scale Minimization and Architectural Screening: Appropriate
measures should be introduced into the site design to reduce or eliminate
negative visual effects from the elevation of a historic structure. These
elements include fencing, landscaping (foundation plantings), stair
configuration and any other site considerations noted by the Design Review
Board.
   C.   Design Review Board. Design Review Board may on a case-by-case basis,
increase the height of a historic structure by up to two (2) feet above the
standard set forth in Section 21-44 B. (1) and make other determinations of the
above design criteria to achieve greater neighborhood compatibility and to
achieve the goals and standards of the Historic Preservation Overlay District
(Article XI).
(Ord. 2017-04, passed 8-15-2017; Ord. 2023-07, passed 2-20-2024)
Sec. 21-45. Reserved.
Sec. 21-46. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV: CC-COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
Sec. 21-47. Change of district name. 
   The CC-Community Commercial District (CC-District) was formerly known as the
“OC-GC General Commercial and Office Commercial District.” This change in name
neither affects the zoning boundary lines of the zoning district nor uses
previously permitted or prohibited.
Sec. 21-48. Purpose and application of CC-Community Commercial District and
CCOD 1 and 2 Overlay Districts. (3/20/12)
   A.   Purpose. It is the intent that the CC-Community Commercial District
(and portions of the associated overlay zones CCOD 1 and CCOD 2) shall be
developed and reserved for commercial business and office use for the benefit
of Sullivan’s Island residents, and to encourage well-regulated residential
land use. The regulations that apply within the district are designed to
encourage the formation and continuance of a compatible and economically
healthy environment for commercial and professional office uses that benefit
from being located in close proximity to one another. It is also the intent to
provide opportunities for residential uses to be developed at appropriate
locations within the CC-District and CCOD 1 and 2 Overlay Districts under
circumstances which will assure compatibility of neighboring commercial and
residential activities. (3/20/12)
   B.   Application of zoning and design standards and design guidelines.
      (1)   Unless otherwise specifically identified as a Design Standard or
Design Guideline, all of the standards under this Article shall be considered
as Zoning Standards.
      (2)   Within the CC District and CCOD 1 and 2 Overlay Districts, all
plans for new construction or for renovations which will change the exterior
appearance must be reviewed in advance by the Design Review Board for
neighborhood compatibility. (3/20/12)
Sec. 21-49. CC, CCOD 1 and CCOD 2. (Entire Section revised 3/20/12)
   A.   Generally. Sullivan’s Island contains lots that are, or previously
were, split zoned lots. These are located generally between Station 20 1/2 and
Station 22 1/2 that have frontage on Middle Street and I’on Avenue and Middle
Street and Jasper Boulevard. These lots are shown in Exhibit 1.1 at the end of
this section, and shall be divided into Districts and Overlay Districts to be
known as CC, CCOD 1 and CCOD 2. In instances of unsubdivided lots within the CC
District, and CCOD 1 and 2 Overlay Districts, the underlying (RS/CC) zoning
boundary line bisecting split zoned lots and shall be retained and observed
absent specific amendment by Council. (Please refer to the Official Zoning Map
for exact demarcation of zoning district boundaries). In instances where lots
are subdivided the subdivision shall occur along the pre-existing (RS/CC)
zoning boundary. In instances in which specific CCOD 1 or CCOD 2 overlay rules
conflict with the underlying base zoning (RS or CC) requirements or the general
zoning, site planning, and use regulations set forth elsewhere within this
code, then the more specific CCOD 1 and CCOD 2 Overlay provisions shall control
for such parcels. In all other instances the more general underlying base
zoning and ordinances of the Town of Sullivan’s Island shall apply.
   B.   Boundaries.
      1.   CC - The CC area may generally be described as consisting of those
lots between Station 20 1/2 and Station 22 1/2 that have frontage on Middle
Street and Ton Avenue and Middle Street and Jasper Boulevard. Some portions of
the CC area are further divided into the CCOD 1 and CCOD 2 Overlay Districts
for regulatory purposes. Town to provide revised description of CC district
boundaries.
      2.   CCOD 1 - The CCOD 1 Overlay District may generally be described as
consisting of those lots between Middle Street and Jasper Boulevard from
Station 22 1/2; to Station 22. This area is comprised of the parcels identified
as TMS Numbers 529-05-00084, 529-05-00034, 529-05-00033, 529-05-00032, 529-05-
00031 and 529-05-00030 (five parcels of land) as well as any additional parcels
later created by subdivision or replatting of these listed parcels. See Exh.
1.1.
      3.   CCOD 2 - The CCOD 2 Overlay District area may generally be described
as consisting of those lots between I’On Avenue and Middle Street from Station
22 to 2019 Middle Street and 2120 Middle Street. This area is comprised of the
parcels identified as TMS Numbers 5290900014, 5290900109, 5290900096,
5290900106, 5290900017, 5290900095, 5290900114, 5290900097, 5290900111,
5290900108, 5290900125, 5290900015, 5290900110, 5290900103, 5290900107,
5290900093, 5290900094, 5290900124, 5290900018, 5290900019, 5290900020,
5290900021, 5290900022, 5290500086, 5290500035, 5290500087 and 5290500085
(twenty-seven parcels of land) as well as any additional parcels later created
by subdivision or replatting of these listed parcels See Exh. 1.1.
COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL OVERLAY DISTRICT PROPERTIES
EXHIBIT 1.1
DISTRICT #1 DISTRICT #2 DISTRICT #2
TMS#        TMS#        TMS#
DISTRICT #1 DISTRICT #2 DISTRICT #2
TMS#        TMS#        TMS#
5290500084  5290900014  5290900107
5290500034  5290900109  5290900093
5290500033  5290900096  5290900094
5290500032  5290900106  5290900124
5290500032  5290900017  5290900018
5290500031  5290900095  5290900019
5290500030  5290900114  5290900020
            5290900097  5290900021
            5290900111  5290900022
            5290900108  5290500086
            5290900125  5290500035
            5290900015  5290500087
            5290900110  5290500085
            5290900103
 
   C.   Subdivision of Lots
      1.   The subdivision of split-zoned lots within the CCOD 1 and 2 Overlay
Districts is permitted as specified herein, but shall not be required. For
split-zoned lots that are not subdivided the split-zoning shall remain
undisturbed absent amendment by Council.
      2.   Parcels within the CCOD 1 and 2 Overlay Districts may be subdivided,
provided that the bisecting boundary line accomplishing the subdivision is
placed along the pre-existing RS / CC zoning district boundary line as shown on
the Official Zoning Map. See Exh. 1.1. Absent specific zoning amendment by
Council, each of the parcels resulting from subdivision shall retain the
respective underlying (RS or CC) base zoning designation previously associated
with the particular land area while split-zoned, subject of course to any
Overlay District modifications.
      3.   Subdivisions in the CCOD 1 and 2 Overlay Districts accomplished in
accordance with this subsection above are permitted without regard to the
minimum lot requirements specified in Sections 21-12(A)(1), 21-12(A)(3) and 21-
21. Lots subdivided in this manner shall be considered conforming lots of
record, but may not be further subdivided. Subdivision of lots in this fashion
must, however, meet all other requirements of Section 21-12 as well as all
requirements of Section 21-51 regarding utility easements and meters.
      4.   Notwithstanding the provisions of Sec. 21-19(C), in the event that
split-zoned lots are subdivided in accordance with the provisions of Section
21-49, the commercial and residential lots so created may be owned by different
owners.
   D.   C Standards Outside of CCOD 1 and 2 Overlay Districts. Applicable
development standards may be found in Sections 21-50 through 66, among others.
   E.   CCOD 1 Standards.
      1.   CCOD 1 RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION.
         a.   For single family residences constructed on the residential (RS)
portion of the split zoned lots or on residentially zoned lots within the CCOD
1 Overlay District, the site planning and other development and zoning
requirements applicable to RS zones shall apply except that
            (i)   a principal building square footage bonus not to exceed
fifteen (15%) percent; and/or
            (ii)   a building height bonus not to exceed fifteen (15%) percent
3 ; and/or
            (iii)   a side setback reduction from those currently set forth
with respect to RS Districts (though in no event shall a side setback of less
than ten (10’) feet be permitted);
            may be approved by the Design Review Board when such bonus(es) or
reduction would improve neighborhood compatibility or further other goals of
the Town’s Comprehensive Plan. An illustration of the application of these
various rules can be seen in Table 1.1. See also, generally among others,
Sections 21-19 through 46, for additional standards.
         b.   For the purpose of calculating Principal Building square footage,
lot coverage, impervious coverage, and other standards for land located within
the residential portion CCOD 1 Overlay District, only that portion of the Lot
Area base zoned RS shall be considered in the calculations.
         c.   Single family residences to be constructed within CCOD 1 Overlay
District must be constructed with all exterior walls facing Middle Street
appropriately built for sound proofing. Additionally, the rear facade (i.e.
facade facing Middle Street) shall not employ a flat, single plane aspect. Rear
facade design and rear wall soundproofing specifications shall be approved by
the Design Review Board prior to permitting.
         d.   The bottom elevation of a Principal Building’s 1st floor joists
shall be no more than one (1) foot above the FEMA base flood elevation.
         e.   Permitted uses shall be determined by reference to Section 21-20
(Principal Uses) and Article XV of these Ordinances (Accessory Uses).
         f.   In order to facilitate the objectives of neighborhood
compatibility, front and rear setbacks described within Section 21-22 may be
reduced by the Design Review Board, but in no case shall the combined total
front and rear setbacks be less than forty (40’) feet and the front setback
shall not be less than fifteen (15’) feet.
         g.   Dormers. Conforming front dormers shall be exempt from the 1:
1 front yard setback rule described in Section 21-22(B)(4)(a). Dormers
constructed in accordance with this exemption shall be limited to twenty (20%)
percent of the roof area with no one dormer exceeding six (6’) feet in length
measured at the portion of the wall plate parallel to the exterior of the
structure at the lowest roof edge. Front dormers constructed in the residential
portions of the CCOD 1 district shall not, however, be eligible for the Design
Review Board modification described in Section 21-22(B)(4)(c).
CCOD 1 Residential Construction
Illustration Table 1.1
 
         Principal       Principal                         Principal Building
Lot Size Building Square Building Square   Principal       Height Plus Max.
         Footage 2       Footage Plus Max. Building Height 15% Bonus
                         15% Bonus
10,890   2391 sf         2750 sf           30.4 ft         35.0 ft
7000     2080 sf         2392 sf           30.4 ft         35.0 ft
 
      2.   CCOD 1 Commercial
         a.   For buildings constructed on the commercial (CC) portion of lots
or commercial (CC) lots within the CCOD 1 Overlay District the site planning
and other development and zoning requirements applicable to CC zones shall
apply except that:
            (i)   for purposes of the maximum structure size calculations
described in Section 21-52(A)(1) the size limit percentage shall be fifty-two
(52%) percent rather than the typical fifty-seven (57%) percent, and for the
calculations described in Section 21-52(A)(2) the listed 2.72% figure shall be
replaced with three (3%) percent 3 ; and
            (ii)   a principal building square footage bonus not to exceed
fifteen (15%) percent may be approved by the Design Review Board when such
bonus(es) would improve neighborhood compatibility or otherwise further the
goals of the Town’s Comprehensive Plan; and/or
            (iii)   a building height bonus not to exceed twenty (20%) percent
may be approved by the Design Review Board when such bonus(es) would improve
neighborhood compatibility or otherwise further the goals of the Town’s
Comprehensive Plan. 4
         An illustration of the application of the rules generally governing
such construction can be seen in Table 1.2. See also, generally among others,
Sections 21-50 through 66, for additional standards.
         b.   For the purpose of calculating Principal Building square footage,
lot coverage, impervious coverage, and other standards, only that portion of
the Lot Area base zoned CC-Community Commercial District shall be considered in
the calculations.
         c.   Foundation height shall be determined by reference to Sec. 21-59
(A) and (B). The Design Review Board shall not be permitted to consider
variances from these requirements.
         d.   Permitted uses for structures on the commercial portion of a lot
within the CCOD 1 Overlay District shall be governed by
Section 21-50 and Article XV of these Ordinances.
         e.   The first floor of the structure must be used exclusively for one
or more commercial uses as described in
Section 21-50 except for building access for the upper floor, mechanical,
utilities and similar uses.
         f.   If developed for commercial and residential use, the structure
shall have a balanced appearance and present a harmonious and substantially
uniform width facing Middle Street.
CCOP 1 Commercial Construction
Illustration Table 1.2
 
         Principal       Principal                         Principal Building
Lot Size Building Square Building Square   Principal       Height Plus Max.
         Footage         Footage Plus Max. Building Height 20% Bonus
                         15% Bonus
10,890   4530 sf         5210 sf           30.4 ft         36.5 ft
7000     3696 sf         4250 sf           30.4 ft         36.5 ft
 
   F.   CCOD 2 Standards.
      1.   CCOD 2 RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION.
         a.   For Single-family residences constructed on the residential (RS)
portion of split-zoned lots or residential (RS) lots within the CCOD 2 Overlay
District, the site planning and other development and zoning requirements
applicable in RS zones shall apply except that:
            (i)   a principal building square footage bonus not to exceed
fifteen (15%) percent; and/or
            (ii)   a building height bonus not to exceed twenty (20%) percent 5
;
         may be approved by the Design Review Board when such bonus(es) would
improve neighborhood compatibility or otherwise further the goals of the Town’s
Comprehensive Plan. An illustration of the application of these rules may be
seen in Table 1.3. See also, generally among others, Sections 21-19 to 46, for
additional standards.
         b.   For the purpose of calculating Principal Building square footage,
lot coverage, impervious coverage, and other standards for land located within
the residential portion CCOD 2 Overlay District, only that portion of the Lot
Area base zoned RS shall be considered in the calculations.
         c.   The bottom elevation of a Principal Building’s 1st floor joists
shall not exceed the lower of seven (7’) feet above grade or two (2’) feet
above the FEMA base flood elevation. See also Section 21-31(B)(1)(2).
         d.   Permitted uses shall be as described in
Section 21-20 and Article XV of these Ordinances.
CCOD 2 Residential Construction
Illustration Table 1.3
 
         Principal       Principal                         Principal Building
Lot Size Building Square Building Square   Principal       Height Plus Max.
         Footage         Footage Plus Max. Building Height 20% Bonus
                         15% Bonus
10,890   2989 sf         3437 sf           30.4 ft         36.5 ft
 
      2.   CCOD 2 Commercial - Middle Street Lots.
         a.   Buildings constructed on the commercial portion of split-zoned
lots or a commercial lot within the CCOD 2 Overlay District the site planning
and other development and zoning requirements applicable to CC zones shall
apply except that:
            (i)   for purposes of the maximum structure size calculations
described in Section 21-52(A)(1) the size limit percentage shall be fifty-two
(52%) rather than the typical fifty-seven (57%) percent, and for the
calculations described in Section 21-52(A)(2) the listed 2.72% figure shall be
replaced with three (3%) percent 6 ; and
            (ii)   a principal building square footage bonus not to exceed
fifteen (15%) percent may be approved by the Design Review Board when such
bonus(es) would improve neighborhood compatibility or otherwise further the
goals of the Town’s Comprehensive Plan: and/or
            (iii)   a building height bonus not to exceed twenty (20%) percent
may be approved by the Design Review Board when such bonus(es) would improve
neighborhood compatibility or otherwise further the goals of the Town’s
Comprehensive Plan. 9
         An illustration of the application of these rules may be seen in Table
1.4. See also, generally among others, Sections 21-50 through 66, for
additional standards.
         b.   For the purpose of calculating Principal Building square footage,
lot coverage, impervious coverage, and other standards, only that portion of
the Lot Area base zoned CC-Community Commercial District shall be considered in
the calculations.
         c.   Foundation height shall be determined by reference to Sec. 21-59
(A) and (B). The Design Review Board shall not be permitted to consider
variances from these requirements.
         d.   Permitted uses for structures on the commercial portion of a lot
within the CCOD 2 Overlay District shall be governed by Section 21-50 and
Article XV of these Ordinances.
         e.   The first floor of the structure must be used exclusively for one
or more commercial uses as described in Section 21-50 except for building
access for the upper floor, mechanical, utilities and similar uses.
         f.   If developed for commercial and residential use, the structure
shall have a balanced appearance and present a harmonious and substantially
uniform width facing Middle Street.
CCOD 2 Commercial Construction
Illustration Table 1.4
 
         Principal       Principal                         Principal Building
Lot Size Building Square Building Square   Principal       Height Plus Max.
         Footage         Footage Plus Max. Building Height 20% Bonus
                         15% Bonus
10,890   4530 sf         5210 sf           30.4 ft         36.5 ft
 
 
Notes
3 3 See Section 21-24 for underlying calculation.
2 4 Please note the impact of Section 21-27(D).
3 5 Please note further the application of Section 21-52(C).
4 6 See Section 21-54 for underlying base calculation.
5 7 See Section 21-54 for underlying base calculation.
6 8 Please note further Section 21-52(C).
9 9 See Section 21-54 for underlying base calculation.
Sec. 21-50. Permitted uses, conditional uses and prohibited uses.
   A.   Permitted uses in CC-District.
      (1)   Retail businesses:
         (a)   Art and framing shop;
         (b)   Candy shop; (8-19-14)
         (c)   Bicycle shop without outdoor storage;
         (d)   Clothing, accessories or fabric shop;
         (e)   Gift or collectibles shop;
         (f)   Jewelry/watch shop and repairs;
         (g)   Stationery and book shop;
         (h)   Toy or hobby shop;
         (i)   Pharmacy with no drive through;
         (j)   Music store;
         (k)   Florist shop; and
         (l)   Woodworking shop.
      (2)   Personal services:
         (a)   Barber shop or beauty salon;
         (b)   Cleaners, drop-off and pick-up only;
         (c)   Dental or medical office;
         (d)   Dressmaker, seamstress, or tailor;
         (e)   Financial, legal and insurance services;
         (f)   Photographic studio and sales;
         (g)   Real estate or property management agency;
         (h)   Studies for instruction in art, music, fitness, dancing, drama,
or similar activity;
         (i)   Shoe repair; and
         (j)   Liquor store.
      (3)   Offices for government, business, professional or general purposes.
   B.   Conditional uses in the CC-District.
      (1)   Bakeries and Delicatessens as defined in Section 21-203. (8-19-14)
      (2)   Specialty grocery store limited to five thousand (5000) square
feet.
      (3)   Video sales/rental: limited to hours between 8:00 a.m. and 11:00
p.m.
   C.   Special Exceptions in the CC-District.
      (1)   Restaurants as defined in Section 21-203 (8-19-14)
         (a)   The use as a restaurant shall only be permitted on existing lots
zoned CC-Community Commercial in the block of Middle Street between Station 22-
1/2 and Station 22; provided, however, that no new bars or restaurants may be
established within three hundred (300) feet of any existing bar or restaurant.
The distance of separation between the two uses shall be measured in a straight
line between the front doors of each use without regard to intervening
structures or objects. (12/16/08) (8-19-14)
         (b)   Outdoor patios, porches and decks are permitted only on the
front facing main floor of the Principal Building; (3/20/12)
         (c)   The hours of operation shall be limited to 6:00 a.m. to 2:00
a.m.; and, (8-19-14)
         (d)   No outdoor entertainment or speaker system is permitted, but
this shall not prevent the service of food and drinks on porches, decks and
patios.
      (2)   Coffee Shop as defined in Section 21-203. (8-19-14)
         (a)   Coffee shops shall only be permitted on existing lots zoned CC-
Community Commercial provided, however, that no new coffee shop may be
established within 300 feet of any existing coffee shop. The distance of
separation between the two uses shall be measured in a straight line between
the front doors of each use without regard to intervening structures or
objects. (8-19-14)
         (b)   Contains no more than twenty-five (25) seats with no more than
seven hundred (700) square feet of interior floor area devoted to patron
seating. (8-19-14)
         (c)   In addition, outdoor patios, porches and decks are permitted
provided such outdoor space does not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the
coffee shop’s available floor area devoted to patron seating. The total number
of patron seats inclusive of outdoor patios, porches and decks, shall not
exceed twenty-five (25). (8-19-14)
         (d)   The hours of operation shall be limited to 6:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m.; and (8-19-14)
         (e)   No outdoor entertainment or speaker system is permitted, but
this shall not prevent the service of food and beverages on porches, decks and
patios. (8-19-14)
         (f)   Coffee shop uses shall be limited to preparing light meals with
appliances which do not require Type 1 or Type II kitchen exhaust hood system
inspections per SCDHEC Section 6-8-20; Subsection 8-400. (8-19-14)
      (3)   Upper Story Residential.
         (a)   Upper Story Residential shall only be permitted on the
commercial portion of lots designated CC, CCOD 1 and CCOD 2; and (3/20/12)
         (b)   Parking provided for Upper Story Residential shall be in
addition to the required parking of the ground floor use unless a shared
parking plan is approved; and,
         (c)   No Upper Story Residential shall be used as a Vacation Rental;
and,
         (d)   No more than two (2) dwelling units per lot shall be permitted
as Upper Story Residential uses; (3/20/12)
         (e)   The total square footage devoted to Upper Story Residential
shall not exceed two (2) times the amount of ground floor principal square
footage devoted to commercial use. (3/20/12)
         (f)   No residential uses are permitted above restaurants or bars and;
         (g)   The proposed uses must be consistent with
Sec. 21-48. (3/20/12)
      (4)   Short-Term Auto Parking Lot.
         (a)    "Short-term auto parking lot" shall be defined as a general use
surface parking lot located within the Commercial District (CC District) for
use during daytime and night-time hours of operation and shall be limited to
the commercial portions of lots located within the CC, CCOD 1 and CCOD 2 areas.
Overnight parking shall be prohibited and monitored by the property owner.
         (b)   There shall be no long-term parking or storage of vehicles,
boats, trailers or other recreational vehicles; and
         (c)   Short-term auto parking lots must comply with the parking design
requirements of Article XV,
Sec. 21-143 D.
   D.   Prohibited uses in the CC-District.
      (1)   Bars as defined in
Section 21-203 or any business that serves alcoholic beverages for on premise
consumption, which generates greater than fifty (50) percent of total revenue
from alcohol sales. (8-19-14)
      (2)   Formula restaurants as defined in
Section 21-203. (8-19-14)
      (3)   Businesses selling gasoline or any other businesses handling
hazardous chemical wastes;
      (4)   Automated teller machine, drive-through or walk up windows, drive-
in or drop-off, or night drop windows;
      (5)   Outdoor storage of vehicles, supplies, or equipment associated with
a commercial or office enterprise.
      (6)   Vacation Rentals.
      (7)   On the commercial portion of a CC lot or a commercial lot within
the CCOD 1 and 2 areas, structures principally dedicated to, or designed for,
first floor residential use (i.e. single family residential structures, first
floor apartments, or first floor condominiums.) (3/20/12)
      (8)   No uses shall be allowed in the CC-District unless specifically
provided in Section 21-50 (A) - (C) herein.
   E.   Parking and sign requirements. Parking requirements for uses within the
CC, CCOD 1 and CCOD 2 Districts shall be in accordance with Accessory Uses and
Structure – Parking, ARTICLE XV.
Sec. 21-143. Sign requirements within the CC-Community Commercial District
shall be in accordance with Sign Regulations, ARTICLE XIV. (3/20/12)
(Ord. 2021-17, passed 11-16-2021)
Sec. 21-51. Electrical and water meters and associated easements. (3/20/12)
   A.   Additional Meters. Nothing contained in this Zoning Ordinance shall
prohibit the lawful existence or installation of additional meters on CC-
District land (including land within the CCOD 1 and 2 Overlay Districts),
provided such meter or meters are duly authorized by the Town of Sullivan’s
Island. Additional water and sewer capacity from the Town’s water and sewer
systems is necessary and therefore must comply with all State and Federal
Regulations as well as Chapters 50 and 51 of the Town’s Ordinances.
Specifically Sections 50.06, 50.07 and 50.10, there is only one sewer tap per
single lot allowed and in accordance with Section 50.06, every property must
have a sewer tap into the system. (3-20-12)
   B.   CCOD 1 and 2: Easements and Line Installations Required Prior to
Subdivision. (3/20/12) The owner of a split zone lot shall, prior to
subdividing the lot or prior to obtaining a building permit to construct a
building on the lot shall;
      (1)   Obtain a water and sewer tap for the portion of the lot zoned
commercial (if it does not already have one that is operable) and a water and
sewer tap for the portion of the lot zoned residential (if it does not already
have one that is operable); The cost of the sewer and water taps shall be paid
by the Owner of said lot in an amount to be determined by the Town’s Water and
Sewer Department; and (3/20/12)
      (2)   (a)   Provide a reasonable size utility easement that will run with
the land connecting with the Town’s water and sewer lines (on Jasper Avenue for
CCOD 1 lots and I’on Avenue or Station 22 for CCOD 2 lots) and extending to the
portion of the lot zoned commercial. The easement shall be owned and maintained
by the Owner of that portion of the lot zoned commercial at the Owner’s sole
expense; and (3/20/12)
         (b)   Construct water and sewer lines within said easements at the
Owner’s sole expense and the Owner shall maintain repair or replace said sewer
and water lines as required by the Town’s Water and Sewer Department, at the
Owner’s sole expense; and the Town’s Water and Sewer Department shall provide
the specifications of the water and sewer lines and the Owner shall obtain the
approval of the Town’s Water and Sewer Department prior to subdividing or
obtaining a building permit or, with the approval of the Town, to provide to
the Town Water and Sewer Department an estimate of the cost to do such work
that is satisfactory to the Water and Sewer Department and post with the Town a
bond equal to one and one-half times the amount of such estimate to ensure that
required water and sewer lines will be constructed as required; and (3/20/12)
         (c)   In the event the Town has installed water and sewer lines along
or in Middle Street adjacent to a split zoned lot, then prior to subdividing
the lot or obtaining a building permit to construct a building on the lot, the
Owner shall pay to the Town 25% (twenty five percent) of the total cost
incurred by the Town in constructing the water and sewer lines along Middle
Street in the CCOD 1 and the Owner shall pay to the Town 12.5% (twelve and one
half percent) of the total cost incurred by the Town in constructing the water
and sewer lines along Middle Street in the CCOD 2. (3/20/12)
Sec. 21-52. Maximum structure size
   A.   For buildings in the CC Community Commercial District constructed no
more than three (3) feet above grade.
      (1)   For lots whose CC Community Commercial District portion is 10,346
square feet (approximately (plus or minus 5%) one fourth acre) or greater, the
maximum number of square feet shall be no greater than fifty-seven percent
(57%) of the area of the CC Community Commercial District portion of the lot;
and
      (2)   For lots whose CC Community Commercial District portion is less
than 10,346 square feet (95% of one fourth of an acre), the maximum number of
square feet, expressed as percentage of the area of the CC Community Commercial
District portion of the lot, shall be no greater than 87%, minus 2.72% for
every 1000 square feet of area platted.
   B.   For buildings constructed more than three feet (3’) above grade, the
maximum number of square feet shall be no greater than two thirds of the
numbers determined in 21-52 A(1) and (2).
   C.   Notwithstanding any of the requirements in Sec. 21-52 A-B above,
commercial buildings in the CCOD 1 and 2 Overlay Districts may be permitted
only if the building square footage shall not exceed 80% of what is permitted
in Sec. 21-52 A-B. (6-19-07) (3/20/12)
Sec. 21-53. Front, side and rear setbacks.
   A.   Encroachments into yard setbacks.
      (1)   For the purpose of determining the Setbacks required for a
Principal Building, it shall not include encroachment by
         (a)   eave overhangs to thirty (30) inches;
         (b)   step treads below a height of six (6) feet, so long as the total
width of all such stairways does not exceed ten (10) feet of the run of the
affected property line;
         (c)   HVAC stands within five (5) feet of the Principal Building
located in the Side or Rear Yards, or
         (d)   Driveways/parking access to the lot area rear yard.
      (2)   In no case shall there be any other type of encroachment into the
required Setbacks by any type of structure unless expressly permitted
hereafter.
   B.   Minimum front yard setback.
      (1)   Front Yard Setback.
         (a)   The required Front Yard Setback shall be no less than five (5)
feet and no greater than ten (10) feet.
         (b)   The Front Yard Setback may be used for porches or patios
provided adequate room remains for a six (6) foot walkway between the curb/
pavement edge and the Principal Building (walkway may be contained within the
public right-of-way and/or Front Yard Setback area).
      (2)   Corner lot. The required Front Yard Setback for a Corner Lot shall
be no less than five (5) feet and no greater than ten (10) feet with a minimum
street corner visibility clearance equivalent to that which would occur with
both the Side Yard Setback and the Front Yard Setback being ten (10) feet.
      (3)   Additional Front Yard Setback: (3/20/12)
         (a)   Except for dormers, for any portion of a Principal Building’s
height exceeding twenty (20) feet, that portion in excess of twenty (20) feet
shall be set back from the Front Yard Setback an additional one (1) foot for
every one (1) foot of increased height above twenty (20) feet as measured at
the front yard setback. (3/20/12)
         (b)   Explanation. (3/20/12)
            i.   This requirement creates a Front Yard Setback “building
envelope” within which the Principal Building’s front facade shall fit. (3/20/
12)
            ii.   The additional front setback line shall be measured as a
straight line from the Front Lot Line to the required setback line, then
turning at a 90 degree angle and extended twenty (20) feet vertically, and then
angled at a 45-degree slope to infinity (1-foot of run to 1-foot of rise). (3/
20/12)
   C.   Minimum side yard setback.
      (1)   The required Side Yard Setback shall be zero (0) foot to five (5)
feet
      (2)   A zero (0) foot Side Yard Setback shall be permitted on one (1)
side if a Principal Building is developed as an attached building to an
adjacent Principal Building located on an adjacent lot.
      (3)   Driveway/parking access to the Lot Area’s rear yard shall be
separately provided for each lot; provided however, driveway/parking access to
the Lot Area’s rear yard may be provided jointly by adjacent property owners,
so that a lot owner may be exempt from a requirement to provide driveway/
parking access to the Lot Area’s rear yard upon documentation of a joint access
agreement with an adjacent property owner.
      (4)   Accessory structures Side Yard Setbacks. See ARTICLE XV for
Setbacks required for Accessory Structures.
   D.   Minimum rear yard setback.
      (1)   The minimum Rear Yard Setback from the adjoining residentially
zoned portion of the lot shall be fifteen (15) feet.
      (2)   Accessory structures Rear Yard Setbacks. See ARTICLE XV for
Setbacks required for Accessory Structures.
Sec. 21-54. Building height.
   A.   No Principal Building shall be erected, altered or moved so as to
exceed thirty-eight (38) feet in overall height.
   B.   Building height shall be measured in a straight line from the highest
point of the Principal Building, excepting any chimney, to the natural ground
elevation at the center point of the Principal Building.
   C.   Elevated Lot: In no case shall the highest point of a Principal
Building be higher than forty (40) feet above the crown of the street nearest
to the center of the foundation.
      (1)   Example: Natural ground elevation is three (3) feet above street
crown; maximum Principal Building height = 37 feet.
   D.   Religious institutions: A height limit of 60 feet shall apply to
spires, belfries, cupolas and domes not intended for human occupancy located on
the Principal Building.
   E.   Notwithstanding any of the requirements in Sec. 21-54 A-C above,
structures on lots in the CCOD 1 and 2 Overlay Districts may be permitted only
if the principal building height shall not exceed 80% of the maximum height
otherwise permitted in Sec. 21-54 A-C; provided, however, that buildings in
such Overlay districts may be eligible for bonuses as set forth in Section 21-
49 (E) and (F). (6-19-07) (3/20/12)
Sec. 21-55. Impervious coverage area.
   A.   Definitions.
      (1)   Impervious Coverage Area. That portion of the Lot Area covered by
an impervious surface.
      (2)   Impervious Surface: Any material or structure through which water
cannot be absorbed or passed without limitation, including but not limited to
roofed structures, compacted soil or stone, pavement consisting of asphalt,
concrete, oil and stone, tar, or asphalt. Impervious surfaces also include
building foundations, porches, decks, patios, sidewalks, play courts (tennis,
basketball, etc.), pools, and other improvements that impede the absorption of
water. Grassed or mulched areas are not considered impervious materials.
      (3)   Pervious Surface: Any material through which water can be easily
absorbed or passed, at a minimum infiltration rate of 2.0 inches per hour, such
as, but not limited to, grass and uncompacted gravel, shell and crushed stone.
(1/20/09).
   B.   Permitted impervious coverage area.
      (1)   Impervious Coverage area shall be no more than fifty percent (50%)
of the commercially zoned portion of a Lot Area of twelve thousand (12,000)
square feet or greater. For commercially zoned portions with smaller areas,
Impervious Coverage areas are limited as follows:
         (a)   Impervious Coverage shall be no greater than (50% times Lot
Area) plus [(12,000 sf minus the Lot Area) times 5 percent].
         (b)   Sample Equation (10,000 sf Lot Area): (50% x 10,000 sf) + [
(12,000 sf - 10,000 sf) x 5%] = 5100 sf Impervious Coverage permitted (51%).
      (2)   Examples:
         (a)   Lot 8,000 sf = 4200 sf Impervious Coverage (52.5%)
         (b)   Lot 6,500 sf = 3525 sf Impervious Coverage (54.2%)
      (3)   Driveways and parking areas shall be developed using pervious
paving materials but no additional Impervious Coverage area shall be granted
based on the use of pervious materials.
   C.   Design Review Board. The Design Review Board may grant up to a fifteen
percent (15%) modification in square feet of impervious coverage in this Zoning
Standard if this or other modifications achieves greater Neighborhood
Compatibility as described in Article XII.
Sec. 21-56. Third story.
   A.   The Enclosed Portion of any third Story of any Principal Building shall
be no greater than four hundred (400) square feet and shall only have fifty
percent (50%) of its wall area projecting outside the roof area as measured
from the outside of the wall studs; unless either of the following apply:
      (1)   if the Principal Building’s finished floor elevation has been
constructed within three feet (3’) of grade, third floor enclosed portion shall
be no greater than fifty percent (50%) of the square feet of the second floor
and shall only have fifty percent (50%) of its wall area projecting outside the
roof area as measured from the outside of the wall studs; and
      (2)   for residential uses in the CC Community Commercial district, third
floor enclosed portion shall be no greater than fifty percent (50%) of the
square feet of the second floor and shall only have fifty percent (50%) of its
wall area projecting outside the roof area as measured from the outside of the
wall studs.
   B.   The Design Review Board may grant up to a fifteen percent (15%)
modification in this Zoning Standard if this or other modifications achieves
greater Neighborhood Compatibility as described in Article XII.
Sec. 21-57. Roof decks and roof gazebos.
   A.   Purpose. Roof decks and roof gazebos increase a Principal Building’s
mass and scale and are often an incompatible design feature.
   B.   Design standard.
      (1)   Roofs with pitch of 3/12 (three inches in twelve inches) or less
are prohibited.
      (2)   Flat roofs, roof decks and roof gazebos are prohibited.
Sec. 21-58. Orientation of Principal Building.
   A.   Purpose. Principal Buildings with street oriented “front doors”
contribute to the sense of “neighborliness” of the Island; having a consistent
front yard orientation, reduces the possibility of accessory structures being
located inconsistent with the pattern of development.
   B.   Definition.
      (1)   Primary Front Facade. The largest front facing surface of a
Principal Building that is parallel or nearly parallel to the front yard street
frontage and is considered to be the front of the structure.
   C.   Design standards. Principal Building’s primary facade (front door)
shall be oriented toward Middle Street.
   D.   Design Review Board. In interpreting and applying this Design Standard,
the Design Review Board shall refer to the Standards of Neighborhood
Compatibility as described in Article XII.
Sec. 21-59. Foundation height (Commercial District Regulations).
   A.   Purpose. Due to FEMA regulations and Hurricane Hugo, the foundations of
Principal Buildings are substantially elevated; although not presently the case
within the CC-District, this provision is intended to prevent Principal
Buildings from being elevated higher than FEMA requirements.
   B.   Design standards for Elevated Buildings.
      (1)   The bottom elevation of a Principal Building’s 1st floor joists
shall be no more than two (2) feet above the FEMA base flood elevation.
      (2)   The Principal Building’s finished floor shall not be more than
three (3) feet above the FEMA base flood elevation.
      (3)   Exception: For Principal Buildings constructed no more than three
feet (3’) above grade, the rear one half (1/2) of the Principal Building may be
elevated to permit parking underneath the Principal Building.
   C.   Design Review Board. The Design Review Board may grant a modification
in this Design Standard of no more than one foot if this or other modifications
achieves greater Neighborhood Compatibility as described in Article XII.
Sec. 21-60. Foundation enclosure.
   A.   Purpose. The treatment of a Principal Building’s foundation has a large
impact on the mass and scale of the structure. Foundations more open by design
diminish a structure’s mass.
   B.   Design standards.
      (1)   A Principal Building’s foundation exceeding three (3) feet in
height shall be enclosed by open lattice or slats having a minimum of one half
(1/2) inch between lattice or slats.
      (2)   Solid enclosure materials such as brick or stucco may only be used
as building materials for supporting the foundation and are limited to four (4)
feet in width and depth and occurring no more often than every eight (8) feet
on the exterior portions of the foundation.
   C.   Design Review Board. The Design Review Board may grant up to a fifteen
percent (15%) modification in this Design Standard if this or other
modifications achieves greater Neighborhood Compatibility as described in
Article XII.
Sec. 21-61. Windows and doors.
   A.   Purpose. Large expanses of uninterrupted walls increase the mass and
scale of a Principal Building; large expanses of walls broken by windows, doors
and porches diminish this impact.
   B.   Design guideline.
      (1)   Doors, windows or glass openings shall comprise at least forty
percent (40%) of any Principal Building’s Front Facade.
      (2)   Front Facades encompassed by porches having a depth of eight (8)
feet or more may reduce to thirty percent (30%) that portion devoted to
windows/doors with glass openings.
   C.   Design Review Board. This is a Design Guideline not binding on the
applicant. The Design Review Board may encourage the use of this guideline for
achieving greater Neighborhood Compatibility as described in Article XII.
Sec. 21-62. Site lighting.
   A.   Purpose. Highly illuminated structures or lots are not compatible with
the character of Sullivan’s Island and encroach upon the enjoyment of the night
skies and beaches.
   B.   Design standards.
      (1)   A Principal Building’s exterior site lighting shall be arranged to
prevent glare on residential properties.
      (2)   Applications for projects shall submit a lighting plan that will
include the following:
         (a)   Site plan with location of all light fixtures and a numerical
grid of lighting levels (in foot-candles) that the fixtures will produce on the
ground.
         (b)   Area of illumination.
         (c)   Lamp type and wattage.
         (d)   Mounting height of all fixtures.
         (e)   Cut sheet indicating the design and finish of all fixtures.
         (f)   Drawings of all relevant building elevations showing the
location and aiming points of the fixtures.
         (g)   Exterior site lighting plans that indicate appropriate
provisions have been made to prevent “sky glow”.
      (3)   High pressure sodium lamps or other lamps producing unnatural color
shall be prohibited.
      (4)   Streetlight, floodlight, or similar fixtures shall be prohibited.
      (5)   Exterior lighting, other than that attached to the Principal
Building, shall not exceed ten (10) feet above the lot grade if located to the
side or rear of the Principal Building. A Principal Building’s exterior site
lighting shall be designed and arranged to prevent the light source (lens and
bulb) from being visible from residential properties.
   C.   Design Review Board. The Design Review Board shall review the lighting
plan to ensure that it complies with the above standards and with neighborhood
compatibility as described in Article XII.
Sec. 21-63. Pedestrian walkways.
   A.   Design Standard. Newly constructed Principal Buildings shall provide a
six (6) foot pedestrian walkway across the front of the Lot parallel to street
uninterrupted by the driveway as it crosses the walkway. The pedestrian walkway
may be located completely within the public right-of-way or fully or partly
within the Front Yard Setback, but shall remain open for public use. An
existing walkway meeting the above width standard shall be deemed meeting this
requirement.
   B.   Design Review Board. The Design Review Board may grant an appropriate
modification in this Design Standard if this or other modifications achieves
greater Neighborhood Compatibility as described in Article XII.
Sec. 21-64. Buffers and refuse containers.
   A.   Design Standard. Newly developed non-residential uses shall provide a
buffer at the rear of the commercially zoned Lot. The buffer shall be a wall or
fence that is completely opaque six (6) feet high.
   B.   Design Standard. Refuse containers for disposal of trash and garbage
shall be located to the rear of the building, fenced, gated and blocked from
view.
Sec. 21-65. Landscaping.
   The minimum requirement is one street tree for every 35 feet of front
footage. The computed required number of trees shall be rounded up at 0.5 or
above. The Design Review Committee shall recommend the species and size of
street trees permissible. These trees shall be on the property within two feet
of the front properly line or preferably, in the right-of-way (if lawful and
permitted).
Sec. 21-66. Design Guidelines.
   A.   Dormers are encouraged.
   B.   Porches are encouraged on the front elevation of the building, at least
on the first floor, with a minimum eight (8) foot depth and should run at least
50% of the front elevation.
   C.   Building materials should be compatible with the character of the
island as decided by the Design Review Board.
   D.   Vegetation on at least one side of walls or fences is encouraged.
ARTICLE V: RC-1 & RC-2 RECREATION AND CONSERVATION AREA DISTRICTS
Sec. 21-67. Findings and intent of RC Area Districts.
   A.   RC Area Districts’ findings of fact. The Town Council of the Town of
Sullivan’s Island finds the following:
      (1)   The RC Areas greatly contribute to the health, safety and welfare
of the residents of Sullivan’s Island and that they provide Island residents as
well as visitors, with countless hours of pleasurable activity and rest and
relaxation, which is important to the goal of public health, safety and
welfare;
      (2)   The boundaries of the RC Areas are constantly shifting over
unpredictable periods of time, in that they are composed of sand dunes and
vegetation that ceaselessly change, and that these areas are prone to flooding,
and, therefore, not suitable to development for any purpose;
      (3)   The Town of Sullivan’s Island originated as a health resort for all
the people of the State of South Carolina, and that the RC Areas are vital to
the purpose, and useful for that purpose only so long as they remain in a
natural, undeveloped condition subject to the changing tides;
      (4)   The RC Areas, left in their natural state, provide protection to
adjoining landowners and their property from the hazards of high tides and
floods caused by hurricanes, tropical storms and seasonal tides;
      (5)   The construction of the Santee-Cooper Diversion Canal and
subsequent changes in the volume of water flowing through Charleston Harbor may
cause further changes of an unknown nature upon the shoreline of Sullivan’s
Island, all of which the Town Council find to be a threat to all of the
residents and property owners of the Town; and,
      (6)   The RC Area are of a particular beauty in its natural state so as
to provide aesthetic value necessary to the public health, safety and welfare
of Island residents and visitors, and in keeping with the historic uses of
Sullivan’s Island.
   B.   Intent and uses in RC Area Districts. The RC Areas shall be preserved
in their natural state, except for the trimming, pruning and cutting of bushes
and trees as provided in herein, as areas of recreation and conservation for
the purpose of protecting the ecology, the adjoining property, and the
environment, and enhancing and protecting the safety and welfare of the Town
and its residents. Further, any activity shall be prohibited in these areas
that would detract from their natural state, including, but not limited to, the
activities stated herein, so as to maintain this natural state for the public
enjoyment and as protection for the Town and all of its citizens against the
dangers and erosion as delineated in the above Findings of Fact.
Sec. 21-68. General description of RC Area Districts.
   A.   RC-1 Area Districts (ocean side).
      (1)   General Description of RC-1 Area District. The RC-1 Area District
shall be defined as follows: all that area within the corporate limits of the
Town of Sullivan’s Island between, on the one hand, a line commencing at a
point being the centerline of Breach Inlet between Sullivan’s Island and the
Isle of Palms on the north side of the bridge across Breach Inlet serving as
South Carolina Highway 703 and running southerly along the centerline of Breach
Inlet to a point opposite the low water mark of the Atlantic Ocean on the
southeastern most part of the front beach of Sullivan’s Island; thence running
with the curve of Sullivan’s Island in a direction that is first generally
southwesterly, then generally westerly, and then generally northerly along the
low water mark of the Atlantic Ocean on the front beach of Sullivan’s Island to
a point in the centerline of Cove Inlet and the Intracoastal Waterway opposite
the low water mark of the Atlantic Ocean on the northernmost part of the front
beach of Sullivan’s Island and, on the other hand, (1) the property platted on
Sullivan’s Island or (2) the primary oceanfront sand dune as marked in the
field by OCRM staff or (3) the seaward face of a functional erosion control
device, whichever line includes more area within the RC-1 Area, including but
not limited to, those areas owned by the Town of Sullivan’s Island, by the
State of South Carolina, by the United States Government, or by persons, and
also including that area between the aforesaid low water mark of the Atlantic
Ocean and a line beginning at the southeast corner of the lot on Sullivan’s
Island bordered by Pettigrew Street on the north and Station 22nd Street on the
east and running in a generally easterly direction to the southwest corner of
the lot bordered on the west by Station 22 1/2 Street and on the north by
Atlantic Avenue.
      (2)   Sub-Areas of RC-1 Area District. The RC-1 Area District, as
depicted upon the official Zoning Map for the Town of Sullivan’s Island, is
hereby subdivided into areas RC-1A, RC-1B, RC-1C, RC-1D and RC-1E. The RC-1A
Area shall be that area from the Thompson Memorial Bridge south to the
intersection of the north lot line of the property owned by School District No.
2 located in the block of Station 20 on the front beach. The RC-1B Area shall
run from the north lot line of the aforesaid School District No. 2 property
south to the intersection of the south lot line of School District No. 2
property on the front beach located in the block of Station 19. The RC-1C Area
shall run from the aforesaid south lot line of the School District No. 2
property in the block of Station 19 south to the intersection of Station 16
Street south and the front beach. The RC-1D Area shall run from Station 16
Street south to Station 12 Street and the front beach. The RC-1E Area shall run
from Station 12 Street south to the Intracoastal Waterway.
   B.   RC-2 Area District (marsh side). The RC-2 Area District shall be
defined as follows: all that area within the corporate limits of the Town of
Sullivan’s Island between, on one hand, beginning at a point at the centerline
of Cove Inlet and the Intracoastal Waterway opposite the low water mark of the
Atlantic Ocean on the northernmost part of the front beach of Sullivan’s
Island, thence running in a generally easterly direction along the centerline
of Cove Inlet and the Intracoastal Waterway to a point marked “L” on a certain
plat entitled “Plat of Area, proposed for annexation to Mt. Pleasant”, by E. M.
Seabrook, Jr. - C.E., dated February 12, 1963, and recorded in the RMC Office
for Charleston County on February 15, 1963, in Plat Book N at Page 127 and on
microfilm in Book R-78 at Page 219; thence running in a generally easterly
direction along the line “L-K-J” on such plat (which line is a present boundary
of the Town of Mt. Pleasant and Sullivan’s Island) and in a generally easterly
direction along the centerline of the Intracoastal Waterway until it intersects
the centerline of Swinton Creek; thence running southwesterly and southerly
along the centerline of Swinton Creek and Breach Inlet to a point being the
center line of Breach Inlet between Sullivan’s Island and Isle of Palms on the
north side of the bridge across Breach Inlet serving as South Carolina Highway
703, and, on the other hand, (1) the property now platted on Sullivan’s Island,
or (2) the South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control Bureau
of Ocean and Coastal Resource Management (OCRM) formerly know as the South
Carolina Coastal Council “Critical Area Line” along Sullivan’s Island,
whichever line includes more area within the RC-2 Area District.
Sec. 21-69. Erosion control structures in RC Area Districts.
   A.   No fill material, seawalls, jetties, bulkheads, revetments, groins,
breakwaters, boardwalks, fences, or other erosion control structures shall be
constructed, erected, or placed within the RC-1 Area District or the RC-2 Area
District, except as provided in herein, without Town permission and permission
of other agencies as appropriate.
   B.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the Town or other
property owners from repairing groins, seawalls, bulkheads, revetments or other
erosion control structures, provided permission for such repairs is obtained
from the OCRM and the Town, where applicable.
   C.   It shall be the responsibility of property owners to furnish by August
1, 1999, the Town with plans or other information pertaining to erosion control
structure location, elevation, and construction materials.
   D.   For the purpose of this Zoning Ordinance, repair of erosion control
structures shall not be allowed when such structures are determined by the Town
to be damaged fifty (50%) percent or more. The Town shall make the damage
determination using procedures developed and adopted by OCRM.
   E.   Erosion control structures damaged less than fifty (50%) percent may be
repaired in place, provided such repairs comply with all Town and OCRM repair
regulations. The Town shall make the damage determination using procedures
developed and adopted by OCRM. In the event that Town and OCRM repair
regulations are in conflict, the more restrictive shall apply.
   F.   Damaged erosion control structures shall not be enlarged, strengthened
beyond pre-damage condition or rebuilt during permitted repairs. Repairs shall
be made with materials similar to those of the existing erosion control
structure. However, in the event that an adjacent erosion control structure is
destroyed and is not permitted to be repaired, a property owner shall be
allowed to construct a wing wall, provided permission is obtained from the OCRM
and Town.
   G.   The Town may require as a condition of erosion control structure repair
that the property owner renourish the beach seaward of the erosion control
structure on an annual basis with two (2) cubic yards of sand per foot of
structure length as measured along the shoreline. This condition shall remain
in effect as long as the erosion control structure remains in place and
exposed, in whole or in part. Renourishment sand shall come from an upland
source and shall be approved by the OCRM as beach-compatible. The timing and
location of renourishment sand placement shall be governed by Town and OCRM
regulations.
Sec. 21-70. General provisions for RC-1 Area District.
   A.   The provisions of this Article are applicable to the RC-1 Area District
land area of the Town. The Town of Sullivan’s Island retains full authority
over RC-1 Area District land, subject to the conditions, restrictions, and
covenants set forth in the Title to Real Estate dated February 12, 1991,
conveying said land to the Town of Sullivan’s Island. The permits allowed
herein for the trimming and pruning of vegetation upon application of private
landowners as set forth herein are not intended by the Town, and the provisions
shall not be construed as granting to any private landowner, the unrestricted
right to trim and prune vegetation in the RC-1 Area District. The trimming and
pruning provided herein is granted as an accommodation to landowners living
immediately adjacent to RC-1A, RC-1C or RC-1E areas, and the Town retains full
authority to amend and/or revoke any portion of these provisions.
   B.   The permits allowed herein do not obviate the need or requirement of
any landowner obtaining a permit under this Article from any other required
permit or authorization from any governmental or regulatory body that may have
jurisdiction over the RC-1 Area District. Any landowner obtaining a permit
shall agree to indemnify the Town for any action taken pursuant to said permit
in derogation of any County, State, or Federal law or regulation, including
costs, fines and attorney’s fees.
   C.   Nothing in this Article shall be construed to prevent the Town of
Sullivan’s Island from erecting or having erected signs in the RC-1 Area
District for regulatory or instructional purposes.
Sec. 21-71. Trimming and pruning in the RC-1 District.
   A.   No construction or removal of vegetation. There shall be no
construction of any type, no destruction or removal of vegetation by any means
except trimming and pruning of shrubs and trees as provided in this Ordinance,
and no manmade changes to topography in an RC-1 Area District, except as
provided herein and in the Title to Real Estate dated February 12, 1991,
conveying said land to the Town of Sullivan’s Island.
   B.   Retaining of a town vegetation consultant. The Town shall engage a
qualified consultant to monitor trimming and pruning of shrubs and trees in the
RC-1 Area District. The consultant shall agree to visit each site during the
trimming and pruning permitted hereunder to ensure that work is being done
according to the highest professional standards and the requirements of this
Ordinance. The cost of the consultant’s visits shall be included in the permit
fee that shall be paid by each applicant.
   C.   Permit for trimming and pruning of vegetation.
      (1)   Any landowner living immediately adjacent to the RC-1A, RC-1C or
RC-1E Area shall upon application to the Zoning Administrator be issued a
permit, subject to the other terms and conditions of this Ordinance, to trim
and prune the shrubs and trees enumerated herein in an area from the
applicant’s lot line towards the ocean within the extension of the landowner’s
side lot lines projected towards the ocean.
      (2)   The trimming and pruning allowed herein shall only be permitted
between November 1st and the following February 28th.
      (3)   The only vegetation that may be trimmed and pruned in the RC-1 A,
RC-1C or RC-1E Areas is limited to the following: Southern Waxmyrtle (Myrica
Cerifera), Eastern Baccharis (Baccharis Halimifolia), and Popcorn trees
(Tallowtree, Sapium Sebiferum). This vegetation may be trimmed and pruned so as
to have a maximum height of no less than five (5) feet above the ground and
shall be trimmed and pruned in accordance with the highest professional
standards and in accordance with the guidelines promulgated by the Town of
Sullivan’s Island. In the case of Popcorn trees, cutting can extend below five
(5) feet if recommended by the consultant hired under this Ordinance and
approved by the Tree Commission.
      (4)   The trimming and pruning allowed and all work performed shall be
accomplished without the use of any heavy machinery, vehicles or other such
machinery being brought into the RC-1 Area District or onto the beach front.
      (5)   There shall be no trimming, cutting or pruning of any vegetation of
any sort in the RC-1B and RC-1D Areas.
   D.   Trimming and pruning by a licensed commercial contractor.
      (1)   Only a commercial contractor licensed by the Town of Sullivan’s
Island specifically for such purpose shall accomplish all trimming and pruning.
      (2)   The Town shall make a list of qualified licensed commercial
contractors available to those who apply for a permit pursuant to the terms of
this Ordinance.
      (3)   Both the landowner and the qualified contractor hired or retained
by the landowner shall make the permit application.
      (4)   To qualify, the contractor shall demonstrate to the Town that he/
she has the experience to perform the trimming and pruning in accordance with
the highest professional standards that he/she is capable of identifying the
vegetation that may be trimmed and that he/she has read the Ordinance and is
familiar with its conditions, regulations and penalties.
      (5)   Each commercial contractor licensed by the Town of Sullivan’s
Island to perform the work allowed by this Ordinance shall, prior to the
issuance of a permit, be required to sign an agreement to perform all work in a
manner consistent with the provisions and restrictions of the Ordinance and
guidelines set forth by the Town and the consultant as identified below.
      (6)   The contractor shall file a certificate of insurance with the Town
evidencing workers’ compensation coverage and public liability coverage of at
least One Million Dollars ($1,000,000). The contractor shall also post a
performance bond in the amount of Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000) wherein he/she
guarantees faithful performance of his/her duties and obligations hereunder in
a manner consistent with this Ordinance and instruction by the Town’s
consultant. Additionally, the principal of each contractor shall agree to be
personally liable for compliance with the terms of this Ordinance.
   E.   Fees and posting of permit.
      (1)   A fee of Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250) shall be paid by the
applicant to the Town of Sullivan’s Island for the granting of a permit to
perform the work allowed hereunder.
      (2)   The applicant shall also pay the costs charged by the licensed
contractor for the actual cutting done pursuant to the application.
      (3)   The permit shall be posted on the Lot facing the street in plain
view of the street at all times that any work is undertaken pursuant to said
permit. Said permit shall be valid for the time specified in the permit with
only one permit per Lot allowed for each cutting season.
   F.   Performance.
      (1)   All work performed pursuant to this permit, and all methods of
trimming and pruning shall be performed in accordance with the highest
professional standards and shall be monitored by and subject to the approval of
the Town of Sullivan’s Island and its consultant.
      (2)   The Town and its consultant shall have the right to immediately
stop any work being performed in a manner not allowed, permitted or approved by
removing and revoking the permit posted pursuant to E.
      (3)   At the conclusion of the trimming and pruning permitted herein, the
consultant shall visit each site and issue a certificate to the Town and to the
landowner certifying that the trimming and pruning has been performed in
accordance with the terms and provisions of this Ordinance and highest
professional standard. The cost of the consultant’s site visits shall be
included in the permit fee that shall be paid by each applicant.
      (4)   All cuttings shall be removed from the RC-1 Area District by said
commercial contractor upon the completion of said work and hauled off of the
Island to an appropriate recycling dump by said contractor or used on the
Island in such use as specifically approved by the Tree Commission.
      (5)   Any person not complying with the terms of this Ordinance shall
immediately forfeit said bond and shall be subject to all other terms and
provisions of this Ordinance relating to fines and penalties in addition to the
forfeiting of said bond.
   G.   Fines for violations.
      (1)   The violation of the terms of this Ordinance shall constitute a
criminal offense and shall be punishable by the Municipal Court of the Town of
Sullivan’s Island or other Court of competent jurisdiction.
      (2)   Each tree or shrub which is trimmed or pruned in violation hereof,
or poisoned or destroyed in any manner, shall subject the person so violating
this Ordinance to a fine of Five Hundred Dollars ($500) and/or thirty (30) days
in jail.
      (3)   Each other violation of this Ordinance shall subject the person so
violating to a fine of Five Hundred Dollars ($500) and/or thirty (30) days in
jail.
      (4)   Penalties prescribed herein shall be in addition to the forfeiture
of the bond specified above. In addition, the violator shall pay for the
replacement of vegetation in like species and volume as determined to be
appropriate by the Town upon the professional recommendation of its consultant.
      (5)   The fees generated by the permit application and fines from any
violations of this Ordinance, as well as forfeiture of any bonds for violations
hereof shall be set aside by the Town in a dedicated fund and used to pay its
consultant and for such matters as appropriate studies and surveys of the land,
its vegetation, wildlife and natural processes, mapping and photographing, also
information and education programs and materials, as well as mitigation
described in H.
   H.   Mitigation.
      (1)   If any violation of the provisions and restrictions of this
Ordinance and the guidelines for trimming and cutting occurs, wherein the
perpetrator is not known, the Town shall undertake mitigation to replace the
vegetation with like species and volume, upon the recommendation of the
consultant, from funds available from fines and fees generated pursuant to this
Ordinance as established in G(5).
      (2)   If the perpetrator is known, then in addition to fines levied by
the Town pursuant to this Ordinance, the Town shall institute civil proceedings
to require said perpetrator to pay the cost of mitigation and to collect such
other damages as are allowed by law. Fines and fees generated shall be used by
the Town to replant vegetation in the specific area where any such loss
occurred. It is the intent of this Ordinance to replace any vegetation so
damaged or destroyed with like kind and volume.
Sec. 21-72. Maintenance of footpaths in the RC-1 Area District.
   A.   Landowners living immediately adjacent to the RC-1 Area District may
maintain existing dirt footpaths through the RC-1 Area District to the beach.
   B.   Existing dirt footpaths shall not exceed six and one-half (6 1/2) feet
in width; new paths shall not be created.
   C.   Footpaths shall follow the natural contours of the land and dunes.
   D.   No trees or branches one and one half (1 1/2) inches in diameter or
larger shall be cut or destroyed without first receiving permission from the
Town of Sullivan’s Island Zoning Administrator or Building Official.
   E.   No fill or any other material whatsoever shall be brought in for said
paths.
   F.   Nothing contained in this section shall restrict the Town from
maintenance of public constructed walkovers and emergency access through the
RC-1 Area District.
Sec. 21-73. Tree Commission assistance with RC-1 Area District.
   A.   The Town may seek the assistance of the Sullivan’s Island Tree
Commission to support the activities of this Ordinance as they pertain to the
gathering, organizing and dissemination of information about the RC-1 Area
District, and to the replacement of vegetation under mitigation.
   B.   The Tree Commission is hereby given the following responsibilities in
addition to those it already has:
      (1)   Provide guidance with the management of tree pruning and trimming
within the RC-1 District;
      (2)   To study and monitor the impact of the pruning and trimming allowed
under Sec. 21-71 with regard to the flora and fauna located within the RC-
1 Area District;
      (3)   To study and monitor the impact of the pruning and trimming allowed
under Sec. 21-71 as to the integrity of the RC-1 Area District as it relates to
erosion control and beach stability, drainage, mosquito control, and the public
welfare, safety, and health of the Town; and
      (4)   To study and make recommendations to the Town as to the management
of all RC-1 Area District so as to preserve and maintain RC-1 Area District in
accordance with the public welfare, safety, and health of the Town and the
covenants and restrictions set forth in the Title to Real Estate dated February
12, 1991, conveying said land to the Town of Sullivan’s Island.
   C.   The Commission in the discharge of its duties may seek the advice of
the consultant retained by the Town as set forth in this Ordinance.
Sec. 21-74. General uses in the RC-2 Area District.
   A.   In the RC-2 Area District there shall be no construction of any type,
no destruction of vegetation, except trimming, cutting and pruning of back
beach bushes and trees as provided in Sec. 21-71, non-manmade changes of
topography, however, the construction of private docks by owners of lots
adjoining this area may be permitted subject to the restrictions of Sec. 21-75.
Sec. 21-75. Construction of private docks in RC-2 Area District.
   A.   In the RC-2 Area District the construction of private docks by owners
of lots adjoining this area may be permitted, provided approval of the Town of
Sullivan’s Island, U.S. Corps of Engineers, the Department of Health and
Environmental Control/Office of Ocean and Coastal Resource Management (DHEC/
OCRM) and any other governmental or regulatory agency with jurisdiction.
   B.   The following restrictions govern the construction of docks in the RC-
2 Area District:
      (1)   No dock shall be permitted to be constructed which extends into the
channel or extends so far as to interfere with navigation;
      (2)   No dock shall be permitted to be constructed across marshland in
the RC-2 Area District from the centerline extension of Station 18 to the
centerline extension of Station 27 and no dock shall be permitted to be
constructed in the marsh lands of the RC-2 Area District in the area located
between the intersection of the eastern point of the Sullivan’s Island Fire
Rescue Squad Boat Landing lot located at the end of Point Street, TMS#523-06-
00-070, and the Osceola Avenue right-of-way and the intersections of the
western point of the lot located at 1010 Osceola Avenue, TMS#523-06-00-003, and
the Osceola Street right-of-way. In all other areas of the RC-2 Area District,
no dock shall be permitted to be constructed where the length of the dock shall
exceed three hundred (300) feet in total length; (4-18-06)
         (a)   Exception: a dock may extend up eight hundred (800) feet to
reach a creek that is two hundred (200) feet or more in width (width of creek
measured from land or marsh grass to land or marsh grass); however, said dock
shall not be permitted to cross a creek that is greater than eight (8) feet in
width to reach the two hundred (200) foot width creek.
      (3)   Pier head, floating dock and boatlift.
         (a)   The head of the permanent dock/“pier head” structure shall be no
greater in size than two hundred twenty-five (225) square feet and may include
a bench not exceeding more than thirty (30) linear feet and twenty-four (24)
inches in width. (4-18-06)
         (b)   In addition to the permanent pier head of the dock, there may be
a floating dock no greater than eight (8) feet by twenty (20) feet or one
hundred sixty (160) square feet. An attached structure for storage (“dock box”)
may be placed on a dock or floating dock provided it is included in the above
two hundred twenty-five (225) square feet of the “head” or one hundred sixty
(160) square feet of the floating dock and provided it does not exceed three
(3) feet in height and does not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in floor
area;
         (c)   In addition to the permanent pier head of the dock there may be
one boatlift, not to exceed four (4) vertical support pilings with a maximum
lift capacity of thirteen thousand (13,000) pounds or one floating boat storage
device with the capacity not exceeding that of the permitted boat lift. (4-18-
06)
         (d)   The boat lift and primary access ramp or ladder to the floating
dock shall only be accessed directly from the pier head; no additional walkways
or catwalks shall be allowed to provide access to the boat lift or floating
dock, nor shall access to these components be allowed from the walkway leading
to the pier head.
      (4)   No docks or pier heads or other associated structures shall be
permitted closer than ten (10) feet from Extended Lot Lines with the exception
of common docks shared by two adjoining property owners.
         (a)   Exception. A dock shall be permitted to cross over Extended Lot
Lines in areas where angled docks currently exist and where these docks cross
over Extended Lot Lines, provided the angled placement would result in the dock
being shorter than if built within the Extended Lot Line Setbacks and meets the
criteria of Sec. 21-76 B(2) above.
      (5)   The maximum width of the walkway or pier between the highland and
the pier head shall be four (4) feet. The walkway may have a railing but shall
have no walls that impede the flow of air through the walkway. Only one walkway
access to the pier head shall be allowed with no deviations or extensions
providing access to other dock components.
      (6)   A single roof may be placed either over the dock or the boat lift
and shall be limited to the area lying immediately above the pier head or the
boat lift with no more than two (2) foot overhang over any portion of the pier
head or boat lift. In no event shall the overall size of the roof exceed three
hundred sixty-one (361) square feet. No roof shall extend above fifteen (15)
feet of the mean high water mark and there shall be no rails or decks
incorporated into the roofs and no ladders or other means of accessing the roof
on a permanent basis shall be allowed;
      (7)   Electrical lighting shall be allowed only at the head of the dock
and not along the walkway provided said lighting is shielded to direct the
light down onto the dock and away from any adjoining residences and further
provided the electrical power is constructed and attached in conformance with
applicable electrical safety codes as promulgated by the building regulations
for the Town of Sullivan’s Island;
      (8)   No plumbing shall be allowed except water sinks and faucets; all
toilets, portable toilets or any other means of sewage collection or disposal
are strictly prohibited;
      (9)   The walkway, pier head and floating dock shall not be enclosed nor
shall there be any walls of any kind on any side of the same. However, safety
rails with slats at least two (2) inches apart shall be allowed provided that
they do not exceed three (3) feet in height;
      (10)   No watercraft or other device may be situated upon a boatlift as
provided herein, in such a fashion whereby any portion of the watercraft or
other device, except masts, antennas and outriggers extends higher than the
fifteen feet (15) above the high water mark; (08-15-06)
      (11)   Boats moored at docks cannot block or unduly impede navigation;
      (12)   The use of the docks shall be limited to private purposes;
      (13)   Living aboard a boat moored at a dock is strictly prohibited;
      (14)   All commercial activities are prohibited; and,
      (15)   All docks and boats moored at a permitted dock shall be maintained
to insure safe usage and not be a potential hazard to navigation.
      (16)   Only such dock components specifically enumerated above shall be
allowed. (4-18-06)
   C.   The following dock components are permitted. (4-18-06)
      1.   Pier Head
      2.   Floating dock
      3.   Boat lift
Sec. 21-76. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI: PF PUBLIC FACILITIES ZONING DISTRICT
Sec. 21-77. Purpose and applicability.
   A.   Purpose. The Public Facilities (PF) Zoning District is intended to
provide area for buildings and facilities that are owned and operated by
federal, state, or local governments and public utilities, which are used to
provide governmental or public services. This zone also provides for school
sites, public parks, recreational facilities, natural areas, trails, wetlands,
and similar types of open space owned and managed by a local government.
   B.   Applicability. The PF Zoning District is identified on the town's
official zoning map. The properties identified within the PF Zone shall comply
with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2021-21, passed 2-15-2022)
Sec. 21-78. Permitted and conditional uses.
   A.   Permitted uses. The land uses listed in Table 1.1 are permitted or
conditionally allowed in the PF Zoning District, subject to the provisions of
this code.
   B.   Conditional uses. The land uses listed in Table 1.1 are conditionally
allowed in the PF Zoning District by way of Town Council and administrative
staff approval.
   C.   Existing uses. Uses and structures lawfully established under
previously effective land use regulations may continue within the Public
Facilities Zone subject to the requirements of Article XVI, Nonconformities. If
a property zoned PF District (Public Facility) is sold to a private individual
or individuals, such property shall be rezoned to a classification that is
compatible with the surrounding area.
Table 1.1 Permitted and Conditional Uses
 
Land Use
Publicly owned and operated facilities such as Town Hall, fire station,
police department, administrative buildings, libraries, museums, storage
buildings, public safety training facilities, utility facilities and any     P
other similar structures and uses necessary for normal public facility
operation.
Public parks, playgrounds and similar public recreation facilities.          P
Facilities owned and operated by state or federal governmental agencies.     P
Community or civic events and services such as public service organizations,
music, or theater performances, holiday events, farmers markets and any
similar events. Such government approved events may be for fundraising or
not-for-profit. For-profit activity is permissible to the extent it is in    C
support of not-for-profit fundraising or any market type event organized and
hosted by the Town of Sullivan's Island. All events described herein require
review and approval by the Sullivan's Island Town Council or other governing
agency.
Key to Permitted and Conditional Uses:
   P = Permitted use in the district                                       
   C = Conditional use in the district
 
(Ord. 2021-21, passed 2-15-2022)
Sec. 21-79. Development standards.
   Development standards provide building separation for fire protection/
security, building maintenance, sunlight and air circulation, noise buffering,
and visual separation.
Table 1.2 Development Standards
Standard Dimensional Requirements
Standard                               Dimensional Requirements
Lot Area                               No requirement
Lot Width                              No requirement
Lot Depth                              No requirement
                                       None, except when abutting to a
                                       residential zone (RS District), then the
Front Yard Setback                     front yard setback to a building or
                                       parking area shall be the required
                                       setback of the abutting Residential
                                       Zone.
                                       None, except when abutting a residential
                                       zone (RS District), then the side or
Side and Rear Yard Setback             rear setback to a building or parking
                                       area shall be the required setback of
                                       the abutting Residential Zone.
Building Height                        As approved by Town Council (or other
                                       governing authority).
Maximum Impervious Coverage, Principal As approved by Town Council (or other
Building Square Footage and Principal  governing authority).
Building Coverage
 
   A.   Other applicable requirements. Town administrative staff shall review
all development to ensure compliance with applicable building codes, ADA
regulations, fire codes and requirements of the Town's Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 2021-21, passed 2-15-2022)
ARTICLE VII: RESERVED
ARTICLE VIII: RESERVED
ARTICLE IX: RESERVED
ARTICLE X: RESERVED
Sec. 21-77. Reserved.
Sec. 21-78. Reserved.
Sec. 21-79. Reserved.
Sec. 21-80. Reserved.
Sec. 21-81. Reserved.
Sec. 21-82. Reserved.
Sec. 21-83. Reserved.
Sec. 21-84. Reserved.
Sec. 21-85. Reserved.
Sec. 21-86. Reserved.
Sec. 21-87. Reserved.
Sec. 21-88. Reserved.
ARTICLE XI: HP HISTORIC PRESERVATION OVERLAY DISTRICT
Sec. 21-90. Statement of purpose and findings.
   A.   The HP Historic Preservation Overlay District is designed to protect
properties that have been determined architecturally, archaeologically,
culturally or historically significant to the Town of Sullivan’s Island, South
Carolina. The Town Council finds that the historic, architectural, cultural,
and aesthetic features of the Town represent valuable resources of the Town.
Therefore, it is hereby declared that the purpose of this Article to be known
as the HP Historic Preservation Overlay District shall be as follows:
      (1)   To promote the designation of historic properties, landmarks, and
contributing structures and the creation of historic overlay districts for the
educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of the public;
      (2)   To preserve, protect and enhance those structures and area that
reflect outstanding elements of the Town’s cultural, architectural, historic or
other heritage;
      (3)   To promote the Island’s outstanding historic or architectural
structures by providing civic pride on the history and accomplishment of the
past;
      (4)   To promote the sound and orderly preservation of historic areas as
a whole, and of the individual properties therein for the education, pleasure
and enrichment of all citizens; and
      (5)   To enhance property values within historic areas.
   B.   It is the Town of Sullivan’s Island desire that by encouraging a
general harmony of style, form, proportion and material between buildings of
historic design and those of contemporary design, the Town’s historic buildings
and historic area will continue to be a distinctive aspect of the Town of
Sullivan’s Island and will serve as visible reminders of its significant
historical and cultural heritage and that of the State of South Carolina.
Sec. 21-91. HP Overlay District applicability.
   The HP Historic Preservation Overlay District is intended to be an overlay
zoning district, and the regulations imposed by such district shall be in
addition to the regulations of the underlying zoning district applicable to the
subject Lot or area. All provisions of this Article, including the definitions
contained therein shall be applicable to this district.
Sec. 21-92. Role of design review board.
   A.   In accordance with SC Title 6, Chapter 29-870, local governments that
enact a Zoning Ordinance which makes specific provision for the preservation
and protection of historic and architecturally valuable districts and
neighborhoods by means of restriction and conditions governing the right to
erect, demolish, remove in whole or in part, or alter the exterior appearance
of all buildings or structures within the areas, may provide for appointment of
a board to oversee these responsibilities.
   B.   The Design Review Board shall be responsible for oversight of the HP
Historic Preservation Overlay District.
   C.   The Design Review Board shall work with the Planning Commission and the
Town Council to effect the creation and maintenance of HP Overlay Districts.
Sec. 21-93. Definitions.
   For the purpose of this Article, the following terms shall have the meaning
as indicated.
   Board. The Design Review Board of the Town of Sullivan’s Island.
   Certificate of Appropriateness. The official document issued by the Design
Review Board, approving and/or concurring in any application for permit for
erection, demolition, moving, reconstruction, restoration or alteration of any
structure designated historic property.
   Historic District. An area, designated by the Town Council pursuant to the
provisions of this Article. The District may contain one or more significant
historic structures and landmarks and may have within its boundaries other
property or structures that are not of such historic and/or architectural
significance to be designated as landmarks, nevertheless, contribute to the
overall visual characteristics of the District.
   Historic Property. Any place (including an archaeological site or the
location of a significant historical event), building, structure, work of art,
fixture or similar object that has been individually designated by the Town
Council of Sullivan’s Island, within or without an Historic District, or
designated as a contributing property within a historic district.
   National Register of Historic Places. The national list of districts, sites,
buildings, structures, and objects significant in American history,
architecture, archeology, engineering, or culture, maintained by the Secretary
of the Interior under authority of the National Historic Preservation Act, as
amended.
   Ordinary Maintenance and Repairs. Any work on which a Building Permit or any
other Town permit or certificate is not required and where the purpose is
stabilization, and further, where such work will not noticeably change the
exterior appearance of the resource. Any work not satisfying all of the above
requirements shall not be considered ordinary maintenance and repair.
Sec. 21-94. Historic property designation criteria.
   A.    Upon the effective date of this ordinance, historic properties shall
be those so designated previously by this chapter of the Town Ordinance as in
effect immediately prior to the effective date of this Ordinance including
Articles XI and XII as adopted on August 17, 2004 subject to any appropriate
changes approved by the Design Review Board subsequent thereto. Those historic
properties were those depicted as “Sullivan’s Island Landmarks” and
“Traditional Island Resources” on the map entitled “Historic Resources of
Sullivan’s Island South Carolina Field Evaluation Map”, revised June 30, 2003,
and also those identified on a list of properties entitled “Sullivan’s Island
Historic Resource Designation Study List”, dated September 24, 2003, as Number
One “Sullivan’s Island Landmarks” and Number Two “Traditional Island
Resources”, both map and list prepared by Schneider Historic Preservation, LLC,
and which are specifically incorporated herein by reference.
   B.   The Town Council, Planning Commission, the Design Review Board or
owners of one or more Lots of land within an area may propose additions to or
deletions from the list of designated historic properties. If initiated by the
property owners, the application shall be made upon forms or pursuant to
standards set by the Design Review Board for this purpose.
   C.   The Design Review Board shall determine whether a property shall be
designated an historic property or shall no longer be considered an historic
property.
      1.   If the Town Council, Planning Commission or Design Review Board
proposes an addition to the list of historic properties, the property proposed
shall be subject to and controlled by the Town’s ordinances governing
designated historic properties from the time of such proposal until final
determination by the Design Review Board. (3-18-08)
      2.   The final determination provided above will be accomplished within a
reasonable time frame. (3-18-08)
   D.   In determining whether a property should be designated an historic
property, it should be considered whether the property:
      (1)   Has significant inherent character, interest, or value as part of
the development or heritage of the Town, state, or nation;
      (2)   Is the site of an event significant in history;
      (3)   Is associated with a person or persons who contributed
significantly to the culture and development of the Town, state, or nation;
      (4)   Exemplifies the cultural, political, economic, social, ethnic, or
historic heritage of the Town, state, or nation;
      (5)   Individually, or as a collection of resources, embodies
distinguishing characteristics of a type, style, period, or specimen in
architecture or engineering;
      (6)   Contains elements of design, detail, materials, or craftsmanship
which represent a significant innovation;
      (7)   Represents an established and familiar visual feature of a
neighborhood or the Town; or
      (8)   Has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in
pre-history or history.
   E.   Owner notification. Owners of property proposed to be designated as
historic or to be no longer designated as historic shall be notified in writing
thirty (30) days prior to consideration by the Design Review Board. Owners may
appear before the Design Review Board to voice approval or opposition to such
designation and inclusion. Objections shall be based on procedural
nonconformities in the designation process or on the misapplication of the
criteria for designation as specified in this Ordinance.
Sec. 21-95. Creation or modification of HP Overlay District.
   A.    Upon the effective date of this Ordinance, the districts shall be
those so designated previously by Chapter 21 of the Town Ordinance as in effect
immediately prior to the effective date of this Ordinance including Articles XI
and XII as adopted on August 17, 2004 subject to any appropriate changes
approved by the Design Review Board subsequent thereto. The initial boundaries
of the district were those shown as “Potential National Register or Local
Historic District” on the map entitled “Historic Resources of Sullivan’s Island
South Carolina Field Evaluation Map”, revised June 30, 2003, prepared by
Schneider Historic Preservation, LLC, and which is specifically incorporated
herein by reference. Upon the effective date of Article XI and Article XII, the
Design Review Board will be vested with the authority to make recommendations
to add or delete districts or to change the boundaries of districts.
   B.   The Town Council, Planning Commission, the Design Review Board or
owners of one or more Lots of land within an area may propose the creation or
modification of an HP Overlay District. If initiated by the property owners,
the application shall be made upon forms or pursuant to standards set by the
Design Review Board for this purpose.
   C.   The procedure for creating or amending an HP Overlay District
applicable to an area of the Sullivan’s Island shall be the same as for any
other zoning amendment, provided that, if the proposal for creating a HP
Overlay District does not originate with the Design Review Board, the proposal
shall be forwarded to the Design Review Board for its review and comment prior
to the holding of a public hearing by the Planning Commission.
   D.   The proposal shall include a rationale for the designation or
modification of the proposed HP Overlay District related, to the maximum extent
practicable, to the Historic Property Designation Criteria as set forth in
Section 21-94.
   E.   Findings. In recommending the application of the HP Overlay District to
an area of Sullivan’s Island, the Design Review Board or other recommending
body shall express findings regarding the specific structures, landscapes or
other physical aspects of the proposed HP Overlay District on which it bases
the determination required by the criteria in Section 21-94. Where the
designation is made based on the general character of the proposed district,
these findings may include, but shall not necessarily be limited to:
      (1)   Height, scale or mass of buildings and structures typical of the
area;
      (2)   Architectural style(s) and periods typical of the area;
      (3)   Building materials and colors typical of the area;
      (4)   Landscapes typical of the area;
      (5)   Typical relationships of buildings to the landscapes or to the
streets in the area;
      (6)   Setbacks and other physical patterns of building in the area;
      (7)   Typical patterns of rooflines of buildings in the area; and/or
      (8)   Typical patterns of porch and entrance treatments of buildings in
the area or height and mass of the buildings.
   F.   The proposal for creation or amending of the HP Overlay District shall
include a map and legal description of the area and addresses of properties to
be included.
   G.   Owners of property proposed to be included in or removed from an HP
Overlay District shall be notified in writing thirty (30) days prior to
consideration by the Design Review Board. Owners may appear before the Design
Review Board to voice approval or opposition to such changes. Objections shall
be based on procedural nonconformities or to misapplication of the criteria
specified in this ordinance.
   H.   The Design Review Board shall complete its review of the HP Overlay
District and shall forward its recommendation regarding any proposed deletion,
addition or change to the HP Overlay District to the Planning Commission.
   I.   The Design Review Board shall hold an open meeting or public hearing on
the proposed HP Overlay District. The process for notice and public hearing
shall be the same as that for notice and a hearing before the Planning
Commission.
   J.   The Design Review Board shall recommend to the Planning Commission
that:
      (1)   The proposal to create the HP Overlay District for the proposed
area of the Town be approved;
      (2)   The proposal be approved subject to specified conditions; or,
      (3)   The proposal be denied.
   K.   Maintenance of inventory and map.
   Where a HP Overlay District is created, it shall be given a unique name that
shall include the words “Historic Preservation” and shall be used to identify
it on the map and in the Zoning Ordinance.
Sec. 21-96. Effect of creation of HP Overlay District.
   The creation of a HP Overlay District shall have the following effects:
   A.   The regulations of the HP Overlay District shall be applicable to all
designated properties within and without the district;
   B.   Because it is an overlay district, the regulations for the underlying
zoning district shall remain in effect, except as provided in the next
paragraph;
   C.   In case of any conflict between the regulations applicable in the
underlying district and the regulations of the HP Overlay District, the
regulations of the HP Overlay District shall apply, even where the applicable
regulation may not be the higher standard;
   D.   The findings adopted by the Town Council, in accordance with the
previous section, shall define the scope of the Town’s interest in protecting
the historic resource and shall provide the guidelines to be used by the Design
Review Board, along with the applicable regulations, in considering whether to
grant or deny a Certificate of Appropriateness within the district; and,
   E.   Nothing in this Article shall be construed as reason for an increased
evaluation of property for purposes of ad valorem taxation because of historic
designation.
Sec. 21-97. Certificate of appropriateness.
   A.   When Required.
      (1)   A Certificate of Appropriateness shall be required before the
commencement of work upon any historic property or on any building or structure
located within the HP Overlay District.
      (2)   A Certificate of Appropriateness for such work includes the
erection, reconstruction, restoration or alteration of the exterior of any
structure or site, except when such work satisfies all the requirements of
ordinary maintenance and repair as defined in this Article.
      (3)   Neither a Certificate of Zoning Compliance nor a Building Permit
shall be issued within the HP Overlay District until the Design Review Board
has approved a Certificate of Appropriateness.
   B.   Procedures.
      (1)   An application shall be completed for a Certificate of
Appropriateness in accordance with the Design Review Board’s submittal
requirements. An application shall not be considered complete until all the
required data have been submitted. The application for a Certificate of
Appropriateness shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning
Administrator shall forward to the Design Review Board the complete application
for a Certificate of Appropriateness, accompanied by an application for a
Certificate of Zoning Compliance.
      (2)   The applicant shall be informed of the hearing date at which the
applications for a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be considered. The
applicant shall have the right to be heard and may be accompanied or
represented by counsel and/or one or more construction or design professionals
at the hearing.
      (3)   After hearing the applicant, and any others wishing to speak, the
Board shall take one of the following actions:
         (a)   Approve the application for a Certificate of Appropriateness;
         (b)   Place conditions on the application and approve a Conditional
Certificate of Appropriateness; or
         (c)   Deny the application for Certificate of Appropriateness.
      (4)   In the case of the disapproval of plans by the Design Review Board,
the Board shall state in writing the reasons for such disapproval and may
include suggestions in regard to actions the applicant might take to secure the
approval of the Board concerning future issuance of a Certificate of
Appropriateness.
      (5)   Work performed pursuant to the issuance of a Certificate of
Appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such Certificate, if any.
It shall be the duty of the Building Official to inspect from time to time any
work performed pursuant to a Certificate of Appropriateness to assure such
compliance.
      (6)   It shall be the responsibility of the Zoning Administrator to issue
the actual Certificate of Appropriateness, with any designated conditions, and
to maintain a copy of the Certificate of Appropriateness, together with the
proposed plans. These shall be public documents for all purposes.
   C.   Criteria for certificate of appropriateness. The Board shall determine
whether to grant a Certificate of Appropriateness based on the following:
      (1)   Consistency of the proposed work with the applicable HP Overlay
District regulations;
      (2)   Consistency of the proposed work with the regulations of the
underlying zoning district;
      (3)   Consistency of the proposed work with the findings adopted by the
Town Council in designating HP Overlay District;
      (4)   For an historic property, consistency of the proposed work with the
findings in designating it a historic structure, or comparable record of
findings from a state or federal listing; and
      (5)   For an historic property, consistency with the following ten
preservation standards, and the most recent version of the Secretary of the
Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties: Guidelines for
Preserving, Rehabilitating, Restoring, and Reconstructing Historic Buildings:
         (a)   Using a property as it was used historically or giving a new use
that requires minimal change to its distinctive materials, features, spaces,
and spatial relationships;
         (b)   Retaining and preserving the historic character of a property;
avoidance of the removal of distinctive materials or alteration of features,
spaces, and spatial relationships that characterize a property;
         (c)   Avoiding changes that create a false sense of historical
development, such as adding conjectural features or elements from other
buildings;
         (d)   Retaining and preserving changes to a property that have
acquired historic significance in their own right;
         (e)   Preserving distinctive materials, features, finishes, and
construction techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a
property;
         (f)   Repairing rather than replacing deteriorated historic features;
or where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a distinctive
feature, the new feature will match the old in design, color, texture, and,
where possible, materials;
         (g)   Utilizing the gentlest means of chemical or physical treatments;
         (h)   Protecting and preserving the archeological resources in place,
and if disturbing, mitigation measures will be undertaken;
         (i)   Not destroying historic materials, features, and spatial
relationships that characterize the property; differentiating the new work from
the old and making it compatible with the historic materials, features, size,
scale, and proportion, and massing to protect the integrity of the property and
its environment; and,
         (j)   Undertaking new construction in such a manner that, if removed
in the future, the essential form and integrity of the historic property and
its environment would be unimpaired.
(Ord. 2017-1, passed 6-20-2017)
   D.   Notification of affected property owners. Prior to the issuance of an
approval or denial of a Certificate of Appropriateness, the Board shall inform
the owners of any property likely to be materially affected by the application,
and shall give the applicant and such owners an opportunity to be heard.
   E.   Staff Approval of Minor Refinements. (7/21/09) Notwithstanding
provisions to the contrary in this chapter, the Zoning Administrator or his/her
designee may modify Certificates of Appropriateness previously approved by the
Design Review Board for minor refinements as allowed in Section 21-109(F)(9 and
10). (7/21/09)
Sec. 21-98. Certificate of appropriateness for moving, demolition or removal. 
   No designated historic property within or without any HP Overlay District
shall be demolished, moved or removed unless such demolition, moving or removal
shall be approved by the Design Review Board and a Certificate of
Appropriateness for Demolition, Moving or Removal shall be granted. The
procedure for issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness for Demolition,
Moving or Removal shall be the same as for the issuance of other Certificates
of Appropriateness with the following modifications:
   A.   After the hearing, the Design Review Board may approve the Certificate
of Appropriateness for Demolition, Moving or Removal thereby authorizing the
demolition moving or removal, or the Board may deny the Certificate of
Appropriateness for Demolition Moving or Removal, or postpone the demolition or
removal for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days.
   B.   In determining whether to issue a Certificate of Appropriateness, the
Board shall consider the following criteria, in addition to the other criteria
above:
      (1)   The contribution which the structure makes to the historic and
architectural nature of the town, individually and/or in its relation to other
structures and properties in the area.
      (2)   The condition of the structure from the standpoint of structural
integrity and the extent of work necessary to stabilize the structure; and,
      (3)   The economically viable alternatives available to the demolition.
Sec. 21-99. Property owned by public agencies.
   The requirements, provisions, and purposes of this Article apply to all
property owned by the Town or any other public agency; provided, however,
designation pursuant to this Article shall not affect the validity of prior
actions of the Town Council approving plans, programs, or authorizations for
public trusts, agencies or authorities of the Town without an express amendment
of such plan, program or authority.
Sec. 21-100. Maintenance, repair, and interior projects.
   A.   Nothing in this Article shall be construed to prevent the ordinary
maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature of structures
designated as historic when that repair does not involve a change in design,
material, or outer appearance of the structure.
   B.   The Board shall not consider the interior arrangements or alterations
to the interior of a building unless they have an impact on the exterior
appearance of the building or unless the interior of a public building or the
public space of a private building is specifically described and designated as
historic.
   C.   The Board may authorize a Town staff or a Board member or subcommittee
to approve minor projects involving repairs and ordinary maintenance that do
not alter design, materials, or the outer appearance of a structure or interior
projects not subject to design review.
Sec. 21-101. Fines and penalties.
   The system of fines applied by the Town of Sullivan’s Island for violation
of the building code will apply to violations of this Article or other relevant
sections of this Zoning Ordinance.
Sec. 21-102. Reserved.
Sec. 21-103. Reserved.
Sec. 21-104. Reserved.
Sec. 21-105. Reserved.
ARTICLE XII: DESIGN REVIEW BOARD
Sec. 21-106. Authority.
   The Design Review Board is established in pursuance of authority conferred
by the South Carolina Code, Title 6, Chapter 29, Sections 870 through 940 and
in accordance with the Town of Sullivan’s Island’s Comprehensive Plan.
Sec. 21-107. Intent.
   The intent of establishing the Design Review Board and initiating design
review is to enhance the Island’s character, preserve property values and
protect the unique island identity of Sullivan’s Island. The Design Review
process is intended to promote design that is compatible in mass and scale with
existing development of the Island and in harmony with the natural environment.
The process is aimed at improving and augmenting other development controls
included in the Zoning Ordinance.
Sec. 21-108. Creation and responsibilities.
   A.   Establishment and purpose. The Town Council hereby establishes the
Design Review Board for
      (1)   The preservation and protection of historic and architecturally
valuable districts and neighborhoods or significant or natural scenic areas;
      (2)   The protection of and/or provision for the unique, special, or
desired character of Sullivan’s Island and defined districts within the Island
or any combination of it; and,
      (3)   Governing the erection, demolition, removal in whole or in part, or
alteration, of buildings, structures and/or grounds by the issuance of a
Certificate of Appropriateness.
   B.   Powers. In accordance with procedures and standards set forth in the
Article, the Design Review Board shall have the power to:
      (1)    Review, approve, approve subject to modification or conditions, or
deny approval for: construction, enlargement or improvements governed by this
Zoning Ordinance that affect the exterior appearance of a structure, except for
those actions deemed to be routine maintenance by the Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Oversee the requirements of the HP Historic Preservation Overlay
District upon the establishment of such district in accordance with the HP
Historic Preservation Overlay District, including the issuance of Certificates
of Appropriateness.
      (3)    Hear appeals from alleged error in any order, requirement,
determination, or decision of the Zoning Administrator or other appropriate
administrator.
      (4)   In connection with the administration of subsections 1 and 2 above,
interpret and apply the standards of this Zoning Ordinance.
   C.   Composition of board. In making appointments to the Design Review
Board, the Town Council shall make an attempt to maintain a balance of interest
and skills on the Board by assessing the individual qualifications of the
candidates including but not limited to their knowledge and demonstrated
interest in architecture, history, archaeology, planning, urban or community
design, landscape architecture, construction and restoration, or law.
Membership should include at least one state licensed design professional and a
member at large. All members should have knowledge and demonstrated interest in
the design and preservation of buildings and places (11-15-05)
Appointment and terms.
   (1)   The Design Review Board shall consist of seven (7) members at least
six (6) of whom must be residents and the seventh (7th) of whom may be a non-
resident of Sullivan’s Island appointed by the Town Council (11-15-05) (12-17-
13).
   (2)   No Board member shall hold any other public office or position in the
Town.
   (3)   The Board members shall serve overlapping terms of three (3) years
each. At the time of the creation of the Design Review Board, three of the
Board’s five (5) members shall serve terms of one (1), two (2) and three (3)
years, as designated by the Town Council. Their successors shall be appointed
for a full three (3) year term. The Board members appointed to fill the
additional two (2) places on the Board shall serve terms of two (2) years and
three (3) years, as designated by Town Council, and their successors shall be
appointed for full three (3) year terms. Members are all eligible for
reappointment.
   D.   Removal and replacement of board member. The Town Council may remove
any Design Review Board member for repeated failure to attend meetings of the
Board or for any other cause deemed sufficient cause. A member appointed to
replace a removed member shall serve the balance of the removed member’s
unexpired term. At the completion of the unexpired term, the member shall be
eligible for reappointment to a full term.
   E.   Election/appointment of officers. The Design Review Board shall elect
one of its members as chair. The chair shall serve for one (1) year or until he
or she is re-elected or his or her successor is elected. The Board shall
appoint a secretary who may be an officer of the governing authority or a
member of the Design Review Board.
Sec. 21-109. Application, notice, meetings, conflicts, quorum, procedures and
time limits.
   A.   Application and fees. Applications to the Design Review Board shall be
those required by the Zoning Administrator and any other information required
for issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness accompanied by an application
fee the amount of which shall be established by resolution of the Town Council.
(9-18-07)
   B.   Public notice of meetings.
      (1)   Hearings shall be required on all applications made to the Design
Review Board. Public notice of all hearings and meetings of the Design Review
Board shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town at
least fifteen (15) days prior to the meeting.
      (2)   Written notice of the hearing date shall be mailed to the
applicant, or the agent for the applicant, and, in the case of Administrative
Appeals, the administrative officer from whom the appeal is taken.
      (3)   Ten (10) days prior to the hearing before the Design Review Board,
the Zoning Administrator shall require a sign that is conspicuous in color,
size and location shall be posted on the property subject to the review. Such
notice shall be visible from each public thoroughfare that abuts the property.
The sign provided by the Zoning Administrator shall indicate that the Design
Review Board shall be considering proposed improvements on the property and
shall furnish the time and date of the Design Review Board hearing.
   C.   Meetings and record of actions.
      (1)   Meetings of the Design Review Board shall be held at the call of
the chair and at such other times as the Board may determine. The chair or, in
his or her absence, the acting chair, may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses by subpoena.
      (2)   All meetings of the Design Review shall be open to the public.
      (3)   All actions of the Design Review Board’s findings of fact and
conclusions shall be separately stated in final decisions or orders of the
Board.
      (4)   The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote
of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating
that fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official
actions, all of which shall be immediately filed at Town Hall and be considered
as a public record.
   D.   Conflicts of interest. Any member of the Design Review Board who has a
personal or financial interest, either directly or indirectly, in any property
which is the subject of, or affected by, a decision of the Board shall be
disqualified from participating in the decision of the Board concerning the
property.
   E.   Quorum and required vote. Three (3) members are required for a quorum
and a concurring vote of three (3) members of the Design Review Board shall be
necessary to take any action.
   F.   Procedures.
      (1)   An application for a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be
submitted to the Zoning Administrator who initially determines whether the
application is complete and whether it requires approval by the Design Review
Board.
      (2)   If the Zoning Administrator determines the application for a
Certificate of Appropriateness does not require approval by the Design Review
Board, the Zoning Administrator shall make the determination as to whether or
not the application is in compliance with the Zoning Ordinance.
      (3)   If the Zoning Administrator determines the application requires
approval by the Design Review Board, the Zoning Administrator shall place the
application on the Design Review Board’s next meeting agenda that falls within
the time limits and notification requirements of this Article. The Zoning
Administrator shall note any inconsistencies between the application and the
Zoning Ordinance including the need for modifications or variance to such
standards.
      (4)   If the Zoning Administrator informs the applicant that the
submission does not meet the Zoning Ordinance standards, and adequate relief
from such standards is not available from the Design Review Board under this
Ordinance, the applicant may request that the Zoning Administrator deny the
application prior to its submission to the Design Review Board to enable the
applicant to appeal forthwith for a variance to the Board of Zoning Appeals. In
such a case, the Zoning Administrator shall issue such denial and, if the
variance is granted, the applicant may reapply to the Zoning Administrator who
shall then forward the application, along with a copy of the variance decision,
to the Design Review Board for further action.
      (5)   Upon hearing the application, the Design Review Board shall
approve, approve subject to modification or conditions, or deny the Certificate
of Appropriateness. The Design Review Board may also continue the application
hearing to allow for changes to be made to the application or additional
information being provided.
      (6)   If the Design Review Board finds that the application is
inconsistent with one or more of the Zoning Ordinance Standards which it does
not have the power to modify, or if the Design Review Board determines that a
requested application does not meet the Standards of neighborhood Compatibility
as described in Sec. 21-111, the Design Review Board shall
         (a)   Deny the application accompanied by suggested changes that might
be made to the application and/or variances that might be sought that would
make the application more appropriate and consistent with the spirit of the
Zoning Ordinance; or,
         (b)   Approve the application subject to a variance being granted by
the Board of Zoning Appeals modifying the required standards.
      (7)   In case of a denial by the Zoning Administrator the following
appeal processes shall apply (Sec. 21-110 for Administrative Appeals to the
Design Review Board and Article XVIII Sec. 21-177 for Administrative Appeals to
the Board of Zoning Appeals):
         (a)   The applicant may appeal a determination based upon an
interpretation based upon an interpretation of the Design Standards to the
Design Review Board. The Design Review Board shall have final authority to
interpret and apply the Design Standards.
         (b)   The applicant may appeal a determination based upon an
interpretation of the Zoning Standards to the Board of Zoning Appeals. The
Board of Zoning Appeals shall have final authority to interpret and apply the
Zoning Standards.
         (c)   In case of any conflict between a Zoning Standard and a Design
Standards, or where it is unclear as to the determination being a Zoning or
Design Standard, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall have final authority in such
appeals.
      (8)   Staff level review and approval of minor improvements and accessory
structures. (7/21/09)
         (a)   Notwithstanding provisions to the contrary in this chapter, the
following items may be reviewed and approved at the Staff level in accordance
with the procedures prescribed herein. (7/21/09)
            i.   Approval of minor improvements or Accessory Structures as
listed in Section 21-137A of the Town ordinances that do not negatively affect
the appearance of the principal dwelling. (7/21/09)
         (b)   Procedure (7/21/09)
            i.   All Design Review Board application forms and appropriate fees
shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator and/or his designee who will
determine if the forms are complete. If complete, the following action(s) may
take place: (7/21/09)
               1.   All properties: Zoning Administrator or his/her designee
may review the requested improvements or added Accessory Structures. After
review, the request may be approved or deferred to the next regularly scheduled
Design Review Board (DRB) meeting. All approved projects will be reported in
writing by the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee to the Design Review
Board at its next regularly scheduled meeting. (7/21/09)
      (9)   Staff level review and approval of minor refinements to designs
that have already received a Certificate of Appropriateness. (7/21/09)
         (a)   Notwithstanding provisions to the contrary in this chapter, the
following items may be reviewed and approved at the Staff level in accordance
with the procedures prescribed herein. (7/21/09)
            i.   Minor refinements to design elements, such as but not limited
to: roofs, fascia treatments, doors, columns, windows, siding, trim details or
lattice that have already received a Certificate of Appropriateness. (7/21/09)
         (b)   Procedure (7/21/09)
            i.   All Design Review Board application forms and appropriate fees
shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee who
initially determines whether the forms are complete. If complete, the following
action(s) may take place: (7/21/09)
               1.   All properties: Zoning Administrator or his/her designee
may review minor
refinements. After review, the request may be approved or deferred to the next
regularly scheduled DRB meeting. All approved minor refinements will be
reported in writing by the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee to the
Design Review Board at its next regularly scheduled meeting. (7/21/09)
      (10)   Notice and Appeal. (7/21/09)
         a.   A Notice of Staff approval of minor improvements, accessory
structures, or alterations to an approved Certificate of Appropriateness must
be posted on the property by the Town. This Notice will be posted in a
conspicuous location on the property immediately upon receiving approval for
the proposed work, and must remain visible for the duration of the appeals
period. The notice does not replace a building permit. (7/21/09)
         b.   Appeals of the Staff review must be made in writing to the Zoning
Administrator or his/her designee within ten (10) business days from the date
of approval or posting, whichever is later. Application information and
materials will be made available at Sullivan’s Island Town Hall. Any appeals
will be considered at the next regularly scheduled Design Review Board meeting.
(7/21/09)
         c.   If an owner elects to proceed upon receipt of Staff approval
prior to the expiration of the appeal period or prior to resolution of an
appeal filed within the appeal period, whichever is later, the owner will do so
at the risk of having the Staff decision reversed by the Design Review Board.
(7/21/09)
   G.   Time limitations.
      (1)   The Design Review Board shall take action on an application for a
Certificate of Appropriateness within sixty-two (62) days of the initial
hearing following the application submittal of a complete set of plans (in
accordance with the application requirements specified by the Zoning
Administrator.
      (2)   If after a Certificate of Appropriateness has been approved by the
Design Review Board, and a Building Permit has not been issued within one (1)
year from the date of approval, then such Certificate of Appropriateness shall
be null and void and no Building Permit shall be issued.
   H.   By-laws. In addition to the rules, regulations and procedures set out
in Section 21, the Design Review Board shall adopt a set of by-laws further
governing their procedures.
Sec. 21-110. Administrative appeal.
   A.   Appeals of the administrative official. Decisions of the Zoning
Administrator or other appropriate administrative official in matters under the
purview of the Design Review Board may be appealed to the Design Review Board
where there is an alleged error in any order, requirement, determination, or
decision. Appeals to the Design Review Board may be taken by any person
aggrieved or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the Town.
   B.   Time limits. The appeal shall be taken within a thirty (30) days, by
filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the Design
Review Board notice of appeal specifying the grounds of it. The officer from
whom the appeal is taken immediately shall transmit to the Design Review Board
all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was
taken.
   C.   Effect of appeal. An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance
of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken
certifies to the Board, after the notice of appeal has been filed with him,
that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion,
cause imminent peril to life and property. In that case, proceedings may not be
stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board
or by a court of record on application, upon notice to the officer from whom
the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown.
   D.   Setting a time for the hearing. The Design Review Board shall fix a
reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal or other matter referred to it,
and give public notice of the hearing, as well as due notice to the parties in
interest, and decide the appeal or other matter within a reasonable time.
   E.   Hearing and order. Upon the hearing any party may appear in person or
by agent or by attorney. The Design Review Board may reverse or affirm wholly
or partially or may modify or reverse the order, requirement, decision or
determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or
determination as should be made.
Sec. 21-111. Standards of Neighborhood Compatibility.
   Where this Ordinance grants the Design Review Board discretion to modify a
Zoning Standard or a Design Standard, the Board shall determine whether or not
the proposed modification is compatible with the neighborhood. In making this
determination the Board shall consider, with reference to adjoining lots, lots
facing across the street, and lots in the immediate vicinity:
   A.   The pattern of setback, foundation elevations and building heights;
   B.   The massing and orientation of structures;
   C.   Fenestration (windows) and doorway spacing and alignment patterns;
   D.   The placement and use of porches, decks and patios;
   E.   The placement and alignment of driveways;
   F.   The treatment of front and side facades;
   G.   Where appropriate, the types of roofs, the roof pitches, and other
aspects of roof design;
   H.   Where appropriate, distinctive architectural styles that characterize a
street or neighborhood; and
   I.   Such other factors as the Board may consider relevant to defining the
character of the neighborhood.
Sec. 21-112. Historic preservation responsibilities.
   A.   Maintenance of historic inventory and map.
      (1)   The Design Review Board shall maintain an inventory of buildings,
structures, objects, and sites that are considered as historic or contributing
to the historic character of the Island.
      (2)   Design Review Board shall insure that all locally designated
historic districts and/or HP Overlay Districts shall be clearly shown on the
Official Zoning Map.
   B.   Nominations to the National Register. The Design Review Board may
conduct the initial review and evaluation of all proposed nominations for the
National Register of Historic Places for properties that are within its
jurisdiction, prior to consideration by the State Board of Review. The Design
Review Board may send their recommendations to the State Historic Preservation
Office for consideration at the meeting of the State Board of Review.
   C.   Establishment of HP Historic Preservation Overlay District. The Design
Review Board shall ensure that the provisions related to the HP Historic
Preservation Overlay District are met.
Sec. 21-113. Protection against liability.
   Any member of the Design Review Board acting within powers granted by the
Ordinance shall be relieved from personal liability for any damage and held
harmless by the Town of Sullivan’s Island. Any suit brought against any member
of the Board shall be defended by a legal representative furnished by the Town
of Sullivan’s Island until the termination of the proceedings.
Sec. 21-114. Appeal to circuit court.
   A person who may have a substantial interest in any decision of the Design
Review Board or any officer, or agent of the appropriate governing authority
may appeal from any decision of the Board to the circuit court in and for the
county by filing with the clerk of court a petition in writing setting forth
plainly, fully, and distinctly why the decision is contrary to law. The appeal
shall be filed within thirty (30) days after the affected party receives actual
notice of the decision of the Design Review Board.
Sec. 21-115. Reserved.
Sec. 21-116. Reserved.
ARTICLE XIII: VACATION RENTALS
Sec. 21-117. Prohibition and nonconformity.
   Vacation Rentals are prohibited uses on Sullivan’s Island. Nothing in this
Ordinance shall be construed to permit any Principal Building or other
structure to be used as a Vacation Rental. All legally established Vacation
Rentals are interpreted to be Nonconforming Uses.
Sec. 21-118. Certificate of zoning compliance and business license required.
   In order for the owner of a Principal Building that has been lawfully used
as a Vacation Rental during the twelve (12) months prior to November 21, 2000
to continue to use the property as a Vacation Rental, the owner shall apply
for, and if approved by the Zoning Administrator upon meeting the requirements
of this Article, be issued a Certificate of Zoning Compliance and shall secure
a Vacation Rental Business License.
   A.   A Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be obtained for each calendar
year the property is used for a Vacation Rental.
   B.   A Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be obtained for each Principal
Building.
   C.   A Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall not be granted, even if the
Principal Building otherwise qualifies for a Certificate of Zoning Compliance,
if subsequent to the ratification of this Ordinance, that Principal Building
has been enlarged or razed or otherwise destroyed.
   D.   If a lot has more than one legally existing Principal Building, a
Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be obtained for each Principal Building
that is being used for a Vacation Rental.
Sec. 21-119. Certificate of zoning compliance application.
   A.   An applicant for a Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall provide the
following information to the Town Clerk in the application for a Certificate of
Zoning Compliance for a Vacation Rental:
      (1)   The complete street address, lot and block number and the tax map
number as used by Charleston County;
      (2)   Proof of ownership, including the name, address and phone number of
each person or entity with an ownership interest in the property;
      (3)   If the applicant is someone other that an owner, the applicant
shall provide proof in writing of the owner’s (or owners’) authorization of the
applicant to apply for the Certificate of Zoning Compliance and a Vacation
Rental Business License;
      (4)   The applicant shall provide a letter signed by all of the owners of
the property acknowledging that a violation of the Town’s Vacation Rental
Ordinance by the applicant, any manager of the property, or tenant shall be
considered a violation by the owner(s);
      (5)   The owner’s valid and current federal employer tax identification
number or the social security number which is used for reporting of state and
federal income tax for income derived from the Vacation Rental property;
      (6)   The name, address and twenty-four (24) hour phone number of the
person who will be operating the Vacation Rental;
      (7)   The name and signature of all owners, authorized agents and
authorized property managers; and,
      (8)   Agreement to comply with all of the rules and regulations set out
in Sec. 21-122.
   B.   No Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be granted until sufficient
written evidence is provided to show that:
      (1)   A Sullivan’s Island Vacation Rental Business License was issued for
the Vacation Rental for the previous calendar year;
      (2)   The property was not assessed under the State, County and Town
Municipal ad valorem tax laws as a qualified assessment for owner occupied
property but rather assessed at the six percent (6%) rate and paid at the six
percent (6%) rate for the previous calendar year. If a property has previously
or is presently being assessed with a qualified assessment as owner occupied
property four percent (4%), then the owner shall present sufficient proof
satisfactory to the Town Clerk that the property has lawfully met and continues
to meet the requirements for the four percent (4%) assessment under the
criteria set out in Section 12-43-220 of the Code of laws of South Carolina, as
amended;
      (3)   Personal rental residential property taxes were assessed and paid
for the previous calendar year;
      (4)   State accommodation taxes were collected and paid for the rental of
the property for the previous calendar year;
      (5)   Sales taxes were collected and paid for the rental of the property
for the previous calendar year;
      (6)   Local option sales taxes were collected and paid for the rental of
the property for the previous calendar year;
      (7)   County accommodation taxes were collected and paid for the rental
of the property for the previous calendar year;
      (8)   Water and sewer fees have been paid in full;
      (9)   The property was actually held out and used as a Vacation Rental
during the previous calendar year and was so used as a Vacation Rental for a
period of more than two (2) weeks during the previous calendar year;
      (10)   The owner consents to an inspection of the property by the Fire
Chief of the Town of Sullivan’s Island and the Building Official for the Town
of Sullivan’s Island to determine if the property complies with all Town of
Sullivan’s Island fire and building ordinances; and,
      (11)   The Zoning Administrator confirms that the property has not been
used in an unlawful manner in the prior twelve (12) months and that the owner
(s) has not violated any laws of the Town of Sullivan’s Island.
   C.   Except in cases involving the initial receipt of a Certificate of
Zoning Compliance, the owner shall have complied with all of the rules and
regulations set out in Sec. 21-122 during the previous twelve (12) months and
there has been a determination by the Zoning Administrator that the owner has
not violated the said rules and regulations on more than two (2) occasions in
the previous twelve (12) months.
Sec. 21-120. Standards for denial.
   (A)   If the Zoning Administrator finds substantial and credible evidence
that one or more of the requirements of Sec. 21-119 have not been met, then the
Zoning Administrator shall deny the applicant a Certificate of Zoning
Compliance.
   (B)   If the Certificate of Zoning Compliance is denied, the applicant may
request a review and re-inspection by the Zoning Administrator. If the review
and re-inspection is denied or if, after review and re-inspection, there is no
change in the denial of the license, the owner/applicant may appeal the
decision by petition to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
Sec. 21-121. Transferability.
   The Certificate of Zoning Compliance and the Vacation Rental Business
License may not be assigned or transferred, pledged, sold, or otherwise
transferred by the license holder to any other person, business, or entity. The
license belongs solely to the owner and shall remain in the owner’s name until
such time that the owner ceases to use the property for a short-term rental
purpose or sells the property. If a new owner wishes to continue to use the
property for a Vacation Rental, an application shall be made to the Town within
thirty (30) days of the transfer of the property or thirty days before the
first Vacation Rental of the property.
Sec. 21-122. Operational requirements.
   A.   Any owner of a Vacation Rental who obtains a Certificate of Zoning
Compliance and a Vacation Rental Business License shall comply with the
following:
      (1)   All Vacation Rentals shall comply with the terms of the current
Sullivan’s Island Waste Hauler contract associated with excessive garbage and
charges for containment and collection of the same;
      (2)   Except as provided herein, each residential property where
transient lodging use is in effect shall prominently display so as to be
visible from the outside of the property the Vacation Rental Business License;
      (3)   A contact person shall be available twenty-four (24) hours per day,
seven (7) days per week for the purpose of responding promptly to complaints
regarding the conduct of the occupants of the Vacation Rental. The name and
phone number of the contact person shall be registered with the Police
Department;
      (4)   The occupancy of a Vacation Rental shall conform to the occupancy
limits of the Town of Sullivan’s Island and Fire and Building Ordinances and
total occupancy in all cases shall be subject to the following:
         (a)   No more than two (2) occupants for each one hundred twenty (120)
square feet of bedroom area, plus one (1) additional occupant for each
additional sixty (60) square feet of bedroom area in bedrooms shared by more
than two (2) occupants;
         (b)   No more then twelve (12) occupants and no more than twenty-four
(24) people (including both occupants and temporary guests) gathered at the
Vacation Rental or otherwise on the property at any time; and,
         (c)   There shall be no weddings, parties, or other social events
where more than twenty-four (24) people would congregate or gather on the
property at one time.
      (5)   The owner or manager shall maintain a tenant and vehicle
registration which shall include the name and address of each unit’s tenant(s),
and the make, year and tag number of the tenant’s (s’) vehicle(s). This
information shall be readily available upon request of any officer of the Town
responsible for the enforcement of this Ordinance;
      (6)   The owner shall provide off-street parking on the Vacation Rental
property for all vehicles, watercraft and trailers to be used by the tenants
during any occupancy;
      (7)   There shall be a written lease between a Vacation Rental owner and
the tenant and it shall contain the tenant’s agreements to the regulations
contained in this subsection; and,
      (8)   There shall be neither overnight leases nor any conversion from
providing Vacation Rentals to operating an inn or motel. All leases, rentals or
uses by a tenant shall be for a minimum of three (3) continuous nights.
   B.   Nothing in this subsection is intended to exclude the application of
any other ordinance for the Town of Sullivan’s Island to the property or to the
related parties.
Sec. 21-123. Suspension, revocation or abandonment.
   A.   A Certificate of Zoning Compliance and/or a Vacation Rental Business
License may be suspended or revoked upon a determination by the Zoning
Administrator of the existence of two (2) or more instances of failure to
satisfy the conditions that are required to be shown as set out in Sec. 21-119
or in violation of the conditions and regulations set out in Sec. 21-122. An
appeal of such determination of the Zoning Administrator may be made by
petition to the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with the provisions of
this Zoning Ordinance.
   B.   The abandonment or failure to use a property as a Vacation Rental for a
period of twelve (12) consecutive months for any period shall be deemed an
abandonment of the Vacation Rental use and the property shall no longer be used
as a Vacation Rental and the owner of the property shall no longer be entitled
to obtain a Certificate of Zoning Compliance nor a Vacation Rental Business
License. Furthermore, the owner of the property and any broker, real estate
agent or authorized agent of the owner shall be prohibited from using the
property as a Vacation Rental.
Sec. 21-124. Violations.
   A.   It shall be a violation of these regulations to enter into a long-term
lease with a mutual intent to subvert the regulatory goals of this Article. It
shall be a violation of these regulations to sublease or allow the subleasing
of a Principal Building for less than twenty-eight (28) days with intent to
subvert the regulatory goals of this Ordinance. It shall also be a violation of
these regulations for a property owner to lease space to “roommates” for a
period of less than twenty-eight (28) days when not licensed as provided
hereunder. For the purposes of enforcement, a reputable presumption that
“roommates” are involved shall exist if the persons use a common entrance to
the Principal Building.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, tenant, broker, real estate
agent, other agent or other representative of the owner to hold out or
advertise a residential dwelling for a Vacation Rental if the property has not
been issued a Certificate of Zoning Compliance and a Vacation Rental Business
License. It shall further be unlawful to hold out and/or advertise a
residential dwelling for occupancy or uses not permitted by these regulations.
A broker or real estate agent who is found in violation of this regulation
shall be subject to having his/her business license revoked.
   C.   Any violation of the regulations provided in this Article by any
person, owner, tenant, agent, broker real estate agent or other representative
of an owner shall be punishable as a misdemeanor and by a fine of up to Five
Hundred Dollars ($500) per day per violation and/or a sentence of thirty (30)
days in jail. Each day the violation continues or occurs shall constitute a
separate offense. In addition to any other remedy available to the Town of
Sullivan’s Island, the Town or any adversely affected party may enforce these
regulations or the terms of this Ordinance in law or in equity. The Town of
Sullivan’s Island or any party adversely affected by any violation may seek
injunctive relief from a Court of competent jurisdiction to prevent a violation
of this Article.
Sec. 21-125. Reserved.
ARTICLE XIV: SIGN REGULATIONS
Sec. 21-126. General provisions.
   A.   The regulations of this Article shall apply only to signs visible from
any point on a street right-of-way, the beach or marsh.
   B.   Signs are considered to be structures and the regulations herein shall
apply and govern in all zoning districts, except where specified. No sign shall
be erected or maintained unless it is in compliance with this Article.
   C.   The following regulations shall apply to all signs on Sullivan’s
Island:
      (1)   A permit shall be required for the erection, alteration,
relocation, or reconstruction of permitted signs unless otherwise noted, and
shall be issued by the Town;
      (2)   Signs shall be constructed of durable materials, maintained in good
condition, and not permitted to become dilapidated;
      (3)   Only signs as accessory uses to the principal uses shall be
permitted except where herein provided; and,
      (4)   Nonconforming signs damaged more than fifty percent (50%) of their
reasonable replacement cost shall not be repaired or replaced except in
conformity with this Article.
Sec. 21-127. Prohibited signs.
   A.   Sign imitating warning signals. No sign or structure shall display
flashing or intermittent lights of any type, nor shall any colored lights be
utilized for sign purposes that resemble lights utilized on emergency vehicles,
including police, fire, EMS, towing, and rescue vehicles; nor shall any sign
use the words “Stop,” “Danger,” or any other to confuse an automobile or other
vehicle driver.
   B.   Signs within public rights-of-way. Except as herein provided, no sign
whatsoever, whether temporary or permanent, except traffic signs and signals
and information signs erected by or authorized by a governmental or other
public agency, shall be permitted within or over public rights-of-way.
   C.   Certain attached and painted signs. Signs painted on or attached to
trees, fence posts, and utility poles or signs painted on or attached to rocks
or other natural features, or painted on the sides or roofs of buildings are
prohibited.
   D.   Fluttering ribbons and banners. Fluttering ribbons and banners and
similar devices are prohibited, except the flags of governments and their
agencies.
   E.   Roof signs. No sign structure may be erected on the roof or project
past the roofiine of any building.
   F.   Internally illuminated signs. No sign shall be erected that is
internally lit except by the use of neon.
Sec. 21-128. Sign illumination.
   Internal illuminated signs are prohibited (with the exception of non-
flashing neon). Illumination devices shall be so placed and so shielded that
rays shall not be cast illumination onto any residential district, or in the
eyes of an automobile or vehicle driver.
Sec. 21-129. Height limitation.
   No sign shall exceed the height of the Principal Building.
Sec. 21-130. Signs - no permit required.
   A permit is not required for the following types of signs in any zoning
district:
   A.   Traffic, directional, warning, or information signs authorized by any
public agency, or signs for special events to be held within Town limits and
with the approval of the Zoning Administrator;
   B.   Official notices issued by any court, public agency, or officer;
   C.   Real estate “for sale,” “for rent,” “lease,” “sold” or “under
construction” signs:
      (1)   Only one (1) per street frontage;
      (2)   Not exceeding six (6) square feet in area;
      (3)   Non-illuminated;
      (4)   Located not less than ten (10) feet out street right-of-way line,
unless attached to the wall of an existing building; and,
      (5)   “Sold” signs shall be removed fourteen (14) days after the sale,
rent, or lease of the property or completion of the construction.
   D.   Home occupation sign:
      (1)   Only one (1) per lot;
      (2)   Not exceeding one (1) square foot;
      (3)   Non-illuminated;
      (4)   Mounted against a wall of the Principal Building; and,
      (5)   At a location of a permitted home occupation.
   E.   Political election signs:
      (1)   No limit on number of signs;
      (2)   Not exceeding four (4) square feet per sign;
      (3)   Non-illuminated;
      (4)   Located not less than ten (10) feet out of the street right-of-way
line; and,
      (5)   Shall be limited to two (2) weeks prior to an election and removed
within one (1) week after the election.
Sec. 21-131. Signs - permitted in CC-Community Commercial District.
   A.   Type of signs permitted. Wall, pole or ground mounted signs, or signs
painted directly on the building exterior surface are permitted.
   B.   Permit required. A sign permit issued by the Town of Sullivan’s Island
shall be required for all signs erected in the CC-Districts, except for signs
specifically exempt from permitting, in accordance with Sec. 21-130.
   C.   Sign area. The area of a sign face computed by means of the smallest
area that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, or
other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of
the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the
structure on which it is placed, but not including any supporting bracing or
pole.
   D.   Size limit. Limited to a total of thirty-two (32) square feet, includes
all sign area on lot (including signage in window areas visible to the exterior
of the building); provided however, the total allowed square feet of signage
shall increase four (4) square feet for each business in excess of four
businesses in any one building.
   E.   Height limited. No sign, unless attached to the building facade shall
exceed twelve (12) feet.
   F.   Number limited. Only one (1) pole or monument sign, permanently
attached to the ground is allowed per lot.
   G.   Location. The sign shall be located not less than ten (10) feet out
street right-of-way line, unless attached to the wall of an existing building.
   H.   Illumination. Signs shall be lit in such a manner so as not to become a
nuisance to adjacent residential lots.
Sec. 21-132. Signs - permitted in all other districts.
   A.   Signs on residential lots. Signs for which permits are not required, as
described in Sec. 21-130.
   B.   Signs on lots for religious uses, or public buildings.
      (1)   Only one (1) sign per street front.
      (2)   Height limited to six (6) feet unless attached to exterior of
Principal Building.
      (3)   Size of sign limited to twenty four (24) square feet unless
attached to Principal Building, then sign limited to thirty two (32) square
feet for wall signs.
      (4)   Signs shall be lit in such a manner so as not to become a nuisance
to adjacent residential lots.
Sec. 21-133. Reserved.
Sec. 21-134. Reserved.
Sec. 21-135. Reserved.
ARTICLE XV: ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
Sec. 21-136. Intent.
   An accessory use or structure is subordinate to the Principal Building on a
lot and is used for purposes customarily incidental to the main or principal
use or building and located on the same lot. Its purpose is for the enhanced
utilization of the principal use of the property but would not exist
independent of the principal use.
   An accessory use or structure is permitted on a property in conjunction with
a principal use. The size of accessory structures should bear a relation to the
size of the principal structure. Proper location of accessory structures is
important to their impact on adjacent homes and businesses.
Sec. 21-137. Accessory uses/structures permitted/restricted.
   A.   Permitted accessory uses/structures:
      (1)   Deck or patio;
      (2)   Fence;
      (3)   Garage for personal use;
      (4)   Gazebo or cabana;
      (5)   Greenhouse for personal use;
      (6)   Historic structure;
      (7)   Home occupation;
      (8)   Kennel for personal pets;
      (9)   Parking and outdoor storage;
      (10)   Personal storage building, shed, tool room or workshop;
      (11)   Recreational facilities for personal use (pool, tennis or
basketball court, large playground equipment, etc);
      (12)   Satellite dish;
      (13)   Signs; and,
      (14)   Temporary uses, limited to those defined herein.
   B.   Restrictions.
      (1)   The above accessory uses and/or structures are permitted within any
zoning district on Sullivan’s Island, subject to restrictions provided herein.
      (2)   No accessory use and/or structure shall be permitted without the
existence of a permitted Principal Building or use on the same lot; provided
however notwithstanding the definition of the term “accessory use or structure”
contained in Section 21-203, fences are expressly allowed on lots without the
existence of a permitted Principal Building or use on the same lot. (08-15-06)
Conservation easement uses and structures may only be permitted as a principal
use (without the existence of a Principal Building) by special exception from
the Board of Zoning Appeals and through the establishment of a conservation
easement. (11-17-15)
      (3)   In the RS-Residential District, accessory uses and/or structures
are confined to the personal, noncommercial use of the property owner or
renter, except as otherwise provided.
      (4)   In the CC-Community Commercial District, accessory uses and/or
structures may be used for commercial or office enterprises related to the
commercial use.
      (5)   All accessory uses and/or structures shall meet the yard Setback
requirements of the zoning districts in which they are located unless otherwise
provided herein.
   C.   Approvals required. A Certificate of Zoning Compliance issued by the
Zoning Administrator shall be required for all Accessory Uses and Structures.
The Design Review Board shall also approve all Accessory Structures that
require a building permit. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall approve all
Accessory Structures and Uses that are permitted by Special Exception. The Town
Council shall approve all Temporary Accessory Uses and Structures.
   Notwithstanding provisions to the contrary in this chapter, the Zoning
Administrator or his/her designee may approve Accessory Structures, as provided
in Section 21-109(F)(8) and 21-109(F)(10). (7/21/09)
Sec. 21-138. Accessory structures.
   A.   Accessory structures shall
      (1)   Be located a minimum of twenty (20) feet to the rear of the
principal building's primary front facade; provided, however, that for lots
adjacent to the RC-1 or RC-2 District zones, accessory structures may be
allowed in the yard area abutting the RC District or in the yard area abutting
the street. (11-20-07)
      (2)   (a)   Not exceed the greater of twenty-five percent (25%) of the
principal buildings square footage in total combined square footage of all
accessory structures or 750 square feet; and no one (1) structure may exceed
750 square feet in total area; total area to include square footage below BFE
(Base Flood Elevation), above BFE and any roof overhang or shed roof, excluding
any roof overhang less than 30 inches beyond the footprint of the structure; a
cantilevered section of a structure will not be considered a roof overhang; and
further provided that the accessory structure footprint shall not exceed 625
square feet, measured between the exterior walls of the structure.
(11-20-07) (2-20-24)
      (3)   (a)   Not exceed 15 feet in height, except that the height may be
extended to 18 feet where the pitch of the accessory structures roof is not
less than seven on twelve (7/12); dormers will be limited to twenty percent
(20%) of the roof area with no one dormer exceeding six (6) feet in length
measured at the portion of the wall plate parallel to the exterior of the
structure at the lowest roof edge; (11-20-07)
         (b)   The Design Review Board may grant no more than a 20% increase in
this zoning standard, if this or other modifications achieve greater
Neighborhood Compatibility as described in ARTICLE XII, and with particular
consideration of the size and floor elevation of the principal dwelling. (11-
20-07)
      (4)   Not have any one wall that exceeds twenty five (25) feet in length;
(11-20-07)
      (5)   (a)   Not be closer to any Lot Line than ten (10) feet; or thirty
(30) feet from street pavement; whichever is greater; (11-20-07)
         (b)   The Design Review Board may grant no more than a 40% decrease in
this zoning standard, if this or other modifications achieve greater
Neighborhood Compatibility as described in ARTICLE XII. (11-20-07)
      (6)   Not encroach upon the RC-1 or RC-2 required setback; and, (11-20-
07)
      (7)   Not have a separate electric meter, but may utilize such plumbing
fixtures as sinks, hose bibs and outdoor showers located below BFE; provided
such plumbing fixtures are attached to a non-breakaway vertical support member,
employ a disconnect valve located above BFE and are not connected to the
sanitary sewer system. (11-20-07)
   B.   Types of Accessory Structures. For the purpose of applying the zoning
standards provided in (A) above, only the following structures are considered
an Accessory Structure: Cabana, garage, gazebo, greenhouse of personal use,
personal storage building, shed, tool room or workshop, and any other structure
having a roof. (11-20-07)
(Ord. 2023-07, passed 2-20-2024)
Sec. 21-139. Fence regulations.
   Intent: A significant contribution to the informality of Sullivan’s Island
is the manner in which fences are used. Tall privacy fences that obstruct views
to create a strong sense of lot privacy are incompatible with the Island’s
informal character.
   A.   Defining a fence. A fence is any created unroofed barrier that blocks
or impedes the flow of people or animals; a fence may be a wall or other
structure that prohibits physical or visual access across a lot, but does not
include vegetation.
   B.   All fences.
      (1)   No fence shall exceed five (5) feet in height in any district
except as provided for in the CC-Community Commercial District.
      (2)   All fences shall be constructed of wood or metal or manufactured
materials that appear to be wood, or wood/wire materials; chain-link fences are
prohibited. New fence products may be allowed, subject to approval by the
Design Review Board. (12-18-12)
      (2)   All fences shall be at least twenty-five percent (25%) open across
the entire plane of the fence.
      (3)   Fences may employ the use of pillars or short runs of solid areas
as an entry feature; however, the total length of these features shall not
exceed sixteen (16) feet.
      (4)   Fences located forward of the Principal Building shall be limited
to four (4) feet in height.
      (5)   Fences located to the side of a Principal Building shall be limited
to four (4) feet in height if within ten (10) feet of a street right-of-way or
public access to the beach.
      (6)   Fences located to the side or rear of a Principal Building, if not
within ten (10) feet of a street right-of-way or public access to the beach,
shall be limited to five (5) feet in height.
   C.   Fences adjacent to RC-Districts.
      (1)   No fence shall be located in the RC-1 or RC-2 Districts.
      (2)   No fence shall be located along the boundary adjoining the RC-1 or
RC-2 Districts that exceeds five (5) feet in height.
   D.   Fences in the CC-Community Commercial Districts. Solid fences not
exceeding eight (8) feet in height may be located along any lot line boundary
dividing the CC-Community Commercial and the RS-Residential District.
   E.   Fences around pools. All fences surrounding pools shall be four (4)
feet in height, and be in compliance with all other applicable ordinances and
regulations of the Town of Sullivan’s Island.
   F.   Visibility standards. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to
modify the requirements of visibility at street intersections as specified
within ARTICLE II. Sec. 21-14 of this Ordinance.
   G.   Nonconforming status of existing fences. Any fence existing as of the
ratification of this Zoning Ordinance that does not conform to the fence
standards contained herein shall be considered a legal, Nonconforming
Structure. If such fence is destroyed and/or damaged beyond fifty percent (50%)
of its value (including falling into a state of disrepair due to lack of
maintenance), such fence shall be replaced in a manner that conforms to the
standards of this Zoning Ordinance.
Sec. 21-140. Historic structures.
   A.   Historic structures as accessory dwelling units in the RS-Residential
District. (5-15-07)
      Historic structures are permitted as an accessory dwelling in the RS-
Residential District subject to the following conditions: As an incentive to
preserve historic structures and avoid their demolition, a second dwelling may
be constructed on the same lot as an historic structure, and the historic
structure may be used as an accessory dwelling, when all of the following
conditions are met:
      1.   Prior use shall have been used as a dwelling; and
      2.   The size of the historic structure is less than twelve hundred
(1200) square feet of heated space at the time of its designation as historic
and is listed as an historic property as described in Section
21-94 Historic Property Designation Criteria; provided, however, that a
structure reduced to less than 1200 square feet of heated space after its
designation as historic may qualify for special exception approval for an
additional dwelling on the same lot, but only if the Design Review Board review
determines and specifies in findings, that: (5-15-07)
         a.   Special circumstances justify such reduction in square feet based
on the criteria listed in Section
21-94D.(1)-(8); and (5-15-07)
         b.   The portions to be removed from the historic property were added
less than 50 years ago and/or obscured an earlier feature of the historic house
which contributed substantially to the most important elements of its historic
character, definition and integrity. Examples of the latter instance include
the removal of an enclosure of a porch when the open porch has been
characteristic of a particular type of Island structure, or removal of an
addition which covered a distinctive feature of the structure that is shared by
neighboring structures. (5-15-07)
      3.   In the event the historic structure does not meet current FEMA
elevation requirements, the Design Review Board finds that bringing it into
compliance would significantly impair the historic and architectural character
of the structure; and
      4.   In the event the historic structure meets current FEMA elevations
requirements, the Design Review Board finds that there is no feasible design
solution for an addition to the historic structure that would not significantly
impair the historic and architectural character of the structure; and
      5.   No separate utility service meters shall be permitted; and
      6.   The Design Review Board must find that the height, scale, mass and
placement of the second structure are appropriate to and compatible with the
lot on which it is sited, the character of the historic structure and
surrounding neighborhood. When necessary to achieve such appropriateness and
compatibility, the Design Review Board may impose stricter limits on height,
setback, size and coverage than those of the zoning standards; and
      7.   Permission to build a second structure and to use the historic
structure as an accessory dwelling is approved as a special exception by the
Board of Zoning Appeals; and
      8.   The following conditions as covenants running with the property
shall be placed on the real estate title to the property by the owner of the
lot by recording deed restrictions for the benefit of the Town of Sullivan's
Island on the owner(s) title and recording the same in the RMC office for
Charleston County before a building permit is issued:
         (i)   The lot shall remain in single ownership; more specifically,
regardless of the type of ownership every owner, member, partner, shareholder,
or unit owner, must have the same percentage of ownership in the historic
structure as in any additional structure(s); and
         (ii)   Every owner, member, partner, shareholder or unit owner must
have the same amount of control over the use of the historic structure as over
any additional structure(s); and
      9.   If the historic structure used as an accessory dwelling is damaged
or destroyed, by natural disaster, civil strife or uncontrollable accident, by
more than fifty percent (50%) of its assessed value based on the most recent
property assessment, the structure may be repaired in accordance with its pre-
existing footprint, square footage, setbacks, and lot coverage. The Zoning
Administrator shall rely on all credible information provided by the owner and/
or available from the Town, to establish the damaged or destroyed structure's
pre-existing condition and lot location. A Certificate of Zoning Compliance and
a Building Permit shall be obtained within twelve (12) months of the date of
occurrence of such damage, and once issued, construction shall be diligently
pursued and completed within two (2) years from the date of the occurrence of
such damage. If FEMA regulations require the structure's foundation to be
elevated over fifty percent (50%) above its original elevation, the Design
Review Board shall determine whether or not the reconstruction shall be
required to meet the current Zoning Ordinance's Setback requirements. (2-20-24)
(Ord. 2018-07, passed 11-20-2018)
      10.   The historic structure used as an accessory dwelling may be used as
a long-term rental, but only so long as the principal structure is occupied by
an owner of the property as primary residence and a current business license is
held on the same property. Primary residence is defined as a dwelling where the
owner or owners reside on a permanent basis and are assessed at the four
percent (4%) assessment rate on their ad valorem property tax.
   B.   This accessory use shall be permitted if approved as a Special
Exception in the RS-Residential District under ARTICLE III.
Sec. 21-20C. and upon the approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(Ord. 2023-07, passed 2-20-2024)
Sec. 21-141. Home occupations.
   A.   Home occupation defined. Any business or occupational use conducted
entirely within a Principal Building and carried on by the residents thereof,
which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the Principal
Building for residential purposes.
   B.   A Home Occupation shall be permitted in the RS-Single Family
Residential District and any residential use permitted in the CC-Community
Commercial District provided that such Home Occupation:
      (1)   Is conducted only by those persons meeting the definition of Family
residing on the premises;
      (2)   Is conducted within the Principal Building;
      (3)   Utilizes not more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total floor
area of the Principal Building;
      (4)   Produces no alteration of the character or exterior appearance of
the Principal Building or Lot Area;
      (5)   Has no display of products shall be visible from the exterior of
the Principal Building;
      (6)   Creates no disturbing or offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust,
odor, heat, glare, traffic hazard, unhealthy or unsightly condition;
      (7)   Will not discharge or dispose of hazardous chemical wastes into the
wastewater or stormwater systems;
      (8)   Does not exchange merchandise of any kind on the premises;
      (9)   Does not involve on-premise activities that are associated with
personal service occupations such as a barbers, hairdressers, manicurists,
massage therapists or similar activities;
      (10)   Does not provide or require any additional parking spaces; and,
      (11)   Does not result in the storage or parking of business vehicles
visibly advertising the home occupation.
   C.   Permit required. A home occupation permit issued by the Zoning
Administrator is required for all home occupations.
Sec. 21-142. Recreation facilities.
   A.   Permitted accessory recreational uses.
      (1)   Swimming pool and attendant facilities.
      (2)   Basketball, tennis or other type of play court.
      (3)   Decks and patios.
   B.   Restrictions.
      (1)   All accessory recreational uses and structures shall be located a
minimum of twenty (20) feet to the rear of the Principal Building’s front
facade.
      (2)   All accessory recreational uses and structures shall meet the same
Setbacks required of the Principal Building.
      (3)   Pools elevated more than six inches above grade are not permitted
unless developed as an integral part of a Principal Building.
      (4)   Elevated decks shall only be permitted if constructed as an
integral part of the Principal Building.
      (5)   Mesh fencing around recreational courts shall be permitted to
exceed the height standards of the fence regulations but shall be substantially
transparent.
      (6)   No accessory recreational use or structure shall be lit for night
play.
Sec. 21-143. Parking and outdoor storage.
   A.   Intent. Parking is an accessory use to both residential and business
land uses. This section sets forth the standards for parking and storage of
personal vehicles, customer vehicles, commercial vehicles, non-operative
vehicles, and recreational vehicles.
   B.   Definitions.
      (1)   Outdoor Storage: The keeping within an unroofed and unenclosed area
any goods, materials, merchandise or vehicles in the same place for more than
thirty (30) days.
      (2)   Parking: The placement of a vehicle or equipment at a location for
thirty (30) or fewer days.
      (3)   Parking Lot: Any area used for the express purposes of parking
automotive vehicles, but not including a single family dwelling’s parking area
incidental to the principal use.
   C.   Parking requirements in the RS-Residential District, and Residential
parcels within the CCOD 1 and CCOD 2 Districts. (3/20/12)
      (1)   Parking lots are not permitted in the RS-District or residential
portions of CCOD 1 and 2 Districts. (3/20/12)
      (2)   To the extent possible, parking areas should be twenty (20) feet to
the rear of the Principal Building’s front facade.
      (3)   In the residential portion of CCOD 1 and 2 districts, designated
off-street parking area of at least 324 sq. ft. shall be required. Such area
may be left in a pervious state. (3/20/12)
      (4)   Outdoor Storage of vehicles and equipment:
         (a)   Storage of personal recreation vehicles, cars, boats, campers,
and trailers shall be permitted in the RS-District and residentially zoned lots
within the CCOD 1 and CCOD 2 Districts; (3/20/12)
         (b)   Storage shall be limited to a total of six hundred (600) square
feet;
         (c)   Storage areas shall be located a minimum of twenty (20) feet to
the rear of the Principal Building’s front facade;
         (d)   Recreation vehicles may be parked anywhere on residential
premises for a period not to exceed seven (7) days during loading and
unloading. After seven (7) days they must be parked to the rear of the front
facade;
         (e)   All setbacks shall be met as required by the zoning district;
         (f)   Neither vehicles nor equipment shall be used for living,
sleeping or housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on a residential lot.
   D.   Parking requirements on Split zoned lots within the CC-Community
Commercial District and on commercial lots within the CCOD 1 and CCOD 2
Districts. (3/20/12)
      (1)   Areas suitable for parking automobiles in on-street and off-street
locations shall be required in the CC-Community Commercial District. A parking
plan shall be required
         (a)   At the time of the initial construction of any Principal
Building;
         (b)   When a structural alteration or other change in a Principal
Building produces an increase in floor area; or
         (c)   If there is a change in use that increases the demand for
parking.
      (2)   A parking plan shall be submitted to the Design Review Board for
approval and required parking shall be within the CC-Community Commercial
District or area otherwise designated by Town Council. The plan must:
         (a)   Demonstrate how parking demand shall be accommodated;
         (b)   Provide information as to how the existing lot will accommodate
the proposed use;
         (c)   Provide information as to plans to utilize on-street parking,
valet parking or shared parking between businesses that may have different
operating hours;
         (d)   Identify available on-street parking area;
         (e)   Provide a scaled drawing or layout of all parking areas showing
the location, size, and arrangement of the individual parking spaces, loading
spaces, and landscaped areas; and,
         (f)   Be prepared by a professional who shall be knowledgeable about
commercial parking demand.
      (3)   Parking design requirements:
         (a)   Direct access provided from parking lot to a public street;
         (b)   Parking space: 18 feet x 9 feet; on-street parallel parking
space a minimum of twenty (20) feet in length;
         (c)   Wheel stops shall be required for all parking area without
raised curbing; the vehicle side of the wheel stop shall be no less than
eighteen (18) inches from the end of the parking space; where sidewalks or
other walkways occur, parked vehicles shall not overhang or extend over the
sidewalk. In these parking facilities, wheel stops shall be provided even if
the parking facility has curbing;
         (d)   Parking driveway aisle for off-street parking: minimum width of
eighteen (18) feet for sixty (60) degree angle parking; minimum width of twenty
four (24) feet for ninety (90) degree parking;
         (e)   Permeable materials shall be used for on-site parking and
drives;
         (f)   Access to parking areas shall not be permitted to cross
residentially-zoned portions of lot;
         (g)   Access driveways shall not exceed fourteen (14) feet in width;
and,
         (h)   Driveways shall be sited to minimize interruption of the
continuity of the public sidewalk.
      (4)   Buffer and landscape plan for parking lot. The applicant shall
submit a proposed buffer and landscape plan to the Design Review Board for
their approval. At a minimum, each parking newly developed or redeveloped
commercial lot area shall have a six (6) to eight (8) foot fence high solid
fence or wall abutting the residential zoning district boundary; lot area
adjacent to the right-of-way lines shall be planted borders not less than five
(5) feet in width parallel to the right-of-way (except where egress to the
street is needed). The planted border areas shall have at least one (1) tree
(having a minimum clear trunk of five (5) feet and a minimum height of eight
(8) feet for each thirty (30) linear feet of the border area). The remainder of
the required landscape buffer area shall be landscaped with shrubs, lawn,
ground cover, or other approved materials.
      (5)   Joint use of off-street parking areas. Two or more principal uses
may utilize a common area in order to comply with the parking requirements,
provided that a covenant agreement with the Town shall be signed that
relinquishes the development rights over the property that is being utilized
for off-site parking until such time as the lot is no longer required to comply
with the parking requirement of the permitted business.
      (6) Overnight parking. Parking lots for the daily use of customers in the
CC-Community Commercial District shall not be used for the overnight parking of
vehicles, unless the vehicles are commercial vehicles used in the conduct of
the commercial activity; if such vehicle is parked overnight, it shall be
located a minimum of twenty (20) feet to the rear of the Principal Building’s
front facade.
      (7) Outdoor Storage. No Outdoor Storage shall be permitted in the CC-
District.
Sec. 21-144. Temporary uses.
   A.   The Zoning Administrator shall be authorized to issue a Certificate of
Zoning Compliance for the following temporary accessory uses subject to the
approval of the Town Council:
      (1)   Carnival or circus for a period not to exceed twenty-one (21) days;
      (2)   Religious meeting in a tent or other temporary structure in the CC-
Community Commercial District, for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days;
      (3)   Open lot sale of Christmas trees in the CC-Community Commercial
District for a period not to exceed forty-five (45) days;
      (4)   Contractor’s office and equipment sheds in any district for a
period of one (1) year or no longer than one month after the issuance of a
final Certificate of Occupancy (which ever is less), provided a Certificate of
Zoning Compliance and a Building Permit have been issued for the construction
and such office is confined to the lot for which said certificate and permit
have been issued;
      (5)   Temporary erosion control structure(s) constructed of sandbags and
beach-compatible fill placed on the beach or seaward of the dune line; and
subject to Town, OCRM, and other agencies’ approval;
      (6)   Beach nourishment using beach or offshore borrow sources subject to
Town, OCRM and other agency approval. Use of offshore borrow sources, including
channel location projects at Breach Inlet, shall be allowed only when such
projects will not adversely affect the Town shoreline by exposing it to
increased wave energy. Beach scraping from the low tide beach may be
permissible when other borrow sources cannot be used and when the scraping will
not adversely affect the shoreline.
   B.   The Certificate of Zoning Compliance is valid for the time limits
specified above; however, the Zoning Administrator may extend the time limits
of the Certificate if the applicant demonstrates that a time limit extension is
warranted, the use is clearly of a temporary nature, it will cause no traffic
congestion and it will not create a nuisance to surrounding uses.
Sec. 21-145. Miscellaneous uses.
   A.   Private kennel. Private kennels shall be limited to no more than 3 dogs
ages older than 4 months that are the personal pets of the residents.
   B.   Satellite dish antennae. One satellite dish shall be permitted per lot,
however, it shall be no greater than three (3) feet in diameter and shall be
located a minimum of twenty (20) feet to the rear of the Principal Building’s
front facade.
   C.   Signs. See ARTICLE XIV for regulations pertaining to signs.
Sec. 21-146. Reserved.
Sec. 21-147. Reserved.
Sec. 21-148. Reserved.
ARTICLE XVI: NONCONFORMITIES
Sec. 21-149. General.
   A.   Scope. The regulations of this Article govern “nonconformities” which
are uses, structures, lots, signs and other situations that came into existence
legally but that do not conform to one or more requirements of this Zoning
Ordinance. These are referred to in this Zoning Ordinance as “nonconformities.”
   B.   Authority to Continue. Increase Prohibited. Any nonconformity that came
into existence lawfully and continues to be a lawful use at the time of
adoption of this Ordinance or that becomes nonconforming upon the adoption of
any amendment to this Zoning Ordinance may be continued in accordance with the
provisions of this Article. The extent, degree, size, and frequency of any
nonconformity shall not be increased in any manner.
   C.   Intent. The regulations of this Article are intended to:
      (1)   Recognize the interests of landowners in continuing to use their
property;
      (2)   Promote reuse and rehabilitation of existing buildings; and
      (3)   Prohibit the expansion of nonconformities.
   D.   Reserved.
   E.   Determination of nonconformity status. The burden of proving that
nonconformity existed prior to the adoption of this Ordinance or subsequent
amendments rests with the subject landowner.
   F.   Repairs and maintenance. 
      (1)   Incidental repairs and normal maintenance necessary to keep a
Nonconforming Structure in sound condition are permitted unless such repairs
are otherwise expressly prohibited by this Zoning Ordinance.
      (2)   Nothing in this Article will be construed to prevent Structures
from being structurally strengthened or restored to a safe condition, in
accordance with an official order of a public official.
   G.   Change of tenancy or ownership. Nonconformity status runs with the land
and is not affected by changes of tenancy, ownership, or management.
   H.   Historic buildings. Buildings designated as historic through the
process set forth in the HP Historic Preservation Overlay District, ARTICLE XI
shall be considered conforming to this Ordinance as hereinafter provided. This
conforming status shall only apply to height, setback, yard, area and other
dimensional requirements as found by the Design Review Board to be of historic
significance in the designation process. Such finding shall supersede any
conflicting standard set forth in the zoning district in which the building is
located and shall be applied to the building and the site in making future
determinations of conformity as to the existing building or any changes
consistent with an approved Certificate of Appropriateness (see Historic
Preservation Overlay District, Article XI). Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary herein, alteration or removal of architectural features and/or
historic fabric considered instrumental in the original designation by the
Design Review Board may, at the option of the Design Review Board, result in
the loss of historic designation and conforming status.
(1/20/09; Ord. 2018-07, passed 11-20-2018)
Sec. 21-150. Nonconforming uses. 
   A.   Definition. A Nonconforming Use is a land use that was legally
established but that is no longer allowed by the use regulations of the Zoning
District in which it is located.
   B.   Expansion. A Nonconforming Use shall not be expanded.
      (1)   A Nonconforming Use may not be extended to any portion of a
completed building that was not occupied by that use when it became
nonconforming.
      (2)   A Nonconforming Use may not be extended to additional buildings,
land outside the original building, additional patron space, or additional
outdoor space.
      (3)   A Nonconforming Use of land or outdoor space may not be extended to
cover more land or outdoor space than was occupied by that use when it became
nonconforming.
      (4)   The extent, degree, intensity, or frequency of a Nonconforming Use
may not be increased.
      (5)   Physical alteration, expansion or extension of structures,
expansion or increase of outdoor space, and expansion or increase of patron
space are unlawful if they result in any increase in the total amount of
volume, square footage, outdoor space square footage, or patron space square
footage devoted to a nonconforming use.
      (6)   New and existing recreational facilities and accessory uses are
allowed in the RS-Residential District in accordance with the minimum standards
set forth in Article XV (Accessory Uses and Structures) and Article III (RS-
District standards). New recreational facilities may not be established for
nonconforming commercial uses and nonconforming vacation rentals which increase
the patron or occupant space square footage devoted to a nonconforming use.
   C.   Moving. A Nonconforming Use shall not be moved in whole or in part to
another location on the lot unless the movement or relocation eliminates or
decreases the extent of nonconformity. When moving or elevating a nonconforming
use to meet FEMA compliance, said moving does not constitute an increasing in
the degree of nonconformity, however, it will still require compliance with
Sections 21-149 and 21-150.
   D.   Damage or destruction of a nonconforming use.
      (1)   When a building or structure containing a Nonconforming Use is
damaged by intent or by neglect, not caused by natural disaster, civil strife
or uncontrollable accident, to the extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of
its assessed value based on the most recent property assessment, the use shall
not be restored except in conformity with the regulations this Zoning
Ordinance.
      (2)   When a building or structure containing a Nonconforming Use is
damaged by natural disaster, civil strife or uncontrollable accident to the
extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its assessed value based on the most
recent property assessment, the use may be restored in as close conformity with
the regulations of this Zoning Ordinance as possible. A Certificate of Zoning
Compliance and a Building Permit shall be obtained within twelve (12) months of
the date of occurrence of such damage, and once issued, construction shall be
diligently pursued and completed within two (2) years from the date of the
occurrence of such damage.
      (3)   When a building or structure containing a Nonconforming Use is
damaged by less than fifty percent (50%) of its assessed value, a Certificate
of Zoning Compliance and a Building Permit shall be obtained within twelve (12)
months of the date of occurrence of such damage, and once issued, construction
shall be diligently pursued and completed within two (2) years from the date of
the occurrence of such damage.
   E.   Abandonment of a nonconforming use.
      (1)   A Nonconforming Use shall be considered abandoned when any of the
following occurs:
         (a)   The intent of the owner to discontinue the use is apparent;
         (b)   The use has been discontinued for a period of twelve (12) months
or more;
         (c)   A demolition permit has been applied for;
         (d)   The characteristic equipment and furnishings associated with the
Nonconforming Use have been removed from the premises and have not been
replaced by similar equipment within 90 days, unless other facts show intention
to resume the Nonconforming Use;
         (e)   The Nonconforming Use has been replaced by a conforming use; or
         (f)   A Certificate of Zoning Compliance nor a Building Permit to
reconstruct a damaged nonconforming use has been secured within twelve (12)
months of the date of occurrence of such damage nor has construction been
diligently pursued and completed within three (3) years from the date of the
occurrence of such damage.
      (2)   Once a Nonconforming Use is abandoned, the use’s nonconforming
status shall be lost and any subsequent use of the property shall comply with
the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.
   F.   Two or more Principal Buildings on one lot. In the event that two or
more Principal Buildings occupy a single lot, said occupancy shall constitute a
nonconforming use. The use of one of the Principal Buildings shall be
conforming and the other(s) shall be nonconforming:
      (1)   If a request to improve the property is received, or a request for
a zoning statement is received, the following procedure will be used. The use
of the Principal Building with the greatest livable square footage, including
porches, shall be a conforming use and the other Principal Building a
nonconforming use.
      (2)   The designation of conforming and nonconforming use of the
Principal Buildings shall be recorded on the Certificate of Occupancy, or a
zoning statement issued by the Zoning Administrator which is to be maintained
on file in the Town Hall.
      (3)   A Building Permit for improvements to the designated conforming
Principal Building may be considered favorably, provided all other requirements
of the Town Ordinances are met. The Principal Building in which the use is
nonconforming shall be regulated in accordance with Sections 21-149 through 21-
151.
      (4)   No Improvements to the Principal Building in which the use is
nonconforming can be made unless a Building Permit is issued.
   G.   Vacation rental. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to allow
the continued use of a Vacation Rental after damage or destruction of greater
than fifty percent (50%) of its assessed value, regardless of reason for such
damage or destruction.
   H.   Accessory uses. A use accessory to a principal Nonconforming Use may
not be continued after the principal use has been abandoned, unless the use is
a permitted Accessory Use in the base zoning district and any applicable
overlay district.
(Ord. 2018-07, passed 11-20-2018)
Sec. 21-151. Nonconforming structures.
   A.   Definition. A Nonconforming Structure is any building or structure that
was legally established but no longer complies with the density, lot coverage,
floor area, height and dimensional standards of this Zoning Ordinance.
Nonconforming Structures may remain, subject to the regulations of this
Article.
   B.   Structural alterations. 
      (1)   Structural alterations, including enlargements, are permitted if
the structural alteration does not increase the extent of nonconformity.
      (2)   When a structure is nonconforming because it encroaches into a
required Side or Rear Yard Setback, this provision shall be interpreted as
allowing other portions of the structure to be expanded out to the extent of
the existing encroachment provided the expansion does not exceed the height of
the existing structure and does not extend the linear distance of the
encroachment by more than fifty percent (50%) of the existing nonconforming
structure. No greater encroachment into a required setback shall be permitted.
      (3)   When a structure is nonconforming because it encroaches into a
required Front Yard Setback, this provision shall be interpreted as prohibiting
other portions of the structure from being expanded out to the extent of the
existing encroachment.
   C.   Moving. A Nonconforming Structure may be moved in whole or in part to
another location only if the movement or relocation decreases or eliminates the
nonconformity. When moving or elevating a nonconforming structure to meet FEMA
compliance, said moving does not constitute an increasing in the degree of the
nonconformity, however, said moving will still require conformance with
Sections
21-149 through
21-151.
   D.   Damage or destruction of a nonconforming structure.
      (1)   When a Nonconforming Structure is damaged or destroyed by natural
disaster, civil strife or uncontrollable accident, by more than fifty percent
(50%) of its assessed value based on the most recent property assessment, the
structure may be repaired in accordance with its pre-existing footprint, square
footage, setbacks, and lot coverage. The Zoning Administrator shall rely on all
credible information provided by the owner and/or available from the Town, to
establish the damaged or destroyed structure’s pre-existing condition and lot
location. A Certificate of Zoning Compliance and a Building Permit shall be
obtained within twelve (12) months of the date of occurrence of such damage,
and once issued, construction shall be diligently pursued and completed within
two (2)) years from the date of the occurrence of such damage. If FEMA
regulations require the structure’s foundation to be elevated over fifty
percent (50%) above its original elevation, the Design Review Board shall
determine whether or not the reconstruction shall be required to meet the
current Zoning Ordinance’s Setback requirements.
      (2)   When a Nonconforming Structure is damaged by intent or by neglect,
by more than fifty percent (50%) of its assessed value based on the most recent
property assessment, the structure shall be restored in conformity with the
Zoning Ordinance in effect at the time a building permit is issued.
      (3)   When a Nonconforming Structure is damaged by less than fifty
percent (50%) of its assessed value based on the most recent property
assessment, the structure may be reconstructed in accordance with its
preexisting footprint, height, square footage, setbacks, and lot coverage. The
Zoning Administrator shall rely on all credible information provided by the
owner and/or available from the Town, to establish the damaged structure’s pre-
existing condition and lot location. A Certificate of Zoning Compliance and a
Building Permit shall be obtained within twelve (12) months of the date of
occurrence of such damage, and once issued, construction shall be diligently
pursued and completed within two (2) years from the date of the occurrence of
such damage. If FEMA regulations require the structure’s foundation to be
elevated over fifty percent (50%) above its original elevation, the Design
Review Board shall determine whether or not the reconstruction shall be
required to meet the current Zoning Ordinance’s Setback requirements.
   E.   Abandonment of a nonconforming structure.
      (1)   A Nonconforming Structure will be considered abandoned when any of
the following occurs:
         (a)   The owner has discontinued all use of the structure for a period
of 12 months or more;
         (b)   A demolition permit has been applied for; or
         (c)   A Certificate of Zoning Compliance or a Building Permit to
reconstruct a damaged Nonconforming Structure has not been secured within
twelve (12) months of the date of occurrence of such damage, nor has
construction under said permit been diligently pursued and completed within
three (3) years from the date of the occurrence of such damage.
      (2)   Once a Nonconforming Structure shall be deemed abandoned, its
nonconforming status shall be lost and the structure, or any replacement, shall
comply with the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.
(Ord. 2018-07, passed 11-20-2018)
Sec. 21-152. Nonconforming lots.
   A.   Definition. A Nonconforming Lot is a duly recorded lot of record
established prior to adoption of the Town’s first Zoning Ordinance that does
not comply with the minimum Lot Area, lot width or lot depth requirements of
this Zoning Ordinance.
   B.   Use of nonconforming lots.
      (1)   A Nonconforming Lot may be developed to the extent that the
development can be accomplished in accordance with the standards set out in
this Zoning Ordinance.
      (2)   This Article shall not protect Nonconforming Lots that have access
only to a paper, unimproved street. Owners of such lots shall replat such lots
in conformity with the subdivision regulations and the applicable regulations
of this Zoning Ordinance before seeking a Certificate of Zoning Compliance and
a Building Permit or otherwise seeking to use one or more of such lots.
      (3)   No action shall be taken that further reduces the Lot Area of a
Nonconforming Lot. Any such action may be prosecuted as a violation of this
Zoning Ordinance and shall deprive the owner and any subsequent owner of the
protection afforded by this Zoning Ordinance.
Sec. 21-153. Other nonconformities.
   A.   Examples. The types of other nonconformities include but are not
necessarily limited to: landscaping, screening, parking and other
nonconformities not involving structural aspects of a building, location of a
building on a lot, lot dimensions or land or building use.
(Ord. 2018-07, passed 11-20-2018)
Sec. 21-154. Reserved.
Sec. 21-155. Reserved.
Sec. 21-156. Reserved.
ARTICLE XVII: TREE COMMISSION
Sec. 21-157. Intent and purpose.
   A.   The intent of this Article is to preserve the natural landscape of
Sullivan’s Island through the protection of trees and palmettos, maintaining
and enhancing the tree mass, and mandating and encouraging the replanting of
trees lost to development, destruction and natural causes.
   B.   The standards and regulations are established in order to promote the
public health and general welfare of the citizens of the Town, to preserve the
natural history, beauty and value of the whole Island, to mitigate and prevent
wind and water damage and erosion, to minimize flooding and to improve water
quality and surface drainage, to improve air quality and lessen air pollution,
to reduce noise, heat and solar glare, to protect wildlife, to sustain property
values and ensure that quality of life and well being are maintained for all
citizens of the Town through an undiminished natural landscape.
Sec. 21-158. Definitions.
   A.   Definitions.
      (1)   Application. An application for the removal and/or relocation of
any Category I or II tree or Sabal Palmetto.
      (2)   Category I Tree. Also known as a “Significant” tree, this tree has
a DBH of at least sixteen (16) inches or a height of at least forty (40) feet.
A Category I tree has the highest level of protection based on its total value
to the Island environment.
      (3)   Category II Tree. Also known as a “Protected” tree or species, this
tree has a DBH of at least six (6) inches. All Sabal Palmetto (Cabbage Palm,
herein called “Palmetto”) shall be given special protection as a “Protected”
species.
      (4)   DBH. Diameter of tree at breast height or the diameter at four and
a half (4 1/2) feet above grade.
      (5)   Determination of Tree Size. Tree size made by measuring the
diameter of the tree at four and a half (4 1/2) feet above grade (DBH).
      (6)   Point of Measurement. Point at which tree size is measured to
determine level of protection. Measurement shall be made by measuring the
diameter of the tree at four and a half (4 1/2) feet above grade.
      (7)   Tree. Any living, self-supporting woody perennial plant that is
evergreen or deciduous.
      (8)   Tree Commission. A Commission appointed by the Town Council to
oversee the Tree Protection Article of the Zoning Ordinance.
Sec. 21-159. Jurisdiction.
   The Tree Ordinance shall apply to all private property on Sullivan’s Island.
Sec. 21-160. Tree Commission.
   A.   Appointment and size. The Town Council shall appoint a Tree Commission
(Commission), comprised of five (5) members, all residents of Sullivan’s Island
who have demonstrated knowledge of the diversity of issues concerning trees and
an interest in the preservation of the total environment of Sullivan’s Island.
   B.   Length of term. Members shall be appointed for three (3) year terms
with reappointment permitted at the expiration of the term.
   C.   Removal and replacement of commission member. The Town Council may
remove any Tree Commission member for repeated failure to attend meetings of
the Commission or for any other cause deemed sufficient cause. A member
appointed to replace a removed member shall serve the balance of the removed
member’s unexpired term. At the completion of the unexpired term, the member is
eligible for reappointment to a full term.
   D.   Officers and conduct of business.
   (1)   The Commission shall elect a chair and vice-chair for one (1) year
terms. Officers may succeed themselves, if reelected.
   (2)   The Commission shall adopt rules for the conduct of business subject
to the review of the Town Attorney.
   (3)   Meetings shall be conducted at such times as agreed by the Commission,
at least once a month, or upon the call of the Chair.
   (4)   Three (3) members are required for a quorum. A concurring vote of
three (3) members shall be necessary to take any action on an application.
   (5)   All Commission meetings shall be public and proceedings shall be
reflected in minutes, kept on file as a public record in Town Hall.
Sec. 21-161. Powers and responsibilities.
   A.   General powers and responsibilities.
      (1)   Adopt a set of standards and guidelines for the implementation of
this Article, including an approved list of appropriate replacement trees.
      (2)   Develop policies and administrative standards related to tree and
palmetto removal, replacement or relocation.
      (3)   Take action on applications for the relocation, or removal and/or
replacement of all Category I trees.
      (4)   Provide policy guidance to the Zoning Administrator related to the
relocation or removal and replacement of Category II trees and palmettos.
      (5)   The Tree Commission may elect to
         (a)   Conduct a survey of Island trees and palmettos;
         (b)   Establish and maintain a record of “Significant” trees;
         (c)   Promote educational programs for tree and palmetto conservation;
         (d)   Serve as a source of information on trees and palmettos;
         (e)   Organize appropriate community activities, such as Arbor Day;
         (f)   Lead public efforts to encourage voluntary tree planting and
tree and palmetto conservation;
         (g)   Develop, with the approval of Town Council, plans for tree and
palmetto planting on public property; and
         (h)   Seek, with the approval of Town Council, public funds and grants
to support these activities as well as for tree and palmetto planting and
preservation projects.
   B.   Responsibilities of the Tree Commission related to the RC-1 District.
      (1)   Provide guidance with the management of tree pruning and trimming
within the RC-1 District.
      (2)   Oversee the manner in which cuttings are removed from and disposed
of in the RC-1 District.
      (3)   Study and monitor the impact of pruning and trimming in the RC-
1 District and its impact on flora and fauna.
      (4)   Study and monitor the impact of the pruning and trimming in the RC-
1 District as to the integrity of the RC-1 public land as it relates to erosion
control and beach stability, drainage, mosquito control, and the public
welfare, safety, and health of the town.
      (5)   Approve or deny, with the concurrence of a consultant, the cutting
or removal of Popcorn trees in the RC-1 District.
      (6)   Study and make recommendations to the Town as to the management of
all RC-1 public land so as to preserve and maintain RC-1 public land in
accordance with the public welfare, safety, and health of the Town and the
covenants and restrictions set forth in the Title to Real Estate dated February
12, 1991, conveying said land to the Town of Sullivan’s Island.
      (7)   Gather, organize and disseminate information about the RC-1 Area
District, and provide guidance to the replacement of vegetation under
mitigation.
   C.   Consultant assistance. The Tree Commission in the discharge of its
duties may seek the advice of a consultant retained by the Town to provide
consultation on the RC-1 District.
Sec. 21-162. Application for relocation, or removal and replacement.
   A.   Damage or destruction forbidden. No individual or agent shall remove,
destroy, cause to be destroyed, move or mortally prune or use any other harmful
treatment such as application of toxic substances, fire or machinery, on any
Category I or II tree or palmetto.
   B.   Category I trees.
      (1)   The landowner shall make every reasonable effort to retain and
preserve Category I trees.
      (2)   The Tree Commission shall oversee the proper retention, removal
and/or replacement of Category I trees.
      (3)   The Zoning Administrator shall process permit applications as
submitted for removal and replacement of Category I trees. A permit application
fee of twenty-five dollars ($25) shall be paid to the Town and credited to the
Tree Fund account. The Zoning Administrator shall provide the Tree Commission
with all information pertaining to the permit application.
      (4)   The Tree Commission shall review all information related to the
facts, circumstances and conditions pertaining to the tree removal application,
including site visits and meeting with the applicant when deemed necessary by
the Commission. The Tree Commission, as needed, may consult with the Urban
Foresters of the South Carolina Forestry Commission or other appropriate
experts in the field.
      (5)   After review and within thirty (30) days of receipt of the
application, the Tree Commission shall render its decision of denial or
approval with or without required conditions, which decision will be
communicated to the applicant by the Zoning Administrator.
      (6)   The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for the issuance of
permits, which have been approved by the Tree Commission and for oversight, and
enforcement of all requirements of the permit.
      (7)   If a landowner wishes to remove a Category I tree because it is
diseased, dying, mortally damaged, or deemed to be a hazard, a landowner shall
submit an application for removal of the tree to the Tree Commission.
         (a)   If the Tree Commission concurs with the landowner’s findings,
the tree may be removed. No replacement tree is required nor is any application
fee charged.
         (b)   If the Tree Commission does not concur with the landowner’s
findings, the tree shall not be removed.
      (8)   If a landowner wishes to remove a Category I tree for any reason
other than listed in (7) above, a landowner shall submit an application for
removal of the tree to the Tree Commission.
         (a)   An application for removal of a Category I tree may be approved
or approved with conditions and issued, or it may be denied. If the Tree
Commission concurs with the landowner’s request, the tree may be removed. Prior
to the removal of the tree, the landowner shall submit a tree replacement plan
or provisions for payment in lieu.
         (b)   If the Tree Commission does not concur with the landowner’s
findings, the tree shall not be removed.
      (9)   The landowner shall bear the expense of removal and replacement of
Category I trees in accordance with the approved permit.
      (10)   See Sec. 21-167 for emergency removal of trees.
   C.   Category II trees.
      (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall oversee the proper retention,
relocation, removal and/or replacement of Category II trees.
      (2)   If a landowner wishes to remove a Category II tree because it is
diseased, dying, mortally damaged, or deemed to be a hazard, a landowner shall
submit an application for removal of the tree to the Zoning Administrator.
         (a)   If the Zoning Administrator concurs with the landowner’s
findings, the tree may be removed. No replacement tree is required nor is any
application fee charged.
         (b)   If the Zoning Administrator does not concur with the landowner’s
findings, the tree shall not be removed.
      (3)   If a landowner wishes to remove a Category II tree for any reason
other than listed in (2) above, a landowner shall submit an application for
removal of the tree to the Zoning Administrator.
         (a)   An application for removal of a Category II tree may be approved
or approved with conditions and issued, or it may be denied. If the Zoning
Administrator concurs with the landowner’s request, the tree may be removed.
Prior to the removal of the tree, the landowner shall submit a tree replacement
plan or provisions for payment in lieu.
         (b)   If the Zoning Administrator does not concur with the landowner’s
findings, the tree shall not be removed.
      (4)   A permit application fee of twenty-five dollars ($25) shall be paid
to the Town and credited to the Tree Fund account.
      (5)   The Zoning Administrator shall review and approve or deny all
Category II tree permit applications. Before issuance of an approved Category
II tree permit, the Zoning Administrator shall attach to the permit the
replacement requirements and conditions as set forth in the Tree Replacement
Plan required in Sec. 21-164, or receive payment in lieu submitted by the
property owner.
      (6)   The landowner shall bear the expense of removal and replacement of
Category II trees in accordance with the approved permit.
      (7)   See Sec. 21-167 for emergency removal of trees.
   D.   Palmettos.
      (1)   Palmettos are a highly valued natural resource of Sullivan’s
Island.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator shall oversee the proper relocation of
palmettos in accordance with the Tree Commission’s guidelines. The Zoning
Administrator processes and reviews all permit applications for the relocation
of palmettos.
      (3)   A permit application fee of twenty-five dollars ($25) shall be paid
to the Town and credited to the Tree Fund.
      (4)   With the concurrence of the Zoning Administrator, a landowner may
relocate palmettos intact either to another site on the same lot or to a site
on public property of the Town. The landowner shall use best professional
management practices in relocation of the palmettos.
      (5)   The landowner shall bear the palmetto(s) relocation expense in
accordance with the approved permit.
      (6)   If the Zoning Administrator does not approve the relocation permit,
the palmetto(s) shall not be relocated.
      (7)   See Sec. 21-167 for emergency removal of palmettos.
Sec. 21-163. Submissions, fees and permit.
   A.   Submission requirements.
      (1)   Photographs of the site shall accompany requests for removal of
Category I and II trees or relocation of palmettos.
      (2)   Two (2) copies of a site survey, drawn to scale, indicating
existing and proposed structures and all Category I or II trees or Sabal
Palmetto to be removed, relocated, or replaced.
      (3)   An application for removal and/or relocation of Category I or II
Trees or Sabal Palmettos will not be accepted without a Building Permit
application on file with the Building Official.
         (a)   The site survey included in the above applications shall be
incorporated into the site plan submitted with the Building Permit application.
         (b)   An approved plan for the removal and/or relocation of Category I
or II Trees or Sabal Palmettos shall become a part of the Building Permit. The
Building Permit shall not be issued until such tree removal and replacement
plan shall be approved.
   B.   Fees.
      (1)   Applications for Tree Commission review of Category I and Category
II plans for tree removal and replacement and palmetto relocation shall be
those required by the Zoning Administrator and any other information required
to make a determination thereof accompanied by an application fee the amount of
which shall be established by resolution of the Town Council. (9-18-07)
      (2)   No fees shall be charged to remove diseased, dying, mortally
damaged, or hazardous trees and palmettos.
   C.   Signed permit. Upon approval by the Tree Commission or the Zoning
Administrator, a permit shall be issued and the plans shall be signed and dated
by the Zoning Administrator. One set of plans will be returned to the
applicant, with the Town retaining a set for its files.
Sec. 21-164. Tree replacement plan.
   A.   Tree replacement required.
      (1)   An approved Tree Replacement Plan prepared by the applicant shall
be an integral part of all tree removal permits.
      (2)   The Tree Commission shall approve the Tree Replacement Plan for
Category I trees. The Zoning Administrator shall approve the Tree Replacement
Plan for Category II trees. Working with the landowner, the Zoning
Administrator shall approve the relocation of palmettos on private property.
   B.   Replacement procedure.
      (1)   Tree replacement shall be required for all approved tree removals
based on the requirement of replacing one (1) linear inch of tree DBH for each
one (1) linear inch of tree DBH removed. Replacement trees shall be from the
approved tree list, except that replacement for the removal of oaks, magnolias,
pecan and red cedar trees shall be with the same kind of tree, as determined by
the Zoning Administrator or Tree Commission, as applicable.
      (2)   Each replacement tree shall have a minimum of two (2) inches
caliper and be at least ten (10) feet tall. However, any permitted removal of a
Sabal Palmetto will require replacement by a Sabal Palmetto at least 8 feet
tall.
      (3)   All replacement trees shall be of healthy, vibrant stock, in
accordance with American Standards for Nursery Stock of the American
Association of Nurserymen.
      (4)   The applicant is responsible for maintenance of the replacement
trees and palmettos and for replacement of these trees and palmettos if they
die within one (1) year of planting.
      (5)   In cases where tree replacement on the same lot is not possible or
desirable, the landowner may donate to the Tree Fund an equivalent sum of money
for the future purchase of public trees or donate a number of trees of the
equivalent mass and quality as those removed to be planted on public property
of the Town.
      (6)   It shall be required that tree replacement be accomplished within a
time limit according to the earliest time possible for replacement as set by
the Zoning Administrator or the Tree Commission.
Sec. 21-165. Public utilities and electric suppliers.
   A.   Public utilities and electric suppliers shall employ best management
practices in regard to tree trimming and removal.
   B.   Annually, public utilities and electric suppliers shall submit to the
Tree Commission their plans for tree trimming and / or tree removal.
   C.   Nothing in this Article shall restrict the ability of public utilities
and electric suppliers from maintaining safe clearance around utility lines.
During a period of Town emergency, such as hurricane, tornado, ice storm, flood
or any other such act of nature, the provisions of this act are suspended, with
the exception of the prohibition of the removal of healthy, non-threatening
trees or palmettos.
Sec. 21-166. Tree fund.
   The money collected from tree permits, as well as from fines for violations
of this Article shall be placed in a special fund referred to as “The Tree
Fund”, to be used for the purchase of trees to be planted on public property of
Sullivan’s Island and for other related activities planned by the Tree
Commission and approved by Town Council.
Sec. 21-167. Emergency removal.
   A.   Emergency removal of Category I and II trees and palmettos that pose an
eminent threat or danger to life and property may be removed without prior
notification and approval.
      (1)   These occurrences shall be reported within five (5) days.
      (2)   Trees or palmettos that have already fallen on their own due to
disease or damage from natural disaster may be cleared away without approval.
      (3)   Occurrence of loss from natural disaster shall be reported within
five (5) days and the requirements for replanting new trees or palmettos in
their place may be waived.
   B.   The Tree Commission shall decide questions concerning the
appropriateness of tree removal under the conditions indicated above.
   C.   There shall be no fee charged for the emergency removal of trees or
palmettos.
Sec. 21-168. Violations, penalties and fines.
   A.   Violations include:
      (1)   Disregard for the provisions of this Article;
      (2)   Destruction of a tree or palmetto or critical damage to a tree or
palmetto by any means such as those described herein; or
      (3)   Disregard of any conditions of a permit, such as failure to protect
trees or palmettos during construction activities or to replant trees or
palmettos in accordance with the permit.
   B.   Penalties and fines.
      (1)   Each unauthorized removal, destruction, negligent act or failure to
replant a tree or palmetto shall constitute a separate offense subject to fines
and penalties;
      (2)   Nothing herein shall prevent the Town from taking such other lawful
action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violations. Replacement as
described herein shall also be required; and,
      (3)   Any person convicted of violating any provision of this Article
shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500) or sentenced to
incarceration for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days, or both.
Sec. 21-169. Protection against liability.
   Any member of the Tree Commission acting within powers granted by the
Ordinance shall be relieved from personal liability for any damage and held
harmless by the Town of Sullivan’s Island. Any suit brought against any member
of the Commission shall be defended by a legal representative furnished by the
Town of Sullivan’s Island until the termination of the proceedings.
Sec. 21-170. Appeal to Board of Zoning Appeals.
   The Board of Zoning Appeals, as contained in ARTICLE XVIII, may consider
appeals from the decision of the Zoning Administrator or the Tree Commission by
any aggrieved party.
Sec. 21-171. Reserved.
ARTICLE XVIII: BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
Sec. 21-172. Purpose
   The Board of Zoning Appeals (Board) hears and decides upon issues related to
appeals of administrative decisions, variances, and special exceptions and to
remand a matter to an administrative official if the Board determines the
record is insufficient for review.
Sec. 21-173. Board membership and removal.
   A.   Appointment and terms.
      (1)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall consist of seven (7) members all
of which are citizens of Sullivan’s Island appointed by the Town Council. (9-
19-06)
      (2)   No Board member shall hold any other public office or position in
the Town.
      (3)   The Board members shall serve overlapping terms of three (3) years
each.
   B.   Election/appointment of officers. The Board shall elect one of its
members as chair. The chair shall serve for one (1) year or until he or she is
reelected or his or her successor is elected. The Board shall appoint a
secretary who may be an officer of the governing authority or a member of the
Board of Zoning Appeals.
   C.   Removal and replacement of board member. The Town Council may remove
any Board member for repeated failure to attend meetings of the Board or for
any other cause deemed sufficient cause. A member appointed to replace a
removed member shall serve the balance of the removed member’s unexpired term.
At the completion of the unexpired term, the member is eligible for
reappointment to a full term.
Sec. 21-174. Powers.
   A.   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the following powers:
      (1)   Administrative appeal. To hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged that there is error in any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by a Town administrative official in the enforcement of this
Zoning Ordinance.
      (2)   Special exception. To hear and decide special exceptions to the
terms of this Zoning Ordinance upon which the Board of Zoning Appeals is
authorized to pass under all of the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.
      (3)   Variance. To hear and decide variances from the terms of this
Zoning Ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest when, owing to
special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this Zoning
Ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship and so that the spirit of this
Zoning Ordinance shall be observed and substantial justice done.
   B.   Remand back for insufficient information. The Board of Zoning Appeals
may also remand back a matter to an administrative official, upon motion by a
party or the Board’s motion, upon determining the record is insufficient for
review. A party’s motion for remand may be denied if the Board determines that
the record is sufficient for review.
Sec. 21-175. Meetings, quorum and time limits.
   A.   Application and fees. Administrative appeals, request for variances and
special exceptions shall be submitted on forms provided by the Zoning
Administrator and accompanied by an application fee the amount of which shall
be established by resolution of the Town Council.
   B.   Appeals. Appeals to the Board of Zoning Appeals may be taken by any
person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board, or commission of the
municipality.
   C.   Public notice of meetings.
      (1)   Public notice of all meetings of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall
be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town at least fifteen
(15) days prior to the meeting.
      (2)   Written notice of the hearing date shall be mailed to the
applicant, or the agent for the applicant, and, in the case of Administrative
Appeals, the administrative officer from whom the appeal is taken.
      (3)   In cases involving a special exception or a variance, conspicuous
notice shall be posted on or adjacent to the property affected, with at least
one such notice being visible from each public thoroughfare that abuts the
property. A sign that is conspicuous in color, size and location shall be
posted on the property. Such sign shall be posted at least ten (10) days prior
to the Board of Zoning Appeals meeting. The sign provided by the Zoning
Administrator shall indicate that a special exception or variance is being
sought, shall furnish the time and date of the Board of Zoning Appeals meeting
and shall describe the type of variance or special exception sought.
   D.   Meetings and record of actions.
      (1)   Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chair and at
such other times as the Board shall determine.
      (2)   All meetings of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be open to the
public.
      (3)   The chair or, in his or her absence, the acting chair, may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena.
      (4)   In all matters of Administrative Appeals, Special Exceptions and
Variances, findings of fact and conclusions of law shall be separately stated
in final decisions or orders of the Board. These shall be delivered to parties
of interest by certified mail.
      (5)   The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote
of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating
that fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official
actions, all of which shall be immediately filed at Town Hall and be considered
a public record.
      (6)   Every action, ruling, decision or determination of the Board shall
be immediately filed at Town Hall and become a public record.
   E.   Quorum and required vote. Four (4) members are required for a quorum. A
majority of the members present shall be necessary to take any action on (1)
remanding back for insufficient information; (2) an administrative appeal; (3)
a special exception, or (4) a variance. (9-19-06)
   F.   Contempt and penalty. In case of contempt by a party, witness, or other
person before the Board of Zoning Appeals, the Board may certify this fact to
the circuit court (Charleston County) and the judge of the court, in open court
or in chambers, after hearing, may impose a penalty as authorized by law.
   G.   Time limitations.
      (1)   When it shall appear to the Zoning Administrator that a request
regarding the same lot for (1) an administrative appeal, (2) a special
exception, or (3) a variance, presents substantially the same issues that have
been decided by the Board of Zoning Appeals within the previous two (2) years,
the Zoning Administrator shall notify the Board of Zoning Appeals. The Zoning
Administrator shall not advertise the hearing or give notice to interested
parties until the Board of Zoning Appeals shall determine that an amendment of
this Zoning Ordinance or other changed conditions requires reopening the issue.
The Zoning Administrator’s written notice to the Chair of the Board of Zoning
Appeals regarding these concerns shall stay any other time deadlines that are
required elsewhere within this Article.
      (2)   If after a special exception or variance has been authorized by the
Board of Zoning Appeals, and no completed application for a Certificate of
Zoning Compliance or Building Permit been has been applied for within one (1)
year from the date of authorization, then such authorization shall be null and
void.
Sec. 21-176. Remand back for insufficient information.
   A.   The Board of Zoning Appeals may remand a matter to an administrative
official, upon motion by a party or the Board’s motion, upon determining the
record is insufficient for review. A party’s motion for remand may be denied if
the Board determines that the record is sufficient for review.
   B.   The Board shall set a rehearing on the remanded matter without further
public notice within sixty (60) days unless otherwise agreed to by the parties.
The Board shall maintain a list of persons who express an interest in being
informed when the remanded matter is set for rehearing, and notice of the
rehearing shall be mailed to these persons prior to the rehearing.
Sec. 21-177. Administrative appeal.
   A.   Appeal process. A party may appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals an
allegation that there is error in an order, requirement, decision or
determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this
Zoning Ordinance.
   B.   Time limit. Such appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) days of the
action of said administrative officer by filing with the administrative officer
from whom the appeal is taken and with the Board of Zoning Appeals a notice of
appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The administrative official or officer
shall immediately transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record
relating to the appeal.
   C.   Effect of appeal. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the
action appealed until the hearing before the Board of Zoning Appeals. However,
if the officer, after receiving notice of the appeal, provides the Board with
certification of facts that a stay would in his/her opinion cause imminent
peril to life or property, then proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a
restraining order which may be granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals or by a
court of record on application, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal
is taken, and on due cause shown.
   D.   Hearing and order. Upon the hearing any party may appear in person or
by agent or by attorney. The Board of Zoning Appeals may reverse or affirm
wholly or partially or may modify or reverse the order, requirement, decision
or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision
or determination as should be made.
Sec. 21-178. Special exception.
   A.   An application for a Special Exception, along with any applicable fee,
shall be filed with Town Hall pursuant to the terms stated on said application.
The property owner or the owner’s authorized agent shall submit the
application.
   B.   A special exception may only be granted for a use that is permitted in
the district for which the special exception is being requested.
   C.   In order to approve a Special Exception, the Board of Zoning Appeals
shall find that:
      (1)   Adequate provision is made for such items such as setbacks, fences,
and buffered or planting strips to protect adjacent properties from possible
adverse influence of the proposed use, such as noise, vibration, dust, glare,
odor, traffic congestion, and similar factors.
      (2)   Vehicular traffic and pedestrian movement on adjacent roads shall
not be hindered or endangered.
      (3)   Off-street parking and loading areas and the entrance and exits of
these areas shall be adequate in terms of location, amount, design, and
construction to serve the proposed use.
      (4)   The proposed use shall be compatible with existing uses to the
extent that such use will not adversely affect the level of property values,
general character, or general welfare of the nearby area.
   D.   In approving a Special Exception, the Board of Zoning Appeals may
attach to it such reasonable terms and conditions, as it may consider necessary
to accomplish the intent of this Article and this entire Zoning Ordinance.
   E.   Upon approval of a Special Exception, an application shall be made for
a Certificate of Zoning Compliance which shall be forwarded by the Zoning
Administrator to the Design Review Board.
   F.   Applicants are encouraged to discuss the Special Exception with the
Design Review Board prior to submission to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
Sec. 21-179. Variance.
   A.   The Board of Zoning Appeals may grant a variance from the terms of this
Zoning Ordinance when strict application of the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance would result in unnecessary hardship.
   B.   A variance may be granted in an individual case of unnecessary hardship
if the Board makes and explains in writing the following findings:
      (1)   There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to
the particular piece of property;
      (2)   These conditions do not generally apply to other property in the
vicinity;
      (3)   Because of these conditions, the application of the Zoning
Ordinance to the particular piece of property would effectively prohibit or
unreasonably restrict the utilization of the property; and
      (4)   The authorization of a variance will not be of substantial
detriment to adjacent property or to the public good, and the granting of the
variance will not harm the character of the district.
   C.   The Board of Zoning Appeals may not grant a variance, the effect of
which would be to:
      (1)   Allow the establishment of a use not otherwise permitted in a
zoning district,
      (2)   Extend physically a nonconforming use of land; or,
      (3)   Change the zoning district boundaries shown on the official zoning
map.
   D.   The fact that property may be utilized more profitably, if a variance
were granted, shall not be grounds for granting a variance.
   E.   Granting of use variance. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall not grant
variances for the use of land building or structure that are prohibited in
specific districts.
Sec. 21-180. Protection against liability.
   Any member of the Board of Zoning Appeals acting within powers granted by
the Ordinance shall be relieved from personal liability for any damage and held
harmless by the Town of Sullivan’s Island. Any suit brought against any member
of the Board shall be defended by a legal representative furnished by the Town
of Sullivan’s Island until the termination of the proceedings.
Sec. 21-181. Appeal to circuit court.
   (A)   A person who may have a substantial interest in any decision of the
Zoning Board of Appeals or an officer or agent of the Town of Sullivan’s Island
may appeal a decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals to the circuit court in
Charleston County, by filing with the clerk of the court a petition in writing
setting forth plainly, fully, and distinctly why the decision is contrary to
law. The appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) days after the decision of
the board is mailed.
   (B)   A property owner whose land is the subject of a decision of the Zoning
Board of Appeals may also appeal by filing a notice of appeal with the circuit
court accompanied by a request for pre-litigation mediation in accordance with
South Carolina Code, Section 6-29-825. Any notice of appeal and request for
pre-litigation mediation shall be filed within thirty (30) days after the
decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals is postmarked.
Sec. 21-182. Reserved.
Sec. 21-183. Reserved.
ARTICLE XIX: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 21-184. Administration officer; powers and duties.
   A.   Authority of zoning administer. The Zoning Administrator shall be
appointed by the Town Council and shall have the authority to administer and
enforce the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. In cases where the Zoning
Administrator is not available, the Building Official shall be authorized to
sign on behalf of the Zoning Administrator.
   B.   Powers of zoning administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall have the
power to
      (1)   Review, approve, approve with conditions, or deny any application
for a Certificate of Zoning Compliance for
         (a)   Permitted uses or conditional uses that do not involve exterior
construction; and,
         (b)   Construction that does not require a Building Permit or expand
or enlarge the interior living space.
      (2)   Process applications to the Design Review Board for Certificates of
Zoning Compliance and upon approval, issue the certificates;
      (3)   Process applications to the Design Review Board for Certificates of
Appropriateness (HP Historic Overlay District) and upon approval, issue the
certificates;
      (4)   Process applications or appeals to the Board of Zoning Appeals for
Special Exceptions, Variances and administrative appeals;
      (5)   Process applications to the Tree Commission for Category I trees
and issue permits or denials at the direction of the Tree Commission;
      (6)   Review and approve or deny all Category II tree and palmetto permit
applications;
      (7)   Review and approve or deny Certificates of Zoning Compliance for
permitted Vacation Rentals;
      (8)   Review and approve or deny Certificates of Zoning Compliance for
signs, parking and other accessory structures and uses as provided for in
ARTICLE XV; and,
      (9)   Review and approve or deny, in collaboration with the Building
Official, Certificates of Occupancy; and,
      (10)   Interpret and enforce the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.
Sec. 21-185. Certificate of zoning compliance required.
   A.   No building, sign or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to,
or structurally altered without obtaining a Certificate of Zoning Compliance
issued by the Zoning Administrator. The Certificate of Zoning Compliance
confirms that the improvement is in conformity with the Zoning Ordinance.
   B.   Any structure being occupied by a new use or business shall first
obtain a Certificate of Zoning Compliance that confirms the use is in
conformity with the Zoning Ordinance.
Sec. 21-186. Application and procedures for certificate of zoning compliance.
   A.   Applications. All applications for a Certificate of Zoning Compliance
(and Building Permit) shall be accompanied by plans in triplicate, drawn to
scale showing the following:
      (1)   With graphic and written scale indicated;
      (2)   Surveyed dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon;
      (3)   Existing buildings’ square footage, lot coverage, setbacks,
elevations and locations and indication of which buildings are to be retained;
      (4)   Existing location of Category I and II trees and palmettos on site
plans with existing buildings and plans showing improvements;
      (5)   Notation of historic structures (existing plan and proposed plan
sheets);
      (6)   The location and dimensions of the proposed building and/or
alterations;
      (7)   A perspective of proposed Principal Building in comparison to
adjacent lots’ Principal Buildings;
      (8)   Front, side and rear elevation schematic (drawings of the front
side and rear of the proposed Principal Building or renovation);
      (9)   Front, Side and Rear Setbacks, and if applicable, Setbacks from the
RC-1 and RC-2 District;
      (10)   Foundation elevation, enclosure; building height; and if
applicable, relationship of building height to elevation of street crown and to
adjacent structures;
      (11)   Building square footage and coverage, impervious surface coverage,
street orientation, facade width and depth;
      (12)   All information related to any proposed accessory structures
including any required off-street parking;
      (13)   FEMA base floor information and elevation of floor joist on 1st
floor and finished floor elevation;
      (14)   Calculations related to windows, doors and porches; location and
elevation of site lighting;
      (15)   Any other calculations or measurements required within the Zoning
Ordinance;
      (16)   Existing or proposed uses of buildings and land;
      (17)   The number of family living units the building is designed to
accommodate;
      (18)   A reduced set of plans (not actual construction plans) showing the
above information that are of a suitable size to be reproduced on a letter size
paper for ease of photocopying;
      (19)   Information related to meeting the required parking;
      (20)   OCRM 40-Year Setback Line. For a Lot that lies in whole or in part
seaward of the OCRM 40-Year Setback Line, plans submitted with the application
shall show the location of the OCRM baseline, the OCRM 40-Year Setback Line,
and any other OCRM jurisdictional lines established in the field by OCRM staff.
Any proposed erection, construction, improvement, alteration or repair seaward
of the OCRM 40-Year Setback Line shall be in compliance with OCRM regulations.
The applicant shall include with the application written OCRM approval for the
activity, where such approval is required by OCRM regulations; and,
      (21)   The Zoning Administrator or Building Official may require other
information to determine conformance with the Zoning Ordinance and other Codes
of Sullivan’s Island or the State of South Carolina.
   B.   Abbreviated Certificate of Zoning Compliance. The Zoning Administrator
shall be authorized to prepare an abbreviated Certificate of Zoning Compliance
form for certain uses that do not need to submit the extensive level of
information required in subsection A above.
   C.   Approved signature. All plans submitted for review shall be signed by a
professional, licensed in the State of South Carolina in architecture,
engineering and/or surveying confirming that all calculations and measurements
presented herein are accurate to the best of their professional expertise. For
projects that do not require Design Review Board approval or a Building Permit,
the Zoning Administer may waive the requirement that a licensed professional
signature sign the submittal.
   D.   Coordination with Design Review Board. Procedures for coordinating
review of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance with the Design Review Board shall
be those described in Article XII.
   E.   Approval of plans. The Zoning Administrator or Building Official shall
return one copy of the plans to the applicant after he or she shall have marked
such copy either as approved or disapproved and attested to it by his or her
signature on such copy. The Town shall retain the two other original copies of
the plans, similarly marked.
   F.   Expiration of certificate of zoning compliance and building permit. If
the work described in any Certificate of Zoning Compliance and Building Permit
has not begun within one (1) year from the date of issuance thereof, said
certificate and permit shall expire. If work has begun, but after three (3)
years of issuance of the Certificate of Zoning Compliance and Building Permit,
no Certificate of Occupancy has been issued or the work has not been completed
based on a determination of the Zoning Administrator, said Certificate of
Zoning Compliance shall expire and a new application shall be required. If a
Certificate of Zoning Compliance is required but no Building Permit, the same
shall apply.
Sec. 21-187. Certificates of occupancy.
   A.   It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of
any building or premises, or both, or parts thereof hereafter created, erected,
changed, converted, or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or
structure until a Certificate of Occupancy has been issued by the Zoning
Administrator or Building Official stating that the proposed use of the
building or land conforms to the requirements of the Town’s Code of Ordinances
and is suitable for occupancy or use.
   B.   A Certificate of Occupancy shall be required for any change of use.
   C.   No permit for erection, alteration, moving, or repair of any building
shall be issued until an application for a Certificate of Occupancy has been
made. Such Certificate of Occupancy may include such conditions and safeguards
as will protect the safety of the occupants and the public.
   D.   The Zoning Administrator or Building Official shall maintain a record
of all Certificates of Occupancy and a copy shall be furnished upon request of
any person.
   E.   Failure to obtain a Certificate of Occupancy shall be a violation of
this Zoning Ordinance, and punishable as provided in this Zoning Ordinance.
Sec. 21-188. Conditional uses and special exceptions.
   The Zoning Administrator shall be authorized to issue a Certificate of
Zoning Compliance for any conditional use or special exception if it meets the
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and if the special exception has received
approval from the Board of Zoning Appeals.
Sec. 21-189. Temporary uses.
   Subject to Town Council approval, the Zoning Administrator is authorized to
issue a Certificate of Zoning Compliance for temporary uses provided for in
ARTICLE XV. Sec. 21-144 and subject to all other applicable provisions of this
Ordinance.
Sec. 21-190. Appeal from decision of zoning administrator or other official.
   Any person not satisfied with the decision or interpretation of the Zoning
Administrator or any other city official or board regarding this Ordinance, may
file an Administrative Appeal to the Design Review Board in accordance with
Article XII or the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with ARTICLE XVIII.
Sec. 21-177.
   A.   The applicant may appeal a determination based upon an interpretation
of the Design Standards to the Design Review Board. The Design Review Board
shall have final authority to interpret and apply the Design Standards.
   B.   The applicant may appeal a determination based upon an interpretation
of the Zoning Standards to the Board of Zoning Appeals. The Board of Zoning
Appeals shall have final authority to interpret and apply the Zoning Standards.
   C.   In case of any conflict between a Zoning Standard and a Design
Standard, or where it is unclear as to the determination being a Zoning or
Design Standard, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall have final authority in such
appeals.
Sec. 21-191. Complaints regarding violations.
   A.   The Town of Sullivan’s Island shall provide for the enforcement of the
Zoning Ordinance by means of the withholding of a Certificate of Zoning
Compliance, a Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy, or all. The Town may
issue stop work orders against any entity not having a proper Certificate of
Zoning Compliance or a Building Permit, or both. The Town may refuse to issue a
Certificate of Occupancy or repeal the Certificate of Occupancy if it finds the
building or structure is not fit for occupancy or is in violation of any of the
Town’s ordinances, or both.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to construct, reconstruct, alter, demolish, change
the use of or occupy any land, building, or other structure without first
obtaining the appropriate approvals. No permit may be issued or approved unless
the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance or any ordinance adopted by the Town
are complied with.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for other officials to issue any permit for the
use of any land, building, or structure, or the construction, conversion,
demolition, enlargement, movement, or structural alteration of a building or
structure without the approval of the Zoning Administrator and/or Building
Official.
   D.   If the Zoning Administrator shall find that any of the provisions of
this Zoning Ordinance are being violated, the Zoning Administrator shall notify
in writing the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of
the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. The Zoning
Administrator shall order discontinuances of improper uses of land, buildings,
or structures, removal of improper buildings or structures or of illegal
additions, alterations, or structural changes, discontinuance of any illegal
work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this Zoning
Ordinance to ensure compliance with or to prevent violations of its provisions.
   E.   Whenever a violation of this Zoning Ordinance occurs, or is alleged to
have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint stating
fully the causes and basis thereof shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator
or his/her designee. The compliant shall be immediately investigated and action
taken as provided by this Zoning Ordinance.
   F.   In a case where a building, structure, or land is or is proposed to be
used in violation of this Ordinance, the Zoning Administrator or other
appropriate administrative officer, Town attorney, or other appropriate
authority of the Town or an adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be
specially damaged by the violation may in addition to other remedies, institute
injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent the
unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion,
maintenance, or use, or to correct or abate the violation, or to prevent the
occupancy of the building, structure, or land.
   G.   In a case where a building, structure, or land is or is proposed to be
used in violation of this Ordinance, the Zoning Administrator or other
designated administrative officer may in addition to other remedies issue and
serve upon a person pursuing the activity or activities a stop order requiring
that entity stop all activities in violation of the Zoning Ordinance.
Sec. 21-192. Penalties for violation.
   Any person violating any provision of this Zoning Ordinance shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined and/or imprisoned, as
determined by the Municipal Court for each offense, in an amount of no more
than $500.00 or imprisonment for 30 days or both. Each day such violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, the Court may order
restitution in an amount not to exceed $5,000.00. In determining the amount of
restitution, the judge shall determine and itemize the actual amount of damage
or loss in the Order. In addition, the judge may set an appropriate payment
schedule. A Municipal Judge may hold a party in contempt for failure to pay the
restitution ordered if the judge finds the party has the ability to pay.
   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Zoning Administrator, or other
appropriate administrator or officer, Town Attorney, or other appropriate
authority of the Town or an adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be
specifically damaged by the violation from pursuing any other remedy available
as set out hereinabove or in accordance with the laws of the State of South
Carolina.
Sec. 21-193. Reserved.
Sec. 21-194. Reserved.
Sec. 21-195. Reserved.
ARTICLE XX: ZONING AMENDMENTS
Sec. 21-196. Amending the zoning ordinance and map.
   When the public necessity, convenience, general welfare, or good zoning
practice justify amending the Zoning Ordinance and/or Official Zoning Map, the
Town Council and Planning Commission, may undertake the necessary steps to make
such amendments.
Sec. 21-197. Amendment requests.
   A.   Amendments proposed by individuals. An individual property owner may
initiate a zone change amendment by following the required submission
requirements in this Article.
   B.   Amendments proposed by Town Council. The Town Council may initiate an
amendment(s) to the Zoning Ordinance and/or Official Zoning Map, at any time.
However, no amendment shall become effective unless it shall first have been
submitted to the Planning Commission for review and recommendation and holding
of a public hearing. The Planning Commission shall make its report and
recommendations to the Town Council within sixty (60) days of the submission.
If the Planning Commission fails to hold a public hearing as prescribed herein,
the Town Council may hold a public hearing on the proposed zoning change. If
the Planning Commission fails to submit its report and recommendations within
the prescribed period, the Planning Commission shall be deemed to have approved
the proposed zoning change.
Sec. 21-198. Amendment requesting a text and/or map change.
   In recommending a change to the Zoning Ordinance text or the Official Zoning
Map, the Town Council shall submit such request to the Planning Commission for
review and recommendation. The Planning Commission will hold a public hearing
on the proposed text and/or map change following the required process for
notification.
Sec. 21-199. Amendment requesting a zone change.
   A.   Requests to amend the Zoning Ordinance and/or map shall be processed in
accordance with the following requirements;
      (1)   Requests.
         (a)   The owner(s) of the property, also referred to as the applicant
(s), shall submit a request for a property zone change to the Zoning
Administrator.
         (b)   A property owner(s) shall not initiate action for a zone change
affecting the same Lot or Lots of property, or any part thereof, and requesting
the same change in district classification more often than once every twelve
(12) months.
      (2)   Application.   Application forms for amendment requests shall be
obtained from Town Hall. Completed application forms, plus any additional
information the applicant(s) feels to be pertinent, shall be filed with the
Planning Commission’s designee. All amendment requests shall be submitted on
official application forms provided by the Town. Amendment requests submitted
on forms not provided by the Town are invalid submissions. All papers and other
data submitted by the applicant on behalf of the amendment request shall be
transmitted to the Planning Commission.
      (3)   Fees. All zoning amendment application submissions shall be
accompanied by payment of the fee required for such submission. The application
shall not be considered as received until such payment is made. Town Council
shall set the amount of the fees.
      (4)   Notice.
         (a)   At least fifteen (15) days notice of the time and place of the
hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town.
         (b)   In cases involving rezoning, conspicuous notice shall be posted
on or adjacent to the property affected, with at least one such notice being
visible from each public thoroughfare that abuts the property.
         (c)   If the Town has maintained a list of groups that have expressed
an interest in being informed of zoning proceedings, notice of such meetings
shall be mailed to these groups.
         (d)   If a landowner whose land is the subject of a proposed amendment
will be allowed to present oral or written comments to the Planning Commission,
at least ten (10) days’ notice and an opportunity to comment in the same manner
shall be given to other interested members of the public, including owners of
adjoining property.
      (5)   Hearing by the Planning Commission.
         (a)   All meetings of the Planning Commission shall be open to the
public. At the public hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent, or
by attorney.
         (b)   No member of the Planning Commission shall participate in a
matter in which he has any pecuniary or special interest.
         (c)   The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the
requested zoning amendment. Following the public hearing, the Planning
Commission shall review and prepare a report and recommendation, for
transmittal to the Town Council. Following action by the Planning Commission,
all papers and data pertinent to the application shall be transmitted to the
Town Council for final action. When the Planning Commission holds the required
public hearing, no public hearing by the Town Council is required.
      (6)   Legal challenge. No challenge to the adequacy of notice or
challenge to the validity of a regulation or map, or amendment to it, whether
enacted before or after the effective date of this section, may be made sixty
(60) days after the decision of the Town Council if there has been substantial
compliance with the notice requirements of this section or with established
procedures of the governing authority or the planning commission.
Sec. 21-200. Changes in the Official Zoning Map.
   Following final action by the Town Council, any necessary changes shall be
made in the Official Zoning Map. A written record of the type and date of such
change shall be maintained by the Planning Commission. Until such change is
made, no action by the Town Council on map amendments to the Zoning Ordinance
shall be considered official.
Sec. 21-201. Reserved.
Sec. 21-202. Reserved.
ARTICLE XXI: DEFINITION OF TERMS
Sec. 21-203. Definitions.
   Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this Zoning
Ordinance have their customary definitions. For the purpose of this Zoning
Ordinance, certain words or terms herein are defined as follows:
   Accessory Use or Structure. A use or structure subordinate to the Principal
Building on a lot and used for purposes customarily incidental to the main or
principal use or building and located on the same lot.
   Addition. Construction to existing structures intended to provide additional
square footage, storage or porch areas, whether or not completely enclosed.
   Addition, Attached to Principal Building. A visually and architecturally
integrated construction intended to provide additional square footage and
living space to an existing principal building. If there is a connection
between the addition and the principal building, said connection should be
located under one roof and contain a permanent floor above grade. The length to
width ratio of any proposed connection may not exceed a two to one (2:1)
dimension ratio, with a minimum width of four (4) feet and a maximum length of
twenty (20) feet. [Example: a bedroom addition is connected by an eight (8)
feet wide and sixteen (16) feet long hallway/corridor/porch (2:1 dimension
ratio.)] (9/17/2013)
   Alley. A secondary way that affords access to the side or rear of abutting
Lots but is not considered a street.
   Alteration. Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as
bearing walls, columns, or girders; any addition or reduction to a building;
any change in use; or any relocation of a building from one location or
position to another.
   Assessed Value or Valuation. A property assessment conducted by the
Charleston County Tax Assessor based upon the most recent property assessment
figures available.
   Bank (Savings and Loan or Credit Union). A financial depository institution
or related banking facility that accepts money for deposit into accounts from
the general public or other financial institutions, and may include personal or
business loans, wire transfers and safe deposit boxes as accessory uses.
   Base Flood Elevation (BFE). The height that floodwaters are projected to
reach during a 100-year flood (1% annual chance or occurring or being
exceeded). The BFE is shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for zones AE
and VE.
   Baseline. The South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control,
Bureau of Ocean and Coastal Resource Management (OCRM) final baseline depicted
on the SCDHEC OCRM orthophoto maps of Sullivan’s Island, sheets 154 through
162. (1-21-92 revised 1999)
   Bedroom. An enclosed space within a single-family dwelling unit designed or
intended for sleeping and which contains at least one closet (or piece of
closet-sized and closet-like storage furniture) for the storage of clothes and
other personal effects. A room or other enclosed area is not a bedroom, nor
considered habitable for sleeping purposes, unless it has a permanent door
permitting complete closure and separation by that door from any and all
kitchen and bathroom areas. As an example, a room or other enclosed area is not
a bedroom within this definition if the room arrangement is such that access to
a bathroom intended for use by the occupants of other bedrooms can be had only
by going through that room, nor shall such a room be considered a bedroom if it
is the only access to another bedroom.
   Bed and Breakfast Inn. A business establishment operated within a Principal
Building by an owner-occupant or resident manager, offering one to four units
for temporary lodging and breakfast to the traveling public while away from
their normal places of residence.
   Blank Facade. A blank facade is an expanse of wall that has no windows,
doors or porches.
   Breakfast. A meal served between the hours of 6 a.m. and 11 a.m.
   Board of Zoning Appeals. An officially constituted body whose principal
duties are to hear appeals, including appeals related variances, special
exceptions and administrative determinations.
   Buildable Area: See “Lot Area, Buildable.”
   Building. A structure which is enclosed by a roof and by exterior walls
along whose outside faces can be traced an unbroken line for the complete
circumference of the structure, which is permanently affixed to a lot or lots,
and used or intended for the shelter, support, or enclosure of persons,
animals, or property of any kind.
   Building Coverage Area, Principal. The Lot Area covered by the Principal
Building measured vertically downward from the Principal Building’s exterior
walls to the ground, but excludes (1) accessory structures not readily useable
as living space; (2) exterior porches and decks; and, (3) exterior stairs.
   Building Envelope. A three-dimensional space created by required setbacks,
heights, coverage and slope angles within a lot.
   Building Envelope, Front Yard. A theoretical line through which the
Principal Building’s front facade shall not cross.
   Building Floor Area. See “Building Square Footage, Principal.” Building
Footprint. See “Building Coverage Area, Principal.”
   Building Height. A vertical distance measured in a straight line from the
highest point of the Building or Structure, excepting any chimney but including
any other vertical improvement, to the natural ground elevation at the center
point of the Building or Structure.
   Building Line. A line that represents the distance a building or structure
shall be set back from a lot boundary line or a street right-of-way line or a
street centerline according to the terms of this Zoning Ordinance. In all
cases, the building lines of a lot shall be determined to run parallel to and
set back the appropriate distance required within the district in which the lot
is located from street right-of-way lines, street centerlines or other lot
boundary lines. Also called Front, Side or Rear Building Line.
   Building Permit. A permit issued by the Building Official for the
construction of a building or structure.
   Building, Principal. A building in which the principal use of the lot is
conducted.
   Building Square Footage, Principal. The entire square footage of the
principal building or buildings measured from the outside of the exterior
walls, specifically including more than one dwelling on the same lot and
historic structures used as accessory dwelling units, but not including (1)
interior space not useable as living space (attic or parking area beneath
Principal Building); (2) structures that are not used as living space; (3)
exterior porches and decks; and, (4) exterior stairs. (12-17-13)
   Category I Tree. Also known as a “Significant” tree, this tree has a DBH of
at least sixteen (16) inches at a height of at least forty (40) feet. A
Category I tree has the highest level of protection based on its total value to
the island environment.
   Category II Tree. Also known as a “Protected” tree or species, this tree has
a DBH of at least six (6) inches. All Sabal Palmetto (Cabbage Palm, herein
called “Palmetto”) shall be given special protection as a “Protected Species.”
   Certificate of Appropriateness. The official document issued by the Design
Review Board, on the recommendation of the Historic Preservation Design Review
Subcommittee, approving and/or concurring in any application for permit for
erection, demolition, moving, reconstruction, restoration or alteration of any
structure designated historic property.
   Certificate of Occupancy. A certificate issued by the Zoning Administrator
or Building Official stating that the proposed use of the building or land
conforms to the requirements of the Town’s Code of Ordinances.
   Certificate of Zoning Compliance, Temporary. A certificate issued by the
Zoning Administrator to confirm that a temporary improvement or use is in
conformity with the Zoning Ordinance.
   Certificate of Zoning Compliance. A certificate issued by the Zoning
Administrator to confirm that an improvement or use is in conformity with the
Zoning Ordinance.
   Clinic. An establishment where medical or dental patients, who are not
lodged overnight, are admitted for examination or treatment.
   Conditional Use. A permitted land use that has specified conditions,
restrictions or limitations that are in addition to the restrictions applicable
to all land uses in the zoning district.
   Conservation Easement. A conservation easement is a nonpossessory interest
of a holder in real property imposing limitations or affirmative obligations,
the purposes of which include one or more of the following: (11-17-15)
      (a)   Retaining or protecting natural, scenic, or open-space aspects of
real property; (11-17-15)
      (b)   Ensuring the availability of real property for agricultural,
forest, recreational, educational, or open-space use; (11-17-15)
      (c)   Protecting natural resources; (11-17-15)
      (d)   Maintaining or enhancing air or water quality; (11-17-15)
      (e)   Preserving the historical, architectural, archaeological, or
cultural aspects of real property; (11-17-15)
   Conservation Easement Uses and Structures. A recreational use or open-air
structure (gazebo, cabana, pergola, arbor, or other open-air structure)
designed specifically to enjoy the natural, scenic, or open-space aspects of
real property, which is only permitted as a principal use by special exception
from the Board of Zoning Appeals through the establishment of a conservation
easement. (11-17-15)
   Construction. The creation or erection of structure(s) or improvements.
   Day Care Facility. The use of a building or premises for the care and
supervision of children or elderly adults who do not reside on the property,
for periods of less than 12 hours.
   Deck. An unenclosed, unroofed horizontal structure, whether or not elevated
above grade in any manner.
   DBH. Diameter of tree at breast height or the diameter at four and a half (4
1/2) feet above grade.
   Density. The number of dwelling units per acre of land developed or used for
residential purposes. Unless otherwise clearly stated, density requirements in
this Zoning Ordinance are expressed in dwelling units per net acre, that is,
per acre of land devoted to residential use exclusive of land utilized for
streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds, school grounds or other public uses, or
contained in the RC 1 and 2 areas.
   Design Flood Elevation (DFE). The height of the lowest occupiable flood, or
the height of the lowest structural member of an inhabitable floor. Includes
the BFE and the town’s freeboard, also referred to as Flood Protection
Elevation.
   Design Guideline. Preferred design features or approaches recommended as
guidelines only and not imposed as requirements.
   Design Standard. Design Standards are regulation governing the design,
orientation, and elevation of buildings and the treatment of site lighting.
   Determination of Tree Size. Tree size made by measuring the diameter of the
tree at four and a half (4 1/2) feet above grade (DBH).
   District. The term applied to various geographical areas of the Town of
Sullivan’s Island for the purpose of interpreting the provisions of this Zoning
Ordinance. The terms “district” and “zoning district” are synonymous and are
used interchangeably throughout this Zoning Ordinance.
   Dwelling. A building or portion of a building arranged or designed to
provide living quarters for a single family, with no structural features
impeding free access throughout the entire structure by all members of the
family.
      Dwelling, Attached Single Family. No more than three single-family
Principal Buildings constructed adjacent to one another and sharing a common
building wall intended to be purchased as single-family Principal Buildings,
also known as “Attached Single Family Residential.”
      Dwelling, Single Family. A detached Principal Building other than a
mobile home designed for or occupied exclusively by a single family on a single
lot.
      Dwelling, Upper Story. An attached dwelling constructed as an integral
part of a non-residential Principal Building located on the second floor.
   Extended Lot Line.
   Exterior. The outside walls of a structure.
   Enclosed Portion. A Principal Building’s living area (or other areas
sheltered from the elements that may be used for living space).
   Erosion Control Structure. Device or material placed on property intended to
minimize erosion of soil from wind or rain events.
   Elevation, Ground. The existing elevation of the earth, without modification
by filling or removal of soil.
   Facade, Primary Front. The largest front facing surface of a Principal
Building that is parallel or nearly parallel to the front yard street frontage
and is considered to be the front of the structure.
   Facade, Side. The side-facing surface of a Principal Building that is
parallel or nearly parallel to the side lot line.
   Family. One or more persons occupying a single Principal Building living and
cooking together as a single housekeeping unit with no such family containing
over six persons unless all members are related by blood or marriage or unless
there is some custodial responsibility for the unrelated family member.
   FEMA. Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   Fence. Any created unroofed barrier that blocks or impedes the flow of
people or animals; a fence may be a wall or other structure that prohibits
physical or visual access across a lot, but does not include vegetation.
   Finished Floor Elevation (FFE). Refers to the FEMA defined “Lowest Floor,”
or the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, except for the unfinished or
flood resistant enclosures used solely for parking of vehicles, building
access, or storage.
   Floor Area. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors of a
building measured from the exterior face of exterior walls, including any space
where the floor-to-ceiling height is four (4) feet or greater, but excluding
any unenclosed porches.
   Food Service Establishments. An establishment where food and beverages are
prepared to individual order, and is limited to restaurants, coffee shops,
bars, bakeries and delicatessens. (8-19-14)
      Bakery and Delicatessen. An establishment where food and beverages are
prepared for take-out or retail sale and does not include any wholesale
activities. Bakeries and delicatessens shall meet all the requirements of
Section 21-50.B.(1). (8-19-14)
      Bar. A prohibited establishment where alcoholic beverages are served for
on premise consumption, which generates greater than fifty (50) percent of
total revenue from alcohol sales. (8-19-14)
      Coffee Shop. A small establishment that does not provide full service of
food and beverages, but limits its offerings to particular foods and beverages.
These limited commodities must reflect a core business of the coffee shop use
and a limited number of ancillary non-core items as a measure to keep from
serving menu items indicative of a full service restaurant. Light meals shall
include, but not be limited to, soups, sandwiches, salads, baked goods,
desserts, ice cream, cheese plates, typical breakfast items and may only be
made available by way of counter service. Sales of food and other goods shall
constitute at least eighty-five (85) percent of total revenue, and limit
alcohol sales to beer and wine only (per SC Code of Regulations 7-200-1 and SC
Code of Laws 61-4-500); revenue from on-site consumption of alcohol shall
constitute no more than 15% of total revenue (excluding carry-out sales of beer
and wine). Coffee shops shall meet all the requirements of Section
21-50.C.(2). (8-19-14)
      Formula Restaurant/Eating Establishment. A restaurant or other eating
establishment consisting of four or more franchise businesses, where food and
beverages are prepared for consumption either on or off the premises and which
is required by contract or other arrangement to offer standardized versions of
any of the following: menus, ingredients, food preparation, decor, uniform,
architecture or similar standardized features. (8-19-14)
      Restaurant. An establishment where food and beverages are prepared for
individual order, ordered and served from the table and consumed primarily
within the principal building or in established outdoor dining areas. Sales of
food and other goods constitute at least fifty (50) percent of total revenue,
and sales of alcohol comprise no more than fifty (50) percent of total revenue.
Restaurants shall meet all the requirements of Section 21-50-C.(l). (8-19-14)
   Forty-year Setback Line. The South Carolina Department of Health and
Environmental Control Bureau of Ocean and Coastal Resource final Setback Line
depicted on the OCRM orthophoto maps of Sullivan’s Island, sheets 154 through
162. Also referred to as OCRM Setback Line. The lines referred to are to be
interpreted as the most recently adopted version.
   Freeboard. The distance between the Base Flood Elevation (BFE) and the
Design Flood Elevation (DFE). Freeboard provides a buffer between projected
flood elevations and a building’s lowest inhabitable floor to minimize flood
damage.
   Frontage. See “Street Frontage.”
   Garage, private. An accessory building or portion of a Principal Building
used primarily for the private storage of motor vehicles, campers, boats, boat
trailers, lawn mowers, or other items as an accessory use.
   Grade, Finished. The final elevation of the ground surface after humanmade
alterations such as grading, grubbing, filling or excavating have been made on
the ground surface. Structural and/or landscape fill is limited to one (1)
foot.
   Greenhouse. A building whose roof and sides are made largely of glass or
other transparent or translucent material and in which the temperature and
humidity can be regulated for the cultivation of plants for personal enjoyment.
   Historic Preservation Overlay District. An area, designated by the Town
Council pursuant to the provisions of this Article. The District may contain
one or more significant historic structures and landmarks and may have within
its boundaries other property or structures that are not of such historic and/
or architectural significance to be designated as landmarks, nevertheless,
contribute to the overall visual characteristics of the district.
   Historic Property. Any place (including an archaeological site or the
location of a significant historical event), building, structure, work of art,
fixture or similar object that has been individually designated by Town Council
of Sullivan’s Island or designated as a contributing property within a historic
district.
   Historic Sites Survey, 2003. A survey completed by David Schneider of
historic structures on Sullivan’s Island.
   Home Occupation. Any business or occupational use conducted entirely within
a Principal Building and carried on by the residents thereof, which use is
clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the Principal Building for
residential purposes.
   HVAC. Heating, ventilation and air conditioning.
   Impervious Coverage Area. That portion of the Lot Area covered by an
impervious surface.
   Impervious Surface. Any material or structure through which water cannot be
absorbed or passed without limitation, including but not limited to roofed
structures, compacted soil or stone, pavement consisting of asphalt, concrete,
oil and stone, tar, or asphalt. Impervious surfaces also include building
foundations, porches, decks, patios, sidewalks, play courts (tennis,
basketball, etc.), pools, and other improvements that impede the absorption of
water. Grassed or mulched areas are not considered impervious materials.
   Improved Access. All driveways except natural grass or lawn areas.
   Living Space. Any interior or exterior portion of a Dwelling used for
residential or home occupation purposes including closets and hallways but
excluding basements or attics used only for storage.
   Loading Space, Off-Street. Space logically and conveniently located for
pickups and deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles, and accessible to such
vehicles when required off-street parking spaces are filled.
   Long Term Rental. The use of a Principal Building(s) that is: (1) rented,
leased, assigned for tenancies; or (2) made available for one or more persons
in return for valuable consideration for any period of more than twenty-eight
(28) continuous days duration.
   Lot or Lot of Record. A land area designated as a separate and distinct
parcel, tract or property on the most recent legally recorded plat filed and/or
approved by the Town of Sullivan’s Island, or in the absence of a legally
recorded plat, that as described on the most recent legally recorded deed
executed and delivered by the Town of Sullivan’s Island, both or either as
filed in the Office of Register of Mesne Conveyance of Charleston County;
provided, however, that for the purpose of determining whether such lot is a
separate, distinct building lot, or lot suitable for independent conveyance,
any and all applicable restrictions and limitations in the chain of title shall
be considered. (9-18-07)
      Lot Line. A legal boundary line of a lot.
      Lot, Corner. A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets.
      Lot, Double Frontage. A lot which has frontage on more than one street,
provided, however, that no corner lot shall qualify as a double frontage lot
unless said corner lot as frontage on more than three or more streets, also
known as a “Through Lot.”
      Lot, Interior. A lot that has frontage on only one street other than an
alley.
   Lot Area. The area of the lot lying outside the area designated as marsh or
that portion above the ocean’s high water mark; lots adjacent to RC-1 - only
land area located above and landward of the landward RC-1 Area District
boundary line; and, lots adjacent to RC-2 - only land area located above and
landward of the SC DHEC-OCRM “Critical Area Line” as determined in the field by
OCRM staff.
   Lot, Buildable Area. The land area remaining after deleting the required
Front, Side, and Rear Yard Setbacks and excluding any land area not considered
as Lot Area as defined above.
   Lot, Buildable Width. The width of the lot at the building line less that
required for Side Yard Setbacks.
   Lot Depth. The mean horizontal distance between front and rear lot lines.
   Lot, Shallow. A lot with less depth than width at the building line.
   Lot Width. The horizontal distance between side lot lines measured at the
building line.
   Manufactured Home. A structure that is transportable in one (1) or more
sections, built on a permanent chassis and has been designed to be used as a
dwelling with or without permanent foundation. This structure, when connected
to the required utilities, which includes plumbing, heating air conditioning
and electrical systems contained therein, bears a label certifying that is
constructed in compliance with the national Manufactured Housing Construction
and Safety Standards act, U.S. Public Law 93-383.
   Map. The word “map” or “zoning map” shall mean the official Zoning Map of
the Town of Sullivan’s Island, South Carolina.
   Mobile Home. A transportable, factory-built home, designed to be used as a
year-round residential dwelling and built prior to enactment of the Federal
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 that became
effective June 15, 1976. This definition differs from that of a “manufactured
home” above.
   Modular building unit. Any building of closed construction, regardless of
type of construction or occupancy classification, other than a mobile or
manufactured home, constructed off-site in accordance with the applicable
codes, and transported to the point of use for installation.
   Neighborhood Compatibility. A condition that exists when land uses and
structures are harmonious, with adjacent development. [See Article XII.]
   National Register of Historic Places. The national list of districts, sites,
buildings, structures, and objects significant in American history,
architecture, archeology, engineering, or culture, maintained by the Secretary
of the Interior under authority of the National Historic Preservation Act, as
amended.
   Natural Ground Elevation. The elevation of any lot or any point on a lot
before fill is placed on a lot as required in section 5-16.
   Nonconforming Lot. A duly recorded lot of record established prior to
adoption of the Sullivan’s Island’s first Zoning Ordinance that does not comply
with the minimum Lot Area, lot width or lot depth requirements of this Zoning
Ordinance.
   Nonconforming Structure. Any building or structure that was legally
established but no longer complies with the density, lot coverage, floor area,
height and dimensional standards of this Zoning Ordinance.
   Nonconforming Use. A land use that was legally established but that is no
longer allowed by the use regulations of the Zoning District in which it is
located.
   Nonconformities. Uses, structures, lots, signs and other situations that
came into existence legally and continued to exist as a legal nonconforming use
until the time of the adoption of this ordinance but that do not conform to one
or more requirements of this Zoning Ordinance.
   Occupant. Any person, including adults and children and guests of such
adults or children, using residential property as a place for overnight
sleeping.
   Occupied. The word “used” or “occupied” as applied to any land or building
shall be construed to imply that said land or building is in actual use or
occupancy and shall be construed to include the words intended, arranged, or
designed to be used or occupied.
   OCRM. Office of Ocean and Coastal Resource Management formerly known as
South Carolina Coastal Council.
   Ordinary Maintenance and Repairs. Any work on which a Building Permit or any
other Town permit or certificate is not required and where the purpose is
stabilization, and further, where such work will not noticeably change the
exterior appearance of the resource. Any work not satisfying all of the above
requirements shall not be considered ordinary maintenance and repair.
   Outdoor Display Area. A portion of a property outside of any building where
merchandise, goods or other items are placed in public view for the purpose of
direct sale or lease to customers.
   Outdoor Storage. The keeping within an unroofed and unenclosed area any
goods, materials, merchandise or vehicles in the same place for more than
thirty days.
   Overlay Zone. A zone which imposes a set of requirements or relaxes a set of
requirements imposed by the underlying zoning district when there is a special
public interest in a particular geographic area that does not coincide with the
underlying zone boundaries
   Parcel. See “Lot”.
   Parking. The placement of a vehicle or equipment at a location for less than
thirty (30) days.
   Parking Lot. Any area used for the express purposes of parking automobiles,
but not including a single family dwelling’s parking area incidental to the
principal use.
   Parking Space. A space within a parking lot or on a single-family dwelling
lot expressively provided for the purpose of parking an automobile or other
vehicle.
   Person. The word “person” includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust company, or corporation, as well as an individual.
   Pervious Materials. Any material through which water can be easily absorbed
or passed, at a minimum infiltration rate of 2.0 inches per hour, such as, but
not limited to, grass and uncompacted gravel, shell and crushed stone. (1/20/
09)
   Pet, Non-traditional. Non-domesticated animals or animals commonly used for
the production of food or products, such as cattle, sheep, goats, hogs or
poultry.
   Premises. A lot or other tract of land including the buildings or structures
thereon. Also, see “lot.”
   Principal Building. See “Building, Principal.”
   Principal Use. The specific, primary purpose for which land or a building is
used.
   Primary Oceanfront Sand Dune. A line marked in the field by South Carolina
Department of Health and Environmental Control Bureau of OCRM staff that
designates the location of the crest of a sand dune.
   Prohibited Use. A use that is not permitted in a Zoning District.
   Property. Something tangible to which its owner has legal title.
   Recreation Vehicle. A mobile home, tent, trailer, or other self-contained
vehicle, designed for recreational purposes, made of metal or other materials,
mounted on two or more wheels and either self-propelled or rigged for towing,
provided such vehicle is less than thirty (30) feet in length and is not used
for residential purposes within the Town of Sullivan’s Island.
   Religious Institution. A religious organization operated for worship,
religious training or study, and including convents, monasteries, shrines and
temples.
   Rental or Rental Dwelling. A dwelling(s) intended to be occupied as a
permanent residence by a person or persons that are other than the property
owner.
   Residence. See “Dwelling.”
   Residential, Attached Single Family. See “Dwelling.”
   Residential, Single Family. See “Dwelling.”
   Residential, Upper Story. See “Dwelling.”
   Restaurant. See “Food Service Establishments.” (8-19-14)
   SCCC. South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control Bureau
of Ocean and Coastal Resource Management.
   SCDHEC. South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control.
   Setback. The required horizontal distance, measured at right angles to the
boundary line, between a Principal Building and a boundary line.
   Single-family. See “family.”
   Sign. The term “sign” shall mean and include every sign, poster panel, free-
standing ground sign, roof sign, projecting sign, pylon sign, sign painted on a
wall, window, marquee, awning or canopy, and shall include any announcement,
declaration, demonstration, display, ribbon, banner, illustration or insignia
used to advertise or promote the interests of any person when the same is
placed in view of the general public, traveling along a public street right-of-
way.
   Sign Area. The area of a sign face (which is also the sign area of a wall
sign or other sign with only one face) shall be computed by means of the
smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle or combination thereof that will
encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem or other
display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the
background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop
or structure against which it is placed, but not including any supporting
framework, bracing or decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall
otherwise meets the requirements of this Ordinance and is clearly incidental to
the display itself.
   Sign Height. The distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the
top of the highest attached component of the sign. Normal grade shall be
construed to be the newly established grade after any site construction,
exclusive of any filling, berming or mounding that was created solely for the
purpose of locating the sign. In cases in which the normal grade cannot be
reasonably determined, sign height shall be computed on the assumption that the
elevation of the normal grade at the base of the sign is equal to the point of
crown elevation of the nearest public street.
   Sign, Wall. A sign attached to a vertical surface of the building on the
walls of a building, attached flat against a wall, or a projecting sign,
including on awnings and in windows.
   Sign, Pole or Ground Mounted. Signs, whether or not illuminated, mounted on
poles or constructed as monument sign at ground level, whose primary purpose is
for advertising or information related to private property or businesses.
   Sign, Illuminated. When artificial illumination techniques are used in any
fashion to project the message on a sign, that sign shall be an illuminated
sign.
   Special Exception. A use permitted in a zoning district that possesses
characteristics that require certain controls in order to insure compatibility
with other uses in the district within which they are proposed for location and
therefore shall be approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
   Spirits Tasting Events. An event or festival produced for a limited time and
permitted by codes and laws for the purpose of public sampling of alcoholic
beverages.
   Story. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it,
then the space between the floor and ceiling next above it. The area used as
foundation beneath the first usable living floor shall not be considered a
“story.”
   Story, Half. A story in which one or more exterior walls intersect a sloping
roof not more than two (2’) feet above the floor of such story.
   Street. A dedicated and accepted public right-of-way for vehicular traffic
that affords the principal means of access to abutting properties.
   Street Centerline. That line surveyed and monumental by the governing body
shall be the centerline of a street; or in the event that no centerline has
been so determined, it shall be that line running midway between, and parallel
to the general direction of, the outside right-of-way lines of such streets.
   Street Frontage. The width in linear feet of a lot where it abuts the right-
of-way of any street from which access may be directly gained.
   Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more
or less permanent location on the ground or which is attached to something
having more or less permanent location on the ground. A “building” and “sign”
as defined in this section are “structures.” A structure or part of a structure
shall include buildings, overhanging eaves, covered structures such as steps,
porches, patios, decks, pools, carports, and any extension of a building beyond
its foundation line.
   Structure Height. See “Building Height.”
   Temporary Use. A use established for a fixed period of time with the intent
to discontinue such use upon the expiration of the time period.
   Town Council. The term “Town Council” refers to the legally constituted and
elected governing body of the Town of Sullivan’s Island.
   Tract. See “lot”.
   Trailer. Any vehicle or structure capable of moving, or being moved, over
streets and highways on its own wheels or on flat beds or other carriers, which
is designed or utilized to: (1) provide temporary or permanent quarters for the
conduct of a business, profession, trade or occupation; (2) serve as a carrier
of people, new or used goods, products or equipment; and (3) be used as
selling, advertising or display device. For the purposes of this Zoning
Ordinance, the term “trailer” shall not include the terms “camper”,
“recreational vehicle”, or “house trailer”.
   Tree. Any living, self-supporting woody perennial plant that is evergreen or
deciduous.
   Tree Commission. A Commission appointed by the Town Council to oversee the
Tree Protection Article of the Zoning Ordinance.
   Tree, Protected. A Category II tree that has a DBH of at least 6 inches.
   Tree, Protected Species. All Sabal Palmettos (Cabbage Palm, herein called
“Palmetto”).   
   Tree, Significant. A Category I tree that has a DBH of at least 16 inches or
a height of at least 40 feet; it shall have the highest level of protection
based on its total value to the island environment.
   Upper Story Residential. See “Dwelling.”
   Useable Living Space. That area contained in a Principal Building used for
bedrooms, living rooms, kitchens, bathrooms, entranceways, hallways, closets,
enclosed sun porches and other such space but not including attics without
windows or skylights, or area below the first floor living area not used as
living space.
   Usable Lot Area. See “buildable Lot Area.”
   Use. Accessory. See “accessory.”
   Use, Principal. The primary purpose for which a lot is occupied and/or used.
   Used. See “occupied”.
   Utility substation. A facility for the operation of public utility services
such as electrical, gas, water and sewer.
   Vacation Rental. The commercial use of a Principal Building(s) that is: (1)
rented, leased, assigned for tenancies; or (2) made available for use,
occupancy, possession, sleeping accommodations, or lodging for one or more
persons in return for valuable consideration for any period of less than
twenty-eight (28) continuous days duration.
   Variance. A modification of the terms of this Zoning Ordinance not contrary
to the public interest where, owning to special conditions, a literal
enforcement of the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance will, in an individual
case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the Zoning
Ordinance or resolution shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured,
and substantial justice done.
   Yard, Front. A yard situated between the front building line and the front
lot line extending the full width of the lot; the front yard is that portion of
the lot adjacent to the street.
   Yard, Rear. A yard situated between the rear building line and the rear lot
line and extending the full width of the lot.
   Yard, Side. A yard situated between a side building line and a side lot line
and extending from the front yard to the rear yard.
   Zoning Administrator. The term “Zoning Administrator” refers to any person
so designated by the Town Council of Sullivan’s Island, and so employed.
   Zoning District. See “District”.
   Zoning Map. See “Map”.
   Zoning Standard. Regulations governing land uses, lot area and dimensions,
setbacks, lot coverage, size and height. These regulations address a
structure’s location on the lot and the permitted building envelope.
(Ord. 2018-07, passed 11-20-2018; Ord. 2020-17, passed 11-17-2020)
Sec. 21-204. Reserved.
ARTICLE XXII: LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS
Sec. 21-205. Conflict with other laws.
   Whenever the regulations of this Zoning Ordinance require a greater width or
size of yards, or require a greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied, or
impose other more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other
statutes, the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance shall govern. Whenever the
provisions of any other statute require more restrictive standards than are
required by this Zoning Ordinance, the provisions of such state statute shall
govern.
Sec. 21-206. Validity.
   Should any section or provision of this Zoning Ordinance be declared invalid
or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration
shall not affect the validity of the Zoning Ordinance as a whole or any part
thereof which is not specifically declared to be invalid or unconstitutional.
Sec. 21-207. Repeal of conflicting ordinances and code sections.
   All ordinances and code sections or parts thereof in conflict herewith are
repealed to the extent necessary to give this Zoning Ordinance full force and
effect.
Sec. 21-208. Effective date.
   This Zoning Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after the
date of its ratification by the Town of Sullivan’s Island.
Sec. 21-209. Severability and inconsistency.
   If any court of competent jurisdiction holds any section, provision, clause,
phrase, or application of this Zoning Ordinance invalid or unconstitutional for
any reason, the remaining provisions of this Zoning Ordinance shall be deemed
severable there from and shall be construed as reasonable and necessary to
achieve the lawful purposes of this Zoning Ordinance. All Ordinances or parts
of Ordinances of the Town of Sullivan’s Island in conflict with the provisions
of this Zoning Ordinance are hereby superseded to the extent of such conflict.
   This Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon its ratification.
      RATIFIED this 17 day of May, 2005.
                                    TOWN COUNCIL OF SULLIVAN’S ISLAND
                                    By:
                                                     
                                          J. Marshall Stith, Mayor
ATTEST:
                                        
Ellen McQueeney, Clerk
FIRST READING: April 19, 2005
SECOND READING: May 2, 2005
THIRD READING: May 2, 2005
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   ADMINISTRATION
      
II.   FRANCHISES
      
III.   PROPERTY
      
IV.   BONDS AND FINANCES
TABLE I: ADMINISTRATION
 
Prior Code Section Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Appendix 1.3       -        7-17-1975   Transfer of power to Town Council
                                      
 
TABLE II: FRANCHISES
 
Prior Code Section Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Appendix 2.3       -        2-18-1980   Cable television franchise
Appendix 2.1       -        4-21-1980   Electric and gas franchise
Appendix 2.2       -        4-21-1980   Telephone company licenses
14-29              -        7-19-2005   Franchise fee for electric company
                  -        3-16-2010    
                                      
 
TABLE III: PROPERTY
Prior Code Section Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Prior Code   Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Section
Appendix 1.2 -        5-14-1953   State charge to own property in fee simple
Appendix 1.1 -        4-2-1964    Annexation of property
                                  Closing and abandonment of unnamed street
14-28        -        4-19-2005   and of old right-of-way of Star of the West
                                  Street
14-31        -        9-19-2006   Lease of real property to Gadsden Cultural
                                  Center
14-32        -        8-21-2007   Lease agreement with American Towers, Inc.
14-35        2014-11  10-21-2014  Lease of property to the Battery Gadsden
                                  Cultural Center Inc.
                                  Grant of permanent easement to the
-            2020-12  7-21-2020   Commissioners of Public Works of Charleston
                                  to construct a water line
-            2020-21  12-15-2020  Amendment to the easement granted to the
                                  Commissioners of Public works of Charleston
-            2021-04  4-20-2021   Grant of permanent easement to Dominion
                                  Energy to construct power lines
-            2021-20  1-18-2022   Lease of property to the Battery Gadsden
                                  Cultural Center Inc.
-            2022-09  1-17-2023   Amending lease of property to the Battery
                                  Gadsen Cultural Center Inc.
-            2024-05  6-18-2024   Lease of property to the Sullivan’s Island
                                  Club
-            2025-05  7-15-2025   Lease of property located at 1452 Poe Avenue
                                  to Sullivan's Island Club
                                
 
TABLE IV: BONDS AND FINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
20-17    10-6-2003   Issuance of bonds
-        6-30-2004   Issuance of bonds
-        6-30-2004   Issuance of bonds
2010-11  11-16-2010  Issuance of bonds
2014-10  9-8-2014    Issuance of bonds
2018-03  6-19-2018   Issuance of bonds
2019-03  7-16-2019   Issuance of bonds
2019-08  2-19-2020   Issuance of bonds
2020-11  7-21-2020   Issuance of bonds
2021-07  6-15-2021   Issuance of bonds
2022-03  6-21-2022   Issuance of bonds
2023-02  6-20-2023   Issuance of bonds
2024-06  6-18-2024   Issuance of bonds
2025-04  6-17-2025   Issuance of bonds
                    
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to South Carolina Code
References to Prior Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO SOUTH CAROLINA CODE
S.C. Code Cites Code Section
S.C. Code Cites             Code Section
4-1-160                     92.02
Title 5                     33.09
5-5                         30.01
                            34.01,
                            34.99,
                            91.35,
5-7-30                      92.02,
                            110.01,
                            150.01,
                            154.01,
                            155.001
5-7-30 et seq.              151.01
                            91.35,
5-7-80                      91.36,
                            92.02
5-7-90                      34.01,
                            34.03
5-7-110                     32.025
5-7-130                     37.01
5-7-140                     70.001
5-7-190                     30.26
5-7-200                     30.06,
                            33.05
5-7-220                     32.002
5-7-230                     32.008,
                            34.01
5-7-240                     32.005
5-7-250(d)                  31.35
5-7-260                     31.30
5-7-280                     150.15
5-11                        30.01
5-15                        33.01
5-15-40                     30.03,
                            30.04
5-15-50                     33.07
5-15-62                     33.01
5-23-150                    153.28
5-23-190                    35.11
5-25-20                     32.040,
                            150.01
5-25-110                    32.040
5-25-120                    32.010
5-25-1110                   150.01
5-25-1110 through 5-25-1160 150.01
5-31-10 to 5-31-2040        Chapter 51
5-31-2010 through 5-31-2040 51.085
6-1-20                      38.011
6-1-400 et seq.             110.19
6-1-400(G)(2)               Ch. 110, App. A
6-1-410                     110.11,
                            110.16
6-1-730                     38.072
6-7-320 et seq.             35.01
6-9-5                       151.01
6-29-310 et seq.            35.07,
                            35.08
6-29-510 et seq.            35.12
Title 7                     33.09
8-13-910                    33.06
12-21-2720(A)(1)            Ch. 110, App. A
12-21-2720(A)(2)            Ch. 110, App. A
12-21-2720(A)(3)            Ch. 110, App. A
12-21-2720(B)               Ch. 110, App. A
12-21-2728                  Ch. 110, App. A
12-21-2746                  Ch. 110, App. A
12-23-210                   Ch. 110, App. A
12-45-180                   155.029
12-47-210 to 12-47-270      38.010
12-49-80                    38.007
12-49-210 to 12-49-300      38.026
12-49-460                   38.027
12-49-530                   38.028
12-49-570                   38.029
12-49-580                   38.040
12-55-60                    38.007
12-56-10 et seq.            38.085
Title 14, Ch. 25            34.01
14-25-10 et seq.            70.001
14-25-430                   34.99
14-25-510                   34.04
14-25-510 to 14-25-540      34.01
14-25-520                   34.05
14-25-530                   34.06
14-25-540                   34.07
14-25-910 et seq.           34.01
14-25-950                   34.08
14-25-960                   34.09
14-25-1000                  34.10
14-25-1010                  34.11
15-1-20                     10.02
16-11-510 et seq.           132.29
16-15-150 et seq.           132.17
16-19-10 to 16-19-200       132.10
16-23-460                   132.22
Title 18, Ch. 13            37.04
20-7-13(11)                 130.05
20-7-2700                   130.05
23-13-70                    132.09
23-43-10 et seq.            Ch. 157, 21-20
30-1-10 to 30-1-170      Ch. 37, App. A
                            110.02,
Title 38, ch. 7             110.11,
                            110.16,
                            Ch. 110, App. A
                            110.02,
Title 38, ch. 45            110.11,
                            110.16,
                            Ch. 110, App. A
38-7-20                     110.02
38-57-10 to 38-57-30        93.04
38-57-10 et seq.            93.03
44-1-8                      90.17
44-1-140                    92.02,
                            92.17
44-1-160                    92.17
44-7-130                    130.05
44-95-10 et seq.            130.01,
                            130.05
44-95-20(4)                 130.05
47-1-10 to 47-1-70          Chapter 90
47-1-10 et seq.             Chapter 90
47-5-210                    90.17
48-1-280                    92.17
48-10-20                    155.002,
                            155.040
48-14-10 et seq.            155.001
48-18-70                    155.052
49-23-10 et seq.            50.26,
                            50.27
56-1-10                     70.001
56-1-10 et seq.             Chapter 70
56-1-510                    70.001
56-5-10 et seq.             90.02
56-5-6150                   70.001
56-5-253D                   70.017
56-5-2740                   70.016
56-5-6220m                  34.03
                            110.02,
Title 58, ch. 9, art. 20    110.11,
                            110.16
58-9-2200                   Ch. 110, App. A
61-4-10                     132.25
                            
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code Section Code Section
Prior Code Section Code Section
1-1                10.01
1-2                10.02
1-3                10.03
1-4                10.04
1-5                10.05
1-6                10.06
1-7                10.99
1-8                10.07
1-9                10.08
1-10               10.09
2-1                30.01
2-2                30.02
2-3                30.03
2-4                30.04
2-5                30.05
2-6                30.06
2-7                30.07
2-8                30.08
2-9                30.09
2-10               30.20
2-11               30.21
2-12               30.22
2-13               30.23
2-14               30.24
2-15               30.25
2-16               30.26
2-17               31.01
2-18               31.02
2-19               31.03
2-20               31.04
2-21               31.15
2-22               31.16
2-23               31.17
2-24               31.18
2-25               31.30
2-26               31.31
2-27               31.32
2-28               31.33
2-29               31.34
2-30               31.35
2-31               31.36
2-32               31.37
2-33               30.40
2-34               30.41
2-35               30.42
2-36               30.43
2-37               30.44
2-38               30.45
2-39               32.001
2-40               32.002
2-41               32.003
2-42               32.004
2-43               32.005
2-44               32.006
2-45               32.007
2-46               32.008
2-47               32.009
2-48               32.010
2-49               32.011
2-50               32.025
2-51               32.026
2-51A              32.027
2-52               32.028
2-53               32.040
2-54               32.041
2-55               32.042
2-55.1             32.043
2-56               32.055
2-57               32.056
2-58               32.070
2-59               32.071
2-60               32.085
2-61               32.086
3-1                90.01
3-2                90.02
3-3                90.03
3-4                90.04
3-5                90.15
3-6                90.16
3-7                90.17
3-8                90.18,
                   90.99
3-9                90.19
Chapter 4          156.01
4A-1               95.01
4A-2               95.02
4A-3               95.03
4A-4               95.04
5-1                150.01
5-2                150.02
5-3                150.99
5-4                150.15
5-5                150.16
5-6                150.17
5-7                150.18
5-8                150.19
5-8.1              150.20
5-9                150.35
5-10               150.36
5-11               150.37
5-12               150.38
5-13               150.39
5-14               150.40
5-15               150.41
5-16               150.42
5-17               150.55
5-18               150.56
5-19               150.57
5-21               151.01
5-22               151.02
5-23               151.03
5-24               151.04
5-25               151.05
5-26               151.06
5-27               151.07
5-28               151.08
5-29               151.09
5-30               151.10
5-31               151.11
5-32               151.12
5-33               151.25
5-34               151.26
5-35               151.27
5-36               151.28
5-37               151.29
5-38               151.30
5-39               151.31
5-40               151.32
5-41               152.01
5-42               152.02
5-43               152.03
5-44               152.04
5-45               152.05
5-46               152.06
5-47               152.07
5-48               152.08
5-49               152.09
5-50               152.10
5-51               152.11
5-52               152.25
5-53               152.26
5-54               152.27
5-55               152.40
5-56               152.41
5-57               152.42
5-58               152.43
5-59               152.55
5-60               152.56
5-61               151.99
5-62               151.99,
                   152.99
5-63               153.01
5-64               153.02
5-65               153.03
5-66               153.04
5-67               153.05
5-68               153.06
5-69               153.07
5-70               153.08
5-71               153.09
5-72               153.10
5-73               153.11
5-74               153.12
5-75               153.99
5-76               153.25
5-77               153.26
5-78               153.27
5-79               153.28
5-80               153.40
5-81               153.41
5-82               153.42
5-83               153.99
6-1                33.01
6-2                33.02
6-3                33.03
6-4                33.04
6-5                33.05
6-6                33.06
6-7                33.07
6-8                33.08
7-1                154.01
7-2                154.02,
                   154.99
7-3                154.03
8-1                93.01
8-2                93.02
8-3                93.20
8-4                93.21
8-5                93.22
8-6                93.03
8-7                93.04
8-9                93.05
8-10               93.06
9-1                91.01
9-2                91.02
9-3                91.15
9-4                91.16
9-5                91.17
9-6                91.18
9-7                91.19,
                   91.99
9-8                91.20
9-8.0              91.20,
                   91.99
9-9                91.35
9-10               91.36
9-11               91.99
10-1               110.01
10-2               110.02
10-3               110.03
10-4               110.04
10-5               110.05
10-6               110.06
10-7               110.07
10-8               110.08
10-9               110.09
10-10              110.10
10-11              110.11
10-12              110.12
10-13              110.13
10-14              110.14
10-15              110.15
10-16              110.16
10-17              110.18
10-18              110.99
11-1               70.001,
                   70.002
11-2               70.015
11-3               70.016
11-4               70.017
11-5               70.018
11-6               70.019
11-7               70.020
11-8               70.021
11-9               70.022
11-10              70.023
11-11              70.024
11-12              70.025
11-13              70.026
11-14              70.040
11-15              70.041
11-16              70.055
11-17              70.056
11-18              70.057
11-19              70.058
11-20              70.059
11-21              70.060
11-22              70.061
11-23              70.062
11-24              70.063
11-25              70.064
11-26              70.065
11-27              70.066
11-28              70.067
11-29              70.068
11-30              70.069
11-31              70.070
11-32              70.071
11-33              70.072
11-34              70.073
11-35              70.074
11-36              70.999
12-1               34.01
12-2               34.02
12-3               34.03
12-4               34.99
12-5               34.04
12-6               34.05
12-7               34.06
12-8               34.07
12-9               34.99
12-10              34.08
12-11              34.09
12-12              34.10
12-13              34.11
13-1               92.01
13-2               92.02
13-3               92.03
13-4               92.15
13-5               92.16
13-6               92.17
13-7               92.18
13-8               92.19
13-9               92.20
13-10              92.21
14-1               132.01
14-2               132.02
14-3               132.03
14-4               132.04
14-5               132.05
14-6               132.06
14-7               132.07
14-8               132.08
14-9               132.09
14-10              132.10
14-11              132.11
14-12              132.12
14-13              132.13
14-14              132.14
14-15              132.15
14-16              132.16
14-17              132.17
14-18              132.18
14-19              132.19
14-20              132.20
14-21              132.21,
                   132.99
14-22              132.22
14-23              132.23
14-25              132.24,
                   132.99
                   131.01,
                   131.02,
14-26              131.03,
                   131.04,
                   131.05,
                   131.06
14-26.1            132.25
14-26.2            132.26
14-26.3            132.27,
                   132.99
14-26.4            132.99
14-27              132.28,
                   132.99
14-28              TSO III
14-29              TSO II
                   130.01,
                   130.02,
                   130.03,
                   130.04,
                   130.05,
14-30              130.06,
                   130.07,
                   130.08,
                   130.09,
                   130.10,
                   130.11,
                   130.99
14-31              TSO III
14-32              TSO III
14-33              132.29
14-34              132.30
14-35              TSO III
15-1               94.01
15-2               94.02
15-3               94.15
15-4               94.16
15-5               94.17
15-6               94.18
15-7               94.19
15-8               94.20
15-9               94.21
15-10              94.22
15-11              94.23
15-12              94.24
15-13              94.25
15-14              94.26
15-15              94.27
15-16              94.28
15-17              94.29
15-18              94.30
15-19              94.31
Chapter 16         36.089
16-1               36.001
16-2               36.002
16-4               36.004
16-5               36.005
16-15              36.041
16-36              36.101
16-37              36.102
17-1               35.01
17-2               35.02
17-3               35.03
17-4               35.04
17-5               35.05
17-6               35.06
17-7               35.07
17-8               35.08
17-9               35.09
17-10              35.10
17-11              35.11
18-1               51.001
18-2               51.002
18-3               51.003
18-4               51.004
18-5               51.005
18-6               51.006
18-7               51.020
18-8               51.021
18-9               51.022
18-10              51.023
18-11              51.024
18-12              51.025
18-13              51.026
18-14              51.027
18-15              51.028
18-16              51.029
18-17              51.030
18-18              51.045
18-19              51.046
18-20              51.047
18-21              51.048
18-22              51.049
18-23              51.050
18-24              51.051
18-25              51.052
18-26              51.053
18-27              51.065
18-28              51.066
18-29              51.080
18-30              51.081
18-31              51.082
18-32              51.083
18-33              51.084
18-34              51.085
19-1               38.001
19-2               38.002
19-3               38.003
19-4               38.004
19-5               38.005
19-7               38.006
19-8               38.007
19-10              38.008
19-11              38.009
19-12              38.010
19-13              38.011
19-14              38.012
19-15              38.025
19-16              38.026
19-17              38.027
19-18              38.028
19-19              38.029
19-20              38.040
19-21              38.041
19-23              38.042
20-1               50.01
20-2               50.02
20-3               50.03
20-4               50.04
20-5               50.05
20-6               50.06
20-7               50.07
20-8               50.08
20-9               50.09
20-10              50.10
20-11              50.11
20-12              50.12
20-12.1            50.13
20-13              50.14
20-14              50.25
20-14.1            50.26
20-14.2            50.27
20-14.3            50.28
20-14.4            50.29
20-14.5            50.30
20-14.6            50.31
20-15              50.32
20-16              50.99
Chapter 21         157.01
21-1               38.999
22-1               37.04
22-2               37.03
22-3               37.05
22-4               37.05
22-8               37.05
22-9               37.05
22-10              37.05
22-11              37.06
                   38.055,
                   38.056,
23-1               38.057,
                   38.058,
                   38.059,
                   38.999
                   38.070,
24-1               38.071,
                   38.072,
                   38.073
25-1               155.001
25-2               155.002
25-3               155.003
25-4               155.004
25-5               155.005
25-6               155.006
25-7               155.007
25-8               155.008
25-9               155.009
25-10              155.010
25-11              155.011,
                   155.999
25-12              155.012
25-13              155.025
25-14              155.026
25-15              155.027
25-16              155.028
25-17              155.029
25-18              155.040
25-19              155.041
25-20              155.042
25-21              155.043
25-22              155.044
25-23              155.045
25-24              155.046
25-25              155.047
25-26              155.048
25-27              155.049
25-28              155.050
25-29              155.051
25-30              155.052
25-31              155.053
25-32              155.054
25-33              155.055
25-34              155.056
25-36              155.057
25-37              155.058
25-38              155.059
25-39              155.060
25-40              155.061
25-41              155.062
25-42              155.063
25-43              155.064
25-44              155.065
25-45              155.999
25-46              155.066
25-47              155.067
25-48              155.068
25-49              155.069
25-50              155.070
25-51              155.071
25-52              155.072
25-53              155.073
25-54              155.074
25-55              155.075
26-1               38.085
Appendix 1.1       TSO III
Appendix 1.2       TSO III
Appendix 1.3       TSO I
Appendix 2.1       TSO II
Appendix 2.2       TSO II
Appendix 2.3       TSO II
Comprehensive Plan 35.12
                   
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
-        8-5-1936    132.09,
                     132.22
                     150.36,
-        4-6-1938    150.39,
                     150.40
-        5-28-1938   93.01,
                     93.02
-        7-6-1938    93.01,
                     93.02
-        12-6-1946   38.041
                     91.02,
                     91.16 –
-        9- -1951    91.18,
                     91.20,
                     91.99,
                     132.19
-        9- -1952    91.01
-        5-14-1953   TSO III
                     91.01,
-        11-10-1955  91.35,
                     91.36,
                     91.99
-        3-13-1958   90.01
-        12-18-1958  93.20 –
                     93.22
-        12-18-1961  150.41,
                     150.99
-        12-16-1963  150.55,
                     150.57
-        4-2-1964    TSO III
-        9-20-1965   150.42
-        3-18-1968   132.17
                     70.015 –
                     70.017,
-        10-21-1968  70.019,
                     70.021 –
                     70.026
-        5-9-1969    94.15 –
                     94.31
-        5-16-1969   94.02 
-        5-19-1969   94.01
                     50.01,
                     50.02,
                     50.04 –
-        11-2-1969   50.10,
                     50.12,
                     50.14,
                     50.32
                     51.003 –
                     51.006,
                     51.020 –
                     51.030,
                     51.045 –
-        12-3-1969   51.053,
                     51.065,
                     51.066,
                     51.080 –
                     51.082,
                     51.084
-        3-16-1970   70.040,
                     70.041
-        9-20-1971   51.085
-        5-15-1972   150.17
-        8-21-1972   132.06
-        7-26-1973   150.18,
                     150.19
-        4-22-1974   150.99
-        9-16-1974   35.01 –
                     35.08
                     151.01,
                     151.03,
                     151.05 –
                     151.12,
                     151.25 –
                     151.32,
                     151.99,
-        5-19-1975   152.01 –
                     152.11,
                     152.25 –
                     152.27,
                     152.40 –
                     152.43,
                     152.55,
                     152.56,
                     152.99
-        5-29-1975   151.02
-        7-17-1975   TSO I
                     30.20,
                     30.21,
                     30.23 –
-        7-21-1975   30.25,
                     31.17,
                     31.18,
                     32.004
-        8-18-1975   132.04,
                     132.05
-        9-2-1975    30.02
-        9-25-1975   30.01
-        12-15-1975  32.010,
                     150.39
                     36.001,
                     36.002,
-        3-15-1976   36.004,
                     36.005,
                     36.101,
                     36.102
-        8-2-1976    30.03 –
                     30.05
-        10-4-1976   153.99
                     38.001,
                     38.002,
                     38.006 –
-        12-6-1976   38.012,
                     38.025 –
                     38.029,
                     38.040
-        4-4-1977    30.05
-        11-21-1977  32.085
                     150.39,
-        12-5-1977   153.05,
                     153.99
-        5-15-1978   30.20
-        7-17-1978   36.042,
                     36.044
-        3-18-1979   33.08
                     33.01,
                     33.02,
                     33.04,
                     33.06,
-        3-19-1979   33.07,
                     70.055 –
                     70.063,
                     70.065 –
                     70.074
-        11-19-1979  110.15
-        2-18-1980   TSO II
-        4-21-1980   TSO II
-        4-21-1980   TSO II
-        5-19-1980   90.15 –
                     90.19
-        11- -1980   110.16
                     110.01 –
                     110.09,
-        11-17-1980  110.14,
                     110.19,
                     110.99
-        11-21-1983  151.03,
                     151.04
-        1-16-1984   150.15
-        3-19-1984   70.002
                     36.117,
-        7-16-1984   91.15,
                     91.19,
                     91.99
-        8-20-1984   31.01
-        5-22-1985   93.05
                     36.042,
-        7-15-1986   90.04,
                     90.99
-        9-16-1986   31.01
-        1-15-1988   93.05
-        8-16-1988   150.37,
                     152.05
-        10-15-1988  93.06
-        10-18-1988  153.05
-        1-17-1989   32.028,
                     32.043
-        8-15-1989   93.03
-        11-7-1989   150.15
-        3-20-1990   91.20,
                     91.99
-        8-21-1990   32.025,
                     32.040
-        12-20-1990  51.083,
                     132.23
-        5-22-1991   32.007
                     32.004,
-        8-20-1991   32.006,
                     32.007
-        9-23-1991   153.99
-        12-17-1991  50.08
                     132.23,
-        1-21-1992   150.36,
                     153.40
-        1-27-1992   90.18
-        3-16-1992   32.010
-        3-19-1992   32.011
-        7-21-1992   132.23
                     110.01 –
-        12-15-1992  110.16,
                     110.99
-        1-19-1993   132.24,
                     132.99
-        6-24-1994   150.18
-        2-21-1995   153.05
-        12-19-1995  150.15
                     50.01,
                     50.03 –
                     50.05,
-        3-19-1996   50.07,
                     50.08,
                     50.11 –
                     50.13,
                     50.32
                     10.99,
                     34.99,
                     38.042,
                     90.99,
                     91.20,
-        9-23-1997   91.99,
                     132.24,
                     132.99,
                     151.99,
                     152.99,
                     153.99
-        3-16-1999   90.03
-        4-20-1999   35.07 –
                     35.10
-        9-21-1999   36.029
-        11-16-1999  35.03
-        1-18-2000   35.09
-        1-19-2000   35.10
-        3-21-2000   34.03
-        6-19-2000   32.027
                     36.041,
-        9-19-2000   132.28,
                     132.99
-        5-15-2001   91.19,
                     91.99
                     132.25 –
-        6-19-2001   132.27,
                     132.99
-        7-17-2001   150.15
-        11-20-2001  35.03,
                     93.06
-        12-3-2001   36.041
-        5-28-2002   93.06
-        7-18-2002   150.15
                     50.12,
-        8-20-2002   50.13,
                     132.15,
                     132.16
                     38.055 –
                     38.059,
-        1-21-2003   38.070 –
                     38.073,
                     38.999
20-17    10-6-2003   50.99,
                     TSO IV
                     50.26 –
-        10-21-2003  50.31,
                     150.42
-        6-15-2004   90.18
-        6-30-2004   TSO IV
-        6-30-2004   TSO IV
                     33.06,
-        10-19-2004  33.07,
                     150.38
-        11-16-2004  90.17,
                     90.18
-        2-15-2005   90.17,
                     90.18
-        4-19-2005   TSO III
-        7-19-2005   TSO II
-        12-20-2005  90.18
                     50.04,
-        2-21-2006   50.07,
                     50.08
                     132.20,
-        4-27-2006   132.21,
                     132.99
                     130.01 –
-        6-20-2006   130.11,
                     130.99
-        9-19-2006   TSO III
-        3-18-2007   132.10 –
                     132.12
                     130.01 –
-        5-15-2007   130.11,
                     130.99
                     153.05,
-        8-21-2007   153.07,
                     TSO III
-        9-18-2007   35.06,
                     150.35
                     155.001 –
                     155.012,
                     155.025 –
2007     9-18-2007   155.029,
                     155.040 –
                     155.075,
                     155.999
-        2-19-2008   31.01
                     130.01 –
-        5-20-2008   130.10,
                     130.11,
                     130.99
                     50.01,
                     50.06 –
                     50.08,
                     50.11,
-        7-15-2008   51.006,
                     51.023,
                     51.080,
                     51.082,
                     51.083
-        9-16-2008   50.01,
                     51.006
                     130.01 –
-        11-18-2008  130.11,
                     130.99
-        12-16-2008  110.02
                     130.01 –
-        7-21-2009   130.11,
                     130.99
-        9-15-2009   35.11
2009-6   10-20-2009  35.12
-        11-17-2009  90.17,
                     90.18
-        3-14-2010   132.14
-        3-16-2010   TSO II
                     90.02,
-        7-20-2010   132.15,
                     132.29
-        8-17-2010   132.08
-        11-16-2010  153.27,
                     153.41
2010-11  11-16-2010  TSO IV
                     50.07,
-        12-21-2010  50.13,
                     90.16
-        4-12-2011   50.26
-        4-17-2012   50.01,
                     51.006
2012-03  5-15-2012   Ch. 156, App. A
                     154.01 –
-        8-12-2012   154.03,
                     154.99
-        10-16-2012  31.32
-        1-22-2013   36.041
-        8-20-2013   31.15,
                     31.18
-        9-17-2013   150.38
-        1-21-2014   36.042
-        4-22-2014   150.38
-        6-17-2014   32.085
2014-10  9-8-2014    TSO IV
2014-11  10-21-2014  TSO III
2015-11  1-19-2016   31.32
2016-01  6-21-2016   35.03
2016-04  7-19-2016   70.017
2016-05  8-1-2016    155.025 –
                     155.029
2016-06  9-20-2016   Ch. 157, App. A,
                     Sec. 21-17
-        11-2-2016   50.99
2016-07  12-20-2016  50.12
2017-1   6-20-2017   Ch. 157, App. A,
                     Sec. 21-97
                     Ch. 157, App. A,
2017-04  8-15-2017   Sec. 21-44, Ch. 157, App. A,
                     Sec. 21-59
2017-06  2-20-2018   90.17
2018-03  6-19-2018   TSO IV
2018-06  11-20-2018  132.31,
                     132.99
                     Ch. 157, App. A,
                     Sec. 21-20, Ch.157, App. A,
                     Sec. 21-140, Ch. 157, App. A,
2018-07  11-20-2018  Sec. 21-149 –
                     Sec. 21-151, Ch. 157, App. A,
                     Sec. 21-153, Ch. 157, App. A,
                     Sec. 21- 203
2018-09  1-15-2018   Ch. 156, App. A,
                     Sec. 4-24
2019-03  7-16-2019   TSO IV
2019-04  8-20-2019   35.12
2019-06  10-15-2019  38.085
                     130.02 –
2019-07  1-21-2020   130.06,
                     130.99
2019-08  2-19-2020   TSO IV
2020-11  7-21-2020   TSO IV
2020-12  7-21-2020   TSO III
                     Ch. 157, App. A,
2020-17  11-17-2020  Sec. 21-31, Ch. 157, App. A,
                     Sec. 21-203
                     150.01,
                     150.02,
                     150.15,
                     150.42,
                     153.05,
2020-18  11-17-2020  153.07,
                     153.08,
                     153.25,
                     153.26,
                     153.40,
                     153.43
2020-21  12-15-2020  TSO III
                     37.01 -
2020-22  1-19-2021   37.08,
                     Ch. 37, App. A
2021-01  1-19-2021   153.40
2021-04  4-20-2021   TSO III
2021-07  6-15-2021   TSO IV
2021-13  10-19-2021  90.05,
                     90.99
                     110.01 –
                     110.20,
2021-18  12-21-2021  110.99,
                     Ch. 110, Apps. A,
                     B
2021-20  1-18-2022   TSO III
                     Ch. 157, App. A,
2021-21  2-15-2022   Sec. 21-9,
                     21-77 –
                     21-79
2022-01  5-17-2022   36.041
2022-02  6-21-2022   Adopting Ordinance
2022-03  6-21-2022   TSO IV
2022-06  7-19-2022   36.041
2022-07  9-20-2022   51.021
2022-08  9-20-2022   50.08
2022-09  1-17-2023   TSO III
                     36.001,
2023-01  6-20-2023   36.002,
                     36.005
2023-02  6-20-2023   TSO IV
2023-06  12-19-2023  Ch. 110, Apps. A,
                     B
                     Ch. 157, App. A, Sec.
                     21-20,
                     21-25,
                     21-27,
2023-07  2-20-2024   21-31,
                     21-43,
                     21-44,
                     21-138,
                     21-140
                     33.05 –
2024-01  5-21-2024   33.07,
                     33.09
2024-04  6-18-2024   Ch. 157, App. A,
                     Sec. 21-22
2024-05  6-18-2024   TSO III
2024-06  6-18-2024   TSO IV
2024-08  10-15-2024  Ch. 157, App. A ,
                     Sec. 21-7
2024-09  11-19-2024  35.12
2025-04  6-17-2025   TSO IV
2025-05  7-15-2025   TSO III
2025-06  12-16-2025  Ch. 110, App. B
                    
 
