VILLAGE OF GILMAN, WISCONSIN
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-5 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance 157- 2025 passed 5-14-2025
 
Published by:
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to other sections
   
10.09   Reference to offices
   
10.10   Errors and omissions
   
10.11   Official time
   
10.12   Reasonable time
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Construction of ordinances
   
10.16   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.17   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.18   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.19   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.20   Effective date
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances by and for the Village of Gilman shall be
designated as the “Code of Gilman” or “this code” and may be so cited.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as
modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or
sections; the Code of Gilman, Wisconsin.
      COUNTY. Taylor County, Wisconsin.
      COUNTY JAIL. In all cases where the term is used in any provision of this
code, the words shall be construed to mean the County Jail of Taylor County.
      HIGHWAYS. Where used in this code, the word refers to the alleys, streets
and highways of the village.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of this municipality unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to
any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of Wisconsin.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      WISCONSIN STATUTES.  Wherever used in this code, shall mean the WISCONSIN
STATUTES for the most current years, as revised from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 1.03)
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
(Ord. passed 3-12-2008)
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of this municipality shall be by the
following rules, unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of
the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance.
   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or”, if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, such
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   Invalidity. If any provision of this code as now or later amended or
its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.
   (B)   Conflict of provisions. If any provision of different chapters of this
code conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions of each chapter
shall prevail as to all matters and questions arising out of the subject matter
of such chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1.04) (Ord. passed 3-12-2008)
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, such
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of this municipality exercising the powers, duties
or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and such word
or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
such error.
§ 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be
the official time within this municipality for the transaction of all municipal
business.
§ 10.12 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME or
notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of such act or the giving of such notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   All ordinances previously adopted by the village are now repealed.
(Prior Code, § 1.01) (Ord. passed 3-12-2008)
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.15 CONSTRUCTION OF ORDINANCES.
   When constructing the ordinances of the village, the following shall be
observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the express
content or manifest intent of the ordinance: the provisions of §§
10.05, 10.06 and 10.12.
(Prior Code, § 1.03) (Ord. passed 3-12-2008)
§ 10.16 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from
their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.17 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
(Prior Code, § 1.02) (Ord. passed 3-12-2008)
§ 10.18 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of such chapter or section. In addition to such
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.19 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example:
(Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980;
Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example:
(Wis. Stats. § 83A.090)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
      § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
         This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
      Statutory reference:
         Inspection of public records, see Wis. Stats. §§ 19.21 et seq.
   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the prior code of ordinances
of the city, the prior code section number shall be indicated in the history by
“(Prior Code, §       )”.
§ 10.20 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This code shall take effect and be in force from and after its adoption,
passage and publication and posting, filing and recording in accordance with
the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 66.0103 and/or § 61.50, a copy of said code
when printed is to be kept on file and open for public inspection in the office
of the Village Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 1.07) (Ord. passed 3-12-2008)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this code of ordinances for
which no other specific penalty has been provided shall be subject to a
forfeiture of not less than $50, nor more than $500, plus costs and fees. Each
day a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this code of ordinances for
which a state statute requires that the penalty for violation shall conform to
the penalty provided by statute, shall be subject to the penalty provided under
the applicable state statute.
(Prior Code, § 1.05)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   VILLAGE GOVERNMENT
      
31.   VILLAGE RECORDS/VILLAGE PROPERTY
      
32.   FISCAL MANAGEMENT
      
33.   ETHICS
      
34.   FEE SCHEDULE
CHAPTER 30: VILLAGE GOVERNMENT
Section
Village Board
   
30.01   Village officers; state law adopted
   
30.02   Village Board meetings and rules of procedure
Village Officials and Organizations
   
30.15   Authority, powers and duties
   
30.16   Special offices
   
30.17   Eligibility for office/incompatibility of office
   
30.18   Committees
   
30.19   Cooperation in transfer of village office
   
30.20   Compensation of elected village officers
Village Newspaper
   
30.60   Official village newspaper
VILLAGE BOARD
§ 30.01 VILLAGE OFFICERS; STATE LAW ADOPTED.
   (A)   Adoption.  
      (1)   The following Wisconsin Statutes are hereby incorporated and made
part of this section thereto: Wis. Stats. § 61.19 Annual elections:
appointments; Wis. Stats. § 61.20 Election of Trustees; terms; number; Wis.
Stats. § 61.23 Terms; temporary vacancy; Wis. Stats. § 61.24 President; Wis.
Stats. § 61.25 Clerk; Wis. Stats. § 61.26 Treasurer; Wis. Stats. § 61.27
Assessor; Wis. Stats. § 61.31 Peace Officers; and Wis. Stats. § 61.32 Village
Board; meetings; salaries, except as such statutes have been modified by
Charter ordinance adopted pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0101.
      (2)   References to specific statutory sections wherever used in this
chapter shall mean the most current applicable state statutes.
   (B)   Offices.
      (1)   Offices dispensed with. The Offices of Engineer, Comptroller and
Board of Public Works are dispensed with and the duties thereof shall be
performed by the Village Board.
      (2)   Trustees.  The village shall have six Trustees, whose term of
office shall be two years (three of whom shall be elected each year).
   (C)   Board of Review. The President, Clerk and all Village Trustees shall
constitute the Board of Review.
   (D)   Village Planning Committee. The Village Planning Committee shall
consist of seven members appointed by the Village President with approval of
the Village Board. The Village President may choose the presiding officer. The
Village President may appoint himself or herself to the Committee and may
appoint other village elected or appointed officials, except that the Committee
shall always have at least three citizen members who are not village officials.
Citizen members shall be persons of recognized experience and qualifications.
Appointments shall be made during the month of April for terms that expire in
April or at any other time if a vacancy occurs during the middle of the a term.
Of members of the Committee first appointed, two shall be appointed for one
year, two shall be appointed for two years, and three shall be appointed for
three years. Thereafter, all members of the commission shall be appointed for
three years. See Wis. Stat. §§ 61.35 and 62.33(1).
   (E)   Board of Zoning Appeals. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall consist of
five members and one alternative member who shall be residents of the village
appointed by the Village President and confirmed by a majority vote of the
Village Board. Members first appointed shall serve one year, two for two years,
two for three years and the alternate member shall serve three years.
Thereafter, all members shall be appointed for three years. The Board shall
have the powers and duties prescribed by §
30.15 and Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e).
   (F)   Assessor. An Assessor, who may reside outside of the village, shall be
appointed by the Village Board on an as need basis.
   (G)   Policeman.
      (1)   The Village Board, pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 61.195 and 66.0101,
has by chapter ordinances discontinued the Office of Marshal or Constable, and
pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 61.31, and other powers including general Village
Board powers has created the Office of Policeman. Village police officers
possess the powers, enjoy the privileges and are subject to the liabilities
conferred and imposed by law upon village marshals or constables.
      (2)   The Village Board may appoint one or more deputies or reserves to
the Village Police Chief from time to time as it sees fit, to assist the Police
Chief in the performance of his or her duties. Such deputies shall be employees
at will, serving at the pleasure of the Village Board without definite term or
promise of continued employment.
   (H)   Bond of Village Treasurer. Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 70.67, the
village elects not to give the bond required by Wis. Stats. § 70.67, and in
compliance with Wis. Stats. § 70.67(2) does obligate the village to pay, in
case the Village Treasurer thereof shall fail to do so, all taxes of any kind
required by law to be paid by such Treasurer to the County Treasurer. No bond
will be required by the municipality of the Treasurer, other than the official
bond required of all municipality treasurers, the Treasurer of this county, and
a certified copy of this section shall be filed with the County Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 2.01) (Ord. passed 3-12-2008; Ord. 2023-02, passed 7-12-2023)
§ 30.02 VILLAGE BOARD MEETINGS AND RULES OF PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Regular meeting of Village Board.  
      (1)   Regular meetings of the Village Board will be held at the Village
Hall at 380 East Main Street, Gilman, Wisconsin, at 7:00 p.m. on the second
Wednesday of each month. Any regular meeting of the Village Board falling on a
legal holiday shall be held on the day designated by the Village Board, or
shall not be held, at the discretion of the Board. Any meeting of the Village
Board, including any special or adjourned meetings that are not held at the
Village Hall but at any other substitute location, shall be designated by the
Village President or his or her designee, in compliance with the Open Meeting
Law, by posting a proper written notice of the substituted location at the
three usual and customary posting location likely to give notice. This notice
shall occur at least 24 hours prior to meeting of the Village Board, unless in
an emergency wherein the proper notice posting shall occur at least two hours
prior to the meeting of the Village Board.
      (2)   The three usual and customary posting locations shall be the
following unless the Village Board directs posting at other locations:
         (a)   Gilman Municipal Building, 380 E. Main Street;
         (b)   Romig’s Inc., 109 E. Main Street; and
         (c)   Gilman Market, 235 E. Main Street.
   (B)   Quorum. A majority of the Village Board, including the Village
President, shall constitute a quorum but a lesser number may adjourn from time
to time or compel the attendance of absent members.
   (C)   Special meeting of the Village Board.
      (1)   Any special meeting of the Village Board may be called by the
Village President or any two members of the Village Board in writing, with the
written call for the special meeting of the Village Board filed with the
Village Clerk at least 24 hours prior to the proposed special meeting of the
Village Board with the specific time specified in the written call for the
special meeting.
      (2)   No special meeting of the Village Board shall be held unless the
notice requirement of the State Open Meeting Law, pursuant to Wis. Stats. §
19.84 and notice requirement of the open meeting provisions have been complied
with by the person or persons requesting the public meeting.
      (3)   The Village Clerk, upon notification of call by the Village
President or receipt of the written call for a special meeting of the Village
Board, shall immediately notify, in writing, each member of the Village Board
by delivering the written notice or by having the written notice delivered to
each member of the Village Board. If any member of the Village Board cannot be
personally notified in writing, then the Village Clerk shall deliver or have
delivered a copy of the written notice at the home of any such member of the
Village Board. The Village Clerk shall post such special meeting written notice
in the above-noted three usual and customary locations.
      (4)   Special meetings of the Village Board attended by a quorum of the
members shall be considered a regular meeting of the Village Board for the
transaction of any village business that may come before the Village Board is
such regular village business was so noted in the written notice to the public
as required by the open meeting provisions.
   (D)   Adjourned meeting of the Village Board. The Village Board may by
majority vote, adjourn any regular meeting of the Village Board from time to
time to a specific date and hour. The adjournment to the specific time and
place will be in compliance with the Open Meeting Law.
   (E)   Order and conduct at Village Board meeting.
      (1)   Business order.
         (a)   At the meeting of the Village Board, any member of the Village
Board may take up any business on the agenda in any order unless there be
objection by any member of the Village Board.
         (b)   All written petitions, written communications and written
reports to the Village Board and all written and oral requests to address the
Village Board shall be presented by the Village Clerk to the Village President
or to the person presiding at the meeting of the Village Board.
      (2)   Quorum at roll call of meeting.  If no legal quorum is present at
the time of the initial roll call, the meeting of the Village Board shall be
thereon adjourned by the members of the Village Board present to a specific
date and hour.
      (3)   Absence of Clerk at meeting. If the Village Clerk is not present at
the time of the initial roll call of the meeting of the Village Board, the
Village President shall appoint the Deputy Clerk or any other person at the
meeting of the village to be the Village Clerk pro tem. The Village Clerk pro
tem shall prepare and maintain minutes of the meeting of the Village Board. The
Village Clerk pro tem shall deliver these minutes to the Village Clerk after
the end of the meeting of the Village Board or when the Village Clerk pro tem
is replaced during the meeting of the Village Board by the Village Clerk.
      (4)   Absence of Village President at call to order of meeting. The
presiding officer at the meeting of the Village Board will be the Village
President. If the Village President is not present at the time for the call to
order, the member of the Village Board selected as Board Vice President shall
call the meeting of the Village Board to order, call the initial roll call and
shall preside as Village President until the Village President is able to
preside at the meeting of the Village Board.
      (5)   Vacation of Village President or presiding officer at meeting.  If
the Village President or any other presiding officer of the Village Board
desires to speak on any question or make a motion, the Village President or the
presiding officer may speak or make a motion without vacating the chair or
without designating a member of the Village Board to preside at the meeting as
Village President pro tem.
      (6)   Meeting in public. Any meeting of the Village Board, or any subunit
of the Village Board shall comply with all provisions of Wis. Stats. § 19.85.
      (7)   Receipts of funds.  Any officer, employee or agent of the village
in possession of funds or receipts or earnings of the village shall deposit any
such funds, receipts or earnings with the Village Treasurer on at least a
weekly basis unless approved otherwise by the Village Board, except Police
Department accounts. All such funds, receipts or earnings shall be deposited
with the Village Treasurer on or before the third day of the succeeding
calendar month. The Village Board shall be advised by the Village Treasurer on
a monthly basis of any funds outstanding that have not been properly deposited
with the Village Treasurer. All elected and non-elected village officers and
village employees, within 14 days of taking office, hiring or rehiring, shall
be informed of this provision by the Village Treasurer.
      (8)   Specific rules of conduct at Village Board meetings.
         (a)   Robert’s Rules.  Unless other rules of conduct are specifically
adopted and codified by ordinance by the Village Board, the Village Board and
the meetings of Village Board shall be governed by Robert’s Rules of Order,
newly revised, which are incorporated herein by reference.
         (b)   Control of meetings. The Village President shall conduct the
proceedings of each meeting and shall preserve order. A member may appeal from
the decision of the presiding officer, but such appeal is not debatable and
must be sustained by a majority present, exclusive of the presiding official.
         (c)   Speaking before Village Board.
            1.   At a meeting of the Village Board, no person other than the
members of this Board shall address the Village Board or any member of the
Village Board. This provision shall not apply to:
               a.   The Village Clerk;
               b.   The Village Treasurer;
               c.   The Village Policeman;
               d.   Any member of the Village Board;
               e.   The village legal counsel;
               f.   Director of Public Works; and
               g.   Members of the public recognized by the President at any
portion of the meeting open to public comment.
            2.   This provision shall also not apply under the specific order
of business established to recognize residents of the village or other persons,
under specific order of business to recognize members of any village office,
village committee, village agency, village commission or a special board or
other village officers or except if the person has specifically requested from
a member of this Board the right to address the Village Board and then only
after approval of the presiding officer of the Village Board through an
affirmative vote by the Village Board.
         (d)   Excused voting.
            1.   For voting upon orders, motions, resolutions, ordinances,
action items, business items or any other question, all individual members of
the Village Board present at the meeting shall vote when the individual Village
Board member’s name is called, unless for special cause a Village Board member
has been excused prior to the vote by an affirmative roll call of the remaining
members. However, no member of the Village Board shall be excused from voting
after the actual voting has commenced, except for conflict of interest.
            2.   The Village Board may establish its own rules regarding when
and if members are not to be voting because of any special cause or causes or
conflict of interest.
(Prior Code, § 2.02) (Ord. passed 3-12-2008)
Statutory reference:
   Regular meetings, see Wis. Stats. §§ 19.84(3) and 61.32
VILLAGE OFFICIALS AND ORGANIZATIONS
§ 30.15 AUTHORITY, POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   General powers and duties of Village President (see Wis. Stats. §
61.24).
      (1)   General powers and duties; preside at Village Board meetings. The
Village President shall preside over meetings of the Village Board.
      (2)   Sign documents.
         (a)   The Village President shall sign all ordinances, resolutions,
bylaws, orders, regulations, commissions, licenses and permits adopted or
authorized by the Village Board, unless the Village Board, by ordinance,
authorizes another village officer to sign specific types of documents in lieu
of the Village President.
         (b)   The Village Board, by ordinance, may authorize use of a
facsimile signature under this division (A)(2).
         (c)   The Village President shall sign all drafts, order checks and
transfer orders as provided under Wis. Stats. § 66.0607.
      (3)   Assure administration of statutes.
         (a)   The Village President shall supervise the administration of
statutes relating to the village and village operations to see that they are
faithfully executed.
         (b)   The Village President in his or her supervisory capacity has
specifically delegated continuing responsibilities for village operations as
village delegation of responsibilities.
      (4)   Acts on behalf of Village Board.
         (a)   The Village President shall see that village orders, directives
and ordinances are obeyed and maintained in the village.
         (b)   The Village President shall obtain necessary assistance, if
available, in case of emergencies, except as provided under Wis. Stats. Chapter
323.
      (5)   Acts on authorization of Village Board.
         (a)   The Village Board does authorize the Village President to act on
behalf of the Village Board to direct, as appropriate, the solicitation and
quotations for the purchase of equipment, materials and services and submit
bids and quotations to the Village Board for approval.
         (b)   The Village Board does authorize the Village President to act on
behalf of this Board to represent or designate another village officer to
represent the village at meetings of, and hearings before governmental bodies
on matters affecting the village.
      (6)   Administer oaths. The Village President or any other individuals
may administer oaths and affidavits on all matters pertaining to the affairs of
the village or designate the Village Clerk.
   (B)   Miscellaneous, specific, and statutory duties. Pursuant to Wis. Stats.
§ 61.34:
      (1)   The Village President shall nominate election officials when the
Village Board disapproves the nomination of a party committee under Wis. Stats.
§ 7.30(4)(b);
      (2)   The Village President shall nominate caucus official under Wis.
Stats. § 8.05(1)(c);
      (3)   The Village President shall sue on official bonds, if any, under
Wis. Stats. § 19.015;
      (4)   The Village President shall execute and sign a certificate of
indebtedness in connection with obtaining a state trust fund loan, if any,
under Wis. Stats. § 24.67;
      (5)   The Village President shall appoint members of the Library Board,
if any, under Wis. Stats. §§ 43.54(1)(a) and 43.60(3);
      (6)   The Village President shall publish annually a notice (village
newsletter) regarding noxious weeds under Wis. Stats. §§ 66.0407 and 66.0517;
      (7)   The Village President, if authorized by the Village Board, shall
represent the interest of the village in connection with appearances before the
State Tax Appeals Commission under Wis. Stats. § 70.64(5);
      (8)   The Village President shall perform duties in connection with
selection of jurors in action relating to the taking of property to provide
access to a cemetery, fairgrounds or land used for industrial exposition;
      (9)   The Village President shall appoint members to the Airport
Commission, if any, under Wis. Stats. § 114.14(2);
      (10)   The Village President, under Wis. Stats. § 167.10(3)(8), shall
enforce regulation of fireworks under Wis. Stats. § 167.10;
      (11)   The Village President shall perform the Village President’s duties
related to stray animals and lost goods under Wis. Stats. Chapter 170;
      (12)   The Village President shall approve bonds by contractors for
public works under Wis. Stats. § 779.14(1m); and
      (13)   The Village President shall execute any conveyances of real
property of the village.
   (C)   Other relevant statutory authority, powers and duties of Village
President. List:
____________________________________________________________________________________.
(Prior Code, § 2.03) (Ord. passed 3-12-2008)
§ 30.16 SPECIAL OFFICES.
   (A)   Creation of special officers. The Village Board has, by adoption of
this section, established the following special offices and retains the power
to retain or appoint these special offices, the power to remove the members in
these special offices, the power to establish the powers and duties of these
special offices, and the power to terminate these special offices.
   (B)   Special offices.
      (1)   Village Housing Authority. A Village Housing Authority shall be
organized pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 61.73. The Village President shall appoint
members to the Authority subject to confirmation by the Village Board.
      (2)   Village Attorney.
         (a)   Retention. The Village Board may designate, retain or employ one
or more attorneys on a temporary or continuing basis for legal matters or to
represent the village in legal proceedings.
         (b)   Compensation.  The Village Board shall negotiate and establish
the compensation for the designation, retention or employment of an attorney
based on a regular salary, per diem rate, retainer, hourly rate or other
methods agreed to by the Attorney and the Village Board.
         (c)   Duties. The Attorney has the duties and powers established
pursuant to the retention or contract between the Village Board and the
Attorney.
      (3)   Village Auditor/Accountant.
         (a)   Retention. The Village Board may designate, retain or employ one
or more accountants, including certified public accountants, on a temporary or
continuing basis for financial matters or to represent the village in financial
matters.
         (b)   Compensation. The Village Board shall negotiate and establish
the compensation for the retention or employment of an accountant based on a
regular salary, per diem rate, retainer, hourly rate or other methods agreed to
by the accountant and the Village Board.
   (C)   Responsibilities for special offices. The Village Board or the Village
President has appointed or retained persons to the special offices.
      (1)   The below noted special office holders shall not be considered
regular officers, employee or agents of the village, namely:
         (a)   Village Attorney;
         (b)   Village Auditor; or
         (c)   Village Engineer.
      (2)   The following special office position need not be village residents
to hold these positions:
         (a)   Village Attorney;
         (b)   Village Auditor/Accountant;
         (c)   Village Engineer; and
         (d)   (List others):
                                                                                                  .
      (3)   Every person appointed to a special office must be at least 18
years of age at the time of appointment.
      (4)   The special office holders, other than the specific compensation
and reimbursement for cost and expenses established shall not be entitled to
any village financial benefits, vacation benefits, health benefits, training
programs, educational programs, insurance benefits, paid leave benefits or any
other benefits except: (list exceptions, if any)
                                                                                      .
(Prior Code, § 2.08) (Ord. passed 3-12-2008)
§ 30.17 ELIGIBILITY FOR OFFICE/INCOMPATIBILITY OF OFFICE.
   (A)   Eligibility for office. Any person who is a qualified elector in the
village may hold any elected village office in the village. No member of the
Village Board may, during his or her term, be eligible for any village office
or village position which, during such term, the office or position has been
created by or the selection to which is vested in the Village Board. Any member
of the Village Board will be eligible for such village office or village
position if he or she resigns from the Village Board before being appointed to
the village office or village position and if the office or position created
during his or her term in office.
   (B)   Incompatibility. Certain village offices are incompatible, by common
law and statutory law, with other village offices and also with other county,
state or federal offices.
      (1)   No village officer, by this section and the below noted cited
authority, shall serve in both offices at the same time, namely (list office
and cited authority): the Office of Village Treasurer and the Offices of County
Treasurer or School District Treasurer.
      (2)   Note to users: this list is not inclusive. The common law doctrine
of incompatibility extends to both officers and an office and position.
OTRADOVEC vs City of Green Bay, 118 Wis. 2nd 393, 347 N.W. end 614 (1984).
Consult the Village Attorney for additional advice.
   (C)   Review by Attorney. If any question or concern by any person is raised
to the Village Board regarding incompatibility of any office in the village,
the Village Attorney shall review the matter and shall provide his or her
written comments to the Village Board.
(Prior Code, § 2.09) (Ord. passed 3-12-2008)
§ 30.18 COMMITTEES.
   (A)   Committee appointments.
      (1)   The Village Board shall appoint all committees except the Planning
Committee and designate the chairperson of each committee except the Planning
Committee chair person by majority vote of the Village Board. The Vice
President will be appointed by the Board every year.
      (2)   The Planning Committee, pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 61.35, shall
consist of members appointed pursuant to §
30.01.
      (3)   The Revolving Loan Committee shall consist of a seven-member Board
appointed by the Village President with approval by the Village Board. These
offices will be three-year terms on the committee with staggered years for
completion of terms.
      (4)   The duties of the committees shall be such as are established by
the Village Board from time to time. The Planning Committee shall have those
powers conferred upon city planning commissions by Wis. Stats. § 62.23, as
authorized by Wis. Stats. § 61.35. The functions of the Planning Committee are
to make and adopt a master plan for the physical development of the
municipality. The master plan, with accompanying maps, plats, charts and
descriptions and explanatory matter, shall show the Committee’s recommendations
for such physical development and may include, among other things without
limitations because of enumeration, the general location, character and extent
of streets, highways, freeways, street grades, roadways, walks, bridges,
viaducts, parking areas, public places and areas, parks, playgrounds, sites for
public buildings and structures, waterways; the general location and extent of
sewers, water conduits and other public utilities; the acceptance, widening
narrowing, extension, relocation, removal, vacation, abandonment or changes of
use of any of the foregoing public ways, grounds, places, spaces, buildings,
properties, utility routes or terminals; the general location, character and
extent of community centers and neighborhood units; and other duties as set
forth in Wis. Stats. §§ 62.23(2)-62.23(5).
   (B)   Committee reports. Each committee shall submit a written report of all
matters considered by or referred to it. Such reports shall, whenever feasible,
recommend definite action on each item included in the report. Any committee
shall require any village officer to confer with it and supply information in
connection with any pending before it.
(Prior Code, § 2.11) (Ord. passed 3-12-2008; Ord. 2023-02, passed 7-12-2023)
§ 30.19 COOPERATION IN TRANSFER OF VILLAGE OFFICE.
   (A)   Duty to cooperate on transfer of office. This section shall be
interpreted liberally to accomplish its purpose which is to provide for and
promote an orderly and efficient transfer of office to a successor. All
officers shall use all reasonable efforts to facilitate transfer of office and
to cooperate with their successor.
   (B)   Status summary and responsibilities at end of term.
      (1)   It shall be the duty of all village officers to provide all
documents, files and information they may have regarding village business
activities, property or finances to their respective successor in office and to
cooperate with successors in office and all successor village official and
successor Village Boards. It shall further be the duty of the following
officers to provide a written, end-of-term status summary to the successor
containing therein such information as the Village Board shall require:
         (a)   Village President;
         (b)   Village Clerk;
         (c)   Village Treasurer;
         (d)   Village Assessor; and
         (e)   Village Attorney.
      (2)   Status summaries at the end of each term shall be delivered to the
Village Clerk for filing in the village records with a copy provided to the
Village President.
   (C)   Brief of Village Board and successor in office. When requested by the
Village Board, any officer shall orally brief the Village Board and/or at the
Village Board’s discretion his or her successor in office and answer questions
pertaining to the status summary, duties of the office, procedures of the
office and/or general village business pertaining to that office.
(Prior Code, § 2.14) (Ord. passed 3-12-2008)
§ 30.20 COMPENSATION OF ELECTED VILLAGE OFFICERS.
   Changes in compensation during the term of office shall be subject to Wis.
Stats. § 66.193, and shall not be increased during the term of office for
elective officers who are entitled to participate in setting their salary.
(Prior Code, § 2.15) (Ord. passed 3-12-2008)
VILLAGE NEWSPAPER
§ 30.60 OFFICIAL VILLAGE NEWSPAPER.
   (A)   At such times as the village may be required to use an official
newspaper for publication, the official village newspaper shall be the Medford
Star News.
(Prior Code, § 4.02) (Ord. passed 3-12-2008)
CHAPTER 31: VILLAGE RECORDS/VILLAGE PROPERTY
Section
   
31.01   Public buildings and public land access
   
31.02   Retention of public records
§ 31.01 PUBLIC BUILDINGS AND PUBLIC LAND ACCESS.
   (A)   Authority for public access. The Village Board has the authority to
establish dates and time for public access to the public buildings and public
lands owned or leased by the village. In addition, the Village Board has the
authority to place additional restrictions on the use of public buildings and
public lands owned or leased by the village.
   (B)   Village Hall.
      (1)   The Village Hall shall be opened to the public at the time and
dates listed unless written notice to the contrary is posted at the usual and
customary locations in the village.
      (2)   The Village Hall shall be open to the public at other times with
the approval of the Village Board/Village Clerk. The use of the Village Hall
may be provided for non-governmental functions and events.
(Prior Code, § 3.02(2)) (Ord. passed 3-12-2008)
§ 31.02 RETENTION OF PUBLIC RECORDS.
   (A)   General records schedule adopted. The village hereby adopts, by
reference, the Wisconsin Municipal Records Schedule (hereinafter, "records
schedule"), pertaining to the retention and destruction of public records, and
approved by the State of Wisconsin Public Records Board (hereinafter, "Records
Board") on August 27, 2018. A copy of the Records Schedule will be kept on file
in the Village Clerk's office located at 380 East Main Street, Gilman, WI 54433
and made available for public viewing during regular village office hours.
   (B)   Other records. In the event the village creates a record not
contemplated by the records schedule, the village may, subject to the Records
Board's prior approval, either adopt an applicable records retention schedule
set forth by the Records Board, if available, or create its own retention
schedule pertaining to the record.
(Ord. 2021-06-09, passed 6-9-2021)
CHAPTER 32: FISCAL MANAGEMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
32.01   Fire cost reimbursement
   
32.02   Financial audit
   
32.03   Confidentiality of information about income and expenses in property
assessment matters; exceptions
Budget
   
32.25   Budget adoption
   
32.26   Budget hearing
   
32.27   Estimates of budget
   
32.28   Elements of budget
   
32.29   Elements in budget summary
   
32.30   Initial preparation of budget
   
32.31   Approval of budget
   
32.32   Changes in final budget
   
32.33   Expenditures of funds
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.01 FIRE COST REIMBURSEMENT.
   (A)   The Village Board may develop and maintain the proper funding for fire
protection. The Village Board may charge property owners a fee for the cost of
fire protection provided to their property according to a written schedule
established by the Village Board. This will include fire protection provided by
a fire department created by municipal intergovernmental cooperation agreement
pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0301, and specifically to the “Gilman Area Fire
Department”.
   (B)   (1)   If the Village Board establishes a schedule for the cost of fire
protection, which may be changed by resolution from time to time, copies of
future resolutions shall be included in the Resolution Binder.
      (2)   In the event charges for a fire call remain unpaid following a
billing notice to the landowner, the cost shall be put on the property tax bill
as a special charge, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.0701(13).
(Prior Code, § 5.01(21)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 32.02 FINANCIAL AUDIT.
   (A)   Scope of audit. The Village Board shall provide for financial audits
of the village. The following accounts of the village will be audited:
 
C.D.B.G. Housing Rehabilitation 662-2 Restricted payroll
General Fund                          RLF
Public utilities                      T.I.D. account
 
   (B)   Audit regularity.
      (1)   The Village Board shall receive interim financial statements from
the Village Treasurer. These statements shall be prepared on a monthly basis.
The Village Clerk shall cooperate and aid the Village Treasurer in the
preparation of these financial statements. These statements shall be received
by the Village Board at the meeting after the report is submitted.
      (2)   The Village Board shall arrange for a financial audit of the
village, annually. The audit will be completed by a certified public accountant
or by the Department of Revenue if the Department of Revenue provides this
service. The Village Treasurer and the Village Clerk will cooperate with these
audits.
(Prior Code, § 5.01(22)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 32.03 CONFIDENTIALITY OF INFORMATION ABOUT INCOME AND EXPENSES IN PROPERTY
ASSESSMENT MATTERS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Adoption by reference and confidentiality requirement. Wis. Stats. §
70.47(7)(af) is adopted by reference. Income and expense information provided
by a property owner to the Village Assessor for the purpose of establishing
valuation for assessment purposes by the income method of valuation shall be
confidential and not a public record open to inspection or copying under Wis.
Stats. § 19.35(1). Unless a court determines that the information is
inaccurate, the information provided to the Assessor is not subject to the
right of inspection or copying as a public record under Wis. Stats. § 19.35(1).
   (B)   Exceptions. A village officer in the Village of Gilman may make public
disclosure or allow access to income and expense information provided by a
property owner to the Village Assessor for the purpose of establishing
valuation for assessment purposes by the income method of valuation in his or
her possession as provided below.
      (1)   The Village Assessor shall have access to the provided income and
expense information in the performance of his or her duties.
      (2)   The Board of Review may review the provided income and expense
information when needed, in its opinion, to decide upon a contested assessment.
      (3)   Any person or body who has the right, or whose duty in his or her
office is to review the provided income and expense information, shall have
access to the information.
      (4)   A village officer who is complying with a court order may release
the provided income and expense information in accordance with the court’s
order.
      (5)   If the provided income and expense information has been determined
by a court to be inaccurate, the information is open and public.
      (6)   If the property owner has provided written approval for public
disclosure or limited disclosure to that person, and the Village Board of the
Village of Gilman has approved the disclosure, the provided income and expense
information is open and public to the extent approved.
   (C)   Penalty. Any person, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity
that fails to comply with the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction, pay a forfeiture plus the applicable surcharges, assessments, and
costs for each violation. Each day a violation exists or continues constitutes
a separate offense under this section. In addition, the Village Board may seek
injunctive relief from a court of record to enjoin further violations.
(Ord. passed 4-11-2018)
BUDGET
§ 32.25 BUDGET ADOPTION.
   (A)   The Village Board shall adopt an annual budget.
   (B)   The Village Board shall establish the duties of the Village Clerk in
preparing and presenting to the Village Board the village annual budget. The
duties, at a minimum, are the following:
      (1)   The Village Clerk will prepare a budget timetable for the Village
Board;
      (2)   The Village Clerk will prepare a budget worksheet for the Village
Board and the Finance Committee;
      (3)   The Village Clerk will prepare estimates for the Village Board and
Finance Committee on the revenue and the cash balance for the year-end; and
      (4)   (List other duties):
                                                                                                .
   (C)   The Village Clerk shall prepare a monthly budget report.
(Prior Code, § 5.01(2)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
Statutory reference:
   Annual budget, see Wis. Stats. § 65.90
§ 32.26 BUDGET HEARING.
   The Village Board shall conduct a budget hearing prior to the adoption of
the budget, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 65.90. At least 15 days prior to the
budget hearing, the Village Clerk shall publish a Class 1 notice containing the
time and place of the budget hearing, a summary of the budget, and notice of
the place where the budget, in detail is available. The Village Clerk shall
publish notice of the budget hearing in at least two public places at least 15
days prior to the budget hearing. The budget hearing shall be held at the
Village Hall unless otherwise noted by the published or posted notice.
(Prior Code, § 5.01(3)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 32.27 ESTIMATES OF BUDGET.
   (A)   Each elected officer and each appointed officer responsible for a
department, committee, commission, agency, board or other special government
unit of the village shall cooperate with the Village Clerk (by a date
established by the Village Clerk) in assembling the following data for their
department, office, special office, committee, commission, agency, board or
other special government unit of the village.
   (B)   The Clerk shall assemble and prepare for the Finance Committee:
      (1)   Prior year’s receipts, disbursements and expenditures;
      (2)   Current year’s receipts, revenues, disbursements and expenditures;
and
      (3)   Estimated receipts, revenues, disbursements and expenditures for
the next year.
(Prior Code, § 5.01(4)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 32.28 ELEMENTS OF BUDGET.
   Each budget prepared by and approved by the Village Board shall include the
following:
   (A)   All existing indebtedness;
   (B)   All anticipated revenue from all sources for the ensuing year;
   (C)   All proposed appropriations for departments, committees, commissions
and boards, active or reserved accounts for next year;
   (D)   All actual revenues and expenditures for preceding year;
   (E)   All actual revenue and expenditures for not less than six months of
current year;
   (F)   All estimated revenues and expenditures for the balance of the year;
and
   (G)   All anticipated unexpended or unappropriated balances and surpluses.
(Prior Code, § 5.01(5)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 32.29 ELEMENTS IN BUDGET SUMMARY.
   Each budget summary prepared by and approved by the Village Board shall
include the following:
   (A)   All expenditures by major expenditure category for the proposed
budget, the budget in effect and the budget of the preceding year;
   (B)   All revenues by major revenue services for the proposed budget, the
budget in effect and the budget of the preceding year;
   (C)   Any financial source and use not identified in divisions (A) and (B)
above;
   (D)   All beginning and year end balances for the proposed budget, the
budget in effect and the budget of the preceding year; and
   (E)   Additional budget summary information can be included by order of the
Village Board but shall be reported separately under the heading “additional
information”.
(Prior Code, § 5.01(6)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 32.30 INITIAL PREPARATION OF BUDGET.
   (A)   The annual budget shall be initially prepared by the Finance Committee
and approved by the Village Board based on data and estimates provided by the
Finance Committee. The following village employees, officers, and agents along
with the Village Clerk shall assist the Village Board in preparing the annual
budget (list):
      (1)   Village Treasurer;
      (2)   Policeman;
      (3)   Finance Committee;
      (4)   Library Board; and
      (5)   Public Works.
   (B)   The Village Board shall publish its annual budget for the public
hearing and public discussion by November 1 of each year. The Village Board
shall provide, at request, a reasonable number of copies of the annual budget
for the public, not to exceed 20.
(Prior Code, § 5.01(7)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 32.31 APPROVAL OF BUDGET.
   The Village Board, after the public hearing, shall act upon the annual
budget. The Village Board may amend the annual budget prior to final adoption.
The annual budget shall be adopted by the Village Board on or before November
30 of each year. The annual budget, as finalized shall be adopted by a majority
roll call vote of the members of the Village Board.
(Prior Code, § 5.01(8)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 32.32 CHANGES IN FINAL BUDGET.
   The amount of the tax to be levied or certified, the amount of the various
appropriations and the purposes of the appropriations stated in the approved
annual final budget may not be changed unless authorized by a roll call vote of
two-thirds of the members of the Village Board.
(Prior Code, § 5.01(9)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
Statutory reference:
   Budget changes, see Wis. Stats. § 65.90(5)(A)
§ 32.33 EXPENDITURES OF FUNDS.
   The Village Board shall not authorize money to be drawn from the Treasury of
the village nor shall the Village Board incur any obligation for the
expenditure of money except as these expenditures or obligations that are made
pursuant to the annual budget appropriations or that are made pursuant to any
revised annual budget appropriations. Any unencumbered budget balance of the
authorized appropriations shall revert to the General Fund and shall be subject
to reappropriation by the Village Board. No order for payment may be issued in
excess of funds available or appropriated for the purpose for which the order
is drawn unless authorized by a two-thirds roll call vote of the Village Board.
(Prior Code, § 5.01(10)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
CHAPTER 33: ETHICS
Section
   
33.01   Responsibility of public office
   
33.02   Dedicated service
   
33.03   Fair and equal treatment
   
33.04   Conflicts of interests
   
33.05   Contracts with the village
   
33.06   Disclosure of interest in legislation
   
33.07   Campaign contributions
   
33.08   Severability
§ 33.01 RESPONSIBILITY OF PUBLIC OFFICE.
   Public officials and employees are agents for public purposes and hold
office for the benefit of the public. They are bound to uphold the Constitution
of the United States, the constitution of the state and the village, and to
observe in their official acts the highest standards of integrity and to
discharge faithfully the duties of their office regardless of personal
considerations, recognizing that the public interest must be their prime
concern. Their conduct in both their official and private affairs should be
above reproach so as to foster respect for all government.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 33.02 DEDICATED SERVICE.
   (A)   All officials and employees of the village should be loyal to the
objectives expressed by the electorate and the programs developed to attain
these objectives. Appointive officials and employees should adhere to the rules
of work performance established as the standard for their position by the
appropriate authority.
   (B)   Officials and employees should not exceed their authority or breach
the law or ask others to do so, and they should work in full cooperation with
other public officials and employees unless prohibited from so doing by law or
officially recognized confidentiality of their work.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 33.03 FAIR AND EQUAL TREATMENT.
   (A)   Use of public property. No official or employee shall request or
permit the use of village-owned vehicles, equipment, materials or property for
personal convenience or profit without previously receiving authorization from
the Village Board.
   (B)   Obligations to citizens. No official or employee shall grant any
special consideration, treatment or advantage to any citizen beyond that which
is available to every other citizen.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 33.04 CONFLICTS OF INTERESTS.
   (A)   Interest prohibited. No official or employee, whether paid or unpaid,
shall engage in any business or transaction or shall act in regard to financial
or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the
proper discharge of their official duties in the public interest contrary to
the provisions of this chapter or would tend to impair their independence of
judgment or action in the performance of their official duties.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      FINANCIAL INTEREST. Any interest which shall yield, directly or
indirectly, a monetary or other material benefit to the officer or employee or
to any person employing or retaining the services of the officer or employee.
      PERSONAL INTEREST. Any interest arising from blood or marriage
relationships or from close business or political associations, whether or not
any financial interest is involved.
   (C)   Specific conflicts enumerated.
      (1)   Incompatible employment. No official or employee shall engage in or
accept private employment or render service for private interest, when such
employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of their
official duties or would tend to impair their independence of judgment or
action in the performance of their official duties, unless otherwise permitted
by law and unless disclosure is made as hereinafter provided.
      (2)   Disclosure of confidential information. No official or employee
shall, without proper legal authorization, disclose confidential information
concerning the property, government, or affairs of the village, nor shall they
use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of
themselves or others.
      (3)   Gifts and favors of more than $25. No official or employee shall
accept any one gift with a value of more than $25, whether in the form of
service, loan, thing or promise from any if such person:
         (a)   Has or is seeking to obtain a contractual or other business or
financial relationship with the village or the Board;
         (b)   Conducts operations or activities which are regulated by the
village or the Board; or
         (c)   Has interests which may be substantially affected by the village
or the Board.
      (4)   Gifts and favors of more than $100. No official or employee shall
accept such gifts having an aggregate value of more than $100 in any calendar
year from any person if such person:
         (a)   Has or is seeking to obtain a contractual or other business or
financial relationship with the village or the Board;
         (b)   Conducts operations or activities which are regulated by the
village of the Board; or
         (c)   Has interests which may be substantially affected by the village
or the Board.
      (5)   Influential gifts and favors. No official or employee shall accept
any gift, favor or thing of value that may tend to influence them in the
discharge of their duties, or grant in the discharge of their duties any
improper favor, service or thing of value.
      (6)   Specific exemptions. Modest ceremonial events, such as, ground
breaking, grand openings as well as business lunches, outings and conferences
shall be exempt, provided that the value does not exceed the value in
subsection (4). Mementos such as coffee, coffee cups, candy provided the value
is less than the value in subsection (3) and that distribution is of a general
nature.
      (7)   Referring gifts received to Ethics Board. Gifts received under
unusual circumstances should be referred to the Ethics Board within ten days
for recommended disposition.
      (8)   Representing private interests before village agencies or courts.
No officer or employee shall appear on behalf of any private person, other than
himself/herself, his/her spouse or minor children, before any village agency or
municipal court. However, a member of the Village Board may appear before
village agencies on behalf of their constituents in the course of their duties
as a representative of the electorate or in the performance of public or civic
obligations.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 33.05 CONTRACTS WITH THE VILLAGE.
   No village official or employee who, in their capacity as such officer or
employee participates in making of a contract in which they have a private
pecuniary interest, direct or indirect, or performs in regard to that contract
some function requiting exercise of discretion on his part, shall enter into
any contract with the village unless the contract is awarded through a process
of public notice and competitive bidding.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 33.06 DISCLOSURE OF INTEREST IN LEGISLATION.
   (A)   Any member of the Village Board who has a financial interest or
personal interest in any proposed legislation before the Village Board shall
disclose on the records of the Village Board, the nature and extent of such
interest.
   (B)   Any other official or employee who has a financial interest in any
proposed legislative action of the Village Board and who participates in
discussion with or gives an official opinion or recommendation to the village
board shall disclose on the records of the Village Board the nature and extent
of such interest.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 33.07 CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS.
   Campaign contributions shall be reported by all candidates for village
office in strict conformity with the provisions of the state statutes. Any
campaign contribution tendered to or accepted by a candidate subsequent to the
final statutory report shall be reported to the village.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 33.08 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this chapter is invalid or unconstitutional, or if the
application of this chapter to any person or circumstances is invalid or
unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the
other provisions of application of this chapter which can be given effect
without the invalid or unconstitutional provision or application.
(Ord. passed - -)
CHAPTER 34: FEE SCHEDULE
Section
   
34.01   Uniform ordinance bond schedule; adopted by reference
   
34.02   Charge schedule
§ 34.01 UNIFORM ORDINANCE BOND SCHEDULE; ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The uniform ordinance bond schedule is hereby adopted by reference as if set
forth in full in this chapter. The bond schedule is available for public
inspection at the office of the Village Clerk during regular village business
hours.
Cross-reference:
   Deposit schedule for violations of §§
73.45 through
73.52, see §
73.99
§ 34.02 CHARGE SCHEDULE.
   The charge schedule for the village is hereby adopted by reference as if set
forth in full in this chapter. This schedule is available for public inspection
at the office of the Village Clerk during regular business hours.
(Prior Code, § 16.11)
(PSC Doc. eff. 3-15-2002; Ord. passed 9- -2011; Res. eff. 10-1-2001; Res.
passed 12-14-2011; PSC Doc. eff. 6-22-2012; Doc. eff. - -2013)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   WASTE MANAGEMENT/RECYCLING
      
51.   PUBLIC UTILITIES
      
52.   SEWER USE AND CHARGE SYSTEM
CHAPTER 50: WASTE MANAGEMENT/RECYCLING
Section
Waste Management
   
50.01   Title/purpose
   
50.02   Adoption
   
50.03   General provisions
   
50.04   Special permit
Recycling
   
50.15   Title/purpose
   
50.16   Statutory authority
   
50.17   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
50.18   Interpretation
   
50.19   Severability
   
50.20   Applicability
   
50.21   Administration
   
50.22   Definitions
   
50.23   Separation of recyclable materials
   
50.24   Separation requirements exempted
   
50.25   Care of separated recyclable materials
   
50.26   Management of lead acid batteries, major appliances, waste oil and yard
waste
Preparation and Collection of Recyclable Materials
   
50.40   Responsibilities of occupants of single-family and two- to four-unit
residences
   
50.41   Responsibilities of owner or designated agents of multiple-family
dwellings
   
50.42   Responsibilities of owner or designated agents of nonresidential
facilities and properties
   
50.43   Prohibitions on disposal of recyclable materials separated for
recycling
   
50.44   Large outdoor events
   
50.45   Parks, waysides, ballfields and recreation areas
   
50.46   Exemptions
   
50.47   Volume-based rates
   
50.48   Collection schedule
   
50.49   Special materials
   
50.50   Construction materials
   
50.51   Right to reject materials
   
50.52   Hauler licensing
   
50.53   Charitable and civic organizations
   
50.54   Enforcement
 
   
50.99   Penalty
WASTE MANAGEMENT
§ 50.01 TITLE/PURPOSE.
   This chapter is entitled the “Village of Gilman Waste Management Ordinance”.
The purpose of this chapter is to document and provide to the public; Village
Board; persons engaged in waste collection, recycling, and solid waste
enterprises; and members of the public the provisions of the waste management
system for the village.
(Prior Code, § 7.01(1)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 50.02 ADOPTION.
   The Village Board hereby establishes by these sections and this chapter,
registration and permit ordinances to regulate and control by ordinance:
   (A)   Persons engaged in certain uses, activities, businesses and operations
in the village;
   (B)   To regulate, by these licenses, registrations and permits, the persons
engaged in these uses, activities, businesses and operations at certain
locations within the village;
   (C)   To assess these persons with appropriate fees for the licenses,
registrations or permit; and
   (D)   To enforce, by revocation or penalty, the provisions of this code and
the provisions of the licenses, registrations and permits.
(Prior Code, § 7.01(2)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 50.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The village prohibits, unless specifically exempted by this chapter or
by order of the Village Board, any person from collecting solid waste or
hazardous waste in the village where waste is intended to be ultimately
disposed, stored, treated or recycled at a waste facility or recycling
operation in the village, or where the waste is intended to be ultimately
disposed, stored, treated or recycled at a waste facility or recycling
operation outside the village, unless that person has a village waste
collection permit.
   (B)   The village prohibits, unless specifically exempted by this chapter or
by order of the Village Board, any person from disposing, storing, treating or
recycling solid waste or hazardous waste in the village unless that person has
the appropriate waste permit issued by the village.
   (C)   The village requires, unless specifically exempted by this chapter or
by order of the Village Board, any person with a village waste management
permit, of any type, knowing of any of the below noted occurrences shall report
these occurrences to the Village Clerk within 48 hours of the occurrence:
      (1)   Any hazardous waste entering or exiting any waste facility or
recycling operation in the village;
      (2)   Any fire or explosion or other emergency hazardous condition at or
near any waste facility or recycling operation in the village;
      (3)   Any ground water, surface water or air pollution occurring at or
near any waste facility or recycling operation in the village; or
      (4)   Any permanent, emergency or temporary closing of any waste facility
or recycling operation in the village.
   (D)   The village requires, unless specifically exempted by this chapter or
by order of the Village Board, any person authorized by the appropriate permit
issued by and the conditions in the permit established by the village to
collect or transport solid waste or hazardous waste in the village to deposit
with the Village Clerk an insurance policy or certificate of liability
insurance covering all waste transport vehicles of the person with said policy
to be used by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state and
with the minimum amount of insurance coverage to be $3,000,000 per occurrence.
   (E)   The village prohibits any solid waste or hazardous waste discharge in
any public or private land in the village by any person, except in containers
authorized by this chapter or authorized by order of the Village Board, except
in permitted or exempted waste facilities or recycling operation authorized by
this chapter or authorized by order of the Village Board. The village prohibits
the littering of solid waste or hazardous waste by any person on any public or
private land in the village without written approval of the Village Board.
   (F)   The village prohibits any person not authorized by the village from
collecting, scavenging and/or removing any solid waste or hazardous waste from
the property owned or leased by a third party or from lands owned or leased by
the village or from other public lands where the solid waste or hazardous waste
has been deposited temporarily near or at the this subchapter side, street,
highway or road in the village for the intent and purpose of collection and
removal of the waste by permitted waste transporters or other persons
authorized by the village.
   (G)   The village prohibits, unless specifically exempted by this chapter or
by order of the Village Board, any person to place or permit another to place
any waste in the waste containers or receptacles at ant waste collection
location in the village unless the waste placed in the waste container or
receptacle was from the premises served by the waste container or receptacle.
Moreover, the village prohibits any person from placing any recyclable
materials in the recycling containers or receptacles at any recycling
collection location in the village unless the recyclable materials placed in
the recycling containers or receptacles was from the premises in the village
serviced by the recycling container or receptacle.
   (H)   The village prohibits, unless specifically exempted by this chapter or
by order of the Village Board, any yard waste, trees, shrub, brush, weeds and
other vegetation from being intentionally discharged or intentionally deposited
by any person upon the sidewalks, roadways, streets, alleys, highways or other
public lands in the village.
   (I)   The village requires, unless specifically exempted by this chapter or
by order of the Village Board that any person owning or leasing real property
in the village shall be responsible in a timely manner to collect and remove
litter or recyclable materials and to properly remove in a timely manner any
discharge of solid waste, hazardous waste or recyclable materials from his or
her residential, commercial or industrial establishments in the village. These
persons shall be responsible in a timely manner to reasonably keep the property
in a clean and orderly condition and to avoid causing any private or public
nuisance in the village.
   (J)   The village prohibits, unless specifically exempted by this chapter or
by order of the Village Board, any person from intentionally discharging or
depositing any solid waste, hazardous waste, recyclable material or any other
waste material on or along any sidewalk, roadway, street, alley or highway in
the village, in any water in the village, on ice of any water in the village,
or on any public property in the village unless the premises is permitted for
deposit or discharge of the particular waste by the Village Board. The village
prohibits any person from failing to remove within 30 days or otherwise abandon
any automobile, boat or other vehicle in any waters in the village.
   (K)   The above two prohibitions against discharging waste do not apply to
any person who places solid waste or recyclable material in a waste container
or receptacle as authorized by order of the Village Board and by this chapter
for solid waste collection and removal along any sidewalk, roadway, street,
alley, highway or other public or private property in the village nor does it
apply to any person who stores, disposes, treats, deposits or discharges solid
waste or recyclable material in conformity with Wis. Stats. Chapters 30, 31,
281 or 283, or in conformity with any permit license or other approval by the
State Department of Natural Resources or the Waste Facility Siting Board, in
conformity with this chapter or in conformity with a permit issued by the
village.
   (L)   The village requires, unless specifically exempted by this chapter or
by order of the Village Board, that any person storing, treating, disposing,
discharging or depositing any type of waste in the village shall dispose,
store, treat, discharge or deposit such waste in a proper manner to not lead to
or constitute a private or public nuisance in the village. This provision shall
apply regardless if the person disposing, storing, treating, discharging or
depositing the waste has a permit to discharge issued by the State Department
of Natural Resources or the village or otherwise is authorized to dispose,
store, treat, waste by the Waste Facility Sitting Board, the State Department
of Natural Resources or by the Village Board.
   (M)   The village shall negotiate and attempt to enter into an annual or
multi-year contract with a licensed waste hauler for the purpose of providing
the collection and removal of solid waste and recyclable material from
residential establishments on a weekly basis in the village. A residential
establishment shall include an agricultural establishment for the purpose of
collection and removal of residential solid waste and recyclable materials. The
final negotiated contract with the licensed waste hauler shall be drafted and
approved by the Village Board. The collection and removal service to be
provided shall be placed for bid by the Village Board. However, no person shall
be excluded by the village from collecting and removing solid waste, hazardous
waste or recyclable materials from residential, commercial or industrial
establishments in the village, provided the person has obtained a waste
collection permit from the Village Board.
   (N)   The village shall receive written notice for every commercial or
industrial establishment in the village by March 1 as to the arrangements or
contracts that these establishments have made for services for collection and
removal of solid waste, hazardous waste or recyclable materials. No person, by
oral or written contract, shall collect and remove solid waste, hazardous waste
or recyclable materials from any commercial or industrial establishment in the
village without receiving a village waste collection permit. All written or
oral waste collection contracts shall be directly between the permitted waste
hauler and the commercial or industrial establishment. The village has no
obligation to arrange nor obligation to pay for any costs associated with
collection and removal of commercial waste or industrial waste in the village.
   (O)   The village requires that all waste haulers collecting and removing
solid waste, recyclable materials or hazardous waste in the village, regardless
of whether the waste hauler has any contract with the village or with any other
person in the village shall apply for and obtain a permit from the village in
order to provide waste collection services in the village.
(Prior Code, § 7.01(3)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.04 SPECIAL PERMIT.
   (A)   Waste permit; coverage. Every person, pursuant to Wis. Stats. Chapters
61, 146, 160, 281, 287 and 823 and this chapter, who with no exceptions and
exemptions herein noted, collects, stores, treats or recycles solid waste or
hazardous waste in the village, shall seek and obtain an appropriate waste
management permit from the village prior to collecting, transporting,
disposing, storing, treating or recycling any solid waste or hazardous waste in
the village. The permits under this chapter shall be issued by the Village
Board of the village unless specifically noted to the contrary.
      (1)   The Village Board has established separate permits as follows:
         (a)   Waste collection permit fee; and
         (b)   Charitable organization permit.
      (2)   The Village Board has approved all of the above-noted required
permits and the fees for each permit. The application for a permit shall be
processed by the village within 30 days of the receipt of a complete and proper
application form.
      (3)   Waste management permits shall be issued on an annual basis unless
a special monthly or weekly permit is authorized by the Village Board. The
appropriate waste management permit or permits shall be issued by the Village
Clerk prior to any person collecting, transporting, disposing, storing or
treating solid waste or hazardous waste or recyclables in the village. No
permit shall be issued by the Village Clerk of the village without Village
Board approval, except (list): charitable organization permit.
      (4)   The Village Board shall not approve any permits unless the Village
Board is fully satisfied the applicant has been and will remain in reasonable
compliance with the conditions of this chapter, with the permit and with any
conditions established by the Village Board in the permit.
   (B)   Application/permit. The application and the permit shall designate the
premises and areas in the village wherein the person requests the permitted
use, activity or operation. The application and the permit shall describe the
permitted waste use, waste activity or waste operation. The permit or
conditions to the permit may not be amended if the person desires to change the
designated premises or area, nor may it be transferred from one person to
another. The application shall, at a minimum, include:
      (1)   The name of the applicant;
      (2)   The address of the applicant;
      (3)   The business and residential telephone numbers of the applicant, if
any;
      (4)   The type of permit requested, the application fee required, if any,
and the bond required, if any;
      (5)   The application date;
      (6)   The general dates requested for hearing and for the issuance of any
permit;
      (7)   The age of the applicant, if applicable;
      (8)   The agent of the applicant, if any;
      (9)   The designated premises or area in the village for waste use, waste
activity or waste operation, including legal description and current zoning, if
any;
      (10)   The proposed plans of operation for the activity or operation,
including plans for construction, operation, maintenance, closure and long-term
care;
      (11)   The type and amount of equipment to be used in the operation or
activity;
      (12)   The proposed plans for public nuisance control and environmental
protection;
      (13)   The likely routes of travel and hours of travel in the village for
waste use, waste activity or waste operation; and
      (14)   The past experience of the applicant in the use, activity or
operation for which the permit is requested.
   (C)   Condition of permit. As a condition of any permit issued, the
permittee agrees to make quarterly reports to the village or its designee
showing the amount of recyclables and solid waste collected by the permittee,
the source of the recyclables and solid waste, the ultimate disposal site and/
or the ultimate recycling center. The permittee shall furnish such additional
statistics as may be reasonably required to enable the village to apply for
recycling grants and to make other reports as may be required by the State
Department of Natural Resources.
   (D)   Report forms. All reports shall be made on report forms provided by
the village and shall be reported on a quarterly basis unless waived or
otherwise required by the village.
   (E)   Exemptions. 
      (1)   This chapter shall not apply to or govern animal waste
transportation, animal waste disposal, animal waste storage, animal waste
treatment or animal waste landspreading by any person wherein the animal waste
is a byproduct from an agricultural operation in the village and wherein the
animal waste is transported to or disposed, stored, treated or landspread by
the person on land that the person or members of his or her family owns,
occupies or leases within the village.
      (2)   This chapter shall not apply to or govern the waste facilities
operated and maintained as sanitary privies, seepage beds or septic tanks which
conform to any applicable ordinance in the village, and shall not apply to or
govern the disposal site, storage or treatment of human waste products into any
public domestic sewage system located in the village nor the landspreading of
human waste in the village.
      (3)   This chapter shall not apply to or govern facilities used for the
landspreading of non-hazardous solid waste from a residential facility or
agricultural operations where the owner, occupant or lessee of the land also
owns, occupies or leases the land used for solid waste disposal.
      (4)   This chapter shall not apply to or govern waste facilities
receiving only sludge from a publicly owned treatment works or a privately
owned domestic sewage treatment works having a permit under Wis. Stats. Chapter
283, provided the sludge disposal is accomplished in accordance with the
requirements of the permit.
      (5)   This chapter shall not apply to or govern waste facilities used
exclusively for the disposal of waste regulated under applicable state law.
      (6)   This chapter shall not apply to or govern waste facilities used for
disposal of treated liquid municipal or industrial waste approved under Wis.
Stats. § 281.41 or permitted under Wis. Stats. Chapter 147.
      (7)    This chapter shall not apply to or govern waste facilities used
for the landspreading of whey.
      (8)   This chapter shall not apply to or govern waste facilities used for
the landspreading of vegetable waste from canned, frozen or preserved fruit and
vegetable processing operations. Waste facilities operated and maintained as
pit silos that are used for storage of byproducts from fruit, vegetables or
grain processing operations where such byproducts are to be used for animal
feed are exempt from this chapter.
      (9)   This chapter shall not apply to or govern facilities used for
landspreading of composting leaves, grass, brush and other similar vegetable
matter. Waste facilities for high volume industrial waste or wood residue where
the waste is stored at the point of generation for less than 72 hours prior to
being transported for disposal or beneficial re-use and the waste facility is
operated and maintained in an environmentally sound and nuisance manner are
exempt from this chapter.
      (10)   This chapter shall not apply to or govern waste facilities
operated and maintained as demolition waste disposal facilities having a design
capacity of less than 50,000 cubic yards. Waste facilities operated and
maintained as auto junk yards or as scrap metal salvage yards are exempt from
this chapter if the only product recycled at these facilities is scrap iron,
steel or non-ferrous metal.
      (11)   This chapter shall not apply to or govern abandoned and closed
waste facilities.
      (12)   List other exemptions:
                                                                                    .
   (F)    Ordinance/permits.
      (1)   The persons subject to this chapter shall comply with Wis. Stats.
Chapters 61, 66, 146, 160, 287 and 823, and this chapter.
      (2)   The Village Clerk shall provide copies of this chapter at no cost
to any applicant requesting a copy under this chapter.
      (3)   The applicant and the persons subject to this chapter shall comply
as follows.
         (a)   No person shall be issued or reissued a waste management permit
until the appropriate application fees has been paid to the Village Clerk and
the appropriate bond, if any, has been received by the Village Clerk. The
Village Board shall establish the application permit fees and bonds by November
15.
         (b)   No person shall be issued or reissued a waste management permit
who has failed to properly and fully complete and submit to the Village Clerk
of the village the application form developed and provided by the village,
including the appropriate application permit fee and bond.
         (c)   No person shall be issued or reissued a waste management permit
if the applicant or permittee:
            1.   Fails to specifically agree in writing to the conditions
established by the Village Board in the permit or fails to comply with any
written agreement or conditions in the permit;
            2.   Fails to specifically agree in writing to specific conditions
established by the Village Board in the permit to require applicant to correct
malfunctions or public nuisance at the waste facility or in the waste use,
waste activity or waste operations in a timely manner upon notice by the
Village Board or fails to comply with any written agreement or conditions in
the permit;
            3.   Fails to specifically agree in writing to specific conditions
established by the Village Board in the permit to have the applicant provide
reasonable physical access to the waste facility in the village for inspection
purposes to the Village Board and its designees or fails to comply with any
written agreement or conditions in the permit;
            4.   Fails to specifically agree in writing to specific conditions
established by the Village Board in the permit to have the applicant provide in
a timely manner reasonable financial records regarding the waste facility
operations or the transportation operations in the village or fails to comply
with any agreement or conditions in the permit; or
            5.   Fails to specifically agree in writing to specific conditions
established by the Village Board in the permit to have the applicant provide in
a timely manner reasonable records regarding source, amount and type of waste
involved with the waste facility operations in the village or fails to comply
with any written agreement or conditions in the permit.
   (G)   Other provisions; restrictions on garbage from outside of the village.
No person, firm, corporation or agent thereof who or which is not a resident or
domiciled within the village shall bring garbage, lawn refuse, household
rubbish or commercial waste from outside the village limits into the village
for the purpose of having the village collect said garbage, lawn refuse,
household rubbish or commercial wastes. Such person, firm, corporation or agent
thereof shall be subject to forfeiture not to exceed $250 for each offense.
Each instance shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, the Village
Board may suspend garbage collection service for any person, firm, corporation
or agent thereof who or which resides or is domiciled within the village and
who or which allows, assists or abets collection of garbage, lawn refuse,
household rubbish or commercial waste which was brought in from outside the
village limits of the village for a period of 30 days. The Village Board shall
have the authority to suspend garbage collection services for a period longer
than 30 days if it is necessary to assure the Village Board that the situation
has been corrected or that it will not occur again.
(Prior Code, § 7.01(4)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009) Penalty, see §
50.99
RECYCLING
§ 50.15 TITLE/PURPOSE.
   This subchapter is entitled the “Village of Gilman Recycling Ordinance”. The
purpose of this subchapter is to promote recycling, composting and resource
recovery through the administration of an effective recycling program as
provided in Wis. Stats. § 287.11 and Wis. Adm. Code Chapter NR 544, as amended
from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 7.02(1)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 50.16 STATUTORY AUTHORITY.
   This subchapter is adopted as authorized under Wis. Stats. § 159.09(3)(b)
and Wis. Adm. Code Chapter NR 544.
(Prior Code, § 7.02(2)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 50.17 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   It is not intended by this subchapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or
interfere with any existing rules, regulations, ordinances or permits
previously adopted or issued pursuant to law. However, whenever this subchapter
imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this subchapter shall apply.
(Prior Code, § 7.02(3)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 50.18 INTERPRETATION.
   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this subchapter
shall be held to be the minimum requirements and shall not be deemed a
limitation or repeal of any other power granted by state law. Where any terms
or requirements of this subchapter may be inconsistent or conflicting, the more
restrictive requirements or interpretation shall apply. Where a provision of
this subchapter is required by Wisconsin Statutes or by a standard in Wis. Adm.
Code Chapter 544 and where the ordinance provision in unclear, the provision
shall be interpreted in light of the Wisconsin Statutes and Wis. Adm. Code
Chapter NR 544 standards in effect on the date of the adoption of this
subchapter or in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 7.02(4)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 50.19 SEVERABILITY.
   Should any portion of this subchapter be declared unconstitutional or
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the subchapter
shall not be affected.
(Prior Code, § 7.02(5)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 50.20 APPLICABILITY.
   The requirements of this subchapter shall apply to all persons within the
village.
(Prior Code, § 7.02(6)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 50.21 ADMINISTRATION.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall be administered by the village and
other authorized employees and representatives given administrative duties by
the Village Board.
(Prior Code, § 7.02(7)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 50.22 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BI-METAL CONTAINER. A container for carbonate or malt beverages that is made
primarily of a combination of steel and aluminum.
   CONTAINER BOARD. Corrugated paperboard used in the manufacture of shipping
containers or related products.
   CURBSIDE RECYCLING PROGRAM. The curbside recycling system in effect in the
village from time to time.
   DROPOFF SITE. The site designated by the village from time to time for
dropoff of recyclables.
   FOAM POLYSTYRENE PACKAGING. Packaging made primarily from foam polystyrene
that satisfies one of the following criteria:
      (1)   Is designed for serving food or beverages;
      (2)   Consist of loose particles intended to fill space and cushion the
packaged article in a shipping container; or
      (3)   Consists of rigid materials shaped to hold and cushion the packaged
article in a shipping container.
   HDPE. High-density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI Code #2.
   LDPE. Low-density polyethylene, labeled by the SPI Code #4.
   MAGAZINES. Magazines and other materials printed on similar paper.
   MAJOR APPLIANCES. A residential or commercial air conditioner, clothes
dryer, clothes washer, dishwasher, freezer, microwave oven (except microwave
ovens from which the capacitor has been removed), ovens, refrigerator, stove
residential and commercial, boilers, dehumidifiers and water heaters.
   MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING. A property containing five or more residential
units, including those which are occupied seasonally.
   NEWSPAPER.  A newspaper and other materials printed in newsprint.
   NONRESIDENTIAL FACILITIES AND PROPERTIES. Commercial, retail, industrial,
institutional and government facilities and property. This term does not
include multiple-family dwellings.
   OFFICE PAPER.  High-grade printing and writing papers from offices in
nonresidential facilities and properties. Printed white ledger and computer
printout are examples of OFFICE PAPER generally accepted as high grade. This
term does not include industrial process waste.
   OTHER RESINS OR MULTIPLE RESINS. Plastic resins labeled by the SPI Code #7.
   PERSON.  Includes any individual, corporation, partnership, association,
local governmental unit, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 287.01(5m), state agency
or authority or federal agency.
   PETE. Polyethylene terephthalate, labeled by the SPI Code #1.
   PLASTIC CONTAINER. An individual, separate, rigid plastic bottle, can, jar
or carton, except for a blister pack, that is originally used to contain a
product that is the subject of a retail sale.
   POST CONSUMER WASTE. Solid waste other than solid waste generated in the
production of goods, hazardous waste, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 287.01(7),
waste from construction and demolition of structures, scrap automobiles or
high-volume industrial waste, as defined in Wis. Stats. § 287.01(7). POST
CONSUMER WASTE does not mean yard waste, brush, trees or stumps.
   PP. Polypropylene, labeled by the SPI Code #5.
   PS. Polystyrene, labeled by SPI Code #6.
   PVC. Polyvinyl chloride, labeled by the SPI Code #3.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. Includes lead acid batteries; major appliances; waste
oil; yard waste; aluminum containers; corrugated paper or other container
board; foam polystrene packaging; glass containers; magazines; newspaper;
office paper; rigid plastic containers; including those made of PETE; HDPE,
PVC, LDPE, PP, PS and other resins or multiple resins; steel containers, waste
tires; and bi-metal containers.
   RECYCLING COLLECTION SITE. Curbside for residential customers and commercial
pickup site for commercial customers.
   SOLID WASTE. The meaning specified in Wis. Stats. § 289.01(33).
   SOLID WASTE FACILITY. The meaning specified in Wis. Stats. § 289.01(35).
   SOLID WASTE TREATMENT. Any method, technique or process which is designed to
change the physical, chemical or biological character of composition of solid
waste. TREATMENT includes incineration.
   WASTE TIRES. A tire that is no longer suitable for its original purpose
because of wear, damage or defect.
   YARD WASTE. Leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris and brush,
including clean woody vegetative material no greater than six inches in
diameter. This term does not include stumps, roots or shrubs with intact root
balls.
(Prior Code, § 7.02(8)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 50.23 SEPARATION OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.
   Occupants of single-family and two- to four-unit residences, multiple-family
dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties shall separate the
following materials from post consumer waste:
   (A)   Lead acid batteries;
   (B)   Major appliances;
   (C)   Waste oil;
   (D)   Yard waste;
   (E)   Aluminum containers;
   (F)   Bi-metal containers;
   (G)   Corrugated paper and other container board;
   (H)   Foam polystyrene packaging;
   (I)   Glass containers;
   (J)   Magazines;
   (K)   Newspaper;
   (L)   Office paper;
   (M)   Rigid plastic containers made of PETE, HDPE, PVC, PP, PS and other
resins or multiple resins;
   (N)   Steel containers; and
   (O)   Waste tires.
(Prior Code, § 7.02(9)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 50.24 SEPARATION REQUIREMENTS EXEMPTED.
   The separation requirements of §
50.23 do not apply to the following:
   (A)   Occupants of single-family and two- to four-unit residences, multiple-
family dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties that send their
post consumer waste to a processing facility licensed by the State Department
of Natural Resources that recover the materials specified in §
50.23 from solid waste in as pure a form as is technically feasible;
   (B)   Solid waste which is burned as a supplemental fuel at a facility if
less than 30% of the heat input to the facilities is derived from the solid
waste burned as supplemental fuel; or
   (C)   A recyclable material specified in §
50.23 for which a variance has been granted by the Department of Natural
Resources under Wis Stats. § 287.11(2m), or Wis. Adm. Code § NR 544.14.
Example: for the year 1995, the Department has exempted plastic ##3-7.
(Prior Code, § 7.02(10)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 50.25 CARE OF SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.
   To the greatest extent practicable, the recyclable materials separated in
accordance with §
50.23 shall be clean and kept free of contaminants such as food or product
residue, oil or grease, or other non-recyclable materials, including but not
limited to household hazardous waste, medical waste and agricultural chemical
containers. Recyclable materials shall be stored in a manner which protects
them to the greatest extent practicable from wind, rain and other inclement
weather conditions.
(Prior Code, § 7.02(11)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 50.26 MANAGEMENT OF LEAD ACID BATTERIES, MAJOR APPLIANCES, WASTE OIL AND YARD
WASTE.
   Occupants of single-family and two- to four-unit residences, multiple-family
dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties shall manage lead acid
batteries, major appliances, waste oil and yard waste as follows.
   (A)   Lead acid batteries shall be picked up at the curb by the recycling
service contracted by the village, delivered to the dropoff site or returned to
a vendor under the vendor’s repurchase or exchange program. Lead acid batteries
may not be disposed of with post consumer waste.
   (B)   Major appliances shall be disposed by making arrangements with
licensed recycling service for pickup. A charge will be made for the pickup.
For white goods that contain freon or oil capacitors, a charge will be made by
the recycling service.
   (C)   Waste oil shall be delivered to the dropoff site provided by the
village for recycling services. Waste oil may also be returned to a vendor
under the vendor’s repurchase recycling or exchange program. Waste oil may be
left at curbside for recycling.
   (D)   Yard waste shall be delivered to the village’s composting area at the
former Ridge and Furrow site.
(Prior Code, § 7.02(12)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
PREPARATION AND COLLECTION OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS
§ 50.40 RESPONSIBILITIES OF OCCUPANTS OF SINGLE-FAMILY AND TWO- TO FOUR-UNIT
RESIDENCES.
   Except as otherwise directed by the village, occupants of single-family and
two- to four-unit residences shall do the following for the preparation and
collection of the separated materials specified in §
50.23(E) through (O).
   (A)   Aluminum containers shall be rinsed and left for curbside collection,
delivered to the dropoff site or sold to persons or businesses who are
operating commercial recycling enterprises. Nothing herein will prevent the
sale or donation of aluminum cans and aluminum foil to local civic and church
groups, where aluminum is ultimately recycled.
   (B)   Bi-metal containers shall be rinsed and left for curbside pickup or
delivered to the dropoff site.
   (C)   Corrugated paper shall be flattened, bundled and tied or boxed in a
large cardboard box, if placed at curbside for pickup. Corrugated paper may
also be delivered to the dropoff site. Nothing herein will prevent sale or
delivery of corrugated paper to church groups, civic groups or commercial
purchasers of corrugated for recycling.
   (D)   Foam polystyrene packaging shall be separated, placed in brown paper
bags, and placed at curbside for collection under the village’s recycling
program.
   (E)   Glass containers shall be rinsed, with covers removed, separated by
color in accordance with the hauler’s instructions, and placed for collection
under the village’s curbside recycling program.
   (F)   Magazines shall be placed in brown paper bags or cardboard boxes for
collection under the village’s curbside recycling program.
   (G)   Newspapers shall be placed in brown paper bags or cardboard boxes for
collection under the village’s curbside recycling program.
   (H)   Office paper shall be placed in brown paper bags or cardboard boxes
for collection under the village’s curbside recycling program in accordance
with hauler’s instructions.
   (I)   Rigid plastic containers shall be prepared and collected as follows.
      (1)   Plastic containers made with PETE (plastic #1) shall be rinsed with
caps, rings and covers removed, separated and placed at curbside for collection
under the village’s curbside recycling program.
      (2)   Plastic containers made of HDPE (plastic #2) shall be rinsed, with
caps, rings and covers removed, separated and placed at curbside for collection
under the village’s curbside recycling program. Wide mouth containers are to be
handled in accordance with hauler’s instructions.
      (3)   Because of changes in markets from time to time, the village may
determine that rigid plastic containers displaying different numbers need not
be separated by number but can be placed together for pickup. In such
instances, instructions will be given through the hauler. Also, if there are no
markets, the Village Board may exempt materials otherwise required to be
recycled. See §
50.46. Example: in 1995 plastic containers ##3-7 are exempted.
      (4)   Steel containers shall be rinsed and placed at curbside for
collection under the village’s curbside recycling program.
      (5)   Waste tires shall not be openly stored in the village. Arrangements
with a licensed hauler shall be made for proper disposal.
      (6)   Recycling bins or containers meeting the hauler’s requirements may
be used as an alternative to brown paper bags or cardboard boxes as
receptacles.
(Prior Code, § 7.03(1)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 50.41 RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNER OR DESIGNATED AGENTS OF MULTIPLE- FAMILY
DWELLINGS.
   Owners or designated agents of multiple-family dwellings shall do all of the
following to recycle the materials specified in §
50.23(E) through (O):
   (A)   Provide adequate, separate containers for the recyclable materials;
   (B)   Notify tenants in writing at the time of renting or leasing the
dwelling and at least semi-annually thereafter about the established recycling
program;
   (C)   Provide for the collection of the materials separated from the solid
waste by the tenants and the delivery of the materials to the recycling
facility; and
   (D)   Notify tenants of reasons to reduce and recycle solid waste; which
materials are collected; how to prepare the materials in order to meet the
processing requirements; collection methods or sites; location and hours of
operation; and a contact person or company, including a name, address and
telephone number.
(Prior Code, § 7.03(2)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 50.42 RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNER OR DESIGNATED AGENTS OF NONRESIDENTIAL
FACILITIES AND PROPERTIES.
   Owners or designated agents of nonresidential facilities and properties
shall do all of the following to recycle the materials specified in §
50.23(E) through (O):
   (A)   Provide adequate separated containers for the recyclable materials;
   (B)   Notify in writing, at least semi-annually, all users, tenants and
occupants of the properties about the established recycling program;
   (C)   Provide for a collection of the materials separated from the solid
waste by the users, tenants and occupants and the delivery of the materials to
a recycling facility; and
   (D)   Notify users, tenants and occupants of reasons to reduce and recycle,
which materials are collected, how to prepare materials in order to meet the
processing requirements, collection methods or sites, location and hours of
operation, and a contact person or company, including a name, address and
telephone number.
(Prior Code, § 7.03(3)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 50.43 PROHIBITIONS ON DISPOSAL OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS SEPARATED FOR
RECYCLING.
   No person may dispose of in a solid waste disposal facility or burn in a
solid waste treatment facility any of the materials specified in §
50.23(E) through (O) which have been separated for recycling, except waste
tires may be burned with energy recovery in a sold waste treatment facility.
(Prior Code, § 7.03(4)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.44 LARGE OUTDOOR EVENTS.
   (A)   Organizers and sponsors of outdoor events and owners of the real
estate where outdoor events are held, with 20 or more persons attending,
including but not limited to fairs, sport events, shows, performances,
reunions, social or business gatherings, with or without charge, on private or
public property, where food or beverage is served, shall provide an adequate
number of clearly identified containers for aluminum containers.
   (B)   Within 24 hours after the event is completed, all recyclable aluminum
shall be delivered by the organizer, sponsor or real estate owner or his or her
designee to the local recycling center designated to receive same.
   (C)   Attendees of all such events shall deposit said aluminum materials to
the provided containers. No such aluminum materials shall be placed or disposed
of in a garbage or refuse containers. All deposited aluminum materials shall be
reasonably clean and free of food particles.
(Prior Code, § 7.03(5)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 50.45 PARKS, WAYSIDES, BALLFIELDS AND RECREATION AREAS.
   (A)   All municipally owned or operated parks, waysides, ballfields and
recreational areas shall have clearly identified containers for aluminum
containers. The aluminum products shall be regularly removed and delivered to
the local recycling center designated to receive same.
   (B)   No person shall deposit to such containers any non-aluminum materials
and shall deposit to said containers aluminum materials that are reasonably
clean and free of food particles.
(Prior Code, § 7.03(6)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 50.46 EXEMPTIONS.
   The Village Board reserves the right to designate additional solid waste
materials as recyclable or currently collected materials as no longer
recyclable in accordance with state law and to either add or delete them from
any collection services provided by the municipality or its contractors. The
municipality shall provide written notice to its service recipients of this
decision.
(Prior Code, § 7.03(7)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 50.47 VOLUME-BASED RATES.
   The municipality determines costs for regular and special solid waste to
cover those costs. Fees shall be assessed on a per container basis for solid
waste to be paid through purchase of designated bags or containers at those
locations specified by the Village Board from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 7.03(8)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 50.48 COLLECTION SCHEDULE.
   The municipality shall establish the time of collection of solid waste and
recyclables and the Clerk shall provide written notice of the collection
schedule at least once in the spring and fall of each year at any time when
collection schedule is changed. The contracted hauler is authorized to inform
persons of changes in the collection schedule due to holidays and other special
circumstances.
(Prior Code, § 7.03(9)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 50.49 SPECIAL MATERIALS.
   Materials such as couches and bulky items shall be specifically arranged
with a licensed garbage hauler.
(Prior Code, § 7.03(10)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 50.50 CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS.
   For construction materials from remodeling or construction, arrangements are
to be made by the individual with a licensed hauler.
(Prior Code, § 7.03(11)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 50.51 RIGHT TO REJECT MATERIALS.
   The hauler or dropoff site attendant has the right to reject or leave at
curbside any recyclable material that is not prepared according to the
specifications provided by the contractor or village to the service recipients.
Materials may also be left if not separated from solid waste and placed in the
proper container. The hauler also has the right to refuse to pick up any solid
waste if it contains recyclable containers and materials. In such cases, the
hauler or attendant shall notify the generator of the materials about the
reasons for rejecting the items either in writing or verbally. The hauler shall
also keep a list of such occurrences and provide it to the municipality on a
monthly basis.
(Prior Code, § 7.03(12)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 50.52 HAULER LICENSING.
   Haulers who collect solid waste or recyclables in the village for storage
treatment, processing, marketing or disposal shall obtain and maintain all
necessary municipal and state permits, licenses and approval prior to
collecting any materials in the village.
(Prior Code, § 7.03(13)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 50.53 CHARITABLE AND CIVIC ORGANIZATIONS.
   (A)   It is determined to be in the public interest of the village to allow
and encourage charitable and civic organizations to promote recycling in the
village by sponsoring paper drives, aluminum can collection drives, corrugated
paper drives and other like recycling activities. Charitable and civic
organizations can and should be encouraged to educate the public on the
benefits of recycling. Statistics need to be collected on the amount of such
recycling activity to comply with state regulations. Need for such data as well
as need to ensure that recyclables collected by charitable and civic
organizations are delivered in an acceptable state to ultimate purchasers for
recycling warrants the village in licensing such activity.
   (B)   (1)   Annual permit. Charitable and civic organizations may haul,
collect and dispose of recyclables through paper drives, aluminum can
collection drives, corrugated paper collection drives and other drives to
collect recyclables by obtaining an annual permit from the village.
      (2)   Fee.  The annual permit fee shall be an amount which can be found
at the office of the Village Clerk.
      (3)   Condition of permit. As a condition of the permit, the permittee
agrees to make quarterly reports to the village showing the amount of
recyclables collected by the permittee, the source of the recyclables, the
ultimate disposal site and/or the ultimate recycling center. The permittee
shall furnish such additional statistics as may be reasonably required by the
village to enable the village to apply for recycling grants and make other
reports to the state.
      (4)   Flow control of recyclables. Permittee will comply with all
recycling laws of the state and will haul or deliver recyclables collected in
the village to a location, recycling center or recycling agent as approved by
the village.
      (5)   Education. Permittee will assist the village in public education
regarding recycling by distributing handouts, flyers and notices prepared by
the village to persons from whom recyclables are collected or solicited by the
permittee.
      (6)   Application. All applications for permits shall be filed with the
Village Clerk on forms provided by the village.
      (7)   License term. All licenses shall be for a term of one year
commencing January 1 of each year. Licenses shall be issued by the Clerk
without Board action.
      (8)   Report forms.  All reports shall be made on report forms prepared
on forms provided by the village and shall be reported on a quarterly basis
unless waived by the Village Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 7.03(14)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 50.54 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   For the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this
subchapter any authorized officer, employee or representative of the village
may inspect recyclable materials separated for recycling, post consumer waste
intended for disposal, recycling collection sites and facilities, collection
vehicles, collection areas of multiple-family dwellings and nonresidential
facilities and properties and any record relating to recycling activities,
which shall be kept confidential when necessary to protect proprietary
information. No person may refuse access to any authorized officer, employee or
authorized representative of the village who request access for purposes of
inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials. No person may obstruct,
hamper or interfere with such an inspection.
   (B)   Any person who violates a provision of this subchapter may be issued a
citation by the Village Police Department, or other authorized personnel to
collect forfeitures. The issuance of a citation shall not preclude proceeding
under any other ordinance or law relating to the same or any other matter.
Proceedings under any other ordinance or law relating to the same or any other
matter shall not preclude the issuance of a citation under this division (B).
(Prior Code, § 7.03(17)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   Penalties for violating this chapter may be assessed as follows.
      (1)   Prior to January 1, 1997:
         (a)   Any person who violates Section 9.01(18) may be required to
forfeit $10 for the first violation, $20 for a second violation, and no more
than $100 for a third or subsequent violation; and
         (b)   Any person who violates a provision of this chapter, except
Section 9.01(18), may be required to forfeit not less than $10 nor more than
$100 for each violation.
      (2)   After December 31, 1996:
         (a)   Any person who violates Section 9.01(18) may be required to
forfeit $50 for a first violation, $200 for a second violation, and not more
than $2,000 for a third or subsequent violation; and
         (b)   Any person who violates a provision of this chapter, except
Section 9.01(18), may be required to forfeit not less than $10 nor more than
$1,000 for each violation.
(Prior Code, § 7.03(17)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
CHAPTER 51: PUBLIC UTILITIES
Section
General Provisions
   
51.001   Public utilities
   
51.002   Rules, regulations and rates
Water Utility Creation; Rules and Regulations
   
51.015   Management and operation
   
51.016   Powers of Utility
   
51.017   Condemnation of real estate
   
51.018   Title to real estate and personalty
   
51.019   User rules and regulations
   
51.020   Miscellaneous rules
   
51.021   Excavations
   
51.022   Tapping the mains
   
51.023   Installation of house laterals
   
51.024   Water service rates; Water Utility rules
   
51.025   Maintenance of services
   
51.026   Payment of bills
   
51.027   Cross-connection control program
   
51.028   Well abandonment and well operation permit
   
51.029   Damage recovery
   
51.030   Charges a lien on property
   
51.031   Adoption of other rules
Sewer Utility Creation; Rules and Regulations
   
51.045   Maintenance of services
   
51.046   Improper use
   
51.047   Damage recovery
   
51.048   Vacating of premises and discontinuance of service
   
51.049   Charges a lien on property
   
51.050   Unit of service definition
   
51.051   Adoption of other rules
Gas Utility
   
51.065   Gas utility regulations
Meters and Charges
   
51.080   Service billing and connections
   
51.081   Meters
Miscellaneous
   
51.095   Fire hydrants
   
51.096   Plumbing
   
51.097   Liability
 
   
51.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A: Private Well Operation Permit
   
Appendix B: PSC Water Utility Rules
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.001 PUBLIC UTILITIES.
   The Village Board shall have charge and management of the Water Utility and
the Sewer Utility and shall supervise the operation thereof.
(Prior Code, § 15.01) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 51.002 RULES, REGULATIONS AND RATES.
   (A)   Rules, regulations and rates governing the Water Utility and the Sewer
Utility shall be as approved by the Village Board (and with respect to the
Water Utility as approved and filed with the State Public Service Commission).
Such rules, regulations and rates shall be considered a part of the contract of
every consumer of services of the Water Utility or Sewer Utility and each
consumer by acceptance of service assents to such rules, regulations and rates.
   (B)   Because charges for utilities are subject to extensive, lengthy and
sometimes wordy revisions, and are revised from time to time, the Village Board
will continue to approve rate and charges but such ordinances shall not be
placed in the body of this chapter and shall instead be placed in the
appendices of this chapter under the appropriate utilities. Water Utility rate
ordinances shall be placed under Appendix K, and Sewer Utility rate ordinances
shall be placed under Appendix L (both appendices, attached to the ordinance
establishing this section, are hereby adopted by reference as if set out in
full herein). Upon adoption, the date of adoption of the ordinance shall be
subscribed in this section.
   (C)   Because different requirements of the individual utilities may be made
a condition of grant or loans by granting agencies, the specific language of §§
51.015 through
51.031 shall apply to the Water Utility, and §§
51.045 through
51.051 shall apply to the Sewer Utility. If the specific requirements of either
subchapter conflict with general requirements applicable to all utilities, the
specific requirements of §§
51.015 through
51.031 (Water Utility) and §§
51.045 through
51.051 (Sewer Utility) shall control.
      (1)   Date of adoption of water rate ordinance.  Location of ordinance as
authorized by Public Service Commission: Order No. 2230-WQ-102 effective June
22, 2012, 2230-WR-101 March 15, 2002.
      (2)   Date of adoption of sewer rate ordinance. Location of ordinance:
Ordinance 73, adopted December 14, 1983, Appendix L (Appendix L, attached to
the ordinance establishing this section, is hereby adopted by reference as if
set out in full herein):
         (a)   Amendment #1 adopted;
         (b)   Amendment #2 adopted February 8, 1984;
         (c)   Amendment #3 adopted March 13, 1985;
         (d)   Amendment #4 adopted June 12, 1991;
         (e)   Amendment #5 adopted February 10, 1988;
         (f)   Amendment #6 adopted August 10, 1994; and
         (g)   Amendment #7 adopted September 2011.
(Prior Code, § 15.02) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
WATER UTILITY CREATION; RULES AND REGULATIONS
§ 51.015 MANAGEMENT AND OPERATION.
   The management, operation and control of the water system for the village is
vested in the Village Board. The Village Clerk or other designee of the village
shall keep all the financial records.
(Prior Code, § 15.03(1)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 51.016 POWERS OF UTILITY.
   The Water Utility of the village shall have the power to construct water
lines for public use and shall have the power to lay water pipes in and through
the alleys, streets and public grounds of the village; and generally, to do all
such work as may be found necessary or convenient in the management of the
water system. The Village Board shall have power by itself, its officers,
agents and servants to enter upon any land for the purpose of making
examination or supervise the performance of its duties under this chapter,
without liability therefor, and the Village Board shall have the power to
purchase and acquire for the village all real and personal property which may
be necessary for construction of the water system, or for any repair,
remodeling or additions thereof.
(Prior Code, § 15.03(2)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 51.017 CONDEMNATION OF REAL ESTATE.
   Whenever any real estate or any easement therein, or use thereof, shall in
the judgment of the village be necessary to the water system; and whenever, for
any cause, an agreement for the purchase thereof cannot be made with the owner
thereof, the Village Board shall proceed with all necessary steps to take such
real estate easement or use by condemnation in accordance with the state
statutes and the Uniform Relocation and Real Property Acquisition Policy Act of
1970 being 42 USC §§ 4651 et seq., if federal funds are used.
(Prior Code, § 15.03(3)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 51.018 TITLE TO REAL ESTATE AND PERSONALTY.
   All property, real, personal and mixed, acquired for the construction of the
water system, and all plans, specifications, diagrams, papers, books and
records connected with said water system, and all buildings, machinery and
fixtures pertaining thereto shall be the property of the said village.
(Prior Code, § 15.03(4)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 51.019 USER RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The rules, regulations and water rates hereinafter set forth shall be
considered a part of the contract with every person, company or corporation who
is connected with the water system and every such person, company or
corporation by connection with the water system shall be considered as
expressing his or their assent to be bound thereby. Whenever any of said rules
and regulations or such others as the said village may hereafter adopt are
violated, the service shall be shut off from the building or place of such
violation (even though two or more parties are receiving service through the
same connection) and shall not be reestablished except by order of the Village
Board, and on payment of all arrears, the expenses and established charges of
shutting off and putting on, and such other terms as the village furthermore
may declare any payment for the service by the party or parties committing such
violation, to be forfeited, and the same shall thereupon be forfeited. The
right is reserved to the village to change the said rules, regulations and
water rates from time to time as it may deem advisable; and to make special
rate and contracts in all proper cases, all subject to the authority of the
State Public Service Commission (Water Utility).
(Prior Code, § 15.03(5)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 51.020 MISCELLANEOUS RULES.
   The following rules and regulations for the government of licensed plumbers,
water users and others, are hereby adopted and established.
   (A)   Plumbers.  No plumber, pipe fitter or other person will be permitted
to do any plumbing or pipe fitting work in connection with the water system
without first receiving a license from the state.
   (B)   Users. Street laterals will be installed by the Utility (on existing
mains) according to the schedule of charges as set forth in current PSC rate
file (see §
34.02 and
Appendix B to this chapter).
   (C)   Tap permits.  After water connections have been introduced into any
building or upon any premises, no plumber shall make any alterations,
extensions or attachments, unless the party ordering such tapping or other work
shall exhibit the proper permit for the same from the village.
   (D)   User to keep in repair.  All users shall keep their own service pipes
in good repair and protected from frost, at their own risk and expense and
shall prevent any unnecessary waste of water.
   (E)   User to permit inspection. Every user shall permit the village or its
duly authorized agent, at all reasonable hours of the day, to enter his or her
premises or building to examine the pipes and fixtures and the manner in which
the water is used, and he or she must at all times frankly and without
concealment answer all questions put to him or her relative to its use.
   (F)   Utility responsibility. It is expressly stipulated that no claim shall
be made against said village or its employees or agents by reason of the
breaking, clogging, stoppage or freezing of any service pipe or from any damage
arising from repairing mains, making connections or extensions or any other
work that may be deemed necessary. The right is hereby reserved to cut off the
service at any time for the purpose of repairs or any other necessary purpose,
any permit granted or regulation to the contrary notwithstanding. Whenever it
shall become necessary to shut off the water service within any part of the
village, the Village Board or its designee shall, if practicable, give notice
to each and every consumer within said village of the time when such service
will be so shut off.
   (G)   Meters. It shall be the duty of the owner of any premises to provide a
location for a water meter and to maintain such locations and passageway
thereto clean and sanitary and free from any obstruction or any conditions of a
hazardous nature. No connection for water meters shall be installed in any
location not easily accessible, or which is or may be unclean, unsanitary or in
any manner unsafe to utility employees in the discharge of their duties.
(Prior Code, § 15.03(6)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.021 EXCAVATIONS.
   (A)   In making excavations in streets or highways for laying service pipe
or making repairs, the paving and earth removed must be deposited in a manner
that will occasion the least inconvenience to the public.
   (B)   No person shall leave any such excavation made in any street or
highway open at any time without barricades; and, during the night, warning
lights must be maintained at such excavations.
   (C)   In refilling the opening after the service pipes are laid, the earth
must be laid in layers of not more than nine inches in depth and each layer
thoroughly compacted to prevent settling. This work, together with the
replacing of sidewalks, ballast and paving, must be done so as to make the
street as good at least as before it was disturbed and satisfactory to the
Village Board or its designee. No opening of the streets for tapping the pipes
will be permitted when the ground is frozen without Village Board approval.
(Prior Code, § 15.03(7)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.022 TAPPING THE MAINS.
   (A)   No persons except those having special permission from the village or
persons in their service and approved by them will be permitted under any
circumstances to tap the water mains or distribution pipes. The kind and size
of the connection with the pipe shall be that specified in the permit or order
from said village.
   (B)   Pipes should be tapped on the top half of the pipe and not within six
inches (15 cm) of the point, or within 24 inches (60 cm) of another connection.
(Prior Code, § 15.03(8)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
Cross-reference:
   Water main extension rule; installations in platted subdivisions, see
Appendix B of this chapter
§ 51.023 INSTALLATION OF HOUSE LATERALS.
   (A)   All water lines on private property, whether underground or within a
structure, will be installed in accordance with Wis. Adm. Code Chapter H-62,
“Design, Construction, Installation, Supervision and Inspection of Plumbing”;
specifically § H-62.13, “Water Distribution Systems”.
   (B)   The building’s water line shall be inspected upon completion of
placement of the pipe and before backfilling, and tested before or after
backfilling.
(Prior Code, § 15.03(9)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 51.024 WATER SERVICE RATES; WATER UTILITY RULES.
   So-called standard rules published by the Public Service Commission of
Wisconsin (small utility rules), and the rates as provided by the Public
Service Commission finding of fact, certification and order are hereby adopted
by the village as applicable to the Water Utility. The provisions of this
chapter are subject to the overriding authority of the Public Service
Commission and provisions of current rate order.
(Prior Code, § 15.03(10)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 51.025 MAINTENANCE OF SERVICES.
   All water services within the limits of the village from the street main to
the property line and including all controls between the same will be
maintained by the Water Utility without expenses to the property owner, except
when they are damaged as a result of negligence or carelessness on the part of
the property owner, a tenant or an agent of the owner, in which case they will
be repaired at the expense of the property owner. All water services from the
point of maintenance by the Utility to and throughout the premises must be
maintained free of defective conditions, by and at the expense of the owner or
occupant of the property.
(Prior Code, § 15.03(11)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 51.026 PAYMENT OF BILLS.
   (A)   Failure to receive bill no penalty exemption. Every reasonable care
will be exercised in the proper delivery of water bills. Failure to receive a
water bill, however, shall not relieve any person of the responsibility for
payment of water rates within the prescribed period, or exempt any person from
any penalty imposed for delinquency in the payment thereof.
   (B)   Billing. The property owner is held responsible for all water bills on
premises that he or she owes. Delinquency notices relative to the water
service, will be addressed to the owner as well as the renter and delivered to
the premises referred to on such bill or notice.
(Prior Code, § 15.03(12)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 51.027 CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL PROGRAM.
   (A)   Description.  The Village Water Utility, under the direction of the
Department of Natural Resources Code, Wis. Adm. Code, NR 811.09, is required to
develop and implement a cross-connection control program. The objective of this
program is to prevent contamination of the municipal potable water supply
through illegal interconnections between private, auxiliary or emergency water
supplies and the village’s potable water distribution system.
      (1)    Residential. Local plumbers are the designated inspectors for all
residential properties. For clarification purposes, rental properties
containing four or fewer rental units will be deemed to be residential
properties. The inspection guidelines are outlined in the Department of
Commerce Code, Wis. Adm. Code Chapter SPS 382. The plumber shall determine if a
cross-connection exists, inform the customer whether or not a cross-connection
exists, assess the severity of the interconnection and determine if it can be
corrected while still on-site. In the case that the cross-connection can be
corrected immediately, corrections shall be made and the plumber will note that
the residence is in compliance. If the cross-connection cannot be corrected
while on-site, the plumber will inform the customer of the cross-connection and
then schedule an appointment no less than 30 days from the initial inspection
date to determine if the corrections were made.
      (2)    Commercial/industrial. The Water Utility shall mail a letter and
an inspection form to all commercial/industrial accounts, requiring each to
have a licensed inspector or plumber perform a cross-connection inspection on
their premises. Each commercial/industrial customer is then required to correct
all illegal interconnections at his, her or its expense. The inspecting
authority (plumber) shall then indicate that the inspection is in compliance.
The business representative and the inspector must then sign the inspection
form, keep their designated copies and forward the completed inspection form to
the Water Utility.
   (B)   Local authority. The local authority is as set forth in this section.
   (C)   Schedule for inspection/reinspection. Inspection of residential
consumers shall take place every ten years unless otherwise authorized by the
Department of Natural Resources. The program may include public education
materials in lieu of inspections of low hazard portions of residential or
commercial facilities (normal kitchen and bathroom fixtures). Inspection of
commercial/industrial consumers shall take place every two to five years.
Records of inspections shall be kept at the Village Water Utility office,
located at 380 East Main Street, Gilman, Wisconsin and saved until the next
compliant inspection is completed.
   (D)   Description of approved methods and devices. The Water Utility
references the Department of Commerce Code, Wis. Adm. Code Chapter SPS 382 for
a list of approved methods and devices.
   (E)   Denial or discontinuance of water service.
      (1)   Residential. The local plumber shall make at least three attempts,
no less than two months apart, to contact and schedule appointments with
customers. Contacts may include phone conversations, phone messages, face-to-
face conversations and written notices left at the customer’s residences. All
attempts at contacts, no-shows and cancelled appointments will be documented.
In the event the Water Utility deems it necessary, the plumber shall provide
records of contacts and noncompliance to the Village Board. The Utility and/or
Village Board then reserves the right to follow the steps outlined in the
Department of Commerce Code, Wis. Adm. Code § PSC 185.37 (11a. through 11f.).
      (2)   Commercial/industrial. The Water Utility shall mail an initial
letter outlining the cross-connection inspection directive, along with a
commercial cross-connection inspection form. Commercial customers will be given
three months to have their inspections completed. Documentation of completed
inspections will be kept on record at the Water Utility. Commercial customers
who neglect to have the inspection completed after the initial three months
shall be sent a follow-up letter and given an additional month to comply. In
the event that a completed inspection is not submitted by the end of the four-
month period, the Water Utility shall forward records of contact and
noncompliance to the Village Board. The Utility/Village Board then reserves the
right to follow the steps outlined in the Department of Commerce Code, Wis.
Adm. Code PSC 185.37 (11a. through 11f.).
(Prior Code, § 15.03(13)) (Doc. passed - -; Ord. passed 6-14-2017)
§ 51.028 WELL ABANDONMENT AND WELL OPERATION PERMIT.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect public health,
safety and welfare and to prevent contamination of groundwater by assuring that
unused, unsafe or noncomplying wells or wells which may act as conduits for
contamination of groundwater, or wells which may be illegally cross-connected
to the municipal water system, are properly maintained or abandoned.
   (B)   Applicability. This section applies to all wells located on premises
served by the village water system. Utility customers outside the jurisdiction
of the municipal system may be required under contract agreement or utility
rule to adopt and enforce equivalent ordinances within their jurisdictions for
the purpose stated in division (A) above.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEMS. A community water system owned by a city,
village, county, town, town sanitary district, utility district, public inland
lake and rehabilitation district, municipal water district or a federal, state,
county or municipal owned institution for congregate care or correction, or a
privately owned water utility serving the foregoing.
      NONCOMPLYING.  A well or pump installation which does not comply with
Wis. Adm. Code § NR 812.42, Standards for Existing Installations, and which has
not been granted a variance pursuant to Wis. Adm. Code § NR 812.43.
      PUMP INSTALLATION. The pump and related equipment used for withdrawing
water from a well, including the discharge piping, the underground connections,
pitless adapters, pressure tanks, pits, sampling faucets and well seals or
caps.
      UNSAFE. Applied to well or pump installation, means one which produces
water which is bacteriologically contaminated or contaminated with substances
which exceed the drinking water standards of Wis. Adm. Code Chapters NR 140 or
809, or for which a health advisory has been issued by the Department of
Natural Resources.
      UNUSED. Applied to well or pump installation, means one which is not used
or does not have a functional pumping system.
      WELL. A drill hole or other excavation or opening, deeper than it is
wide, that extends more than ten feet below the ground surface constructed for
the purpose of obtaining groundwater.
      WELL ABANDONMENT. The proper filling and sealing of a well according to
the provisions of Wis. Adm. Code § NR 812.26.
   (D)   Abandonment required. All wells on premises served by the municipal
water system shall be properly abandoned in accordance with division (G) below
by (date) or no later than (days) [90 days to one year] from the date of
connection to the municipal water system, unless a valid well operation permit
has been issued to the well owner by (municipality) under terms of division (E)
below.
   (E)   Well operation permit.  
      (1)   Owners of wells on premises served by the municipal water system
wishing to retain their wells for any use shall make application for a well
operation permit for each well no later than (days) [90 days to one year] after
connection to the municipal water system. The (municipality) shall grant a
permit to a well owner to operate a well for a period not to exceed five years
providing all conditions of this section are met. A well operations permit may
be renewed by submitting an application verifying that the conditions of this
section are met. The (municipality) or its agent may conduct inspections and
water quality tests or require inspections and water quality tests to be
conducted at the applicant’s expense to obtain or verify information necessary
for consideration of a permit application or renewal. Permit applications and
renewals shall be made on forms provided by the Clerk. [(optional) All initial
and renewal applications must be accompanied by a fee of (     )].
      (2)   The well and pump installation shall comply with the Standards for
Existing Installations, described in Wis. Adm. Code § NR 812.42, or repaired to
comply with current standards. Compliance shall be verified by inspection for
initial issuance of a permit and every ten years thereafter. Inspections shall
be conducted by a Wisconsin licensed well driller or pump installer and
documented on inspection report form DNR #3300-221, to be submitted to the
Clerk.
   (F)   Renewal of well operation permit. The following conditions must be met
for issuance or renewal of a well operation permit.
      (1)   The well and pump installation shall meet the standards for
existing installations described in Wis. Adm. Code § NR 812.42.
      (2)   The well and pump shall have a history of producing safe water
evidenced by at least one coliform bacteria sample. In areas where the
Department of Natural Resources has determined that groundwater aquifers are
contaminated with substances other than bacteria, additional chemical test may
be required to document the safety of the water.
      (3)   There shall be no cross-connections between the well’s pump
installation or distribution piping and the municipal water system.
      (4)   The water from the private well shall not discharge into a drain
leading directly to a public sewer utility unless properly metered and
authorized by the Sewer Utility.
      (5)   The private well shall have a functional pumping system.
      (6)   The proposed use of the private well shall be justified as
reasonable in addition to water provided by the municipal water system.
   (G)   Abandonment procedures.
      (1)   All wells abandoned under the jurisdiction of this section shall be
done according to the procedures and methods of Wis. Adm. Code § NR 812.26. All
debris, pumps, piping, unsealed liners and any other obstructions which may
interfere with sealing operations shall be removed prior to abandonment.
      (2)   The owner of the well, or the owner’s agent, [(optional) may be
required to obtain a well abandonment permit prior to any well abandonment and]
shall notify the Clerk at least 48 hours in advance of any well abandonment
activities. The abandonment of the well may be observed or verified by
personnel of the municipal system.
      (3)   An abandonment report form, supplied by the Department of Natural
Resources, shall be submitted by the well owner to the Clerk and the Department
of Natural Resources within 30 days of the completion of the well abandonment.
(Prior Code, § 15.03(14)) (Ord. passed 1-9-2002; Am. Ord. passed 6-14-2017)
Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.029 DAMAGE RECOVERY.
   The Utility shall have the right of recovery from all persons of any expense
incurred by said Utility for the repair or replacement of any water pipe, curb
stop, gate valve, hydrant or valve box damaged in any manner by any person by
the performance of any work under his, her or their control, or by any
negligent act. Owners or operators of motor vehicles will be held liable for
the cost of repair of any hydrant damaged by them and the Utility will not be
responsible for the damage due the motor vehicle by reason of such accident.
(Prior Code, § 15.03(15))
§ 51.030 CHARGES A LIEN ON PROPERTY.
   All water services, charges and special assessments shall be a lien on a
lot, part of a lot or land on which water services were supplied. All sums
which have accrued during the preceding year, and which are unpaid by October 1
of any year, shall be certified to the Village Clerk/Treasurer to be placed on
the tax roll for collection as provided by Wis. Stats. § 66.0809.
(Prior Code, § 15.03(17))
§ 51.031 ADOPTION OF OTHER RULES.
   There is hereby adopted all the rules and regulations of the State Plumbing
and State Building Codes and the building rules of the Department of Industry,
Labor and Human Relations; and the Department of Natural Resources of this
state as the same are amended from time to time, insofar as the same are
applicable to the village.
(Prior Code, § 15.03(18))
SEWER UTILITY CREATION; RULES AND REGULATIONS
§ 51.045 MAINTENANCE OF SERVICES.
   (A)   The utility shall maintain sewer service within the limits of the
village from street main to the property line and including all controls
between the same, without expenses to the property owner, except when they are
damaged as a result of negligence or carelessness on the part of the property
owners, a tenant or an agent of the owner, in which case they will be repaired
at the expense of the property owner. All sewer services from the point of
maintenance by the system to and throughout the premises must be maintained
free of defective conditions, by and at the expense of the owner or occupant of
the property.
   (B)   For purposes of allocating maintenance responsibility under division
(A) above, in the event maintenance is required to the lateral between the
sewer main and the building or dwelling, the property owner shall have the duty
to determine and ascertain to a reasonable degree of certainty whether the
maintenance or repair is required on the village’s side of the property line or
the owner’s side of the property. After said determination is made, the
maintenance or repairs shall be remedied in accordance with division (A) above.
   (C)   When any sewer service is to be re-laid and there are two or more
buildings on such service, each building shall be disconnected from such
service and a new service shall be installed for each building.
(Prior Code, § 15.04(1)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 51.046 IMPROPER USE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully injure the sewer system, or
any building, machinery or fixture, pertaining thereto; or, willfully and
without authority of the village, to bore or otherwise cause to leak, any
tunnel, aqueduct, reservoir, pipe or other thing used in the system for
holding, conveying or collecting sewage.
(Prior Code, § 15.04(2)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.047 DAMAGE RECOVERY.
   The system shall have the right of recovery from all persons, any expense
incurred by said system for the repair or replacement of any sewer pipe damaged
in any manner by any person by the performance of any work under his or her
control, or by any negligent act.
(Prior Code, § 15.04(3)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 51.048 VACATING OF PREMISES AND DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.
   Whenever premises served by the system are to be vacated, or whenever any
person desires to discontinue service from the system, the system must be
notified in writing. The owner of the premises shall be liable for any damages
to the property or such damage which may be discovered having occurred to the
property of the system other than through the fault of the system or its
employees, representatives or agent.
(Prior Code, § 15.04(5)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 51.049 CHARGES A LIEN ON PROPERTY.
   All sewer services, charges and special assessments shall be a lien on a
lot, part of a lot or land on which sewer services were supplied. All sums
which have accrued during the preceding year and which are unpaid by October 1
of any year, shall be certified to the Village Treasurer to be placed on the
tax roll for collection as provided by state law, including Wis. Stats.§
66.0809.
(Prior Code, § 15.04(6)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 51.050 UNIT OF SERVICE DEFINITION.
   A UNIT OF SERVICE shall consist of any residential, commercial, industrial
or charitable aggregation of space or area occupied for a district purpose such
as a residence, store, office, industrial plant, church or school. Each unit of
service shall be regarded as one consumer. If there are five or more suites or
apartments in the aggregation of space, each suit or apartment shall be
classified as a unit of service for purposes of determining the UCF. In mobile
home parks, each mobile home unit within the park will be considered as a
separate unit of service, for purposes of determining the UCF. When a
consumer’s premises has several buildings, for which services are eligible and
such buildings are used in the same business and connected by the user, the
village shall set a separate rate for such complex.
(Prior Code, § 15.04(7)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 51.051 ADOPTION OF OTHER RULES.
   There is hereby adopted all the rules and regulations of the State Plumbing
and State Building Code and the building rules of the Department of Industry,
Labor and Human Relations; and the State Department of Natural Resources
insofar as the same are applicable to the village. All extensions of the system
will comply with Wis. Adm. Code Chapter NR 108 and Chapter NR 110 of the
Department of Natural Resources.
(Prior Code, § 15.04(8)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
GAS UTILITY
§ 51.065 GAS UTILITY REGULATIONS.
   Every gas utility operating in the village shall comply with Wis. Adm. Code
Chapter PSC 135, which is adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 15.10) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
METERS AND CHARGES
§ 51.080 SERVICE BILLING AND CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Billing. All charges and procedures for furnishing water and meter
rental and collecting the same shall be as set forth in the pertinent rate
schedules and orders approved by the Public Service Commission, which current
schedules and orders shall be available for inspection in the Village Clerk’s
office.
   (B)   Service connections. Any person desiring the service of a utility
shall make application therefor upon forms provided by the utility. Upon the
payment of the fee (which amount can be found in the Village Clerk’s office or
online at the city’s PSC website), the Clerk shall issue the permit. For sewer
and water connections, the permit shall show the location of the tap and such
other information as may be necessary to properly record the location of the
tap. All connections shall be inspected by the Clerk and the permit returned to
the Clerk for filing. Connection charges for such utility shall be determined
by the Village Board by resolution or order as set forth in the Public Service
Commission rate order.
(Prior Code, § 15.05) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 51.081 METERS.
   (A)   All persons taking water from the village system shall receive the
same through a meter installed and paid for by the village.
   (B)   All meters shall be placed and connected by the Water Utility and the
owner of the premises shall pay the standard price fixed by the Public
Utilities Commission for such connection.
   (C)   All meters shall be placed in the basement of the building where the
service enters the same. Where there is not a basement, the meter must be
placed indoors to prevent freezing.
(Prior Code, § 15.06) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
MISCELLANEOUS
§ 51.095 FIRE HYDRANTS.
   All fire hydrants shall be under the control of the Village Board who shall
be responsible for their condition. The Fire Chief of the area Fire Department
shall periodically make an inspection of all hydrants owned by the village and
by trail determine whether they are operating satisfactorily. No person in the
village shall be permitted to use or take any water from any public hydrant for
private use unless such person shall have first received a permit signed by the
Village Board permitting the use of water from the hydrant for that purpose.
(Prior Code, § 15.07) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 51.096 PLUMBING.
   All plumbing and all connections to the sanitary sewer system, and all rain
water connections to the village sanitary sewer system, including roof drains,
cistern overflows, building foundation drains and all other types of
connections, shall conform to the State Plumbing Code which is hereby made by
reference a part of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 15.08) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 51.097 LIABILITY.
   The village shall not be liable for any disruption of water or sewer
service.
(Prior Code, § 15.09) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 51.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or rules,
regulations or orders adopted hereunder for which a specific penalty is not
adopted, shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
10.99. Each violation and each day a violation continues or occurs shall
constitute a separate offense. This section shall not preclude the village from
maintaining any appropriate action to prevent or remove a violation of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 15.13)
   (B)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of §§
51.015 through
51.031 or rules or regulations of the village; or who shall connect a service
pipe without first having obtained a permit therefor; or who shall violate any
provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes, Wisconsin Administrative Code or any
other materials which are incorporated by reference, shall upon conviction
thereof forfeit not less than $10 nor more than $200 and the cost of
prosecution.
(Prior Code, § 15.03(16))
   (C)   Any well owner violating any provision of §
51.028 shall upon conviction be punished by forfeiture of not less than
_________ nor more than __________ and the cost of prosecution. Each day of
violation is a separate offense. If any person fails to comply with this
chapter for more than 30 days after receiving written notice of the violation,
the municipality may impose a penalty and cause the well abandonment to be
performed and the expense to be assessed as a special tax against the property.
(Prior Code, § 15.03(14))
   (D)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or
rules or regulations of the Village Board of the village; or who shall connect
a service pipe without first having obtained a permit therefor; or who shall
violate any provisions of the Wisconsin Statutes, Wisconsin Administrative Code
or any other materials which are incorporated by reference, shall upon
conviction thereof, forfeit not less than $10 nor more than $200 and the costs
of prosecution.
(Prior Code, § 15.04(4))
(Ord. passed 1-9-2002; Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
APPENDIX A: PRIVATE WELL OPERATION PERMIT
PROPERTY OWNER:
________________________________________________________________
STREET ADDRESS:
_________________________________________________________________
PURPOSE OF WELL:   Private/Domestic ________   Yard/Garden ________
                  Industrial ______________   Other ______________
IS PROPERTY SERVED BY THE MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM? _________________________
DO ANY CROSS-CONNECTIONS EXIST? _______________________________
DOES WELL MEET EXISTING STATE CODES? ________________________________________
IS A WELL CONSTRUCTION REPORT ON FILE WITH THE DNR? _______________________
WELL INSPECTED BY? _______________________________________________
WELL INFORMATION: DEPTH ______   DIAMETER ____   CONSTRUCTION DATE _______
WATER SAMPLES REQUIRED: A minimum of two bacteriological samples taken at least
two weeks apart are required, and the results must be attached to the
application. Additional test(s) may also be required in some situations.
SAMPLE #1: DATE ________________________ RESULTS
_______________________________
SAMPLE #2: DATE ________________________ RESULTS
_______________________________
ANY OTHER SAMPLING REQUIRED? ________________________________________________
RESULTS:
_________________________________________________________________________
WELL OPERATING PERMIT APPROVED?   YES _______    NO _________
RENEWAL DATE: (5 YEARS) ________________________________
PERMIT FEE: an amount which can be found at the office of the Village Clerk
                                                                                                                                               
APPLICANT’S SIGNATURE         DATE:
                                                                                                                                               
AUTHORIZED SIGNATURE         DATE:
(Ord. passed 1-9-2002)
APPENDIX B: PSC WATER UTILITY RULES
The following are from the Public Service Commission of Wisconsin for the
Gilman Water Utility.
   (A)   Public fire protection.
Schedule No. Fd-1
Public Service Commission of Wisconsin    Amendment No. 14
   PUBLIC FIRE PROTECTION SERVICE
Under Wis. Stats. § 196-03(3)(b), the municipality has chosen to have the
utility bill the retail general service customers for public fire protection
service.
This service shall include the use of hydrants for fire protection service only
and such quantities of water as may be demanded for the purpose of
extinguishing fires within the service area. This service shall also include
water used for testing equipment and training personnel. For all other
purposes, the metered or other rates set forth, or as may be filed with the
Public Service Commission shall apply.
Quarterly Public Fire-Protection Service Charges: Amounts can be found on the
PSC rate file online at the PSC website and also at the office of the Village
Clerk
Customers who are provided service under Schedules Mg-1, Ug-1, Mgt-1 and Mz-
1 shall also be subject to the charges in this schedule.
Billing: Same as Schedule Mg-1.
(Eff. date 6-22-2012)
   (B)   Private fire protection.
Schedule No. Upf-1
Public Service Commission of Wisconsin    Amendment No. 11
   PRIVATE FIRE PROTECTION SERVICE - UNMETERED
This service shall consist of permanent or continuous unmetered connections to
the main for the purpose of supplying water to private fire protection systems
such as automatic sprinkler systems, standpipes, and private hydrants. This
service shall also include reasonable quantities of water used for testing
check valves and other backflow prevention devices.
Quarterly Private Fire Protection Service Demand Charges: Amounts can be found
on the PSC rate file online at the PSC website and also at the office of the
Village Clerk
Billing: Same as Schedule Mg-1.
(Eff. date 3-15-2002)
   (C)   General service, metered.
Schedule No. Mg-1
Public Service Commission of Wisconsin    Amendment No. 14
   GENERAL SERVICE - METERED
Quarterly Service Charges: Amounts can be found on the PSC rate file online at
the PSC website and also at the office of the Village Clerk
Plus Volume Charges:
   Amounts can be found at the office of the Village Clerk
Billing: Bills for water service are rendered quarterly and become due and
payable upon issuance following the period for which service is rendered. A
late payment charge of 1 percent per month will be added to bills not paid
within 20 days of issuance. This late payment charge will be applied to the
total unpaid balance for utility service, including unpaid late payment
charges. The late payment charge is applicable to all customers. The utility
customer may be given a written notice that the bill is overdue no sooner than
20 days after the bill is issued. Unless payment or satisfactory arrangement
for payment is made within the next ten days, service may be disconnected
pursuant to Wis. Adm. Code Ch. PSC 185.
Combined Metering: Volumetric meter readings will be combined for billing if
the utility for its own convenience places more than one meter on a single
water service lateral. Multiple meters placed for the purpose of identifying
water not discharged into the sanitary sewer are not considered for utility
convenience and shall not be combined for billing. This requirement does not
preclude the utility from combining readings when metering configurations
support such an approach. Meter readings from individually metered separate
service laterals shall not be combined for billing purposes.
(Eff. date 6-22-2012)
   (D)   Public service.
   Schedule No. Mpa-1
Public Service Commission of Wisconsin    Amendment No. 11
   PUBLIC SERVICE
Water service supplied to municipal buildings, schools, sewer treatment plants,
etc. shall be metered and the regular metered service rates applied.
Water used on an intermittent basis for flushing sewers, street sprinkling,
flooding skating rinks, drinking fountains, etc., shall be metered where meters
can be set to measure the service. Where it is impossible to measure the
service, the superintendent shall estimate the volume of water used based on
the pressure, size of opening, and period of time water is allowed to be drawn.
The estimated quantity used shall be billed per 1,000 gallons at the rate of an
amount which can be found on the PSC rate file online at the PSC website and
also at the office of the Village Clerk.
Billing: Same as Schedule Mg-1.
(Eff. date 3-15-2002)
   (E)   General water service - unmetered.
   Schedule No. Ug-1
Public Service Commission of Wisconsin    Amendment No. 11
   GENERAL WATER SERVICE - UNMETERED
Where the utility cannot immediately install its water meter, service may be
supplied temporarily on an unmetered basis.
   Charge, amounts can be found at the office of the Village Clerk.
   Rate shall be applied only to single-family residential and small commercial
customers and approximates the cost of 9,000 gallons of water per quarter under
Schedule Mg-1. If it is determined by the utility that usage is in excess of
9,000 gallons of water per quarter, an additional charge per Schedule Mg-1 will
be made for the estimated additional usage.
Billing: Same as Schedule Mg-1.
(Eff. date 3-15-2002)
   (F)   Seasonal, emergency, or temporary service.
   Schedule No. Mgt-1
Public Service Commission of Wisconsin    Amendment No. 11
   SEASONAL, EMERGENCY, OR TEMPORARY SERVICE
Seasonal customers* shall pay an annual seasonal service charge equal to four
times the applicable service charge in Schedule Mg-1. Water use in any billing
period shall be billed at the applicable volume rates in Schedule Mg-1 and the
charge added to the annual seasonal service charge.
In addition, customers who have an additional meter pursuant to Schedule Am-
1 shall also pay an annual seasonal rental charge equal to four times the
applicable additional meter rental charge in Schedule Am-1.
Further, if service has been disconnected or a meter removed, a charge under
Schedule R-l shall be applied at the time of reconnection or meter
reinstallation.
*Seasonal customers are general service customers whose use of water is
normally for recurring periods of less than a year. This includes service under
Schedule Mg-1 and/or Schedule Am-1.
Billing: Same as Schedule Mg-1.
(Eff. date 3-15-2002)
   (G)   Building and construction water service.
   Schedule No. Mz-1
Public Service Commission of Wisconsin   Amendment No. 11
   BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION WATER SERVICE
For single-family and small commercial buildings, apply the unmetered rate
(Schedule Ug-1).
For large commercial, industrial, or multiple apartment buildings, a temporary
metered installation shall be made and general metered rates (Schedule Mg-1)
applied.
Billing: Same as Schedule Mg-1.
(Eff. date 3-15-2002)
   (H)   Bulk water.
   Schedule No. BW-1
Public Service Commission of Wisconsin    Amendment No. 11
   BULK WATER
All bulk water supplied from the water system through hydrants or other
connections shall be metered, or at the direction of the utility, estimated.
Utility personnel or a utility-approved party shall supervise the delivery of
water.
Bulk water sales are:
A.   Water supplied by tank trucks or from hydrants for the purpose of
extinguishing fires outside the utility’s immediate service area;
B.   Water supplied by tank trucks or from hydrants for purposes other than
extinguishing fires, such as irrigation or the filling of swimming pools; or,
C.   Water supplied from hydrants or other temporary connections for general
service type applications. (Water supplied for construction purposes - see
Schedule Mz-1.)
Charges: Amounts can be found at the office of the Village Clerk. In addition,
for hydrant meters that are in place for more than 30 days, the applicable
service charge in Schedule Mg-1 will apply, prorated for the period in excess
of 30 days that the meter is in place.
The Water Utility may require reasonable deposits for consistent application
for the temporary use of its equipment under this and other rate schedules. The
deposit(s) collected will be refunded upon return of the utility’s equipment.
Damaged or lost equipment will be repaired or replaced at the customer’s
expense.
Billing: Same as Schedule Mg-l.
(Eff. date 3-15-2002)
   (I)   Reconnection charges.
   Schedule No. R-1
Public Service Commission of Wisconsin    Amendment No. 11
Charges:
   Amounts can be found at the office of the Village Clerk.
Billing: Same as Schedule Mg-1.
(Eff. date 3-15-2002)
   (J)   Water lateral installation charge.
   Schedule No. Cz-1
Public Service Commission of Wisconsin    Amendment No. 11
   WATER LATERAL INSTALLATION CHARGE
Subdivision developers shall be responsible, where the main extension has been
approved by the utility, for the water service lateral installation costs from
the main through the curb stop and box.
When the cost of a utility main extension is to be collected through assessment
by the municipality, the actual average water lateral installation costs from
the main through the curb stop and box shall be included in the assessment of
the appropriate properties.
The initial water service laterals, not installed as part of a subdivision
development or an assessable utility extension, will be installed from the main
through the curb stop and box by the utility, for which the actual cost will be
charged.
Billing: Same as Schedule Mg-1.
(Eff. date 3-15-2002)
   (K)   Water Utility operating rules.
   Schedule No. X-l
Public Service Commission of Wisconsin    Amendment No. 11
   WATER UTILITY OPERATING RULES
Compliance with Rules
All persons now receiving water service from this Water Utility, or who may
request service in the future, shall be considered as having agreed to be bound
by the rules and regulations as filed with the Public Service Commission of
Wisconsin.
Establishment of Service
Application for water service may be made in writing on a form furnished by the
Water Utility. The application will contain the legal description of the
property to be served, the name of the owner, the exact use to be made of the
service, and the size of the service lateral and meter desired. Note
particularly any special refrigeration, fire protection, or water-consuming
air-conditioning equipment.
Service will be furnished only if (1) the premises have a frontage on a
properly platted street or public strip in which a cast iron or other long-life
water main has been laid, or where the property owner has agreed to and
complied with the provisions of the Water Utility’s filed main extension rule,
(2) the property owner has installed or agrees to install a service lateral
from the curb stop to the point of use that is not less than 6 feet below the
surface of an established or proposed grade and meets the Water Utility’s
specifications, and (3) the premises have adequate piping beyond the metering
point.
The owner of a multi-unit dwelling has the option of being served by individual
metered water service to each unit. The owner, by selecting this option, is
required to provide interior plumbing and meter settings to enable individual
metered service to each unit and individual disconnection without affecting
service to other units. Each meter and meter connection will be treated as a
separate Water Utility account for the purpose of the filed rules and
regulations.
No division of the water service lateral to any lot or parcel of land shall be
made for the extension and independent metering of the supply to an adjoining
lot or parcel of land. Except for duplexes, no division of a water service
lateral shall be made at the curb for separate supplies for two or more
separate premises having frontage on any street or public service strip,
whether owned by the same or different parties. Duplexes may be served by one
lateral provided (1) individual metered service and disconnection is provided
and (2) it is permitted by local ordinance.
Buildings used in the same business, located on the same parcel, and served by
a single lateral may have the customer’s water supply piping installed to a
central point so that volume can be metered in one place.
The Water Utility may withhold approval of any application where full
information of the purpose of such supply is not clearly indicated and set
forth by the applicant property owner.
Reconnection of Service
Where the Water Utility has disconnected service at the customer’s request, a
reconnection charge shall be made when the customer requests reconnection of
service. See Schedule R-l for the applicable rate.
A reconnection charge shall also be required from customers whose services are
disconnected (shut off at curb stop box) because of nonpayment of bills when
due. See Schedule R-l for the applicable rate.
If reconnection is requested for the same location by any member of the same
household, or, if a place of business, by any partner of the same business, it
shall be considered as the same customer.
Temporary Metered Service, Meter, and Deposits
An applicant for temporary water service on a metered basis shall make and
maintain a monetary deposit for each meter installed as security for payment
for use of water and for such other charges which may arise from the use of the
supply. A charge shall be made for setting the valve and furnishing and setting
the meter. See Schedule BW-1 for the applicable rate.
Water for Construction
When water is requested for construction purposes or for filling tanks or other
such uses, an application shall be made to the Water Utility, in writing,
giving a statement of the amount of construction work to be done or the size of
the tank to be filled, etc. Payment for the water for construction may be
required in advance at the scheduled rates. The service lateral must be
installed into the building before water can be used. No connection with the
service lateral at the curb shall be made without special permission from the
Water Utility. In no case will any employee of the Water Utility turn on water
for construction work unless the contractor has obtained permission from the
Water Utility.
Customers shall not allow contractors, masons, or other persons to take
unmetered water from their premises without permission from the Water Utility.
Any customer failing to comply with this provision may have water service
discontinued and will be responsible for the cost of the estimated volume of
water used.
Use of Hydrants
In cases where no other supply is available, permission may be granted by the
Water Utility to use a hydrant. No hydrant shall be used until the proper meter
and valve are installed. In no case shall any valve be installed or moved
except by an employee of the Water Utility.
Before a valve is set, payment must be made for its setting and for the water
to be used at the scheduled rates. Where applicable, see Schedule BW-1 for
deposits and charges. Upon completing the use of the hydrant, the customer must
notify the Water Utility to that effect.
Operation of Valves and Hydrants and Unauthorized Use of Water - Penalty
Any person who shall, without authority of the Water Utility, allow
contractors, masons, or other unauthorized persons to take water from their
premises, operate any valve connected with the street or supply mains, or open
any fire hydrant connected with the distribution system, except for the purpose
of extinguishing fire, or who shall wantonly damage or impair the same, shall
be subject to a fine as provided by municipal ordinance. Utility permission for
the use of hydrants applies only to such hydrants that are designated for the
specific use.
Refunds of Monetary Deposits
All money deposited as security for payment of charges arising from the use of
temporary water service on a metered basis, or for the return of a hydrant
valve and fixtures if the water is used on an unmetered basis, will be refunded
to the depositor on the termination of the use of water, the payment of all
charges levied against the depositor, and the return of the Water Utility’s
equipment.
Service Laterals
No water service lateral shall be laid through any trench having cinders,
rubbish, rock or gravel fill, or any other material which may cause injury to
or disintegration of the service lateral, unless adequate means of protection
are provided by sand filling or such other insulation as may be approved by the
Water Utility. Service laterals passing through curb or retaining walls shall
be adequately safeguarded by provision of a channel space or pipe casing not
less than twice the diameter of the service connection. The space between the
service lateral and the channel or pipe casing shall be filled and lightly
caulked with an oakum, mastic cement, or other resilient material and made
impervious to moisture.
In backfilling the pipe trench, the service lateral must be protected against
injury by carefully hand tamping the ground filling around the pipe. There
should be at least 6 inches of ground filling over the pipe, and it should be
free from hard lumps, rocks, stones, or other injurious material.
All water service laterals shall be of undiminished size from the street main
into the point of meter placement. Beyond the meter outlet valve, the piping
shall be sized and proportioned to provide, on all floors, at all times, an
equitable distribution of the water supply for the greatest probable number of
fixtures or appliances operating simultaneously.
Replacement and Repair of Service Laterals
The service lateral from the main to and through the curb stop will be
maintained and kept in repair and, when worn out, replaced at the expense of
the Water Utility. The property owner shall maintain the service lateral from
the curb stop to the point of use.
If an owner fails to repair a leaking or broken service lateral from the curb
to the point of metering or use within such time as may appear reasonable to
the Water Utility after notification has been served on the owner by the Water
Utility, the water will be shut off and will not be turned on again until the
repairs have been completed.
Abandonment of Service
If a property owner changes the use of a property currently receiving water
service such that water service will no longer be needed in the future, the
Water Utility may require the abandonment of the water service at the water
main. In such case, the property owner may be responsible for all removal and/
or repair costs, including the water main and the utility portion of the water
service lateral.
Charges for Water Wasted Due to Leaks
See Wis. Adm. Code § PSC 185.35.
Thawing Frozen Service Laterals
See Wis. Adm. Code § PSC 185.88.
Curb Stop Boxes
The curb stop box is the property of the Water Utility. The Water Utility is
responsible for its repair and maintenance. This includes maintaining, through
adjustment, the curb stop box at an appropriate grade level where no direct
action by the property owner or occupant has contributed to an elevation
problem. The property owner is responsible for protecting the curb stop box
from situations that could obstruct access to it or unduly expose it to harm.
The Water Utility shall not be liable for failure to locate the curb stop box
and shut off the water in case of a leak on the owner’s premises.
Installation of Meters
Meters will be owned, furnished, and installed by the Water Utility or a
utility-approved contractor and are not to be disconnected or tampered with by
the customer. All meters shall be so located that they shall be protected from
obstructions and permit ready access for reading, inspection, and servicing,
such location to be designated or approved by the Water Utility. All piping
within the building must be supplied by the owner. Where additional meters are
desired by the owner, the owner shall pay for all piping. Where applicable, see
Schedule Am-1 for rates.
Repairs to Meters
Meters will be repaired by the Water Utility, and the cost of such repairs
caused by ordinary wear and tear will be borne by the Water Utility.
Repair of any damage to a meter resulting from the carelessness of the owner of
the premises, owner’s agent, or tenant, or from the negligence of any one of
them to properly secure and protect same, including any damage that may result
from allowing a water meter to become frozen or to be damaged from the presence
of hot water or steam in the meter, shall be paid for by the customer or the
owner of the premises.
Service Piping for Meter Settings
Where the original service piping is installed for a new metered customer,
where existing service piping is changed for the customer’s convenience, or
where a new meter is installed for an existing unmetered customer, the owner of
the premises at his/her expense shall provide a suitable location and the
proper connections for the meter. The meter setting and associated plumbing
shall comply with the Water Utility’s standards. The Water Utility should be
consulted as to the type and size of the meter setting.
Turning on Water
The water may only be turned on for a customer by an authorized employee of the
Water Utility. Plumbers may turn the water on to test their work, but upon
completion must leave the water turned off.
Failure to Read Meters
Where the Water Utility is unable to read a meter, the fact will be plainly
indicated on the bill, and either an estimated bill will be computed or the
minimum charge applied. The difference shall be adjusted when the meter is
again read, that is, the bill for the succeeding billing period will be
computed with the gallons or cubic feet in each block of the rate schedule
doubled, and credit will be given on that bill for the amount of the bill paid
the preceding period. Only in unusual cases shall more than three consecutive
estimated or minimum bills be rendered.
If the meter is damaged (see Surreptitious Use of Water) or fails to operate,
the bill will be based on the average use during the past year, unless there is
some reason why the use is not normal. If the average use cannot be properly
determined, the bill will be estimated by some equitable method.
See Wis. Adm. Code § PSC 185.33.
Complaint Meter Tests
See Wis. Adm. Code § PSC 185.77.
Inspection of Premises
During reasonable hours, any officer or authorized employee of the Water
Utility shall have the right of access to the premises supplied with service
for the purpose of inspection or for the enforcement of the Water Utility’s
rules and regulations. Whenever appropriate, the Water Utility will make a
systematic inspection of all unmetered water taps for the purpose of checking
waste and unnecessary use of water.
See Wis. Stat. § 196.171.
Vacation of Premises
When premises are to be vacated, the Water Utility shall be notified, in
writing, at once, so that it may remove the meter and shut off the water supply
at the curb stop. The owner of the premises shall be liable for prosecution for
any damage to the Water Utility’s property. See “Abandonment of Service” in
Schedule X-l for further information.
Deposits for Residential Service
See Wis. Adm. Code § PSC 185.36.
Deposits for Nonresidential Service
See Wis. Adm. Code § PSC 185.361.
Deferred Payment Agreement
See Wis. Adm. Code § PSC 185.38.
Dispute Procedures
See Wis. Adm. Code § PSC 185.39.
Disconnection and Refusal of Service
See Wis. Adm. Code § PSC 185.37.
The following is an example of a disconnection notice that the utility may use
to provide the required notice to customers.
   DISCONNECTION NOTICE
Dear Customer:
The bill enclosed with this notice includes your current charge for Water
Utility service and your previous unpaid balance.
You have 10 days to pay the Water Utility service arrears or your service is
subject to disconnection.
If you fail to pay the service arrears or fail to contact us within the 10 days
allowed to make reasonable deferred payment arrangement or other suitable
arrangement, we will proceed with disconnection action.
To avoid the inconvenience of service interruption and an additional charge of
(amount) for reconnection, we urge you to pay the full arrears IMMEDIATELY AT
ONE OF OUR OFFICES.
If you have entered into a Deferred Payment Agreement with us and have failed
to make the deferred payments you agreed to, your service will be subject to
disconnection unless you pay the entire amount due within 10 days.
If you have a reason for delaying the payment, call us and explain the
situation.
PLEASE CALL THIS TELEPHONE NUMBER, (telephone number), IMMEDIATELY if:
1.   You dispute the notice of delinquent account.
2.   You have a question about your Water Utility service arrears.
3.   You are unable to pay the full amount of the bill and are willing to enter
into a deferred payment agreement with us.
4.   There are any circumstances you think should be taken into consideration
before service is discontinued.
5.   Any resident is seriously ill.
Illness Provision: If there is an existing medical emergency in your home and
you furnish the Water Utility with a statement signed by either a licensed
Wisconsin physician or a public health official, we will delay disconnection of
service up to 21 days. The statement must identify the medical emergency and
specify the period of time during which disconnection will aggravate the
existing emergency.
Deferred Payment Agreements: If you are a residential customer and, for some
reason, you are unable to pay the full amount of the Water Utility service
arrears on your bill, you may contact the Water Utility to discuss arrangements
to pay the arrears over an extended period of time.
This time payment agreement will require:
1.    Payment of a reasonable amount at the time the agreement is made.
2.    Payment of the remainder of the outstanding balance in monthly
installments over a reasonable length of time.
3.    Payment of all future Water Utility service bills in full by the due
date.
In any situation where you are unable to resolve billing disputes or disputes
about the grounds for proposed disconnection through contacts with our Water
Utility, you may make an appeal to the Public Service Commission of Wisconsin
by calling (800) 225-7729.
   (WATER UTILITY NAME)
Collection of Overdue Bills
An amount owed by the customer may be levied as a tax as provided in Wis.
Stats. § 66.0809.
Surreptitious Use of Water
When the Water Utility has reasonable evidence that a person is obtaining
water, in whole or in part, by means of devices or methods used to stop or
interfere with the proper metering of the Water Utility service being
delivered, the Water Utility reserves the right to estimate and present
immediately a bill for unmetered service as a result of such interference, and
such bill shall be payable subject to a 24-hour disconnection of service. If
the Water Utility disconnects the service for any such reason, the Water
Utility will reconnect the service upon the following conditions:
A.   The customer will be required to deposit with the Water Utility an amount
sufficient to guarantee the payment of the bills for Water Utility service.
B.   The customer will be required to pay the Water Utility for any and all
damages to Water Utility equipment resulting from such interference with the
metering.
C.   The customer must further agree to comply with reasonable requirements to
protect the Water Utility against further losses.
See Wis. Stat. §§ 98.26 and 943.20.
Repairs to Mains
The Water Utility reserves the right to shut off the water supply in the mains
temporarily to make repairs, alterations, or additions to the plant or system.
When the circumstances will permit, the Water Utility will give notification,
by newspaper publication or otherwise, of the discontinuance of the water
supply. No credit will be allowed to customers for such temporary suspension of
the water supply.
See Wis. Admin. Code § PSC 185.87.
Duty of Water Utility with Respect to Safety of the Public
It shall be the duty of the Water Utility to see that all open ditches for
water mains, hydrants, and service laterals are properly guarded to prevent
accident to any person or vehicle, and at night there shall be displayed proper
signal lighting to insure the safety of the public.
Handling Water Mains and Service Laterals in Excavation Trenches
Contractors must call Digger’s Hotline and ensure a location is done to
establish the existence and location of all water mains and service laterals as
provided in Wis. Stat. § 182.0175. Where water mains or service laterals have
been removed, cut, or damaged during trench excavation, the contractors must,
at their own expense, cause them to be replaced or repaired at once.
Contractors must not shut off the water service laterals to any customer for a
period exceeding 6 hours.
Protective Devices
A.   Protective Devices in General: The owner or occupant of every premise
receiving water supply shall apply and maintain suitable means of protection of
the premise supply and all appliances against damage arising in any manner from
the use of the water supply, variation of water pressure, or any interruption
of water supply. Particularly, such owner or occupant must protect water-cooled
compressors for refrigeration systems by means of high and/or low pressure
safety cutout devices. There shall likewise be provided means for the
prevention of the transmission of water ram or noise of operation of any valve
or appliance through the piping of their own or adjacent premises.
B.   Relief Valves: On all “closed systems” (i.e., systems having a check
valve, pressure regulator, reducing valve, water filter, or softener), an
effective pressure relief valve shall be installed at or near the top of the
hot water tank or at the hot water distribution pipe connection to the tank. No
stop valve shall be placed between the hot water tank and the relief valve or
on the drain pipe. See applicable plumbing codes.
C.   Air Chambers: An air chamber or approved shock absorber shall be installed
at the terminus of each riser, fixture branch, or hydraulic elevator main for
the prevention of undue water hammer. The air chamber shall be sized in
conformance with local plumbing codes. Where possible, the air chamber should
be provided at its base with a valve for water drainage and replenishment of
air.
Cross-Connections
Every person owning or occupying a premise receiving municipal water supply
shall maintain such municipal water supply free from any connection, either of
a direct or of an indirect nature, with a water supply from a foreign source or
of any manner of connection with any fixture or appliance whereby water from a
foreign supply or the waste from any fixture, appliance, or waste or soil pipe
may flow or be siphoned or pumped into the piping of the municipal water
system.
See Wis. Adm. Code § NR 811.09.
(Eff. date 3-15-2002)
   (L)   Water main extension rule.
   Schedule No. X-2
Public Service Commission of Wisconsin    Amendment No. 11
   WATER MAIN EXTENSION RULE
Water mains will be extended for new customers on the following basis:
A.   Where the cost of the extension is to immediately be collected through
assessment by the municipality against the abutting property, the procedure set
forth under Wis. Stat. § 66.0703 will apply, and no additional customer
contribution to the utility will be required.
B.   Where the municipality is unwilling or unable to make a special
assessment, the extension will be made on a customer-financed basis as follows:
   1.   The applicant(s) will advance as a contribution in aid of construction
the total amount equivalent to that which would have been assessed for all
property under A.
   2.   Part of the contribution required in B.1. will be refundable. When
additional customers are connected to the extended main within 10 years of the
date of completion, contributions in aid of construction will be collected
equal to the amount which would have been assessed under A. for the abutting
property being served. This amount will be refunded to the original contributor
(s). In no case will the contributions received from additional customers
exceed the proportionate amount which would have been required under A., nor
will it exceed the total assessable cost of the original extension.
C.   When a customer connects to a transmission main or connecting loop
installed at utility expense within 10 years of the date of completion, there
will be a contribution required of an amount equivalent to that which would
have been assessed under A.
(Eff. date 3-15-2002)
   (M)   Water main installations in platted subdivisions.
   Schedule No. X-3
Public Service Commission of Wisconsin    Amendment No. 11
   WATER MAIN INSTALLATIONS IN PLATTED SUBDIVISIONS
Application for installation of water mains in regularly platted real estate
development subdivisions shall be filed with the utility.
If the developer, or a contractor employed by the developer, is to install the
water mains (with the approval of the utility), the developer shall be
responsible for the total cost of construction.
If the utility or its contractor is to install the water mains, the developer
shall be required to advance to the utility, prior to the beginning of the
construction, the total estimated cost of the extension. If the final costs
exceed estimated costs, an additional billing will be made for the balance of
the cost due. This balance is to be paid within 30 days. If final costs are
less than estimated, a refund of the overpayment will be made by the Water
Utility.
(Eff. date 3-15-2002)
(PSC Doc. eff. 3-15-2002; PSC Doc. eff. 6-22-2012)
CHAPTER 52: SEWER USE AND CHARGE SYSTEM
Section
Use System
   
52.01   Purpose
   
52.02   Definitions
   
52.03   General requirements
   
52.04   New connections
   
52.05   Protection from damage
   
52.06   Powers of approving authority
   
52.07   Prohibited discharges
   
52.08   Limited and restricted discharges
   
52.09   Pretreatment
   
52.10   Special agreements
   
52.11   Industrial wastes
   
52.12   Industrial cost recovery
   
52.13   Violations
   
52.14   Management, operation and control of facilities
   
52.15   User rules and regulations
   
52.16   Plumbing requirements
   
52.17   Excavations
   
52.18   Tapping mains
   
52.19   Septic tank sludge and holding tank disposal
   
52.20   Audit
   
52.21   Validity; amendments
User Charge System
   
52.35   Basis of sewer service charge
   
52.36   Sewer charges
 
   
52.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Charges, see §
34.02
USE SYSTEM
§ 52.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the use of village-owned
and operated sewerage facilities, including the wastewater treatment facility,
without damage to the physical facilities, without impairment of their normal
function of collection and treating wastewater from the service area and
contributing customers, and without the discharge by the publicly owned
treatment works of pollutants which would be in violation of its permitted
discharge under the applicable rules and regulations of the state and federal
regulatory agencies.
   (B)   Enactment of this chapter and its user charge system shall take place
following approval by the Village Board.
   (C)   This chapter is adopted under the authority granted by Wis. Stats. §§
62.18, 62.185 and 66.0821.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 52.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATION COSTS. Include costs, all or in part, related to the cost of
billing, collection, administration of accounts, insurance, outside services
and administration of the Sewer Utility. The administrative charge will be
based upon the water meter size serving the building.
      (1)   An ADMINISTRATIVE COST CHARGE FACTOR is assigned as follows:
Meter Size Charge Factor
Meter Size    Charge Factor
5/8 - 3/4 in. 1
1 in.         2.5
1-1/4 in.     2.5
1-1/2 in.     4
2 in.         6
3 in.         9
4 in.         16
6 in.         18
 
      (2)   The ADMINISTRATIVE COST per meter size will be determined by
multiplying the Charge Factor times the base charge:
      Base charge    = Total administrative cost X (% if applicable)
   Total number of charge factors for the village
   APPROVING AUTHORITY.  The Village Board or its designated agent. APPROVING
AUTHORITY and VILLAGE are used interchangeably.
   BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter, under standard laboratory procedure,
in five days at 20ºC and expressed in milligrams per liter.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer intended to receive both wastewater and storm water
or surface water.
   COMMERCIAL USER. Those users of the publicly owned treatment works, which
deal primarily in the transfer of goods or services.
   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS. Those pollutants generally characterized as BOD,
suspended solids, pH and fecal coliform, together with any additional
pollutants defined in the village’s WPDES permit, unless the concentrations of
any of these pollutants are such that they interfere with the operation of the
treatment works or exceed the limits established under §§
52.04 and
52.05.
   DEBT SERVICE CHARGE. The charge to the users, which shall, in whole or in
part, defray the costs of retiring the debts incurred in the construction or
retrofitting of any wastewater facilities, components or appurtenances by the
village. The DEBT SERVICE CHARGE will be based upon the water meter size
serving the building. A DEBT SERVICE CHARGE factor is assigned as follows:
Meter Size Charge Factor
Meter Size        Charge Factor
5/8 in. - 3/4 in. 1
1 in.             2.5
1-1/4 in.         2.5
1-1/2 in.         4
2 in.             6
3 in.             9
4 in.             16
6 in.             18
 
   The debt payment per meter size will be determined by multiplying the Charge
Factor times the base charge:
      Base charge    =  Total debt payment  X (% if applicable)
   Total number of charge factors for the village
   DOMESTIC WASTEWATER. Waterborne wastes normally being discharged from the
sanitary conveniences of dwellings, apartment houses, hotels, office buildings,
factories and institutions, free of industrial wastes, in which the average
concentration of suspended solids is established at or below 250 mg/l and the
BOD is established at or below 250/mg/l.
   FLAT CHARGE. The charge made to unmetered users for use of the treatment
works.
   HOLDING TANK. A buried temporary storage reservoir, usually located adjacent
to the structure it serves, which directly receives raw wastewater from a
building’s internal waste plumbing collection system. The waste contents are
periodically removed by a septic tank pumper and transported elsewhere for
treatment.
   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS. Specifically defined in §
52.05. Generally, INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS shall mean wastewater or septage with
pollutants that will adversely affect or disrupt the wastewater treatment
processes or effluent quality if discharged to the wastewater treatment
facility.
   INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY. Recovery by the village from industrial users of a
wastewater works of the grant amount allocable to the treatment of wastes from
such users; pursuant to § 204(b) of the Federal Act, being 33 USC §§ 1284; if
and when applicable.
   INDUSTRIAL USER AS DEFINED FOR INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY.
      (1)   Any nongovernmental user of publicly owned treatment works which
discharges more than 25,000 gallons per day of sanitary waste, or a volume of
process waste, or combined process and sanitary waste, equivalent to 25,000
gallons per day of domestic strength sanitary waste. Sanitary wastes are the
wastes discharged from the average residential user in the village’s service
area. The strength of the average residential waste in the village’s service
area shall be defined in terms of a concentration of 250 mg/l biochemical
oxygen demand (BOD) and 250 mg/l suspended solids (SS). These concentrations
will be applied in determining equivalent volumes of process waste or combined
discharge of sanitary and process wastes.
      (2)   Any nongovernmental user of publicly owned treatment works which
discharges wastewater to the treatment works which contains toxic pollutants or
poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or
create any hazard in or have any adverse effect on the waters receiving any
discharge from the treatment works.
   INDUSTRIAL USER AS DEFINED FOR INDUSTRIAL USER CLASS. Any user or publicly
owned treatment process that engages in processing, blending, assembling or in
some way transforming of materials or substances into new products. This type
of user would normally occupy an establishment described as a plant, factory or
a mill.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. The wastewater from an industrial user as distinct from
domestic wastewater.
   INSTITUTIONAL USER. A user of the publicly owned treatment works that
functions primarily as a social, charitable, religious, educational or of a
hospice nature.
   MAY. The action referred to is permissive.
   MINIMUM CHARGE. The amount charged to each user regardless of volume of use.
This charge provides the user a minimum of 2,000 gallons of use.
   MONITORING STATION. A location where a method of monitoring wastewater can
be performed for a specific customer before his, her or their wastewater is
introduced into the village wastewater collection system.
   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS. All costs incurred in the operation and
maintenance of the village’s wastewater collection system and wastewater
treatment facility. This class of cost shall include but not be limited to
labor, energy, chemicals and replacement costs, but excludes debt retirement.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation,
public authority or group.
   pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion
concentration in gram moles per liter of solution as determined by acceptable
laboratory procedures.
   PRETREATMENT. The treatment of wastewater by the user before introduction or
discharge into the village’s wastewater collection system.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The waste from preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in
sanitary sewers. No particle shall be greater than one-half inch in any
dimension.
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY USER. A user of the publicly owned treatment works that
would be a group, organization or authority that is a governmental institution.
   REPLACEMENT COST. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances that are necessary to maintain the capacity and
performances during the service life of the Wastewater Treatment Works for
which such works were designed and constructed. The term “operation and
maintenance” includes REPLACEMENT. The yearly REPLACEMENT COST is calculated as
follows:
      Yearly Replacement Cost =    Present Installed Cost
                  Projected Service Life
   RESIDENTIAL USER. A user of the publicly owned treatment works that would
occupy an establishment considered a house or apartment or other dwelling
facilities in which people reside.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer pipe that conveys domestic wastewater or industrial
waste or a combination of both, and into which storm, surface and ground waters
or unpolluted industrial wastewater are not intentionally passed.
   SEPTAGE. Scum, liquid, sludge or other waste from a septic tank, soil
absorption field, holding tank, vault toilet or privy. This does not include
the waste from a grease trap.
   SEPTIC TANK.  A buried reservoir, usually located adjacent to the structure
it serves, which directly receives raw wastewater from a building’s internal
waste plumbing collection system. During detention of the wastewater in the
SEPTIC TANK, sewage solids are separated from the liquid and bacterial action
digest a portion of these solids.
   SERVICE LATERAL. Either a pressure or gravity pipe connecting an individual
building’s sanitary sewer with the municipal wastewater collection system.
   SEWER SERVICE CHARGE. The sum of the minimum charge, treatment charge and
any applicable surcharge.
   SHALL. The action referred to is mandatory.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water or wastewater which, in concentrations of any
given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds, for any period of duration
longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24-hour concentration
of flows during normal operation, and which adversely affects the sewage
collection system and/or performance of the wastewater treatment plant.
   STANDARD METHODS. The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the
most recent edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the
American Waterworks Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation.
   STORM SEWER. A sewer pipe, which carries storm and/or surface drainage but
excludes domestic wastewater and industrial wastes.
   SURCHARGE. An additional charge related to wastes being discharged by any
user having unusual characteristics such as excessive BOD, excessive suspended
solids or other pollutants.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS). Total suspended matter that either floats on the
surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids and which
are removable by a laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of
SS shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER.  Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards as established by DNR and published in the applicable section
of the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
   USER. Any person discharging domestic wastewater or industrial wastes into
the collection system.
   USER CHARGE. The charge to users of the treatment facility which adequately
provides for proportionate recovery of the operation and maintenance costs.
   USER CLASS. A group of users having similar wastewater flows and
characteristics, levels of BOD, suspended solids, pH and the like.
   WASTEWATER. A combination of the water-carried waste discharged into the
sanitary sewer collection system from residences, commercial buildings,
institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface
and/or storm water as may be present.
   WASTEWATER COLLECTION SYSTEM. The wastewater (sewer) collection system of
the village, including lift stations, force mains, sewer mains, manholes and
related components that collect and transport sewage to the treatment facility.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS. All facilities and appurtenances for collection,
pumping, treating and disposing of domestic wastewater and industrial waste.
   WPDES PERMIT. The WISCONSIN POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM PERMIT,
which allows the village to discharge treated effluent to a watercourse,
provided the effluent meets the condition of the WPDES PERMIT.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 52.03 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Discharge of wastewater prohibited. It shall be unlawful to discharge,
within the village or in any area under the jurisdiction of the village, any
wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been
provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Privies, septic tank and cesspools; compliance with provisions
required.  Except as provided in this section, it shall be unlawful to
construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, holding tank,
cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater.
   (C)   Connection with public sewer required. The owner of any house,
building or structure used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other
purposes, situated within the village and abutting on any street, alley or
right-of-way in which there is now located, or may in the future be located, a
public sanitary sewer of said village, is hereby required, at the owner’s
expense, to install plumbing facilities which have been designed, pursuant to
all applicable rules as published in the Wisconsin Administrative Code,
therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the public sanitary
sewer, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 90 days after
date of official notice to do so; provided that said public sewer is within 100
feet of the property line. Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under
the provisions of this section, the owner must apply for an exemption from the
village. Such exemption application shall require an inspection fee, payable to
the village at the time of application. Then the building sewer shall be
connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions
of this chapter and all applicable state codes and county regulations.
   (D)   Compliance with county regulations required. Before commencement of
construction of a private wastewater disposal system, the owner shall first
obtain a written permit signed by the County Zoning Administrator and comply
with the then-applicable county sanitary laws. The village expressly consents
to the enforcement of such laws by the County Zoning Administrator, and other
county officials within the village. Violations of this section may also be
prosecuted by the village.
   (E)   Inspection of installation. A permit for a private wastewater disposal
system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the
satisfaction of the approving authority. The approving authority shall be
allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the
applicant for the permit shall notify the approving authority when the work is
ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered.
The inspection shall be made within 48 hours of the receipt of notice by the
approving authority.
   (F)   Compliance with Department of Commerce regulations (Wisconsin
Administrative Code). All private wastewater collection and treatment/disposal
systems shall comply with applicable sections of the Wisconsin Administrative
Code.
   (G)   Connections with public sewer required when. At such times as a public
sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal
system, as provided in division (F) above, a direct connection shall be made to
the public sewer within 90 days, in compliance with this chapter, and any
septic tanks, cesspools and similar private wastewater disposal facilities
shall be abandoned as required by applicable Wisconsin Administrative Codes and
county regulations within 30 days of connection to the sanitary sewer.
   (H)   Sanitary operation required. The owner shall operate and maintain his
or her private wastewater disposal facility in a sanitary manner at all times,
at no expense to the village.
   (I)   Conflict of provisions. No statement contained in this section shall
be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed
by the Health Office or agent thereof.
   (J)   Wastewater discharge permit.  A wastewater discharge permit shall be
required of any person desiring to discharge wastewater to the wastewater
treatment facility and shall be one of two classes.
      (1)   A domestic wastewater discharge permit or request for sanitary
sewer service shall be required of any person desiring to discharge domestic
waste into the municipal system and shall be considered as part of the building
permit required and issued by the village for new construction.
      (2)   An industrial wastewater discharge permit shall be required of any
person desiring to discharge any industrial waste and shall be completely
separate from any other permits issued by the village. Further requirements for
this class of permit can be found in §
52.11.
   (K)   Owner responsibility and compliance with village regulations. All
costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the
building sewer to the municipal sanitary sewer collection system shall be borne
by the owner and shall conform to the requirements of the Department of
Commerce’s Building and Plumbing Code, and other applicable rules and
regulations of the village.
   (L)   Inspection and sampling. The village shall be permitted to have an
authorized representative inspect any new or existing installation for
compliance with the regulations of this chapter. The user shall allow the
village or an authorized representative to enter upon the premises of the user
at a reasonable time, for the purpose of inspection, sampling or records
examination of the sanitary sewer facility and/or sanitary plumbing/connection.
The village shall have the right to set upon said property such devices as
necessary to collect samples, monitor, test or meter the installation.
   (M)   New connection availability. New connections to the system shall not
be allowed unless all downstream components have a reserve capacity capable of
accepting the proposed additional wastewater.
   (N)   Monitoring manhole. The village reserves the right to require any user
of the system to install and maintain, at the user’s expense, a control or
monitoring manhole on the user’s discharge sewer line. The user shall provide
the village unobstructed access to the installed manhole, as required under
division (L) above.
   (O)   Monitoring station. Any industrial or commercial user, directed by the
village or its authorized representative for reasonable cause, shall install
and maintain at the user’s expense a monitoring station. The station may
include 24-hour composite samplers, continuous flow meters, flow recorders and
other necessary equipment to accurately measure and sample the wastewater being
discharged. Where conditions do not permit monitoring of all discharges from a
user at a single station, multiple monitoring stations may be required. The
station shall be situated on the user’s premises. The user shall allow the
village access to the station at all reasonable hours.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.04 NEW CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
openings into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance without
first obtaining a written permit from the approving authority.
   (B)   (1)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: domestic
and industrial. In either case, the owner shall make application on forms
obtained from the village. See also §
52.16.
      (2)   Attached to the permit application shall be any plans,
specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of
the approving authority. A permit and inspection fee, to be determined by the
village, shall be paid to the village at the time the application is filed.
   (C)   The costs for installation and connection of the building sewer shall
be the responsibility of those needing these facilities so as to allow their
wastewater to be discharged to the village sanitary sewer system.
   (D)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; except where it is not feasible, and at the village’s discretion, an
exemption is allowed.
   (E)   Existing building sewers may be used to serve new buildings only when
they are found, upon examination and testing by the approving authority, to
meet all requirements of this chapter.
   (F)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, joining,
testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the
this chapter. All connections shall be gastight and watertight. The connection
of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be in compliance with all
aspects of the Department of Commerce’s Building and Plumbing Codes.
   (G)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary
sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
   (H)   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, drain tile or other sources of runoff or groundwater to a
building sewer or building drain, which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   (I)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the approving
authority when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the
public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the
approving authority or his or her representative.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.05 PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE.
   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is a part of the wastewater collection and treatment system.
Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under
the charge of disorderly conduct.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.06 POWERS OF APPROVING AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The approving authority, bearing proper credentials and
identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter. The approving authority shall have no authority
to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining,
ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on
the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for
waste treatment.
   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties, the
approving authority shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises
established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury
or death to the village employees, and the village shall indemnify the company
against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage
asserted against the company and growing out of the measuring and sampling
operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company
to maintain safe conditions as required by OSHA.
   (C)   The approving authority shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the village holds an easement for the purpose of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair or maintenance of any
portion of the wastewater collection and treatment system lying within said
easement.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 52.07 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   (A)   No person or persons shall discharge or cause to be discharged any
unpolluted water, such as storm water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage or cooling water to any sanitary sewer; except that storm water runoff
from limited areas, which may be polluted at times, may be discharged to the
sanitary sewer by permission of the approving authority. Unpolluted industrial
cooling water or process waters may be discharged, only with the approval of
the approving authority, DNR, Department of Commerce or other regulatory agency
as required by law, to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
   (B)   Except as provided in this chapter, no person or persons shall
discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters,
wastes, compounds or material to any public sewer:
      (1)   Explosive mixtures. Gasoline, kerosene, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil,
alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, ethers, xylene, toluene, peroxides, chlorates,
perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, sulfides or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;
      (2)   Toxic substances. Water or wastes containing toxic or poisonous
solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by mixing
with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any waste treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create a public nuisance in the
receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant;
      (3)   Corrosive wastes. Water or wastes having a pH lower than 6.0 or
higher than 9.0, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to piping, structures, equipment and personnel of the
wastewater treatment works;
      (4)   Solid or viscous wastes. Solid or viscous substances in quantities
or of such size as to be capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers,
or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities,
such as but not limited to ashes, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass,
rags, feathers, entrails, whole blood, paunch manure, hair, fleshings, paper
dishes, cups, milk containers and the like, either whole or ground by garbage
grinders;
      (5)   Noxious material.  Noxious or malodorous solids, liquids or gases
which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are capable of
creating a public nuisance or hazard to life, or will prevent the entry into
the sanitary sewer collection system for maintenance purposes;
      (6)   Radioactive wastes. Radioactive waste or isotopes of such half-life
or concentration that they are in noncompliance with regulations issued by the
appropriate authority having control over their use and which will or may cause
damage or hazards to the waste treatment facilities or personnel operating the
system; or
      (7)   Accidental discharge.  Each user shall provide protection from
accidental discharge of prohibited or regulated materials or substances
established by this chapter. Users shall notify the village immediately upon
occurrence of a “slug” or accidental discharge of substances prohibited by this
chapter and shall submit within 48 hours a written report of the incident. The
report shall include location of discharge, date and time thereof, type of
waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions. Any user who
discharges a slug of prohibited materials shall be liable for any expense, loss
or damage caused by the discharge, in addition to any fines imposed by the
village. Signs shall be permanently posted in conspicuous places on the user’s
premises, advising employees whom to call in the event of a slug or accidental
discharge. Users shall instruct all employees who may cause or discover such a
discharge with respect to wastewater emergency notification procedure.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.08 LIMITED AND RESTRICTED DISCHARGES.
   (A)   The following described substances, materials, water or wastes shall
be limited to discharges to municipal systems, to concentrations or quantities
which will not harm the municipal sewers, wastewater treatment process
equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving waters, or will not
otherwise endanger life, limb or public property, or constitute a nuisance. The
approving authority may set limitations lower than the limitations established
in the regulations below at specific discharge points, if such limitations are
necessary to meet the above objectives. In forming an opinion as to
acceptability, the approving authority will give consideration to such factors
as the quantity of subject waste in relation to flows and velocities in the
sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, the wastewater treatment
process employed, capacity of the wastewater treatment facility and other
pertinent factors.
   (B)   The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of
waste or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer, which shall not be
violated without written approval of the approving authority, are as follows:
      (1)   Temperature limit. Wastewaters having a temperature higher than
150ºF (65ºC);
      (2)   Oil content.  Wastewater containing more than 25 milligrams per
liter (25 mg/l) of petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oils or products of
mineral oil origin;
      (3)   Grease limit. Wastewater containing fats, wax, oils and grease,
whether emulsified or not, shall not exceed a concentration of 100 milligrams
per liter. This concentration limit shall be lowered if it is found that the
substances are solidifying or becoming viscous and creating obstructions in the
sewerage system;
      (4)   Garbage restriction. Garbage that has not been properly shredded.
Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels,
institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments or similar places
where the garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the
purpose of consumption on the premises, or when served by caterers;
      (5)   Metals restrictions. Water or wastes containing iron, chromium,
copper, zinc and similar objectionable or toxic substances to such a degree
that any such material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater
treatment works exceeds the limits established by the approving authority in
compliance with the WPDES permit and applicable state regulations;
      (6)   Odor limit. Water or wastes containing odor-producing substances
exceeding limits which may be established by the approving authority in
compliance with state regulations and to those levels which do not create a
nuisance;
      (7)   Slugs. Quantities of flow, concentrations or both, which constitute
a slug, as defined in §
52.02;
      (8)   Incompatible wastes. Water or wastes containing substances which
are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment
processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the
wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of the
village’s WPDES permit;
      (9)   Interactive wastes. Water or wastes which, by interaction with
other water or wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form
suspended solids which interfere with the collection system, or create a
condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes; or
      (10)   Materials which exert or cause unusual excessive conditions:
         (a)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the wastewater treatment
plant;
         (b)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids, such as
fuller’s earth, lime slurries and lime residues, or of dissolved solids, such
as sodium sulfate; or
         (c)   Excessive discoloration, such as dye wastes, inks and/or
vegetable tanning solutions.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 52.09 PRETREATMENT.
   (A)   Pretreatment required. When, in the opinion of the approving
authority, and in accordance with 40 C.F.R. Part 128, and/or other applicable
state and federal regulations, pretreatment is required to modify or eliminate
wastes that are harmful to the structures, processes or operation of the
wastewater treatment facility, the person or persons creating the waste shall
provide, at his, her or their expense, such preliminary treatment or processing
facilities as may be determined required to render his, her or their wastes
acceptable for admission to the public sewers.
   (B)   Interceptor requirements. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be
provided when, in the opinion of the approving authority, they are necessary
for the proper handling of such wastes; except that such interceptors shall not
be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors
shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Department of Commerce Plumbing
Code, and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these interceptors, the owner
shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal, by appropriate means,
of the captured material, and shall maintain records of the dates and means of
disposal, which are subject to review by the approving authority. Any removal
and handling of the collected materials not performed by the owner’s personnel
must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms.
   (C)   Regulatory action.  If the wastewater to be discharged by a user may
be harmful to the sanitary sewer system or to the operation of the treatment
system, or if the proposed wastewater discharge is prohibited, limited or
restricted by this chapter, the village may take the following actions:
      (1)   Prohibit the discharge of such wastewaters;
      (2)   Require a discharger to demonstrate that in-plant modifications
will eliminate the discharge of such substances to a degree as to be acceptable
to the village;
      (3)   Require pretreatment including storage facilities, or flow
equalization necessary to reduce or eliminate the objectionable characteristics
or substances so that the discharge will not violate these rules and
regulations;
      (4)   Require the person making, causing or allowing the discharge to pay
all additional costs of collecting, handling and treating the wastewater; and
      (5)   Take such other remedial action, as may be deemed desirable or
necessary to achieve the purpose of this chapter.
   (D)   Submission of plans. Where pretreatment or equalization of wastewater
flows prior to discharge into any part of its sanitary sewer facilities is
required by the village, plans and specifications, other pertinent data or
information relating to such pretreatment or flow-control facilities shall be
submitted to the village for review and approval. Approval shall in no way
exempt the discharge or such facilities from compliance with any applicable
code, ordinance, rule or regulation of any other governmental unit or the
village. Any subsequent alterations or additions to such pretreatment or flow-
control facilities shall not be made without due notice to and approval of the
village.
   (E)   Costs. The cost of constructing grease, oil and sand interceptors,
pretreatment facilities and flow equalization facilities shall be the
responsibility of the person needing these facilities so as to allow their
wastewater to be discharged to the village sanitary sewer system.
   (F)   Operations. If pretreatment or flow equalization facilities are
installed, they shall be effectively operated and maintained at the user’s
expense.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 52.10 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.
   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting any
special agreement between the village and any person or persons,
notwithstanding or limited to an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be admitted to the sewage disposal works, either before or after
pretreatment, provided that there is not impairment of the functioning of the
sewage disposal works by reason of the admission of such wastes, and no extra
costs are incurred by the village without recompense by said person or persons
to the village.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 52.11 INDUSTRIAL WASTES.
   (A)   An industrial wastewater discharge permit is required under §
52.03. For any discharge by an industrial user, as defined in §
52.02, this permit must be obtained 180 days prior to the beginning of
discharge.
   (B)   In support of this application, the user shall comply with the
following:
      (1)   Application information.
         (a)   Name, address and standard industrial classification number of
applicant;
         (b)    Average hydraulic volume of wastewater to be discharged;
         (c)   Wastewater constituents and characteristics as determined by
examination according to the latest edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water, Sewage and Industrial Wastes;
         (d)   Time and duration of discharge;
         (e)   Average and peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly
and seasonal variations; if any;
         (f)   Site plan, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and
details to show all sewers and appurtenance by size, location and elevation;
         (g)   Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises, including all materials and types of materials which are or could be
discharged;
         (h)   Each product produced by type, amount and rate of production;
         (i)   Number and type of employees, including work hours of week; and
         (j)   Any other information as may be deemed appropriate by the
approving authority to be necessary to evaluate the permit application.
      (2)   Review. The approving authority will evaluate the data furnished by
the prospective user and may require additional information be supplied by
applicant. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the approving
authority may issue a wastewater discharge permit, subject to appropriate terms
and conditions.
      (3)   Duration of permit. Industrial discharge permits shall be issued
for a specified time period, not to exceed four years. A permit may be issued
for a period of less than one year, or may be stated to expire on a specific
date. If the user is not notified by the village 15 days prior to the
expiration of the permit, the permit shall automatically be extended for 12
months. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification
and change by the village during the life of the permit. The user shall be
informed of any proposed changes in his or her permit at least 30 days prior to
the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall
include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.
      (4)   Permit conditions. Industrial wastewater discharge permits shall be
subject to all provisions of this chapter. Additional permit conditions may
include:
         (a)   The average and maximum wastewater flow and constituent limits
the user will be allowed to discharge to the village sewerage system;
         (b)   Limits on the rate of discharge and time of discharges necessary
to reduce slug flows;
         (c)   Requirement to construct and maintain a flow regulation or
equalization facility;
         (d)   Requirement to construct, operate and maintain a monitoring
station;
         (e)   The monitoring requirements for the industrial discharge will
include type of sample, sampling frequency and the laboratory analyses
required. All analyses shall be performed in accordance with Standard Methods
and shall be at the user’s expense;
         (f)   Require the user to install pretreatment facilities;
         (g)   Require the user to maintain stipulated wastewater records and
to allow the village access to these records; and
         (h)   Other conditions deemed necessary by the village to ensure
compliance with the ordinance.
      (5)   Transfer of permit.  Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a
specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not
be reassigned, transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises
or a new or changed operation.
      (6)   Wastewater monitoring. The user discharging industrial waste shall
be responsible for the required flow monitoring, sample collection and
laboratory analyses stated in his or her permit. If the user is not qualified
to perform these duties, the user shall engage a qualified private firm. As an
alternative, the user may engage the village to perform these duties, provided
the associated costs are borne by the user.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 52.12 INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY.
   The Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, being 33 USC §§
1251 et seq., require that industrial users of municipal wastewater treatment
works make payments for that portion of the cost of construction of such
treatment works which is allocable to the treatment of such industrial wastes.
The village shall individually prepare industrial cost recovery agreements with
each and every applicable industry. Said agreements shall be part of this
chapter by reference. The agreements shall be prepared in accordance with the
federal regulations.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 52.13 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Written notice required. Any person found to be violating any
provision of this chapter shall be served by the village with a written notice
stating the nature of the violation, and providing a reasonable time for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time
stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
   (B)   Recovery of costs incurred by the village.  Any user violating any of
the provisions of this chapter, or who discharges or causes a discharge
producing a deposit or obstruction, or causes damage to or impairs the
village’s sanitary sewer system shall be liable to the village for any expense,
loss or damage caused by such violation or discharge. The village shall bill
the cleaning, repair or replacement work resulting from the violation or
discharge. Refusal to pay the assessed costs shall constitute a violation of
this chapter, and shall be enforceable under the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Liability for expense, loss or damage. Any person violating any
provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the village for any expense,
loss or damage occasioned by reason of such violation, which the village may
suffer as a result thereof.
   (D)   Right to reject connections. The village reserves the right to reject
connections to the system if downstream facilities do not have adequate
capacity.
   (E)   Right to enter premises. The village reserves the right to enter
premises of any user to sample and/or inspect.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.14 MANAGEMENT, OPERATION AND CONTROL OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   Responsibility. The management, operation and control of the
wastewater treatment facility and sanitary collection system for the village is
the responsibility of the Village Board and all records, minutes, and written
proceedings thereof shall be kept by the Village Clerk. The Village Clerk shall
also keep all financial records of said facilities.
   (B)   Sewer lines and pipes. The Sewer Utility of the village shall have the
power to construct sewer lines for public use, and shall have the power to lay
sewer pipes in and through alleys, streets, easements and public grounds of the
village; and generally, to do all such work as may be found necessary or
convenient in the management of the sewer system. The village shall have the
power by itself, its officers, agents and representatives, to enter upon any
land for the purpose of making examination or supervise in the performance of
its duties under this chapter, without liability therefor; and the village
shall have power to purchase and acquire for the Sewer Utility all real and
personal property which may be necessary for construction of the sewer system,
or for any repair, remodeling or additions thereto.
   (C)   Condemnation of real estate. Whenever any real estate or any easement
therein, or use thereof, shall in the judgment of the Village Sewer Utility be
necessary to the sewer system; and whenever, for any cause, an agreement for
the purchase thereof, cannot be made with the owner thereof, the village shall
proceed with all necessary steps to take such real estate easement, or use by
condemnation in accordance with Wisconsin Statutes and the Uniform Relocation
and Real Property Acquisition Policy Act of 1970, being 42 USC §§ 4651 et seq.,
if federal funds are used.
   (D)   Title to real estate and personal property. All property, real,
personal and mixed, acquired for the construction of sewer system, and all
buildings, equipment, piping, tanks, machinery and fixtures pertaining thereto
shall be property of said village.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 52.15 USER RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The rules, regulations and sewer rates of the Village Sewer Utility herein
set forth shall be considered a part of the contract with every person, company
or corporation who is connected to the sewer system of the village and every
such person, company or corporation, by connecting to the sewer system, shall
be considered as expressing his, her or their consent to be bound thereby.
Whenever any said rules and regulations as adopted are violated, the service
shall be shut off from the building or place of such violation (even though two
or more parties are receiving service through the same connection), and shall
not be re-established except by order of the village, and on payment of all
debts, plus the expenses and established charges of shutting off and putting
on, and such terms as the village may determine, and a satisfactory
understanding with the parties that no further cause for complaint shall arise.
In case of such violation, the village, furthermore, may declare any payment
made for the service by the party or parties committing such violation to be
forfeited. The right is reserved by the village to change said rules,
regulations and sewer rates from time to time, as it may deem advisable; and to
make special rates and contracts as necessary in the best interests of the
Sewer Utility.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 52.16 PLUMBING REQUIREMENTS.
   The following rules and regulations for the governing of licensed plumbers,
sewer users and others are hereby adopted and established.
   (A)   Plumbing. No plumber, pipe fitter or other persons will be permitted
to do any plumbing or pipe fitting work in connection with the sewer system
without first receiving a proper license from the state.
   (B)   Application for service. Every person connecting with the sewer system
shall file an application in writing to the village on such forms as are
prescribed for that purpose. Blanks for such applications will be furnished at
the office of the Village Clerk. The application must state fully and truly all
the use, which is requested. If the applicant is not the owner of the premises,
the written consent of the owner must accompany the application. People
connected to the sewer system of the village are referred to herein as “users”.
The application may be for service to more than one building, or more than one
unit of service through one service connection; and, in such case, charges
shall be made accordingly. If it appears that the service applied for will not
provide adequate service for the contemplated use, the village may reject the
application.
   (C)   Tap permits. After sewer connections have been introduced into any
building or upon any premises, no plumber shall make any alterations,
extensions or attachments, unless the party ordering such tapping or other work
shall exhibit the proper permit for the same from the village.
   (D)   User use only. No user shall allow others or other services to connect
to the sewer system through his or her lateral.
   (E)   User to permit inspection. Every user shall permit the village or its
duly authorized agent at any reasonable hour of the day, to enter his, her or
its premises or building to examine the pipes and fixtures, and the manner in
which the drains and sewer connections operate; and they must at all times,
frankly and without concealment, answer all questions put to them relative to
its use.
   (F)   Utility responsibility. It is expressly stipulated that no claim shall
be made against said village or its representative by reason of the breaking,
clogging, stoppage or freezing of any service pipes; nor from any damage
arising from repairing mains, making connections or extensions or any other
work that may be deemed necessary. The right is hereby reserved to cut off the
service at any time for the purpose of repairs or any other necessary purpose,
any permit granted or regulation to the contrary notwithstanding. Whenever it
shall become necessary to shut off the sewer service within any district of the
said Sewer Utility, the village shall, if practicable, give notice to each and
every consumer within such affected district of the time when such service will
be so shut off.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.17 EXCAVATIONS.
   (A)   The contractor executing the excavation must properly notify all
affected utilities prior to commencing any work; i.e., notify Diggers Hotline.
   (B)   In making excavations in streets, alleys, highways or easements for
laying service pipe or making repairs, the paving and earth removed must be
deposited in a manner that will occasion the least inconvenience to the public.
   (C)   No person shall leave such excavation made in any street or highway
open at any time without barricades; and during the night, warning lights must
be maintained at such excavations.
   (D)   In refilling the opening, after the service pipes are laid, the earth
must be laid in layers of not more than nine inches in depth, and each layer
thoroughly compacted to prevent settling. This work together with the replacing
of sidewalks, gravel and paving, must be done so as to make the street as good,
at least, as before it was disturbed and satisfactory to the village. No
opening of the streets for tapping the pipes will be permitted when the ground
is frozen.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.18 TAPPING MAINS.
   (A)   No person, except those having permission from the village, will be
permitted, under any circumstances to tap the sanitary mains or collection
pipes.
   (B)   The kind and size of the connection with the pipe network shall be
that specified in the permit or order from the village.
      (1)   Laterals. All private service laterals and pumping facilities shall
be installed according to the specifications approved by the village.
      (2)   Hookup fee. The connection fee shall be paid in advance of physical
installation of lateral.
      (3)   Inspection. All private service laterals and pumping facilities
will be inspected by a village representative upon completion of pipe
installation and prior to backfilling and testing.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 52.19 SEPTIC TANK SLUDGE AND HOLDING TANK DISPOSAL.
   The village will not accept septage and/or holding tank waste.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 52.20 AUDIT.
   The village shall conduct an annual audit, the purpose of which shall be to
maintain equitable proportionality between users and user classes of the user
charge system and to ensure that adequate revenues are available relative to
increasing operation, maintenance and replacement costs. The village shall
conduct an annual audit of the separate industrial cost recovery account, if
and when it is applicable, to ensure that proportionate and adequate payments
are being made by industries to the village.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 52.21 VALIDITY; AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Repeal of conflicting ordinances. All ordinances, resolutions, orders
or parts thereof heretofore adopted, enacted or entered which are in conflict
with this chapter are hereby repealed.
   (B)   Savings clause. If any provision of this chapter is found invalid or
unconstitutional or if the application of this chapter to any person or
circumstances is found to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect the other provisions or application of
this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid or unconstitutional
provision of application.
   (C)   Amendments. The village, through its duly qualified governing body,
may amend this chapter in part or in whole whenever said body may deem it
necessary.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
USER CHARGE SYSTEM
§ 52.35 BASIS OF SEWER SERVICE CHARGE.
   (A)   Authority.  
      (1)   The village shall have the authority to establish and collect a
sewer service charge for the use of the wastewater treatment works maintained
and operated by the village.
      (2)   It shall be the policy of the village to obtain sufficient revenues
through a user charge system to pay for the costs of annual debt retirement,
operation and maintenance expenses, replacement account, administration costs
and any other related costs. The user charge system (UCS) shall assure that
each user of the wastewater treatment works pay an equitable share of all costs
necessary to operate the utility. These charges are to be reviewed annually and
all excess revenues shall be applied to the replacement account. The initial
user charge system shall be as set forth in this subchapter, which may then be
changed from time to time by the village, with the then current resolution to
be included in the appendix attached to the ordinance establishing this
subchapter, which is hereby adopted by reference as if set out in full herein.
   (B)   Classes of users.
      (1)   For the purpose of billing there shall be two classes of users:
         (a)   Industrial, being any industry that has wastewater strength in
excess of domestic; and
         (b)   Residential (this includes residential, commercial,
institutional, public authority and any industry that discharges domestic
strength wastewater).
      (2)   All users will pay at the residential rate plus any appropriate
surcharges.
   (C)   Usage. The service charge shall be based on water or wastewater meter
readings, when available. When such meter readings are unavailable, the service
charges will be a flat charge based on the estimate. This estimate shall be
12,000 gallons per quarter. Where the flat charge must be used, it will be paid
for the full quarter and shall not be prorated.
   (D)   Debt service charge. All or a portion of the charges incurred for
debts for capital improvements for the wastewater treatment works shall be paid
for by a debt service charge, which is a part of the total sewer service
charge. The amount of this charge will be reviewed when required and adopted by
resolution.
   (E)   Minimum charge. The minimum charge per connection shall be the
administration charge based upon meter size, plus the debt service charge based
upon meter size plus capital improvements cost based upon meter size. This
charge will be made regardless of the amount of use but credits the user a
minimum of 2,000 gallons and shall be adopted by resolution (this is referred
to as a standby charge under Wis. Stats. § 66.0821(4)(b)).
   (F)   Replacement fund charge (short-lived assets). This charge represents
the total yearly replacement cost necessary to cover the expenditures for
replacement and installation of equipment, accessories or appurtenances that
are necessary to maintain the capacity and performances during the service life
of the wastewater treatment works for which such works were designed and
constructed.
   (G)   Administration charge. All or a portion of the costs related to the
cost of billing, collection, administration of accounts, insurance, outside
services and administration of the Sewer Utility.
   (H)   Operation and maintenance charge. Operation and maintenance charge
shall be the sum of all non-fixed annual costs, such as but not limited to:
labor, electrical power, testing, supplies, repairs, maintenance, chemicals,
fees and the like.
   (I)   Capital improvements charge. Capital improvements charge shall be the
sum of all annual costs spent on construction projects that are not financed
through the debt service charge.
   (J)   Surcharge. Surcharge is an additional fee charged per pound of BOD, SS
and phosphorus discharged in excess of domestic strength.
   (K)   Treatment charge. Treatment charge is the sum of operation and
maintenance costs, plus replacement fund costs expressed as a charge per 1,000
gallons of use.
   (L)   User charge. The user charge for all users discharging domestic
wastewater shall be based on a minimum charge per meter size, plus the
treatment charge according to the volume used. Those discharging wastewater in
excess of domestic strength shall also pay the surcharges. The amount of this
charge will be reviewed annually and adopted by resolution.
   (M)   Billing periods. The total sewer service charge shall be billed
quarterly. The due date shall be as set forth on the quarterly bill.
   (N)   Late penalties. Charges levied in accordance with this section shall
be a debt due to the village and shall be a lien upon the property. If this
debt is not paid within 30 days after it is due and payable, it shall be deemed
delinquent, and a late payment charge is added. The late payment charge is
equal to 1.5% per month. This debt may then be recovered by civil action in the
name of the village against the property owner, the person or both. If
delinquent payments are not received by November 1 of the calendar year, a 10%
charge shall be added to delinquent bills. Thereafter, if payment is not
received prior to November 15, the delinquent bill will be forwarded to the
county for placement on the succeeding tax roll.
   (O)   Failure to pay, removal or closure of connection, restoration of
service.
      (1)   In the event of failure to pay sewer service charges after they
become delinquent, the village shall have the right to remove or close sewer
connections and enter upon the property for accomplishing such purposes.
      (2)   The expense of such removal or closing, as well as the expense of
restoring service, shall likewise be a debt to the village and a tax lien upon
the property, and may be recovered by a civil action in the name of the village
against the property owner, the person or both.
      (3)   Sewer service shall not be restored until all charges, including
the expense of removal, closing and restoration shall have been paid.
      (4)   Change of ownership or occupancy of premises found delinquent shall
not be cause for reducing or eliminating these penalties.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 52.36 SEWER CHARGES.
   Metered services, per quarter; unmetered services; and surcharges can be
found in the Village Clerk’s office. These charges are to be reviewed when
required. These charges shall become effective October 1, 2011.
(Res. eff. 10-1-2011)
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   General penalty. Any person violating any provision of this chapter
for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Civil penalties. Whoever fails to comply with any provisions of this
chapter or with an order of the village issued in pursuance of this chapter
shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 for each offense. Each
day’s continuance of such failure is a separate offense. The penalties so
imposed, plus reasonable attorneys’ fees, court costs and other expenses of
litigation, are recoverable by the village upon its suit as debts are
recoverable by law.
   (C)   Falsifying information. Any person who knowingly makes any false
statement, representation or certification in any application, record or
report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to
this chapter, or a wastewater discharge permit; or who falsifies, tampers with
or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under
this chapter, shall upon conviction be punished by the imposition of the civil
penalty stated above or by imprisonment for not more than 30 days or by both.
(Ord. passed 9- -9011)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC RULES
      
72.   STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
      
73.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
      
74.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
75.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
70.01   State traffic laws adopted by reference
   
70.02   Creating an unreasonable noise in the operation of a motor vehicle
   
70.03   School bus warning lights
§ 70.01 STATE TRAFFIC LAWS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, all
applicable provisions of the state statutes are adopted by reference and made a
part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein, including but not limited to
Wis. Stats. Chapters 340 to 349 describing and defining regulations with
respect to vehicles and traffic for which the penalty is a forfeiture only,
including penalties to be imposed and procedures for prosecution.
   (B)   Any future amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutory
regulations in Wis. Stats. Chapters 340 to 348 incorporated herein are intended
to be part of this code in order to secure to the extent legally practicable
uniform statewide regulation of vehicle traffic on the highways, streets and
alleys of this state.
(Prior Code, § 9.01(1)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.02 CREATING AN UNREASONABLE NOISE IN THE OPERATION OF A MOTOR VEHICLE.
   In order to preserve the peace, quiet and safety of the people of the
village, no person shall operate or drive a motor vehicle in such a manner as
to make an unreasonably loud sound. An UNREASONABLY LOUD NOISE is a sound that
can be clearly heard at a distance of 75 feet or more.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.03 SCHOOL BUS WARNING LIGHTS.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 346.48(2)(b)2., adopted by
reference in §
70.01 to the contrary, school bus operators shall use flashing red warning
lights in residential and business districts when pupils or other authorized
passengers are to be loaded or unloaded at locations at which there are no
crosswalks or traffic signals so that pupils must cross the street or highway
before being loaded or after unloaded.
(Prior Code, § 9.01(17)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC RULES
Section
General Provisions
   
71.01   Driving vehicles outside established roadways in village parks
Parades, Marches and Demonstrations
   
71.30   Permit required
   
71.31   Conditions for issuance of permit
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 71.01 DRIVING VEHICLES OUTSIDE ESTABLISHED ROADWAYS IN VILLAGE PARKS.
   (A)   Automobiles, trucks and vehicles are prohibited from parking in the
village park except on established roadways and established parking areas. Any
person driving a vehicle outside of the established roadway or parking areas
within the premises of the village park shall be subject to a forfeiture of $25
plus cost and penalty assessment for each and every occasion wherein said
person drives a vehicle outside of the established roadway or parking areas.
Signs shall be erected at entrances to the village park informing the public
that off-road driving is prohibited.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to the village crew while on designated
village business, to law enforcement officials of the village or to other
persons specifically given written or oral permission to travel in the village
park outside of the established roadway or parking areas.
(Prior Code, § 9.01(22)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
PARADES, MARCHES AND DEMONSTRATIONS
§ 71.30 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall organize, assist in the organization of or participate in
any parade, march or demonstration, which is held in whole or in part on any
village street, sidewalk, park or in or around any public building within the
village, unless a permit has been issued pursuant to §
71.31.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.31 CONDITIONS FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   The Village Clerk shall issue a permit to conduct a parade, march or
demonstration only under the following conditions:
   (A)   An application is submitted to the Village Clerk at least 14 days
prior to the parade, march or demonstration;
   (B)   The application states the name and address of the persons or
organizations, organizing the parade, march or demonstration, the route to be
used, the time of commencement and the expected duration; and
   (C)   The permit bears the written approval of the Mayor and the Chief of
Police.
CHAPTER 72: STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Section
   
72.01   Parking for more than 24 hours
   
72.02   Limited parking
   
72.03   Compliance with parking signs
   
72.04   Use of village-owned parking lots
   
72.05   Declaration of snow emergency; parking prohibited
   
72.06   Parking prohibited at all times
§ 72.01 PARKING FOR MORE THAN 24 HOURS.
   No person or motor vehicle owner shall park or permit a motor vehicle to be
parked on any street or village-owned property in the village for a period
longer than 24 hours without proper permit.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.02 LIMITED PARKING.
   (A)   No person or motor vehicle owner shall park or permit a motor vehicle
to be parked adjacent to a curb painted yellow on any street within the
village.
   (B)   Any motor vehicle parked in violation of this section shall at the
direction of a police officer be towed away and stored at the owner’s expense
if such vehicle inhibits snow removal in any manner, or blocks a private or
public driveway.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.03 COMPLIANCE WITH PARKING SIGNS.
   No person or motor vehicle owner shall park or permit a motor vehicle to be
parked on any street in the village in violation of any parking restriction
delineated by a posted parking sign.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.04 USE OF VILLAGE-OWNED PARKING LOTS.
   (A)   Village-owned parking lots include any and all off-street parking
areas owned by the village, except those areas in the village parks.
   (B)   No person may park or cause to be parked any vehicle within a village-
owned parking lot in excess of 24 hours.
   (C)   Parking in the lots described in division (A) above shall be
prohibited between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., except as follows:
vehicles parked in designated overnight parking spaces properly displaying a
valid overnight parking permit.
   (D)   Permits will be required for long-term parking and/or overnight.
      (1)   The Police Department may issue parking permits for long-term and
overnight parking at a fee set by resolution of the Village Board.
      (2)   Said permit shall be displayed in the upper left corner of the rear
window of the vehicle.
   (E)   Overnight parking spaces shall be established by the Committee on
Public Works and approved by resolution of the Village Board.
   (F)   The owner of a vehicle in violation of divisions (B), (C) or (D) above
shall be liable for the violation as provided for in this chapter.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.05 DECLARATION OF SNOW EMERGENCY; PARKING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   An authority is hereby granted to the Director of Public Works to
declare a snow emergency in the village. Such an emergency shall continue in
effect for a period of 24 hours or until such time as the snow has been removed
from the village’s streets or until the snow emergency has been rescinded by
action of the Director of Public Works.
   (B)   Notice of the declaration of a snow emergency shall be given by
notifying the local news media; however, said notification shall be a service
aid only and not a duty on the part of said officials.
   (C)   During a declared snow emergency no motor vehicle shall be left parked
on any street or public way in the village.
   (D)   During a declared snow emergency any village police officer who finds
a motor vehicle in violation of this section shall attempt to contact the owner
of said motor vehicle and require the owner to immediately move said motor
vehicle so as not to be in violation of this section. If said owner does not
immediately remove said motor vehicle or the owner cannot be located, said
officer is authorized to have said motor vehicle removed at the owner’s
expense.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.06 PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES.
   Except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading
or unloading or in receiving or discharging passengers or property and while
the vehicle is attended by a licensed operator so that it may be moved promptly
in case of an emergency or to avoid obstruction of traffic, no person shall at
any time park or leave standing any vehicle, upon any of the highways or parts
of highways listed in
Chapter 75, Schedule I.
(Prior Code, § 9.01(8)(A)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 73: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Play Vehicles
   
73.01   Definition
   
73.02   Pedestrian right-of-way
   
73.03   Riding in village parking lots prohibited
Snowmobiles and Snowmobile Traffic
   
73.30   Snowmobile law adopted
ATV/UTV Regulations
   
73.45   Preamble
   
73.46   Authority
   
73.47   State all-terrain vehicle laws adopted
   
73.48   Applicability of rules of the road to all-terrain vehicles
   
73.49   Speed restrictions
   
73.50   Age restrictions
   
73.51   All-terrain vehicle routes
   
73.52   Filing
 
   
73.99   Penalty
PLAY VEHICLES
§ 73.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PLAY VEHICLES. A coaster, skateboard, roller skates, sled, toboggan,
unicycle or toy vehicle upon which a person may ride.
§ 73.02 PEDESTRIAN RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   Where the riding of play vehicles on sidewalks is permitted, every person
operating a play vehicle upon the sidewalk shall yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrian and shall exercise due care when passing a pedestrian on the
sidewalk.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 73.03 RIDING IN VILLAGE PARKING LOTS PROHIBITED.
   The riding of play vehicles on any parking lot owned by the village is
prohibited.
Penalty, see §
10.99
SNOWMOBILES AND SNOWMOBILE TRAFFIC
§ 73.30 SNOWMOBILE LAW ADOPTED.
   All applicable state statutes that apply to the operable of snowmobiles are
adopted by reference.
(Prior Code, § 11.01(1)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
ATV/UTV REGULATIONS
§ 73.45 PREAMBLE.
   It is the intent of this subchapter to create all-terrain vehicle routes for
the convenience of village residents and visitors to the village and to
regulate all-terrain vehicle operation in accordance with state statutes and
Administrative Code provisions.
(Prior Code, § 21.01) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 73.46 AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The Village Board has the specific powers, and duties pursuant to Wis.
Stats. § 23.33, to regulate, control, prevent and enforce against in the
village certain uses, activities and operations by persons that may affect all-
terrain use and traffic in the village, and has the power to designate all-
terrain routes and trails by Wis. Stats. § 23.33.
   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to all of the roads in
the village within the jurisdiction of the Village Board. The provisions of
this subchapter shall be enforced by the Village Police Department, the County
Sheriff’s Department and such other officers may by authorized by law.
(Prior Code, § 21.02) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 73.47 STATE ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE LAWS ADOPTED.
   Except as specifically noted otherwise in this subchapter, Wis. Stats. §
23.33, describing and defining regulations with respect to all-terrain vehicles
and all-terrain vehicle traffic for which the penalty is a forfeiture,
including penalties to be imposed and procedures for prosecution, is hereby
adopted and incorporated by reference by the village and made a part of this
subchapter as if fully set forth herein. Any future amendments, modifications,
revisions, additions or deletions of the above-noted statutory chapter shall be
incorporated herein and made a part of this subchapter in order to secure
uniform state regulation of all-terrain use and traffic on the public highways,
roads, all-terrain vehicle routes, all-terrain vehicle trails, streets and
alleys of the state.
(Prior Code, § 21.03) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 73.48 APPLICABILITY OF RULES OF THE ROAD TO ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES.
   The operator of an all-terrain vehicle upon a roadway shall in addition to
the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 23.33, be subject to Wis. Stats. §§ 346.04,
346.06, 346.11, 346.14(1), 346.18, 346.19, 346.40, 346.44, 346.46, 346.47,
346.48, 346.50(1)(b), 346.51, 346.52, 346.53, 346.54, 346.55, 346.71, 346.87,
346.88, 346.89, 346.90, 346.91, 346.92(1) and 346.94(1) and (9).
(Prior Code, § 21.04) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 73.49 SPEED RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   The village has specifically adopted the state statutes, including the
provisions set forth at Wis. Stats. § 23.33(3)(i), which indicates that no
person may operate an all-terrain vehicle in a manner which violates rules
promulgated by the Department. The village specifically adopts Wis. Adm. Code §
NR 67.07, as it may be amended from time to time, including the provisions of
Wis. Adm. Code § NR 67.07(c), which provides that no person may operate an all-
terrain vehicle at a rate that is unreasonable or improper under the
circumstances.
   (B)   The Village Board further finds and determines that the all-terrain
vehicle routes and trails as adopted in this subchapter are unsuitable for
travel of all-terrain vehicles at a speed in excess of 25 mph.
(Prior Code, § 21.05) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 73.50 AGE RESTRICTIONS.
   While the Village Board recognizes that restrictions with respect to
operator’s age in state statutes may not be varied by village ordinance, the
Village Board hereby determines and suggests to the public that village all-
terrain vehicle trails and all-terrain vehicle routes not be used by any
individuals who do not hold a valid driver’s license unless such persons are
accompanied by a parent or adult person.
(Prior Code, § 21.06) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 73.51 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE ROUTES.
   (A)   All village roadways subject to the jurisdiction of the village are
designated as all-terrain vehicle routes and are open to use when signed in
accordance with Wis. Stats. § 23.33 and Wis. Adm. Code § NR 64.12, except such
roadways as are exempted by Village Board resolution, and which may be revised
from time to time.
   (B)   The following roadways are exempted:
      (1)   Highway 64; and
      (2)   5th Avenue North.
(Prior Code, § 21.07) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 73.52 FILING.
   This subchapter and revisions thereof shall be filed with the Department of
Natural Resources in the office of the enforcement agency of this village
having jurisdiction over the streets and highways in accordance with Wis.
Stats. § 23.23.
(Prior Code, § 21.09) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 73.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Forfeitures for violation of §§
73.45 through
73.52 as set forth in Wis. Stats. § 23.33(13), are adopted by reference,
exclusive of any penalty for imprisonment.
      (2)   The State Bond Schedule for the statutory counterparts, as it may
be amended from time to time, is adopted as the Deposit Schedule for violations
of §§
73.45 through
73.52. If a particular deposit is not established by the statutes or the State
Deposit Schedule, then the person shall deposit a forfeiture penalty as
provided by the village and approved by the Village Board.
      (3)   Citation procedure as set forth in Wis. Stats. §§ 23.53 and 23.54,
is adopted as the enforcement procedure for §§
73.45 through
73.52 as expressed in Wis. Stats. § 23.53.
(Prior Code, § 21.08) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
Cross-reference:
   Uniform Ordinance Bond Schedule; adopted by reference, see §
34.01
CHAPTER 74: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Stop signs
      
II.   Railroad grade crossings
      
III.   No-passing zones
      
IV.   U-turns prohibited
      
V.   Snowmobile routes
SCHEDULE I. STOP SIGNS.
   In the interest of public safety, stop signs shall be installed at the
following locations to control traffic on the highways over which the village
has exclusive jurisdiction:
Location at Intersection Intersection/ Prior Code Section Ord. No. Date Passed
                         Applicability
Location at                                                                                Prior   Ord. Date
Intersection Intersection/Applicability                                                    Code    No.  Passed
                                                                                           Section
Southeast    1st Avenue North and Babit Avenue, for traffic on 1st Avenue North            9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner                                                                                     (B)          2009
Northwest    1st Avenue North and Main Street, for traffic on 1st Avenue North entering    9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       Main Street                                                                   (B)          2009
Northeast    2nd Avenue North and Crumb Street, for traffic on 2nd Avenue North entering   9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       Crumb Street                                                                  (B)          2009
Southeast    2nd Avenue North and Davlin Street, for traffic on 2nd Avenue North entering  9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       Davlin Street                                                                 (B)          2009
Northwest    2nd Avenue North and Main Street, for traffic on 2nd Avenue North entering    9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       Main Street                                                                   (B)          2009
Northwest    2nd Avenue South and Main Street, for traffic on 2nd Avenue South entering    9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       Main Street                                                                   (B)          2009
Northwest    3rd Avenue North and Davlin Street, for traffic on 3rd Avenue North entering  9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       Davlin Street                                                                 (B)          2009
Southeast    3rd Avenue North and Davlin Street for traffic entering Davlin Street         9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner                                                                                     (B)          2009
Northwest    3rd Avenue North and Main Street, for traffic on 3rd Avenue North entering    9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       Main Street                                                                   (B)          2009
Southeast    3rd Avenue South and Main Street, for traffic on 3rd Avenue South entering    9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       Main Street                                                                   (B)          2009
Northeast    4th Avenue North and Main Street, for traffic on 4th Avenue North entering    9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       Main Street                                                                   (B)          2009
Northwest    4th Avenue South and Main Street, for traffic on 4th Avenue South entering    9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       Main Street                                                                   (B)          2009
Northwest    4th Avenue South and Riverside Drive on 4th Avenue South entering Riverside   9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       Drive                                                                         (B)          2009
Southeast    5th Avenue North and Main Street, for traffic on 5th Avenue North entering    9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       Main Street                                                                   (B)          2009
Southeast    5th Avenue South and Main Street, for traffic on 5th Avenue South entering    9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       Main Street                                                                   (B)          2009
Southeast    6th Avenue South and Main Street, for traffic on 6th Avenue South entering    9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       Main Street                                                                   (B)          2009
Northwest    6th Avenue South and Mill Street, for traffic on 6th Avenue South             9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner                                                                                     (B)          2009
Northeast    7th Avenue South and Main Street, for traffic on 7th Avenue South entering    9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       Main Street                                                                   (B)          2009
Northwest    7th Avenue South and Mill Street, for traffic on 7th Avenue South             9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner                                                                                     (B)          2009
Southeast    8th Avenue South and Main Street, for traffic on 8th Avenue entering Main     9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       Street                                                                        (B)          2009
Southwest    Alley between Main Street and McSloy Street between 4th and 5th Avenue for    9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       traffic entering 5th Avenue South                                             (B)          2009
Northwest    Bernard Lane and Main Street (Highway 64), for traffic on Bernard Lane        9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       entering Main Street (Highway 64)                                             (B)          2009
Northeast    Crumb Street and 1st Avenue North, for traffic on Crumb Street entering 1st   9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       Avenue North                                                                  (B)          2009
Southwest    Crumb Street and 2nd Avenue North, for traffic on Crumb Street entering 2nd   9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       Avenue North                                                                  (B)          2009
Northeast    Crumb Street and 3rd Avenue North, for traffic on Crumb Street entering 3rd   9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       Avenue North                                                                  (B)          2009
Southwest    Crumb Street and 3rd Avenue North, for traffic on Crumb Street entering 3rd   9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       Avenue North                                                                  (B)          2009
Northeast    Crumb Street and 4th Avenue North, for traffic on Crumb entering 4th Avenue   9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       North                                                                         (B)          2009
Southwest    Crumb Street and 4th Avenue North, for traffic on Crumb Street entering 4th   9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       Avenue North                                                                  (B)          2009
Southwest    Crumb Street and 5th Avenue North, for traffic on Crumb entering 5th Avenue   9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       North                                                                         (B)          2009
Northwest    Crumb Street and Main Street for traffic entering Main Street from Crumb      9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       Street                                                                        (B)          2009
Northeast    Davlin Street and 1st Avenue North, for traffic on Davlin Street entering 1st 9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       Avenue North                                                                  (B)          2009
Northeast    Davlin Street and 4th Avenue North, for traffic on Davlin Street entering 4th 9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       Avenue North                                                                  (B)          2009
Southwest    Davlin Street and 4th Avenue North, for traffic on Davlin Street entering 4th 9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       Avenue North                                                                  (B)          2009
Southwest    Davlin Street and 5th Avenue North, for traffic on Davlin entering 5th Avenue 9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       North                                                                         (B)          2009
Northeast    Davlin Street and Railroad Street North, for traffic on Davlin Street         9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       entering Railroad Street North                                                (B)          2009
Northeast    Delos Street and 8th Avenue South, for traffic on Delos Street                9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner                                                                                     (B)          2009
Northeast    Drangle Street and Gilman Drive, for traffic on Drangle Street                9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner                                                                                     (B)          2009
Northwest    Gilman Drive and Main Street (Highway 64), for traffic on Gilman Drive        9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       entering Main Street (Highway 64)                                             (B)          2009
Southwest    Gilman Street and Main Street (Highway 64), for traffic on Gilman Street      9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       entering Main Street (Highway 64)                                             (B)          2009
Northwest    Gilman Street and W. Riverside Drive for traffic entering W. Riverside Drive  9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner                                                                                     (B)          2009
Northeast    Heagle Street and 4th Avenue South, for traffic on Heagle entering 4th Avenue 9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       South                                                                         (B)          2009
Southwest    Heagle Street and 4th Avenue South, for traffic on Heagle Street entering 4th 9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       Avenue South                                                                  (B)          2009
Southwest    Heagle Street and 5th Avenue South, for traffic on Heagle Street entering 5th 9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       Avenue South                                                                  (B)          2009
Northeast    Hickory Street and Gilman Drive, for traffic on Hickory Street                9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner                                                                                     (B)          2009
Southeast    Kapsy Drive and Mill Street, for traffic on Kapsy Drive                       9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner                                                                                     (B)          2009
Southeast    Kapsy’s parking lot and Main Street for traffic of the parking lot entering 9.01(4)      3-11-
corner of    Main Street                                                                   (B)     -    2009
the exit of
Southeast    Lagoon Road and Highway 64, for traffic on Lagoon Road entering Highway 64    9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner                                                                                     (B)          2009
Northwest    McSloy Street and 2nd Avenue South, for traffic on 2nd Avenue South entering  9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       McSloy St                                                                     (B)          2009
Southwest    McSloy Street and 3rd Avenue South, for traffic on McSloy Street entering 3rd 9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       Avenue South                                                                  (B)          2009
Northwest    McSloy Street and 4th Avenue South, for traffic on 4th Avenue South entering  9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       onto McSloy Street                                                            (B)          2009
Southeast    McSloy Street and 4th Avenue South, for traffic on 4th Avenue South entering  9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       McSloy Street                                                                 (B)          2009
Northeast    McSloy Street and 5th Avenue South, for traffic on McSloy entering 5th Avenue 9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       South                                                                         (B)          2009
Southwest    McSloy Street and 5th Avenue South, for traffic on McSloy entering 5th Avenue 9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       South                                                                         (B)          2009
Northeast    McSloy Street and 6th Avenue South, for traffic on McSloy entering 6th Avenue 9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       South                                                                         (B)          2009
Southwest    McSloy Street and 6th Avenue South, for traffic on McSloy entering 6th Avenue 9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       South                                                                         (B)          2009
Northeast    McSloy Street and 7th Avenue South, for traffic on McSloy Street entering 7th 9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       Avenue South                                                                  (B)          2009
Southwest    McSloy Street and 7th Avenue South, for traffic on McSloy Street entering 7th 9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       Avenue South                                                                  (B)          2009
Southwest    McSloy Street and 8th Avenue South for the traffic on McSloy Street entering  9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       8th Avenue South                                                              (B)          2009
Northeast    Mill Street and 5th Avenue South, for traffic on Mill Street entering 5th     9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       Avenue South                                                                  (B)          2009
Southwest    Mill Street and 5th Avenue South, for traffic on Mill Street entering 5th     9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       Avenue South                                                                  (B)          2009
Southwest    Mill Street and 8th Avenue South, for traffic on Mill Street                  9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner                                                                                     (B)          2009
Southwest    Murphy Street and 5th Avenue South, for traffic on Murphy Street entering 5th 9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       Avenue South                                                                  (B)          2009
Northeast    Murphy Street and Riverside Drive, for traffic on Murphy Street entering      9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       Riverside Drive                                                               (B)          2009
Northeast    Palmer Street and 5th Avenue South, for traffic on Palmer Street              9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner                                                                                     (B)          2009
Southeast    Park Drive and 5th(County B) Avenue South, for traffic on Park Drive entering 9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       5th (County B) Avenue South                                                   (B)          2009
Southwest    Pine Street and Bernard Lane, for traffic on Pine Street                      9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner                                                                                     (B)          2009
Northeast    Pine Street and Gilman Drive, for traffic on Pine Street                      9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner                                                                                     (B)          2009
Northwest    Railroad Avenue North and Main Street, for traffic on Railroad Avenue North   9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       entering Main Street                                                          (B)          2009
Southeast    Railroad Avenue South and Main Street, for traffic on Railroad Avenue South   9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       entering Main Street                                                          (B)          2009
Northwest    Railroad Avenue South and Riverside Drive, for traffic on Railroad Avenue     9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       South entering Riverside Drive                                                (B)          2009
Northeast    Rogers Street and 5th Avenue North, for traffic on Rogers Street entering 5th 9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       Avenue North                                                                  (B)          2009
Southwest    Rogers Street and 5th Avenue North, for traffic on Rogers Street entering 5th 9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       Avenue North                                                                  (B)          2009
Southeast    Sunset Drive and Main Street, for traffic on Sunset Drive entering Main       9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       Street                                                                        (B)          2009
Southeast    Trucker Lane East and County Trunk B (5th Avenue South), for traffic on       9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       Trucker Lane East entering County Trunk B (5th Avenue South)                  (B)          2009
Southeast    Trucker Lane West and County Trunk B, for traffic on Trucker Lane West        9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       entering County Trunk B                                                       (B)          2009
Southeast    W. Riverside Drive and Main Street (Highway 64), for traffic on W. Riverside  9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       Drive entering Main Street (Highway 64)                                       (B)          2009
Southwest    Walnut Street and Benard Lane, for traffic on Walnut Street                   9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner                                                                                     (B)          2009
Northeast    Walnut Street and Gilman Drive, for traffic on Walnut Street                  9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner                                                                                     (B)          2009
Southwest    Well Street and Main Street, for traffic on Well Street entering Main Street  9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner                                                                                     (B)          2009
Northwest    Well Street and W. Riverside Drive, for traffic on Well Street entering W.    9.01(4) -    3-11-
corner       Riverside Drive                                                               (B)          2009
 
Penalty, see §
10.99
SCHEDULE II. RAILROAD GRADE CROSSINGS.
   In the interest of public safety, stop signs and/or electronic signaling
devices shall be installed at railroad crossings on the following village
streets:
 
Street                            Prior Code Section Ord. No. Date Passed
5th Avenue South (County Trunk B) 9.01(4)(D)         -        3-11-2009
Main Street                       9.01(4)(D)         -        3-11-2009
Riverside Drive                   9.01(4)(D)         -        3-11-2009
 
SCHEDULE III. NO-PASSING ZONES.
   (A)   Designated. No passing zones shall be marked with unbroken yellow
lines and/or signs indicating the beginning and end of such zones on the
following highways within the jurisdiction of the village in accordance with
standards and procedures adopted by the State Department of Transportation:
      (1)   State trunk highways and county highways: all locations established
and marked by the State Department of Transportation; and
      (2)   Highways within the jurisdiction of the village:
Street/Direction Extent Prior Code Section Ord. No. Date Passed
Street/Direction   Extent               Prior Code Section Ord. No. Date Passed
5th Avenue (County From Heagle Street
Trunk B),          to Main Street       9.01(6)            -        3-11-2009
northbound lane
5th Avenue (County From West Trucker
Trunk B),          Lane to Park Drive   9.01(6)            -        3-11-2009
northbound lane
5th Avenue (County From Park Drive to
Trunk B),          West Trucker Lane    9.01(6)            -        3-11-2009
southbound lane
Main Street,       From 6th Avenue to   9.01(6)            -        3-11-2009
eastbound land     Babit Creek Bridge
Main Street,       From Bernard Lane to
eastbound lane     Railroad Avenue      9.01(6)            -        3-11-2009
                   South
Main Street,       From west village
eastbound lane     limits to Wells      9.01(6)            -        3-11-2009
                   Street
                   To two-tenths of a
Main Street,       mile from Babit      9.01(6)            -        3-11-2009
eastbound lane     Creek Bridge to the
                   East Town Apartments
Main Street,       From 3rd Avenue to   9.01(6)            -        3-11-2009
westbound lane     Gilman Street
Main Street,       From Babit Creek     9.01(6)            -        3-11-2009
westbound lane     Bridge to 7th Avenue
Main Street,       From Bernard Lane to 9.01(6)            -        3-11-2009
westbound lane     West Riverside Drive
Main Street,       From east village
westbound lane     limits to East Town  9.01(6)            -        3-11-2009
                   Apartments
 
   (B)   Passing prohibited. When no-passing zone markers or signs giving
notice thereof are erected or placed on the pavement as provided in this
section, including applicable state and county designated areas, no person
shall operate a vehicle so as to overtake or pass another vehicle or drive to
the left of the center of the roadway in designated no-passing zones.
(Prior Code, § 9.01(6)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
SCHEDULE IV. U-TURNS PROHIBITED.
   Pursuant to authorization of the State Department of Transportation, U-turns
are prohibited at the following locations:
 
Street                               Prior Code Section Ord. No. Date Passed
State Highway 64 within the village  9.01(5)(C)(5)      -        3-11-2009
except for 1st Avenue and 4th Avenue
 
Penalty, see §
10.99
SCHEDULE V. SNOWMOBILE ROUTES.
   The following streets are open to snowmobile routes when signed in
accordance with Wis. Stats. § 350.02(2)(a)5.
 
Streets                                Prior Code Section Ord. No. Date Passed
All streets, with the exception of 5th 11.01(3)           -        3-11-2009
Avenue North
Highway 64 and County Trunk B (5th     11.01(3)           -        3-11-2009
Avenue South)
 
CHAPTER 75: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Prohibited at all times
      
II.   Limited time parking
SCHEDULE I. PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES.
   Except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading
or unloading or in receiving or discharging passengers or property and while
the vehicle is attended by a licensed operator so that it may be moved promptly
in case of an emergency or to avoid obstruction of traffic, no person shall at
any time park or leave standing any vehicle upon any of the following highways
or parts of highways:
 
Street/Side         Location            Prior Code Section Ord. No. Date Passed
5th Avenue North,   From Davlin Street
east side           to Rogers Street    9.01(8)(A)         -        3-11-2009
                    (fire lane)
                    From the southwest
Crumb Street, north corner of Lot 11,
side                Block 6 of Ways     9.01(8)(A)         -        3-11-2009
                    Plat to 2nd Avenue
                    North
Davlin Street,      From 3rd Avenue
north side          North to 4th Avenue 9.01(8)(A)         -        3-11-2009
                    North
McSloy Street,      From 3rd Avenue
south side          South to 4th Avenue 9.01(8)(A)         -        3-11-2009
                    South
Riverside Drive,    From McSloy Street  9.01(8)(A)         -        3-11-2009
east side           to Murphy Street
Well Street, east   From Riverside
side                Drive to Main       9.01(8)(A)         -        3-11-2009
                    Street
 
Penalty, see §
10.99
SCHEDULE II. LIMITED TIME PARKING.
   (A)   Parking/loading prohibited during certain periods.  No person shall
park or leave standing any vehicle upon any of the following highways or parts
of highways at the time indicated, except for the purpose of and while engaged
in receiving or discharging passengers:
 
Street/Side       Restriction           Prior Code Section Ord. No. Date Passed
                  No parking from 7:00
                  a.m. to 4:00 p.m on
5th Avenue North, school days, except
east side         in the first block of 9.01(8)(B)         -        3-11-2009
                  5th Avenue just north
                  of Main Street
                  (Highway 64)
 
   (B)   Limited time parking.  When official traffic control devices or
parking meters are erected in any block giving notice thereof, no person shall
park, stop or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, for
more than the following time periods between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. on any day except Sundays and holidays on any of the following highways or
parts thereof:
 
Street/Side       Restriction           Prior Code Section Ord. No. Date Passed
Two-hour parking limit:
5th Avenue North, During school days
west side         from 7:00 a.m. to 4:  9.01(8)(E)         -        3-11-2009
                  00 p.m.
Well Street, west From State Highway 64 9.01(8)(E)         -        3-11-2009
side              to Riverside Drive
 
Penalty, see §
10.99
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
91.   TREES AND SHRUBS
      
92.   PARKS AND RECREATION; LIBRARY
      
93.   FAIR HOUSING
      
94.   PUBLIC NUISANCES
      
95.   ANIMALS
CHAPTER 90: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
   
90.01   Roads
   
90.02   Street and sidewalk grade
   
90.03   Sidewalk construction and repair
   
90.04   Driveways
   
90.05   Street and sidewalk excavations and openings
   
90.06   Obstructions and encroachments
   
90.07   Cleaning, repair, snow and ice removal
§ 90.01 ROADS.
   (A)   Public roads. All public roads shall conform to those specifications
set forth in the publication Standard Specifications for Roads and Bridge
Construction as published by the Department of Transportation of this state as
from time to time revised.
   (B)   New subdivisions. In new subdivisions, the village will accept
dedication of land for new village roads and approve plats under Wis. Stats.
Chapter 236, only if the roads are surveyed and constructed by the developer
pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 236.13(2)(a) and (b). Such roads must be constructed
to village standards as set forth in this chapter. Subdivisions shall be
defined by Wis. Stats. § 236.02(8). The Village Board may waive any
requirements in specific instances to promote development and additions to the
tax base of the village.
   (C)   Grade alterations. No person shall cause, allow or permit any person
to alter the grade of any public highway, road, street or alley in the village
without written approval by the Village Board.
(Prior Code, § 14.01(1)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.02 STREET AND SIDEWALK GRADE.
   (A)   Establishment. The grade of all streets, alleys and sidewalks shall be
established by resolution by the Village Board and the same recorded by the
Village Clerk in his or her office. No street, alley or sidewalk shall be
worked until the grade thereof is established.
   (B)   Alteration of grade prohibited. No person shall alter the grade of any
street, alley, sidewalk or public grounds or any part thereof in the village by
any means whatever unless authorized or instructed to do so by the Village
Board. All such alterations of grade shall be recorded in the office of the
Village Clerk by the Clerk or officer authorizing the alteration.
(Prior Code, § 14.01(2)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.03 SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR.
   (A)   Owner to construct. It shall be the duty of the abutting owner to
build, repair, construct and perpetually maintain sidewalks along or upon any
street, alley or highway in the village and to pay one-half of the cost
thereof. Whenever the Village Board shall by resolution determine that a
sidewalk be laid, rebuilt, repaired, lowered or raised along or upon any public
street, alley or highway within the village, it shall proceed according to Wis.
Stats. § 66.0907.
   (B)   Qualification required. No person, firm or corporation shall hereafter
lay, remove, replace or repair any public sidewalk within the village unless
such work is done by a person, firm or corporation qualified to do such work by
the Village Board.
   (C)   Specifications. All public sidewalks in the village shall conform to
those specifications set forth in the publication Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction as published by the Department of Transportation
of this state as from time to time revised. All sidewalks shall be Grade AA
air-entrained concrete.
   (D)   Width and thickness.  Sidewalks in front of residential, commercial or
industrial establishments shall be constructed according to the dimensions as
the Village Board may by resolution require.
(Prior Code, § 14.01(3)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.04 DRIVEWAYS.
   (A)   Approval required. No person shall construct or maintain any driveway
across any sidewalk or curbing without first obtaining a driveway permit from
the Village Board.
   (B)   Specifications for driveway construction.
      (1)   Width. No driveway shall exceed 26 feet in width at the outer or
street edge of the sidewalk unless special permission is obtained from the
Village Board.
      (2)   Interference with intersections prohibited. At street
intersections, a driveway shall not provide direct ingress or egress to or from
the street intersection area and shall not occupy areas of the roadway deemed
necessary by the Village Board for effective traffic control or for highway
signs or signals.
      (3)   Interference with street. No driveway apron shall extend out into
the street further than the face of the curb, and under no circumstances shall
such driveway apron extend into the gutter area. All driveway entrances and
approaches shall be so constructed that they shall not interfere with the
drainage of streets, side ditches or roadway areas or with any existing
structure on the right-of-way. When required by the Village Board to provide
for adequate surface water drainage along the street, the property owner shall
provide any necessary culvert pipe at his or her own expense.
      (4)   Workmanship and materials. All driveway entrances and approaches
which are constructed across sidewalks shall be in accordance with the
requirements for sidewalk construction in §
90.03 insofar as such requirements are applicable, including thickness
requirements in §
90.03(D).
      (5)   Owner liable for damage or injury. The owner of the premises shall
assume all responsibility for any injury or damage to persons or property
resulting directly or indirectly during the construction or repair of driveway
approaches or entrances. When curb or gutter is removed, the new connection
shall be of equivalent acceptable materials and curb returns provided or
restored in a neat workmanlike manner. Driveway surfaces shall connect with the
street pavement and sidewalk in a neat, workmanlike manner. Any sidewalk areas
which are damaged or are inadequate by reason of vehicle travel across the
sidewalk shall be replaced in accordance with the requirements of this code.
(Prior Code, § 14.01(4)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.05 STREET AND SIDEWALK EXCAVATIONS AND OPENINGS.
   (A)   Permit required. No person, firm or corporation shall make or cause to
be made any excavation or opening in or under any street, alley, highway,
sidewalk or other public ways within the village without first obtaining a
permit therefor from the Village Board.
   (B)   Application for permit. The application for the permit provided for in
the preceding division (A) shall state the purpose for which the permit is
desired and the location of the proposed excavation, which shall contain an
agreement that the applicant will pay all damages to persons or property,
public or private, caused by the applicant, his or her agents, employees or
servants in the doing or erection of the work for which the permit is granted.
Any applicant may be required as a condition to the granting of a permit, in
the discretion of the Village Board, to file an undertaking in such amount as
the Village Board shall determine to leave the street, sidewalk or alley in as
good condition as the same was in when the work commenced, to at all times keep
the place where the excavation is made properly guarded by day and night and
lighted by night, and to save the village harmless from any and all damages,
costs and charges that may accrue from the applicant’s use of such street,
sidewalk or alley by reason of such excavation.
   (C)   No further privileges granted. No permit for an excavation granted
under the provisions of this section shall be deemed to convey or grant any
privilege to occupy the space within or below any street or sidewalk, or any
utility, vault, pipe, drain or any other thing whatsoever.
   (D)   Conditions. When excavations are made under the provisions of this
section, the excavations shall not be left open longer than the necessities of
the work demand. In refilling the excavation, fill and stone shall be
thoroughly and properly tamped and the surface of the street, sidewalk or alley
left in as good condition as the same was in before the excavation was made;
provided, however, that whenever it is necessary to break into a sidewalk for
the purpose of making any excavation authorized under this section, the entire
square so broken into shall be removed and replaced, it being the intent of
this subsection to prohibit the patching of a square in a sidewalk.
   (E)   Notice to Village Police Department.  Before any excavation, opening
or blockage in any street or sidewalk is made by any person, firm or
corporation under the provisions of this section, 48 hours in advance notice
shall be given by the person intending to make such excavation, opening or
blockage to the Village Police Department.
   (F)   Village work excluded. The provisions of this section shall not apply
to excavation work under direction of the Village Board by village employees or
contractors performing work under contract with the village necessitating
openings or excavations in village streets.
(Prior Code, § 14.01(5)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.06 OBSTRUCTIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS.
   (A)    Obstructions and encroachment prohibited. No person shall encroach
upon or in any way obstruct or encumber any street, alley, sidewalk, public
grounds or land dedicated to public use, or any part thereof, or permit such
encroachment or encumbrance to be placed or remain on any public way adjoining
the premises of which he or she is the owner or occupant, except as provided in
division (B) below.
   (B)   Exceptions.  The prohibition of division (A) above shall not apply to
the following:
      (1)   Signs or clocks attached to buildings which project not more than
six feet from the face of such building and which do not extend below any point
ten feet above the sidewalk, street or alley;
      (2)   Awnings which do not extend below any point seven feet above the
sidewalk, street or alley;
      (3)   Public utility encroachment duly authorized by state law or the
Village Board;
      (4)   Goods, wares, merchandise or fixtures being loaded or unloaded
which do not extend more than three feet on the sidewalk, provided such goods,
wares and the like do not remain thereon for a period of more than two hours;
and
      (5)   Excavations and openings permitted under §
90.05(B) of this code.
   (C)   Removal by village. In addition to any other penalty imposed, if the
owner or occupant of the premises adjoining any unlawfully obstructed sidewalk
shall refuse or neglect to remove such obstructions within 24 hours after
notice from the Village Policeman to do so, it shall be the duty of the Village
Policeman to remove such obstruction and make return of the cost and expense
thereof to the Village Clerk who shall enter such cost on the next annual tax
roll as a special charge against the property abutting such obstructed
sidewalk, and such sum shall be levied and collected as other special taxes
against real estate.
(Prior Code, § 14.01(6)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.07 CLEANING, REPAIR, SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL.
   (A)   Responsibility of owner, occupant and the like. The owner, occupant or
person in charge of each and every building or structure or unoccupied lot in
the village fronting or abutting any street shall keep all adjoining sidewalks
in good, sufficient, safe repair and clean of any snow, ice, dirt or rubbish to
the full width and extent of the sidewalk. In the case of snow or ice
accumulation, each owner, occupant or person in charge of such building or
structure shall clean or cause to be clean the sidewalk in front of or
adjoining such home, building or structure as the case may be of snow or ice to
the width of such sidewalk by 10:00 a.m. of each day and shall cause the same
to be kept clear from such ice and snow, provided that when the ice is formed
on any sidewalk so that it cannot be immediately removed, the persons herein
referred to shall keep the same sprinkled with ashes, sawdust or sand; provided
also, that in case snow shall continue to fall during and after 10:00 a.m.,
then it shall be removed within three hours of daylight after it shall cease to
fall.
   (B)   Report of defective walks. It shall be the duty of the Street
Department to report to the Village Board all cases of defective sidewalks,
describing the lot or premises along or upon which the same exists, giving the
name of the owner or occupant thereof.
   (C)   Village shall clean at owner’s expense. Whenever an abutting property
owner or occupant shall fail, neglect or refuse to remove from the sidewalk
adjacent thereof any snow, dirt or rubbish, or remedy any slippery or dangerous
condition, such work may be done by the Street Department of the village at the
expense of such owner or occupant, and such expense shall be collected and
levied in the special tax in the manner provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 14.01(7)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 91: TREES AND SHRUBS
Section
   
91.01   Statement of policy; applicability
   
91.02   Definitions
   
91.03   Authorization of Village Forester
   
91.04   Authority of Village Forester to enter private property
   
91.05   Interference with Village Forester prohibited
   
91.06   Abatement of tree nuisances
   
91.07   Assessment of costs
   
91.08   Permit for planting, maintenance and removal of trees and shrubs in
public areas
   
91.09   Planting of trees and shrubs
   
91.10   Pruning
   
91.11   Trees, plants and/or shrubbery obstructing view at intersection or view
of traffic signs
   
91.12   Removal of trees and stumps
   
91.13   Prohibited acts
   
91.14   Tree root protection zone
   
91.15   Appeal from determinations and orders
   
91.16   Creation and establishment of Village Tree Board
   
91.17   Conflicts; effective date
 
   
91.99   Penalty
   
Appendix A: Forms
§ 91.01 STATEMENT OF POLICY; APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Intent and purpose. It is the policy of the village to regulate the
planting, removal, maintenance and protection of trees and shrubs in or upon
all public areas and alongside any streets of the village in the village right-
of-way; to eliminate and guard against any dangerous conditions which may
result in injury to persons using village streets, alleys, sidewalks or other
public areas; to promote a diversity of tree species to protect the community
forest and enhance the beauty and general welfare of the village; to prohibit
any undesirable and unsafe planting, removal, treatment and maintenance of
trees and shrubs in public areas within the village; and to guard all trees and
shrubs both public and private, within the village against the spread of
diseases, insects, pests or risk situations.
   (B)   Application. The provision of this chapter shall apply to trees and
shrubs growing or hereafter planted in or upon the public areas and alongside
any street within the village, and to all trees and shrubs growing or to be
planted in or upon and private property which shall threaten the life, health,
safety and/or welfare of the citizens.
(Prior Code, § 14.01(8)(1)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 91.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ARBORIST. The professionally trained men and women who make a career of
caring for the urban forest. Some are self-employed, some work for tree care
companies and others work for municipalities.
   BOULEVARD. The land between the normal location of the street curbing and
sidewalk; also refers to the center or median of divided streets. Where there
is no curb and gutter, the area from the edge of the blacktop to the edge of
the right-of-way shall be deemed to be BOULEVARD for the purpose of this
chapter. These areas and the plants within them are village-owned and thus are
controlled by the village.
   DEVELOPER. Any person or persons engaged in the act of the division of a
lot, parcel or tract of land, by the owner thereof, or the owner’s agent, for
the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development that creates five
or more lots, parcels or building sites within a five-year period.
   DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH). The stem diameter measured at a point of
four and one-half feet above the ground.
   FORESTER. Person designated by the Village Board as authorized to carry out
provisions of this chapter.
   MAJOR ALTERATIONS. Trimming a tree where its natural form is compromised.
   PERMIT FOR PLANTING, MAINTENANCE AND REMOVAL OF TREES AND SHRUBS IN PUBLIC
AREAS.  Written permission from the Village Forester to perform maintenance and
protection of public trees or shrubs. Any PERMIT may include specifications
which shall be complied with, and any special provisions applicable to the
purpose of the PERMIT.
   PERSON. Person, firm, association or corporation, LLC or LLP.
   PRUNING. By the Village Forester, shall be accomplished according to current
technical specifications of the International Society of Arboriculture, Tree
Pruning Guidelines and the American National Standard Institute (ANSI) A300
Standard Practices for Pruning.
   PUBLIC AREAS. Includes all public parks, rights-of-way and other lands
owned, controlled or leased by the village.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE. Any tree or shrub or part thereof which, by reason of its
condition, interferes with the use of any public area; is infected with a plant
disease; is infested with injurious insects or pests; is damaging to public
improvements; or endangers the life, health, safety and/or welfare of persons
or property (nuisances, see
Chapter 94).
   PUBLIC TREES AND SHRUBS. All trees and shrubs located or to be planted in or
upon public areas within the village such as parks, boulevards, medians or
alleys.
   SHRUBS. Any woody vegetation or a woody plant having multiple stems and
bearing foliage from the ground up.
   TOPPING. The practice of cutting limbs to stubs larger than three inches in
diameter within the tree’s crown regardless of branch juncture.
   TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS. Any sign or device used to direct or aid in the flow
of traffic on any right-of-way or public area.
   TREE. Any woody plant, normally having one stem or trunk bearing its foliage
or crown well above ground level to heights of 12 feet or more.
   URBAN FOREST. The sum of all trees within corporate limits subjected to
alterations in the soil and other stresses resulting from activities of urban
life.
   VISION TRIANGLE. A triangle formed by the two intersection rights-of-way and
a third line connecting the rights-of-way lines at a distance of 25 feet in
each direction from the point of rights-of-way line intersection. This
triangular area of land shall provide unobstructed view to vehicular traffic
(typically a clear line of sight between three and eight feet from ground
level). The Village Forester may designate the pruning necessary to maintain
this view and have property owners perform the necessary work within 20
calendar days of being notified by the Village Forester.
(Prior Code, § 14.01(8)(2)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 91.03 AUTHORIZATION OF VILLAGE FORESTER.
   (A)   The Village Board may designate a municipal employee or citizen to
perform the duties of Village Forester under state statutes and authorize such
Village Forester to perform the duties and exercise the powers of the Board
imposed by this chapter.
   (B)   The Village Forester shall be properly trained and responsible to the
Village Board.
(Prior Code, § 14.01(8)(3)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 91.04 AUTHORITY OF VILLAGE FORESTER TO ENTER PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   The Village Forester or his or her authorized representative may enter upon
private premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of examining any tree
or shrub located upon or over such premises to carry out the provisions of this
chapter. If a request to inspect such tree(s) or shrub(s) is denied by the
person responsible for the property, an inspection warrant may be obtained
pursuant to state statutes.
(Prior Code, § 14.01(8)(4)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 91.05 INTERFERENCE WITH VILLAGE FORESTER PROHIBITED.
   No person shall interfere with the Village Forester and/or his or her
authorized representative while he or she is engaged in carrying out any work
or activities authorized by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 14.01(8)(5)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.06 ABATEMENT OF TREE NUISANCES.
   (A)   Tree disease a public nuisance. The Village Board has determined there
are many trees growing on public or private premises within the village, the
loss of which could depreciate the value of the urban forest, impair the use
and enjoyment of public and private property, and that the health and life of
such trees could be threatened by fatal diseases, insects or risk trees (dead,
damaged, split trunk, hanging limbs and the like). The Village Board hereby
declares its intention to control and prevent these situations for the health
of trees, and general welfare of citizens’ property and lives (incorporated in
Chapter 94).
   (B)   Inspection.  The Village Forester may, under §
91.04, inspect or cause to be inspected all premises and places within the
village to determine whether any tree nuisance exists.
   (C)   Abatement procedures. When the Village Forester determines with
reasonable certainty that a tree nuisance exists and becomes dangerous or
obstructive upon private premises, he or she shall immediately report the same
to the Police Department for process under Chapter 94.
(Prior Code, § 14.01(8)(6)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 91.07 ASSESSMENT OF COSTS.
   If the village abates any public nuisance, as defined in this chapter, or
subcontracts the nuisance abatement under this chapter located on privately
owned property, the entire cost plus a 25% administrative fee may be charged to
the property owner.
   (A)   The Village Forester, or authorized representative, shall keep an
accurate account of costs and forward the charges, including a description of
work, land description, name and address of owner, to the Clerk for processing
and billing.
   (B)   The Clerk shall mail the billing to the property owner stating that,
unless paid within 30 days, such charge will be entered on the tax roll as a
special charge against the property.
   (C)   The village hereby declares that in making charges under this chapter,
it is acting under its police power and no damage shall be awarded to any
property owner for the abatement of a public nuisance under this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 14.01(8)(7)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 91.08 PERMIT FOR PLANTING, MAINTENANCE AND REMOVAL OF TREES AND SHRUBS IN
PUBLIC AREAS.
   (A)   Right-of-way. No person shall plant, trim or remove, or do major
alterations on a tree or shrub in the public right-of-way or any public area or
cause such act to be done by others without a permit from the Village Forester.
This includes all persons engaged in the business of pruning or removing trees
or shrubs who shall acquire a permit and show proof of insurance to the Village
Forester.
   (B)   Permit to public utilities.
      (1)   Under this chapter a permit may be issued to a public utility to
remove, trim, prune, cut, disturb, alter or do surgery on any public tree or
shrub. The desired all-around clearance on primary conductor lines (14,000
volts) is ten feet. The Village Forester shall limit the work to be done to the
actual necessities of the utility and may periodically review the work being
done. The permit shall adhere to the arboricultural specifications and
standards of workmanship set forth in the permit, therefore no topping may
occur.
      (2)   Every permit shall be issued by the Village Forester on a standard
form, which includes a description of the work to be performed and shall
specify variety, size and specific location. Any work under such permit must be
performed in strict accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Permits
issued under this chapter shall expire six months after date of issuance unless
otherwise noted.
(Prior Code, § 14.01(8)(8)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.09 PLANTING OF TREES AND SHRUBS.
   (A)   Trees, plants and/or shrubs planted without a permit within any
boulevard or planting easement after the date of this chapter may be removed.
The Village Forester shall notify the abutting property owner in writing,
listing the unlawfully planted trees, plants and/or shrubs, ordering their
removal, and establishing a reasonable time within which such removal shall be
accomplished. In the event removal is not accomplished within the time
specified, the village may remove such trees, plants and/or shrubs and may
assess the entire costs to the abutting property owner.
   (B)   Items to follow if an abutting property owner receives a tree planting
permit are the following.
      (1)   No tree shall be planted which is less than one and one-half inches
in caliper measured six inches above the ground.
      (2)   No tree shall be planted closer than two feet from either the
street curb or edge of the sidewalk.
      (3)   No tree shall be planted in a boulevard that has a total width of
less than five feet.
      (4)   No shade type tree (oaks, maples, basswood, elms and the like) or
trees that will have a mature height of 30 feet or more may be planted in
boulevards that have overhead utility lines.
      (5)   No tree shall be planted less than ten feet from any driveway or
fire hydrant, 20 feet from a street sign or within the designated clear vision
triangle at an intersection.
      (6)   Street tree spacing shall be a minimum of 30 feet apart for small
sized trees, i.e., crabapples, hawthorns, Japanese tree lilacs, with 45 to 50
feet being preferred for shade trees, i.e., basswood, maple, oaks, elms and the
like. The following trees shall not be planted on the village’s boulevards: any
conifers, any species of the genus populus, box elder, any willow, silver,
Norway maple or black locust.
(Prior Code, § 14.01(8)(9)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 91.10 PRUNING.
   (A)   Pruning by professionals. All trees in public areas, including
boulevards, shall be pruned according to current technical specifications of
the International Society of Arboriculture and current safety specifications of
the American National Standard for Tree Care Operations, ANSI Z133.1 and shall
use OSHA approved methods.
   (B)   Vertical clearance for streets, alleys and sidewalks. Trees, plants
and/or shrubs growing in or upon any boulevard or public area, or upon any
private property adjacent to any public right-of-way or public area, shall be
kept trimmed so that the lowest branches projecting over the public street or
alley provide a clearance of not less than eight feet. No tree, plant and/or
shrub shall be permitted to grow in such a manner as to obstruct the proper
diffusion of light from any streetlight. The Village Forester shall determine
the necessity of pruning. The Village Forester may waive the provisions of this
section for newly planted trees and existing trees if it is determined they do
not interfere with public travel, obstruct the light of any streetlight or
endanger public safety.
   (C)   Restriction, April to July. It is unlawful to prune any oak or elm
trees from April to July within the village. This stipulation is to prevent oak
wilt or Dutch elm disease to become present in the village.
(Prior Code, § 14.01(8)(10)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.11 TREES, PLANTS AND/OR SHRUBBERY OBSTRUCTING VIEW AT INTERSECTION OR VIEW
OF TRAFFIC SIGNS.
   (A)   Vision triangle. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter,
no person shall maintain, plant or permit to remain on any private or public
property situated at the intersection of two or more streets or alleys in the
village, any tree, shrub or other plant growth, which may obstruct the view of
the operator of any motor vehicle or pedestrian approaching such intersection,
as described in §
91.02.
   (B)   Responsibility. It is unlawful for any person to plant, cause to grow,
allow to grow or maintain any tree, shrub or other plant growth of any kind
which is an obstruction to the clear and complete vision of any traffic sign or
driveway approach to a street in the village. It shall be the duty of every
owner of such tree, shrub or other plant growth to prune or remove such
obstruction.
   (C)   Remedy. Any tree, shrub or other plant growth which obstructs the view
at an intersection or the view of a traffic sign shall be deemed to be
dangerous to public travel and the Village Forester may order, by written
notice, the owner or occupant of any private property to take such steps as are
necessary to remove such obstruction, if performed by the village, shall be
borne by the property owner as stated in §
91.07.
(Prior Code, § 14.01(8)(11)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.12 REMOVAL OF TREES AND STUMPS.
   For dangerous, obstructive and infected trees, any tree or part thereof,
whether alive or dead, which the Village Forester shall find to be infected,
hazardous or a public nuisance, as defined in §
91.06, so as to endanger the public or other trees, plants or shrubs growing
within the village, or to be damaging to sewers, sidewalks or other public
improvements, whether growing on public or private premises, shall be removed,
pruned or treated by the owner of such tree. All stumps of boulevard and park
trees shall be removed six inches below the surface of the ground and follow
the abatement procedure under §
91.06(C).
(Prior Code, § 14.01(8)(12)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 91.13 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   Damage to public trees. No person shall, without the consent of the
property owner in the case of a private tree or shrub, or without a permit from
the Village Forester in the case of a boulevard tree, public tree or shrub,
perform or cause to be performed by others any of the following acts. No person
without a permit shall harm any public tree or shrub in any of the manners
listed under division (B) below.
   (B)   Fine. If a person is found to have damaged a public tree as in
divisions (B)(1) through(B)(6) below, he or she will be fined as set forth in §
91.99. The money collected for this damage will be deposited in the village’s
Tree Board budget to be used for forestry related activities.
      (1)   Remove, destroy or injure a tree on a public area other than in
accordance with this chapter;
      (2)   Break, injure, mutilate, deface, kill or destroy any tree or shrub,
or permit any fire to burn where it will injure any tree or shrub;
      (3)   Permit any toxic chemical, gas, smoke, oil or other injurious
substance to seep, drain or be emptied upon or around any tree or shrub, or
place concrete or other solid substance around the base of any tree or shrub;
      (4)   Remove any guard, stake, plaque or other device or material
intended for identification of or the protection of a public tree or shrub, or
close or obstruct any open space about the base of a public tree or shrub
designed to permit access of water and fertilizer;
      (5)   Attach any sign, poster, notice or other device to any tree, or
fasten any guide wire, cable, rope, nails, screws or other device to any tree,
except that the village may tie temporary “no parking” signs to trees when
necessary; and
      (6)   Topping of any tree, whether it is a street tree, park tree or any
other public tree.
(Prior Code, § 14.01(8)(13)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.14 TREE ROOT PROTECTION ZONE.
   This zone consists of protecting tree roots two feet from the base of the
tree for every inch in diameter, measured four and one-half feet off the
ground.
   (A)   Protection. All trees in any public area or boulevard near any
excavation or construction shall be sufficiently guarded and protected by
installation of appropriate durable (i.e., snow fence) fencing. Such fencing
shall be erected by and be the responsibility of the appropriate permittee
throughout the entire duration of the construction activities. No activity,
including placement and storage of any material and equipment, shall be
permitted within the designated tree root protection zone.
   (B)   Activity in zone. If during construction in public areas, activity
occurs in the fenced tree root protection zone or the fence is not maintained,
a penalty as set forth in §
91.99 shall be assessed. In addition, if the tree root protection zone is not
maintained, the contractor is responsible for any cost associated with any
damage done to any tree(s) in the tree root protection zone.
   (C)   Auguring and trenching. No trenching in any boulevard or public area
shall take place within the tree root protective zone. In place of trenching,
auguring may be approved.
   (D)   Approval.  The Village Forester must approve all activities under this
section before work begins; this will be confirmed through the permit system.
(Prior Code, § 14.01(8)(14)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.15 APPEAL FROM DETERMINATIONS AND ORDERS.
   Any person who receives a determination or order under this chapter, and
objects to all or any part thereof, shall have the right to appeal such
determination or order, subject to the provision of state statutes, to the
Village Board within ten calendar days upon receiving notice, shall be
presented to the Village Clerk’s office, and the Village Board shall hear such
appeal within 20 days of receipt of written notice of the appeal. After such
hearing, the Village Board may reverse, affirm or modify the order or
determination appealed and the grounds for its decision shall be stated in
writing. The Village Board shall, by letter, notify the party appealing the
order or determination of its decision within ten days after the hearing has
been concluded. The Village Board shall file its written decision with the
Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 14.01(8)(16)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 91.16 CREATION AND ESTABLISHMENT OF VILLAGE TREE BOARD.
   There is hereby created and established a Village Tree Board for the village
which shall consist of seven members, who shall be appointed by the President
with the approval of the Village Board.
   (A)   Term of office. The term of the seven members shall be indefinite. In
the event that a vacancy shall occur or three consecutive unexcused absences,
the Village Tree Board Chair shall recommend another member with approval of
the Village Board.
   (B)   Compensation. Members of the Village Tree Board shall serve without
compensation.
   (C)   Operation. The Tree Board shall choose its own officers, make its own
rules, regulations and keep minutes of its proceedings. A majority of the
members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business.
   (D)   Duties and responsibilities. The Village Tree Board shall have the
following responsibilities and duties to be attended to in a timely fashion.
      (1)   The Tree Board is to review and propose revisions to this chapter.
      (2)   The Tree Board shall review and update the Village Urban Forestry
Management Plan and tree inventory and recommend a Village Forester.
      (3)   The Tree Board shall recommend to the Department of Public Works/
Village Forester the type of trees to be planted upon village property.
      (4)   The Tree Board will provide information to village residents
regarding the selection, planting and maintenance of trees on village and
private property.
      (5)   The Tree Board shall provide ongoing community education in order
to promote public understanding of the village’s urban forest and public
adherence to the standards and procedures established under this chapter.
      (6)   The Village Tree Board will plan and coordinate the Arbor Day
activities.
(Prior Code, § 14.01(8)(17)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 91.17 CONFLICTS; EFFECTIVE DATE.
   (A)   All ordinances, and/or parts of ordinances, in conflict herewith are
hereby repealed.
   (B)   This chapter shall be in full force and effect upon its passage and
publication.
(Prior Code, § 14.01(8)9:) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   The Village Forester is hereby charged with the responsibility for the
enforcement of this chapter and may serve notice to any person, partnership,
firm or corporation or other legal entity that violates any provision of this
chapter by the institution of legal proceedings as may be required. Violations
of this chapter shall be turned over to the Police Department for investigation
and for further action under the terms of Chapter 94. A minimum penalty of $200
per diameter inch, measured four and one-half feet off the ground, shall be
assessed all damaged or destroyed trees. In addition to the minimum penalty, or
any other penalty imposed for violation of this chapter, any person who shall
cause physical damage to or destroy any public tree shall be liable for the
cost of repairing and/or replacing such damaged or destroyed public tree. The
parent or parents of an unemancipated minor child are responsible for all
penalties levied against such child.
(Prior Code, § 14.01(8)(15))
   (B)   If a person is found to have damaged a public tree as set forth in §
91.13, he or she will be charged $200 per diameter inch measured at four and
one-half inches above ground for every tree damaged.
(Prior Code, § 14.01(8)(13))
   (C)   For violations of §
91.15(B), a minimum penalty of $500 per day shall be assessed. In addition, if
the tree root protection zone is not maintained, the contractor is responsible
for any cost associated with any damage done to any tree(s) in the tree root
protection zone.
(Prior Code, § 14.01(8)(14))
(Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
APPENDIX A: FORMS
   Application No: __________
PERMIT FOR PLANTING, MAINTENANCE AND REMOVAL OF TREES
AND SHRUBS IN PUBLIC AREAS
   Village Code of Ordinances §
91.08
Applicant’s Name:
___________________________________________________________________
Company:
__________________________________________________________________________
Street Address:
________________________________________________________________________
City / State:
_________________________________________________________________________
Phone / Cell Phone:
__________________________________________________________________
Description of work: (include variety, size, and specific location)
___________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
Proof of Insurance      Copy Obtained:   ____ yes ____ no      
The permit shall expire 6 months after date of issuance.
Signed:_________________________________    Signed:
_________________________________
              Applicant                               Village Forester
Date: _________________________             Date:
___________________________________
   (For Village Use Only)
         granted __________    date granted _____________
         denied __________    (see attached letter)
   Application No: __________
PERMIT FOR TREE ROOT PROTECTION ZONE
DURING EXCAVATION OR CONSTRUCTION IN PUBLIC AREAS
   Village Code of Ordinances §
91.08
Applicant’s Name:
___________________________________________________________________
Company:
__________________________________________________________________________
Street Address:
______________________________________________________________________
City / State:
_________________________________________________________________________
Phone / Cell Phone:
__________________________________________________________________
Description of work: (include variety, size and specific location)
___________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
Proof of Insurance         Copy Obtained:   _____ yes   _____ no
The permit shall expire 6 months after date of issuance.
Signed: ____________________________       Signed:
____________________________________
             Applicant                         Village Forester
Date:_______________________________    Date:
______________________________________
   ***********(For Village Use Only)**********
                  granted _________________   date granted _________________
                  denied ____________   (see attached letter)
(Prior Code, § 14.01(8)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
CHAPTER 92: PARKS AND RECREATION; LIBRARY
Section
Library Services
   
92.01   Declaration of intent
   
92.02   Adoption by reference
Management of Parks and Recreation Programs
   
92.15   Creation
   
92.16   Purpose
   
92.17   Park and Recreation Committee; composition
   
92.18   Appointment; term of office
   
92.19   Duties and responsibilities
   
92.20   Meetings
Campgrounds
   
92.30   Campground regulations
LIBRARY SERVICES
§ 92.01 DECLARATION OF INTENT.
   It is the intent of the Village Board of Trustees to establish library
service in the village pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stats. Chapter 43, in
effect as of the date of the adoption of this subchapter and any future
amendments to said Chapter 43.
(Prior Code, § 14.01(9)(A)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 92.02 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   Such provisions of Wis. Stats. Chapter 43 as applicable to municipal library
operations are adopted in full by reference.
(Prior Code, § 14.01(9)(B)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
MANAGEMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION PROGRAMS
§ 92.15 CREATION.
   A Park and Recreation Committee is hereby created which shall have the
powers and duties as authorized by the Village Board.
(Prior Code, § 14.01(10)(A)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 92.16 PURPOSE.
   The establishment of this Committee shall be for the purpose of acquiring,
governing, managing, controlling, improving and caring for all public parks and
recreation programs in the village. The powers and functions of the Park
Committee shall be those set forth by the Village Board.
(Prior Code, § 14.01(10)(B)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 92.17 PARK AND RECREATION COMMITTEE; COMPOSITION.
   The Park and Recreation Committee shall consist of three trustees, one of
whom shall be appointed chairperson of the Committee by the Village Board, all
of whom can vote. The Village President, Summer Recreation and/or other
designee shall be ex officio non-voting members of the Committee.
(Prior Code, § 14.01(10)(C)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 92.18 APPOINTMENT; TERM OF OFFICE.
   (A)   Trustee members. The Trustee members shall be appointed by the Village
Board, subject to confirmation by the Village Board during April for the
duration of their current terms as Village Trustees. The term of office on the
Committee shall begin May 1.
   (B)   Citizen members. The two citizen members shall be appointed by the
Village Board, during April for the term of three years beginning May 1.
Citizen members do not need to be a resident of the village. All citizen
members of the Committee shall have equal voting rights with the Trustee
members of the Committee. Must attend 50% of called meetings to maintain member
status, if not member can be replaced by the discretion of the committee.
(Prior Code, § 14.01(10)(D)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 92.19 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The Committee shall have the following duties and responsibilities which
shall be advisory except as otherwise provided:
   (A)   To review and recommend to the Village Board policies necessary for
the governance of the village parks and recreation facilities, and programs
which shall take into consideration and attempt to provide for the social,
physical and cultural well-being of the citizens of the village;
   (B)   To review and recommend to the Finance Committee all budgetary revenue
and expenditures proposals relating to Park and Recreational facilities and
programs. The Committee shall submit to the Village Board by September 1 of
each year a proposed program and budget for the ensuing calendar year. The
Committee shall not contract any liability in excess of the budget appropriated
unless specifically authorized in writing, by the Village Board. All monies
received for the purpose of the Committee, whether from the General Fund or
from approved donations, or from such reasonable fees as may be charged for
activities, shall be paid over to the Village Treasurer and be disbursed by
order of the Village Clerk drawn upon the Village Treasurer to pay accounts or
bills that have been audited and allowed by the Committee and presented to the
Village Clerk;
   (C)   To review and recommend to the Village Board rules and regulations for
the effective management of the village parks and recreational facilities;
   (D)   To perform such duties and have such responsibilities as the Village
Board shall, from time to time, by ordinance, resolution or by law direct; and
   (E)   Revise and update a park plan on an annual basis for use in long- and
short-range planning and applying for grant proceeds.
(Prior Code, § 14.01(10)(E)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 92.20 MEETINGS.
   The Committee shall meet quarterly, as needed or directed by the Committee
Chairperson.
(Prior Code, § 14.01(10)(F)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
CAMPGROUNDS
§ 92.30 CAMPGROUND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning.
      CAMP OR CAMPING. The use of a tent, shelter, or recreational vehicle for
temporary residence.
      CAMPING PARTY. Any individual, family or single group occupying a
campsite.
      CAMPING UNIT. Any single tent, shelter or recreational vehicle used for a
camp by a camping party.
      CAMPSITE. A segment of a campground that is designated for camping use by
a camping unit or camping party.
      COMMITTEE. The Gilman Parks and Recreational Committee of the Board or
its successor committee.
      DEPARTMENT. The Gilman Parks and Recreational Department or its successor
department.
      PARK, TRAIL OR OUTDOOR RECREATIONAL AREA. Any park, trail or outdoor
recreation area owned or managed by Gilman which is under the jurisdiction of
the committee or its successor committee, including the ground, buildings
thereon and waters therein.
      SINGLE GROUP. A camping party of not more than five persons occupying on
camping unit.
      TRANSACTION FEE. A non-refundable fee for campsites or buildings.
   (B)   Camping regulations.
      (1)   Camping is prohibited except in designated areas.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful to camp without a camping permit or use power
without paying a deposit.
      (3)   No more than one family or individual group shall occupy a single
campsite.
      (4)   No camping unit shall be set up beyond limits of the campsite.
      (5)   It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle outside a designated
parking area.
      (6)   No more than two motor vehicles are permitted at any campsite.
      (7)   The Committee shall have the authority to eliminate campsites in a
campground.
      (8)   All camping permits expire at noon on the last day of the permit
period.
      (9)   Quiet hours shall be observed in campgrounds between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. No loud music, loud noises or operation of loud
vehicles shall be allowed.
      (10)   Violation of any state law or any rules of the Committee by a
member of a camping party is cause for revocation of the camping permit.
      (11)   No campsite may be left unoccupied by a camping party for more
than 48 hours.
      (12)   Designate the grass by the river as tent only.
      (13)   Failure to comply with these regulations may result in removal
from this campground.
   (C)   Penalties. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this
section shall be subject to fines.
   (D)   Enforcement. Any law enforcement officer may issue a citation or
arrest any offender who is in violation of any provision of this section. The
officer shall have at all times the right to enter the premises of any
building, structure, or enclosure in any part of the campground for the purpose
of inspection or investigation of disturbances. This section provides special
authority to any municipal, county or state officer to act as agent of the
village in inspection or investigation of disturbances.
   (E)   Hours of use. The hours of use by the public for any park, trail, or
outdoor recreation area shall be from 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. It shall be
unlawful for any person to be in any park, trail or outdoor recreation area
except registered campers in designated campgrounds, outside the established
hours.
   (F)   Regulations governing pets.
      (1)   Dogs shall at all times be kept on a leash less than eight feet
long. Other pets shall be effectively restrained or under the owner's control
at all times.
      (2)   Pet owners shall clean up feces deposited by their pets.
   (G)   Prohibited activities on village property governed by this section.
The following activities shall be prohibited in any park, trail or outdoor
recreation area:
      (1)   Starting a fire except at designated fire places in campground
only.
      (2)   Leaving fire unattended.
      (3)   Operating any vehicle in excess of 15 miles per hour or in excess
of any other posted limit.
      (4)   Gathering wood or cutting trees, shrubs, or downed wood without the
written permission of the committee.
   (H)   Permits. The following activities or uses require the issuance of a
permit.
      (1)   Camping at the campground.
   (I)   Distribution of permits. Camping fees/power fees shall be set and
revised from time to time by the Committee and be part of the fee/charge
schedule.
(Ord. 2023-01, passed 4-12-2023)
CHAPTER 93: FAIR HOUSING
Section
   
93.01   State fair housing laws adopted by reference
§ 93.01 STATE FAIR HOUSING LAWS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   The Board of the Village of Gilman hereby adopts by reference Wis.
Stats. § 106.50, as amended, and all subsequent amendments thereto as if fully
set forth herein.
   (B)   The officials and employees of the Village of Gilman shall assist in
the orderly prevention and removal of all discrimination in housing within the
Village of Gilman by implementing the authority and enforcement procedures set
forth in Wis. Stats. § 106.50, as amended.
   (C)   The Municipal Clerk shall maintain forms for complaints to be filed
under Wis. Stats. § 106.50, as amended, and shall assist any person alleging a
violation thereof in the Village of Gilman to file a complaint thereunder with
the Wisconsin Department of Work Force Development, Equal Rights Division, for
enforcement of Wis. Stats. § 106.50, as amended.
(Res. 2018-04, passed 5-9-2018)
CHAPTER 94: PUBLIC NUISANCES
Section
   
94.01   General provisions
   
94.02   Definition
   
94.03   Public nuisances affecting health
   
94.04   Public nuisances affecting peace and safety
   
94.05   Accumulation of junk forbidden
   
94.06   Abatement of public nuisances
   
94.07   Cost of abatement
 
   
94.99   Penalty
§ 94.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   No person shall cause, allow, continue, maintain or permit any person to
create or permit to exist any public nuisance or public nuisance area within
the village. This shall apply also to any premises owned, leased or controlled
by that person in the village.
(Prior Code, § 12.01(1)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.02 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE. Any thing, act, occupation, condition or use of property
that shall continue for such length of time as to:
      (1)   Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the public comfort, health
or safety;
      (2)   Render the soil, water, air or any article of food or drink impure,
noxious, unwholesome or unhealthy;
      (3)   Greatly offend the public morals or decency;
      (4)   Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to
obstruct or render dangerous for passage any street, alley and highway,
navigable body of water or other public way or the use of public property; or
      (5)   In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of the
property.
(Prior Code, § 12.01(2)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 94.03 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH.
   The following are hereby specifically declared to be public health
nuisances, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other health
nuisances within the definition in §
94.02:
   (A)   Accumulations of decay animal or vegetable matter, trash, rubbish,
rotting lumber, bedding, packing materials, scrap metal or any material
whatsoever in which flies, mosquitoes, disease-carrying insects, rats or other
vermin may breed;
   (B)   A noxious weed area where these noxious weeds are allowed to exceed
one foot in height;
   (C)   All abandoned wells not securely covered or secure from public use;
   (D)   A rat harborage area where rats or other vermin can live and breed;
   (E)   A waste accumulation area where waste amounts in excess of two cubic
yards of waste are allowed to accumulate without a proper waste management
permit issued by the Village Board;
   (F)   An unburied animal carcass area where a dead animal or dead animals
are not buried in a sanitary manner within 48 hours of death;
   (G)   A stagnant water area where mosquitoes, flies and other insects are
allowed to harborage;
   (H)   A noxious odor area where emissions of any noxious odors, foul odors,
offensive odors, nauseous odors, gases or any stench repulsive to the sense of
ordinary persons are allowed to continue to the substantial annoyance or
substantial discomfort of persons or are allowed to cause injury to persons or
property in the village;
   (I)   A surface water pollution area where pollution from the premises
entering the surface water has caused a private or public drinking water well
on another property or any river, stream, lake, ditch, canal or other body of
water to become contaminated;
   (J)   An air pollution area where emissions of smoke, soot, fumes, gases,
ash, dust or other pollutants into the atmosphere repulsive to the senses of
ordinary persons are allowed to continue to the substantial annoyance or
substantial discomfort of persons or are allowed to cause injury to persons or
property in the village;
   (K)   An unwholesome food area where unwholesome, contaminated or polluted
food or drink is sold or served on the premises to persons in the village;
   (L)   A dangerous building area where the building, structure, place or the
electricity, heat or water supply is in a condition and location to cause a
menace or danger to the public health of persons in the village;
   (M)   An improper sewage area where the effluent from the sewer, septic
tank, holding tank or cesspool on the premises is in a condition and location
to cause a menace or danger to public health of persons in the village;
   (N)   A hazardous waste area where the discharge, disposal, storage or
treatment of hazardous, nuclear or toxic waste are allowed to accumulate to the
substantial annoyance or substantial discomfort of persons or are allowed to
cause injury to persons or property in the village; and
   (O)   A noxious material discharge area where the discharge, disposal,
storage or treatment of noxious, filthy, decaying or nauseous materials
repulsive to the senses of ordinary persons are allowed to continue to the
substantial annoyance or substantial discomfort of persons or are allowed to
cause injury to persons or property in the village.
(Prior Code, § 12.01(3)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 94.04 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY.
   The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby
declared to be public nuisances affecting peace and safety, but such
enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances affecting public
peace or safety coming within the provisions of §
94.02:
   (A)   All signs, billboards, awnings and other similar structures over or
near streets, sidewalks, public grounds or places frequented by the public, so
situated or constructed as to endanger the public safety;
   (B)   All use or display of fireworks except as provided by the laws of the
state and ordinances of the village;
   (C)   Repeated or continuous violations of the ordinances of the village;
   (D)   An abandoned or wrecked motor vehicle area where motor vehicles,
tractors, house trailers, railroad cars and other motorized vehicles are
allowed to accumulate without a proper junkyard permit issued by the Village
Board;
   (E)   A loud noise area where loud, discordant and unnecessary sounds of
motor vehicles, animals or music repulsive to the senses of ordinary persons
are allowed to continue to the substantial annoyance or substantial discomfort
of persons or injury to persons or property in the village;
   (F)   An obstruction area where structures, hedges, trees, weeds, signs,
billboards, buildings or equipment are installed or maintained near a public
highway, road, street, alley or railroad crossing and due to the condition and
location block a clean view of traffic that causes a menace or danger to public
safety of persons in the village;
   (G)   Allowing trash, debris, old lumber, furniture, freezers, stoves,
refrigerators, junk motor vehicles or waste to accumulate in unsheltered areas
on the premises for more than 30 consecutive days in any calendar year;
   (H)   Allowing unauthorized disposal, storage, treatment or recycling of
waste on the premises without the approvals from the state, the village or the
county; and
   (I)   Allowing domestic animals (dangerous or otherwise) to run at large on
the premises wherein they can access property of another to the substantial
annoyance or substantial discomfort of persons or are allowed to cause injury
to persons or property in the village.
(Prior Code, § 12.01(4)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 94.05 ACCUMULATION OF JUNK FORBIDDEN.
   (A)   Declaration. The following is hereby declared to be a public nuisance
wherever it may be found within the village: any junk stored contrary to
division (C) below.
   (B)   Definition.  For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      JUNK. Worn out or discarded materials of little or no value, including
but not limited to household appliances or parts thereof, machinery and
equipment or parts thereof, vehicles or parts thereof, tools, discarded
building materials or any other unsightly debris, the accumulation of which has
an adverse effect upon the neighborhood or village property values, health,
safety or general welfare.
   (C)   Storage of junk prohibited.  No person, except a junk dealer, licensed
by the village, shall accumulate, store or allow any junk outside of any
building on any public or private real estate located within the village
corporate limits.
   (D)   Issuance of citation/action to abate. Whenever the Police Department
shall find any such junk as defined in division (B) above, accumulated, stored
or remaining in the open upon any property within the village limits contrary
to the provisions of division (C) above, the Department shall notify the owner
of said property on which such junk is located of the violation of this
section. If such junk is not removed within 30 days, the Police Department
shall cause a citation to be issued to the property owner or occupant of the
property upon which such junk is located. The following steps shall be taken in
enforcing public nuisance violations.
      (1)   The Welfare and Protection Committee shall direct the Police Chief
to investigate a possible violation of the nuisance ordinance.
      (2)   The Police Chief will investigate, take documentation and file a
written report with the Village Clerk on his or her findings.
      (3)   The Clerk will bring both (provisions of divisions (D)(1) and (D)
(2) above) to the next Village Board meeting and the Village Board will discuss
the merits of the situation.
      (4)   If the Board finds that a violation has not occurred, the matter
will be tabled.
      (5)   If the Board finds, based on the provisions of divisions (D)(1) and
(D)(2) above, that a violation has indeed occurred, it will recommend the
following.
         (a)   A letter will be sent to the property owner explaining the
situation and ask the owner to handle the situation within 30 days.
         (b)   The property owner will be informed that he or she can address
the Board in regard to the situation.
         (c)   If the Board still fells that the situation has an adverse
effect upon the neighborhood, then it will direct the owner to correct the
situation within five days.
         (d)   If the owner still has not corrected the problem, then the
Police Chief shall issue a citation.
         (e)   If the matter still is not resolved, the provisions of abatement
shall be followed.
(Prior Code, § 12.01(5)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 94.06 ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCES.
   (A)   Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the Village President, Village
Board and Village Policeman to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and they
shall make periodic inspections and inspections upon complaint to ensure that
such provisions are not violated. No action shall be taken under this section
to abate a public nuisance unless the officer(s) shall have inspected or cause
to be inspected the premises where the nuisance is alleged to exist and has or
have satisfied himself or herself that a nuisance does in fact exist.
   (B)   Summary abatement.
      (1)   Notice to owner. If the inspecting officer shall determine that a
public nuisance exists within the village and that there is great and immediate
danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the Village
President may direct the Taylor County Health Department in the event of a
public health matter, and shall direct the Village Policeman to take
appropriate action in other nuisance matters, and to serve notice on the person
causing, permitting or maintaining such nuisance, or upon the owner or occupant
of the premises where such nuisance is caused, permitted or maintained, and to
post a copy of said notice on the premises. Such notice shall direct the person
causing, permitting or maintaining such nuisance or the owner or occupant of
the premises to abate or remove such nuisance within 24 hours and shall state
that unless such nuisance is so abated, the village will cause the same to be
abated and will charge the cost thereof to the owner, occupant or person
causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance, as the case may be.
      (2)   Abatement by village. If the nuisance is not abated within the time
provided or if the owner, occupant or person causing the nuisance cannot be
found, the officer having the duty of enforcement shall cause the abatement or
removal of such public nuisance.
   (C)   Abatement by court action. If the inspecting officer shall determine
that a public nuisance exists on private premises but that the nature of such
nuisance is not such as to threaten great and immediate danger to the public
health, safety, peace, morals or decency, he or she shall file a written report
of his or her findings with the Village President who, upon direction of the
Village Board, shall cause an action to abate such nuisance to be commenced in
the name of the village in Circuit Court of the county in accordance with the
provisions of Wis. Stats. Chapter 823. In addition or as an alternative, the
village can proceed with citation procedures and impose forfeiture for
violation of this chapter.
   (D)   Other methods not excluded. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed
as prohibiting the abatement of public nuisance by the village or its officials
in accordance with the laws of this state.
(Prior Code, § 12.01(6)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 94.07 COST OF ABATEMENT.
   In addition to any other penalty imposed by this chapter for the erection,
contrivance, creation, continuance or maintenance of a public nuisance, the
cost of abating a public nuisance by the village shall be collected as a debt
from the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the
nuisance, and if notice to abate the nuisance has been given to the owner, such
cost shall be assessed against the real estate as a special charge.
(Prior Code, § 12.01(7)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to a penalty as provided in §
10.99, except that the forfeiture imposed shall not be less than $50 nor more
than $200 per day plus penalty assessment, in addition to any specific
penalties provided in this chapter. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day on which a violation of this chapter occurs or continues.
This section shall not preclude the village from maintaining any appropriate
action to prevent or remove a violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 12.01(8)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
CHAPTER 95: ANIMALS
Section
Animals Generally
   
95.01   Cruelty to animals
   
95.02   Animals not to run at large
Vicious and Dangerous Dogs
   
95.15   Definitions
   
95.16   Vicious dogs
   
95.17   Dangerous dog
   
95.18   Confinement
   
95.19   Leash and muzzle
   
95.20   Insurance
   
95.21   Apprehension and impoundment
   
95.22   Exceptions
 
   
95.99   Penalty
ANIMALS GENERALLY
§ 95.01 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
   No person shall treat cruelly any animal within the village.
(Prior Code, § 13.01(6)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.02 ANIMALS NOT TO RUN AT LARGE.
   No person owning, possessing or harboring any animal shall allow it to run
at large within the village.
(Prior Code, § 13.01(7)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009) Penalty, see §
95.99
VICIOUS AND DANGEROUS DOGS
§ 95.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DANGEROUS DOG. As used in this subchapter:
      (1)   Any dog which, because of aggressive nature, training or
characteristic behavior, is capable of inflicting serious physical harm or
death to humans and which would constitute danger to human life or property if
it were not kept in the manner required by this subchapter; or
      (2)   Any dog, which, when unprovoked, chases or approaches a person in a
menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack on public or private property.
   OWNER. Any person, firm, corporation, organization or department possessing
or harboring or having the care or custody, whether temporarily or permanently,
of a dog.
   VICIOUS DOG.
      (1)   Any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack
unprovoked, to cause injury to or otherwise threaten the safety of human beings
or domestic animals;
      (2)   Any dog which, without provocation, attacks or bites, or has
attacked or bitten, a human being or domestic animal; or
      (3)   Any PIT BULL TERRIER, which shall be defined as any American Pit
Bull Terrier or Staffordshire Bull Terrier or American Staffordshire Terrier
breed of dog, or any mixed breed of dog which contains as an element of its
breeding the breed of American Pit Bull Terrier or Staffordshire Bull Terrier
or American Staffordshire Terrier as to be identifiable as partially of the
breed of American Pit Bull Terrier or Staffordshire Bull Terrier or American
Staffordshire Bull Terrier.
(Prior Code, § 24(A)(1)) (Ord. passed - -)
§ 95.16 VICIOUS DOGS.
   No person shall harbor, keep or maintain within the village limits any
vicious dog. Any dog alleged to be vicious by virtue of an attack upon human
being or domestic animal shall be impounded as directed by the Village Police
Chief/Police Department until disposition of the charge issued by the citation.
Moreover, the owner of any dog found to be vicious in the trial of a charge of
harboring a vicious dog, or by plea to such a charge, shall be prohibited from
returning that dog to the village.
(Prior Code, § 24(A)(2)) (Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.17 DANGEROUS DOG.
   Any person having knowledge which he or she believes constitutes probable
cause to believe that another is harboring, keeping or maintaining a dangerous
dog shall file with the Village Police Department a sworn affidavit setting
forth the basis on which they believe the animal to be a dangerous dog, the
name and address of the owner of the dog and a description of the dog. The
Police Department shall, upon receipt of such affidavit, inquire and
investigate if the dog is currently a dangerous dog pursuant to this subchapter
and notify the owner or keeper thereof.
(Prior Code, § 24(A)(3)) (Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.18 CONFINEMENT.
   (A)   The owner of a dangerous dog shall not suffer or permit the dog to go
unconfined.
   (B)   A dangerous dog is UNCONFINED if the dog is not securely confined
indoors or confined in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure,
suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and designed to prevent the
animal from escaping upon the premises of the owner of the dog. The pen or
structure must have a minimum dimension of five feet by ten feet and must have
secure sides and a secure top attached to the sides. If the pen or structure
has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides must be embedded into the ground
no less than two feet. All such pens or structures must be adequately lighted
and kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
(Prior Code, § 24(A)(4)) (Ord. passed - -)
§ 95.19 LEASH AND MUZZLE.
   The owner of a dangerous dog shall not suffer or permit the dog to go beyond
the premises of the owner unless the dog is securely muzzled and restrained by
a chain or leash, and under the physical restraint of a person. The muzzle
shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere
with its vision or respiration, but shall prevent it from biting any human or
animal.
(Prior Code, § 24(A)(5)) (Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.20 INSURANCE.
   Owners of dangerous dogs must within 30 days of the effective date of this
provide proof to the Village Clerk of public liability insurance in the amount
of at least $50,000, insuring the owner for any personal injuries inflicted by
his or her vicious dog.
(Prior Code, § 24(A)(6)) (Ord. passed - -)
§ 95.21 APPREHENSION AND IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Village Police Department and other such
persons, as from time to time may be designated by resolution of the Village
Board, to apprehend any dogs running at large. Any dog found running at large
shall be impounded and may be returned to its owner if the owner is found in
compliance with provisions of §
95.18. A police officer may shoot a dog if the dog attacks the officer or
approaches the officer in a menacing fashion so that the officer believes that
the dog is about to attack him or her.
   (B)   In any event, when a dog is impounded, the impounding authority shall
give notice to the owners of the impoundment and advise the owners whether and
under what circumstances the dog may be redeemed. The owner of any animal
impounded, confined or destroyed pursuant to the terms of this subchapter shall
be responsible for all costs of such confinement.
(Prior Code, § 24(A)(7)) (Ord. passed - -)
§ 95.22 EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter regarding dangerous and vicious dogs shall
not apply to animals owned by law enforcement agencies and used for law
enforcement purposes.
(Prior Code, § 24(A)(9)) (Ord. passed - -)
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of §§
95.15 through
95.22 may be punished by a forfeiture fine of not less than $100 and not more
than $500. Every day that a violation of this subchapter continues, it shall be
deemed a separate offense. In addition to the foregoing penalties, any person
who violates this subchapter shall pay all expenses including shelter, food,
handling, veterinary care and expert testimony fees necessitated by enforcement
of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 24(A)(8)) (Ord. passed - -)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   BUSINESS LICENSING AND PERMITS
      
111.   CABLE TV
CHAPTER 110: BUSINESS LICENSING AND PERMITS
Section
Licensing Generally
   
110.01   Title/purpose
   
110.02   General provisions
Specific Licenses/Permits
   
110.15   Cigarette license
   
110.16   Dog license
   
110.17   Fireworks permit
   
110.18   Junkyard permit
LICENSING GENERALLY
§ 110.01 TITLE/PURPOSE.
   This chapter is entitled the “Village of Gilman General License and Permit
Ordinance”. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate activities in the
village which, in the public interest, should be conducted on a permit basis.
(Prior Code, § 10.01(1)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 110.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Fees/permits. The Village Board has by this chapter required and
confirmed the following licenses or permits and the Village Board has
established the fees to be paid by any person to the village for the noted
licenses, or noted permits, and the penalties to be by any person to the
village for violations of these ordinances and the violations of the license
and permit conditions for penalties of these ordinances and/or the specific
ordinance.
   (B)   General license and permit ordinance provisions.
      (1)   The terms LICENSE and PERMIT may be used in these village
ordinances and by the village, its officers, and its employees and by its
agents interchangeably.
      (2)   No person shall engage or allow on land owned, used or leased by
that person in the village any particular use, activity, business or operation
until that person has obtained the required license or permit as established by
the village in this chapter.
      (3)   The application for the license or permit shall be in writing to
the village. The application shall be filed with the Village Clerk. The Village
Clerk shall prepare and shall then forward, when available and when approved by
the Village Board, the appropriate written application form to the applicant.
The application form for licenses or permits from the village shall contain the
appropriate request for relevant information as may be required by the state or
federal statute, as required by any village ordinance or as otherwise required
by order of the Village Board. The Village Clerk shall cooperate fully with the
Village Board in the preparation of the forms. The Village Board shall approve
the form and content of the application form. All application fees are to be
paid to the Village Clerk upon submittal of the application form by the
applicant or the agent of the applicant.
      (4)   The application shall, at minimum, contain:
         (a)   The name, address and business telephone number of the
applicant, if available. In addition, if a partnership, the name, address and
business telephone number of every partner. If a corporation, the name, address
and business telephone of every officer of the corporation;
         (b)   The age and state or national residence of the applicant. In
addition, if a partnership, the age and state or national residence of every
partner. If a corporation, the age and state or national residence of every
officer of the corporation;
         (c)   If a corporation, the state of incorporation. If not the State
of Wisconsin, proof of authorization from the State of Wisconsin to do business
in the State of Wisconsin; and
         (d)   If a corporation, the name, address and business telephone
number of registered corporate agent. The application shall be subscribed and
sworn to by the applicant, if a natural person; by a general partner if a
partnership; by a principal officer, if a corporation.
      (5)   All application fees are to be made payable to the Village
Treasurer. The application for license or permit, when submitted to the Village
Clerk by the applicant, shall contain the appropriate fee amount attached. If
the license or permit is issued, a receipt for payment of the license or permit
fee shall be issued by the Village Clerk. If the license or permit is not
issued, then the fee amount shall be returned with the written denial letter by
the Village Clerk. No refunds, unless expressly noted in any village ordinance
or by order of the Village Board, shall be refunded by the Village Treasurer
unless the license, registration or permit is denied by the Village Board.
      (6)   Unless expressly provided herein by this chapter, by other village
ordinance provisions or as specifically noted below, all licenses and permits
shall be issued by the Village Clerk upon approval of the Village Board.
      (7)   The following specific licenses and permits may be issued by the
Village Clerk without formal Village Board approval if the application is
completed and submitted to the Village Clerk, the Village Board does not desire
to formally approve or deny the license or permit, and if the proper
application amount is attached:
         (a)   Dog license under §
110.16;
         (b)   Cigarette license under §
110.15;
         (c)   Picnic license;
         (d)   Fireworks permit; and
         (e)   Building permit.
      (8)   Unless expressly provided herein or by other village ordinance
provisions, all licenses and permits shall be issued to commence on July 1 and
expire on the next June 30 in the fiscal year of issuance or upon the date
specifically noted in the license, registration or permit, and in either case
the license or permit expires after midnight on the last effective date.
      (9)   The license or permit shall be issued to the applicant by the
Village Clerk. If the license, registration or permit is for a particular
premises, a particular use, activity, a particular business or a particular
operation, the particular use, activity, business or operation shall be clearly
described in the license or permit. No license or permit is transferable,
unless specifically provided herein or by other village ordinance provisions,
to another person without consent of the Village Board. If specific conditions
are established in the license or permit by the Village Board, those conditions
shall be expressly noted in writing on the license or permit and shall be
accepted by the applicant by signature prior to issue by the Village Clerk of
the license or permit and prior to approval by the Village Board.
      (10)   The Village Clerk shall keep a record of the licenses and permits
issued by him or her and the amount of the fees collected for each license or
permit.
      (11)   The license or permit must be dated and signed by the Village
Clerk if required by the Village Board and by such other person, if any, as the
Village Board shall direct for a particular license. The license or permit
shall contain the date of issuance and the date of expiration. The license or
permit must be exhibited for public view in a conspicuous location by the
applicant on the premises or in the vehicle, wherever the licensed or permitted
use, activity, business or operation will occur.
      (12)   Prior to the issuance by the Village Clerk of any license or
permit, the applicant must agree that he, she or it will fully comply with any
and all conditions established with the issuance of the license or permit and
he, she or it will comply with all applicable village ordinances. Moreover, the
applicant further agrees to obey all reasonable orders and reasonable
directives of any Village Policeman or law enforcement officer related to the
compliance with applicable ordinances and compliance with conditions in the
licenses or permits. Failure to fully comply with the conditions of the license
or permit or failure to fully comply with these village ordinances will allow
the Village Board to suspend or revoke the license or permit and to take
whatever other necessary legal action may be provided by these regulations and
state and federal law. Any suspension or revocation of any license or permit
will be after hearing, unless emergency conditions require immediate and
temporary suspension by the Village Board. Following any temporary suspension,
written notice of same shall be served on or mailed to the last known address
of the licensee or permittee. Such notice shall include a statement that the
party may make a written request for a hearing before the Village Board within
30 days, by mailing or delivering to the Village Clerk a request for hearing.
      (13)   Unless expressly provided herein or by other village ordinance
provisions, all applications for reissuance and renewal of any village license
or village permit will be filed by the licensee or permittee with the Village
Clerk within 60 days before the expiration date of the previous license or
permit. The Village Board may waive this 60-day provision at its sole
discretion.
      (14)   Unless expressly provided herein or by other village ordinance
provisions, the person, once issued the license or permit by the Village Clerk
and upon acceptance of the license or permit by the person, and the acceptance
by that person of the conditions attached thereto, consents to the entry of the
Village Board or any designee of the Village Board upon the license or
permitted premises at reasonable hours, upon hours noted within this chapter,
or upon hours noted by the license or permit, for regulatory inspection.
Further, the person consents to allow the Village Board or any designee to
remove from the premises and to introduce into evidence in court, for
violations of this chapter, all relevant items and relevant products found
therein by the Village Board or its designee. The person issued a license or
permit shall comply with all applicable federal and state regulations, and
applicable village ordinances.
      (15)   Unless expressly provided herein, or by other village ordinance
provisions, a license or permit may be suspended or revoked for the cause after
the proper village hearing noted below, unless in an emergency condition
determined by the Village Board wherein the license or permit can be suspended
temporarily for a set time period. Prior to any action for suspension or
revocation, the Village Board must, by the Village Clerk, receive a certified
complaint concerning the licensee or permittee. The following persons may file
a certified complaint with the Village Board:
         (a)   The Village President;
         (b)   The Village Clerk;
         (c)   The Village Trustees;
         (d)   The Village Treasurer;
         (e)   The Village Policeman;
         (f)   Any village resident; and
         (g)   Other law enforcement officials.
      (16)   The person subject to charges for violation of any village
ordinance or any violation of a condition of any license or permit shall be
provided a copy of the verified complaint and notice of hearing before the
Village Board. The hearing shall be required to be not less than 15 days nor
more than 45 days after receipt of notice unless stipulated in writing by the
Village Board and the person subject to charges. All alcohol license hearings,
pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 125.12, must be held not less than three days and not
more than ten days from the date of issuance of a summons.
      (17)   The person subject to charges for violation of any village
ordinance or any violation of a condition of any license or permit shall be
entitled to the following:
         (a)   Representation by legal counsel;
         (b)   Right to present and cross-examine witnesses; and
         (c)   Right to subpoena witnesses by the Village President issuing
subpoenas to compel attendance of witnesses.
      (18)   The Village Board may, after hearing for any person previously
issued a license, registration or permit by the Village Board:
         (a)   Revoke the license or permit as a final decision;
         (b)   Suspend the license or permit for a date certain as a final
decision;
         (c)   Request additional information as an interim decision prior to
taking future action; or
         (d)   Take no action on the license or permit as a final decision.
      (19)    The final decision of the Village Board to revoke or suspend a
license or permit shall be subject to appeal as provided by state law.
      (20)    The Village President or the Clerk of the village, by order of
the Village Board, shall repossess any license or permit that has been revoked
or suspended by the Village Board.
      (21)    If no hearing is requested by the person subject to charge within
the time herein noted, the license or permit shall be revoked at the discretion
of the Village Board at its next or subsequent meeting.
      (22)   Specific reasons that may be considered, at minimum, by the
Village Board in determining whether to initially issue or not issue a license
or permit are as follows:
         (a)   A false statement was made by the applicant in the application
filed with the village and/or a false statement was included in the material
attached to the application by the applicant;
         (b)   The applicant was not of a good moral character;
         (c)   The applicant was not a citizen of the United States of America
or was not a legal alien;
         (d)   The use, activity, business or operation as proposed by the
applicant in the application filed with the village, in the material attached
to the application, will be detrimental to the peace, health, safety and
general welfare of the public in the village;
         (e)   The use, activity, business or operation as proposed by the
applicant in the application filed with the village and in the material
attached to the application will likely cause a public nuisance in the village;
         (f)   The use, activity, business or operation as proposed by the
applicant in the application and the material attached to the application will
not likely conform or meet the conditions of this chapter or any specific state
or federal law or regulations;
         (g)   The applicant, if a corporation, was not authorized to do
business in this state;
         (h)   The applicant was not of age;
         (i)   The applicant was not legally competent;
         (j)   The applicant did not meet the specific conditions for issuance
of a specific license of permit; and
         (k)   (List others):
___________________________________________________________.
      (23)   Specific reasons that may be considered, at a minimum, by the
Village Board in determining whether to revoke or suspend a previously issued
license or permit are as follows:
         (a)   A false statement was made by the applicant in the application
filed with the village and/or a false statement was included in the material
attached to the application by the applicant;
         (b)   The applicant was not of a good moral character;
         (c)   The applicant was not a citizen of the United States of America
or was not a legal alien;
         (d)   The current or former uses, activities, businesses or operations
as operated or maintained by the operator is detrimental to the peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the public in the village;
         (e)   The current or former uses, activities, businesses or operations
as operated or maintained by the applicant have or do cause a public nuisance
in the village;
         (f)   The current or former uses, activities, businesses or operations
as operated or maintained by the applicant have or do not conform to or meet
the conditions of this chapter or any specific state or federal law or
regulations;
         (g)   The applicant, if a corporation, has not been or is not
authorized to do business in this state;
         (h)   The applicant has not been or is not of age;
         (i)   The applicant is not legally competent;
         (j)   The applicant has not or does not meet the specific conditions
included in the previously issued license or permit;
         (k)   The applicant failed to operate or maintain the uses,
activities, businesses or operations as set forth in the application or in the
material attached to the application by the applicant; and
         (l)   For alcohol beverages, revocations, suspensions, refusals to
issue or renew, refer to Wis. Stats. § 125.12 for specific listing of
procedures and reasons relating to alcohol beverages licenses.
      (24)   Any licenses or permits issued by the village are to be deemed
non-exclusive unless otherwise so stated. No special privileges, franchises or
agreements are intended or to be inferred by the issuance of any license or
permit by the village other than those specifically prescribed privileges noted
in the license or permit. Any license, registration or permit issued by the
village shall not be issued for the purpose of any restraint of trade or
commerce nor issued for the purpose of establishing any type or form of
monopoly. No village official, employee or agent shall refuse to issue or
reissue a license or permit because of the belief of the village official,
employee or agent that there are sufficient licenses or permits in the village
unless the state law or Village Board has established a quota or fixed amount
of licenses or permits. However, with alcohol licenses, the Village Board has
specific authority to determine a quota level or to refuse to issue a license
in the best interest of the village’s health and welfare. In each case where a
license or permit is refused, the Village Board shall do so based upon rational
reasons which shall be conveyed by the Village Clerk to the applicant. The
Village Board may, for the following licenses or permits, require an annual
performance review to determine if the village will, upon application, reissue
the license or permit. This review will be held at least 30 days prior to the
expiration date for the license or permit. The review will be completed under
the supervision of the Village President. The results of the review will be
forwarded in writing to the applicant within ten days of expiration. The
following licenses and permits will require a performance review:
         (a)   Cable TV permits will require performance review as required by
state and federal law and these regulations; and
         (b)   (List others):
__________________________________________________________.
      (25)   The applicant, upon acceptance of the written license or permit,
acknowledges that he or she has not been induced by any promise or statement,
whether verbal or written, made by any village official, employee or agent
concerning the license or permit of any written conditions attached to and made
part of the license or permit. If any applicant, upon receipt of the license or
permit, has any questions or concerns regarding the license or permit, the
applicant is urged, in a timely manner, to contact the Village Clerk.
      (26)   The Village Clerk upon the receipt of any application for any
license, registration or permit, shall, if he or she has reason to believe the
person is not eligible for the license or permit, is not fit for a license or
permit or the premises are not suitable for the uses, activities, businesses or
operations contemplated by the applicant, refer the matter to the village,
Village Policeman or other law enforcement officer for investigation or
inspection. If, as a result of the investigation, the Village Clerk believes
the license or permit should be denied or delayed, he or she shall forward
these recommendations to the Village Board. The investigation report shall be
in writing and shall be filed with the Village Clerk.
      (27)   Any license or permit issued or reissued by this chapter may be
revoked for cause by the Village Board. Any licensee or permittee whose license
or permit is revoked may apply for a public hearing within ten days of
revocation. The licensee or permittee shall be entitled to be represented by
legal counsel. After hearing, the Village Board may confirm the previous
revocation, reverse the revocation action, modify the revocation action or
suspend for a date certain the license or permit. The determination by the
Village Board after the hearing shall be final.
      (28)   All applications for licenses or permits shall be in writing
unless otherwise noted in the specific license or permit section. The Village
Clerk shall prepare application forms as soon as practicable after any new
license or permit ordinance has been enacted by the village. The applicant,
unless otherwise noted by the specific license or permit section, shall submit
the application form as developed and provided by the village to the Village
Clerk. Upon application, unless otherwise noted in the specific license or
permit section, all licenses and permits shall be issued, reissued or referred
for issuance by the Village Board within 30 days of the Village Clerk receiving
a copy of a fully completed application form. All licenses and permits when
issued or reissued by the Village Clerk shall have the signature of the Village
Clerk and the signature of the Village President.
      (29)    No license or permit shall be issued or reissued for any use,
activity, business or operation if the use, activity, business or operation
would be a nuisance in fact or if the use, activity, business or operation
would violate any federal law or regulations or any state law or regulations.
      (30)    The Village Board may, subject to the limitations of Wis. Stats.
§ 111.335, consider any criminal convictions for violations of federal and
state laws, federal or state regulations or county or village ordinances in its
determination to issue, reissue, suspend or revoke any license or permit.
Specifically, criminal convictions, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 111.335, shall be
sufficient grounds for failure to issue or reissue a license or permit or
sufficient grounds for revocation or suspension of a license or permit.
      (31)    The Village Board shall, prior to revoking or suspending any
license or permit or prior to refusing to issue or reissue a license or permit,
make on the record specific written findings as to the reason or reasons the
Village Board took such actions. Any applicant, licensee or permittee shall be
provided the opportunity for a public hearing (or a private hearing if
circumstances under the Open Meeting Law so allow and are advisable), an
opportunity to cross-examine witnesses, present evidence and to require that
witnesses testify under oath. The Village Board, in lieu of revoking a license
or permit, may suspend the license or permit to a date certain not to exceed 60
days. The Village Board, in lieu of refusing to issue or reissue a license or
permit, may delay determination action pending further investigation upon its
own motion for 60 days beyond the original required determination date.
      (32)    The following license and permit applications for issuance or
reissuance of a license or permit be published with a Class 1 notice (list and
describe):_________________________________.
      (33)    Class A and B alcohol license applications, pursuant to Wis.
Stats. § 125.04, shall be published in the general circulated newspaper weekly.
      (34)    Any applicant for a license or permit can request a hearing by
the Village Board prior to the decision of the Village Board regarding the
issuance, reissuance or denial of a license or permit application. The request
for a hearing shall be filed with the Village Clerk. The Village Board shall be
prepared to provide a hearing if requested by the applicant in writing.
      (35)    For unpaid forfeitures, claims and taxes: the right to refuse a
license or permit.
         (a)    Pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 66.117, village officials may refuse
to issue any license or permit to applicants who have not paid overdue
forfeitures resulting from a violation of a municipal ordinance of the village
or of an ordinance of another municipality subject to an agreement between the
municipalities as set forth in Wis. Stats. § 66.117. If a permit is refused,
the applicant may appeal such refusal to the Village Board.
         (b)    All applicants for license or permits for doing business in the
village, whether such licenses are required by village ordinance or state
statute, including liquor licenses required by Wis. Stats. Chapter 125, must
have all personal property taxes, assessments, claims and forfeitures owing to
the village paid in full before the Village Clerk may issue such license.
         (c)    The procedural provisions of Wis. Stats. § 125.12(3) and (3m)
(as amended from time to time) relating to refusals to issue or renew licenses
are hereby adopted as the procedure for refusal to issue or renew licenses
under this section.
            1.   When an applicant applies for a license and such applicant has
unpaid personal property taxes, claims, assessments or forfeitures, the Village
Clerk shall so inform the Village Board and may send a written notice to the
applicant of the unpaid amount and of the requirements of this chapter.
            2.   When notified by the Village Clerk of such unpaid amounts, the
Village Board shall notify the licensee or prospective licensees of the
village’s intention not to renew or issue the license and provide the licensee
with an opportunity for such hearing.
            3.   The hearing shall be conducted as required for refusals to
renew as provided in Wis. Stats. § 125.12(2)(b), and judicial review shall be
whether or not the applicant has unpaid personal property taxes, special
assessments, claims or forfeiture.
   (C)   Administration and enforcement of license/permit violations.
      (1)   Unless otherwise noted by order of the Village Board, the Village
Clerk shall be the officer of the village responsible for administration of the
village licenses and permits.
      (2)   Unless otherwise noted by order of the Village Board, the Village
Policeman shall be the official of the village responsible to investigate
matters related to licenses and permits and to file any complaints with the
Village Board regarding licenses and permits.
      (3)   Unless otherwise noted by order of the Village Board, the Village
Policeman shall be the official of the village responsible to enforce the
conditions established in the licenses and permits issued by the village and to
enforce the ordinances of the village against any licensee, permittee and other
persons violating these regulations.
      (4)   Unless otherwise noted by order of the Village Board, the Village
Clerk shall, in a timely fashion, inform the Village Board of any alleged or
real violation of the conditions established in the licenses or permits issued
by the village and any alleged real violations of the village ordinances.
      (5)   Unless otherwise noted by order of the Village Board, the Village
Clerk shall be responsible to inform the Village Board of the refusal of any
person to obtain a required license or permit.
(Prior Code, § 10.01(2)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
SPECIFIC LICENSES/PERMITS
§ 110.15 CIGARETTE LICENSE.
   (A)   Coverage.  Every person, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 134.65 and this
chapter, who sells in the village cigarettes to a person who does not hold a
village cigarette license or who does not hold a permit under Wis. Stats. §§
139.30 to 139.41 or 139.79, shall seek and obtain a cigarette sales license
from the village. The fee for such license shall be, by statute, per premises
at an amount which can be located in the office of the Village Clerk. The
license shall be issued from July 1 of one year to June 30 of the next year.
The license shall be issued by the Village Clerk prior to any person selling
any cigarettes without the proper license or permit in the village.
   (B)   Application/license.  The applications and license shall designate the
premises. Such licenses are not transferable from one person to another or are
not to be amended from one premises to another. The application shall include:
      (1)   The name of the applicant;
      (2)   The address of the applicant;
      (3)   The address of the premises;
      (4)   The business and residential telephone number of the applicant, if
any; and
      (5)   The age of the applicant.
   (C)   Ordinance/license.
      (1)   Persons subject to this section shall comply with Wis. Stats. §
134.65 and this chapter.
      (2)   The Village Clerk shall provide copies of this section at no cost
to any applicant requesting copies under this chapter.
      (3)   The applicant and any other person subject to this chapter shall
comply as follows.
         (a)   No person shall be issued or reissued a cigarette retail sales
license in the village until the appropriate fee has been paid to the Village
Clerk.
         (b)   No person shall be issued or reissued a cigarette retail sales
license in the village who has failed to properly and fully complete and submit
to the Village Clerk the application form as developed and provided by the
village.
         (c)   No person shall be issued or reissued a cigarette retail sales
license until the person owns or has leased a premises in the village.
      (4)   No person shall cause, allow or permit any person to sell or
provide in the village cigarette or tobacco products to a person under the age
of 18 years. This provision shall be subject to any defenses for persons
established under Wis. Stats. § 134.66. No person shall cause, allow or permit
any cigarette vending machine in the village within 500 feet of a school.
“School”, for the purpose of this section, has the meaning given in Wis. Stats.
§ 118.257(1)(d).
(Prior Code, § 10.02) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 110.16 DOG LICENSE.
   (A)   Coverage. Every person, pursuant to Wis. Stats. Chapter 174 and this
chapter, residing in the village who owns a dog that on January 1 is at least
five months old, shall annually at the time and in the manner prescribed by law
for the payment of personal property taxes, seek and obtain a dog license for
his or her dog from the village. The fee for the license shall be established
annually by the Village Board. The fee is as noted in Appendix E attached to
the ordinance establishing this section and hereby adopted by reference. The
license shall be from January 1 through December 31. Late fees shall be charged
by the village if the license is not purchased by April 1 or if not purchased
within 30 days of acquiring ownership of the dog.
   (B)   Ordinance/license.
      (1)   The owner of any dog in the village shall comply with Wis. Stats.
Chapter 174 and this chapter.
      (2)   The Village Clerk shall provide copies of this chapter at no cost
to any applicant requesting a copy of this chapter.
      (3)   The applicant and any person subject to this chapter shall comply
with this chapter as follows.
         (a)   No person shall be issued or reissued a dog license in the
village until the appropriate fee has been paid to the Village Treasurer.
         (b)   No person shall be issued or reissued a dog license in the
village who has failed to properly and fully complete and submit to the Village
Treasurer the application form as developed and provided by the village.
         (c)   No person will allow his or her dog to run at large in the
village beyond the property owned or leased by that person unless the dog is
accompanied by and is under the control of the owner or another person.
         (d)   No person shall own or keep any dog in the village that:
            1.   Habitually pursues vehicles on highway, roads, streets and
alleys in the village;
            2.   Assaults or attacks physically persons in the village;
            3.   Bites persons in the village;
            4.   Habitually barks or habitually howls to the disturbance and
annoyance of at least two persons residing in the village; or
            5.   Remains unlicensed after warning from the village.
         (e)   Dogs will be surrendered by the owner or by any other person in
the village upon demand by the Village Policeman.
         (f)   Dogs will be reported by the owner or by any other person when
he, she or they know that a dog has bitten any person in the village. The
report will be made by the Village Policeman. The dog will be immediately
confined by the owner or by any other person reporting the dog bite upon the
dog biting any person. The dog will not be released by the owner or by any
other person reporting the dog bite until the Village Policeman approves the
release.
         (g)   Dogs will be apprehended and confined by an officer appointed by
the Village Board. This officer shall be the Village Policeman or his or her
designee.
         (h)   Dogs that are apprehended and confined shall be kept by the
village for at least seven days at the pound, unless released sooner if claimed
by the owner. After the time period noted herein, the dog will either be sold,
for inoculation, apprehension, confinement and care costs, or will be destroyed
in a careful, proper and humane manner. The owner, if he or she claims the dog,
shall pay the above-noted costs incurred by the village to the Village Clerk.
If the dog is unlicensed at time of apprehension, the owner shall pay a penalty
of $10. The owner shall post bail in the below-noted amount when reclaiming a
dog:
            1.   Five dollars for first offense within one calendar year;
            2.   Ten dollars for second offense within one calendar year; and
            3.   Twenty dollars for the third offense within one calendar year.
         (i)   No person shall own or keep any dog within the village unless
the dog is wearing a valid village license tag attached to its collar.
   (C)   Other. Other provisions (list and describe):
                                                                   .
(Prior Code, § 10.03) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 110.17 FIREWORKS PERMIT.
   (A)   Coverage. Every person, pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 167.10 and this
chapter, in the village who sells, possesses or uses fireworks in the village
shall seek and obtain a fireworks permit from the village, except if exempt
under this chapter. The permit fee shall be established by the Village Board
which amount can be found at the office of the Village Clerk. The permit shall
be issued for the date established for the permitted use. The permit shall be
issued by the Village President or an employee designated by the Village
President (Village Clerk) and a copy of the issued permit shall be given to the
Village Policeman pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 167.10(3)(g), at least two days
before the date of authorized use in the village.
   (B)   Application/permit. The application shall be made to the Village
President or an employee designated by the Village President (Village Clerk)
and the Village Clerk shall issue or not issue the fireworks permit. The
application shall include:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   The date and location for permitted use; and
      (3)   The classification of the applicant as noted in Wis. Stats. §
167.10(3)(c).
   (C)   Exemptions. Certain persons are exempt from this permit requirement in
the village. The permit requirement does not apply to:
      (1)   The village, but village fire and law enforcement officials shall
be notified of the proposed use of fireworks at least two days in advance;
      (2)   The possession of or use of explosives in accordance with rules or
general orders of the State Department of Industry, Labor and Human Relations;
      (3)   The disposal of hazardous substances in accordance with rules
adopted by the State Department of Natural Resources;
      (4)   The possession of or use of explosives or combustible materials in
any manufacturing process;
      (5)   The possession of or use of explosives or combustible materials in
connection with classes conducted by educational institutions; and
      (6)   The possession of or use of explosives in possession of a license
or permit under 18 U.S.C. Pt. 841 to 848 if the possession of the fireworks is
authorized under the license or permit.
   (D)   Ordinance/permit.
      (1)   The person subject to this section shall comply with Wis. Stats. §
167.10 and this chapter.
      (2)   The Village Clerk shall provide copies of this section at no cost
to any applicant requesting copies under this chapter.
      (3)   The applicant and any other person subject to this section shall
comply as follows:
         (a)   No person shall be issued or reissued a fireworks permit in the
village until the appropriate fee has been paid to the Village Clerk; and
         (b)   No person shall be issued or reissued a fireworks permit in the
village who has failed to properly and fully complete and submit to the Village
Clerk the application form as developed and provided by the village.
(Prior Code, § 10.06) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 110.18 JUNKYARD PERMIT.
   (A)   Coverage.  Every person, pursuant to Wis. Stats. §§ 66.049, 84.31 and
175.25, and this chapter, in the village who shall accumulate or store junked
automobiles or parts thereof within 500 feet of the centerline of any village
road in the village shall seek and obtain a junkyard permit from the Village
Board. The fee for such a permit shall be established by the Village Board at
an amount which can be found at the office of the Village Clerk. The fees shall
be established annually by the Village Board prior to July 1. Fees are as noted
in Appendix E attached to the ordinance establishing this section and hereby
adopted by reference. The permit shall be established for July 1 of the first
year to June 30 of the next year. The permit shall be issued by the Village
Clerk prior to any person accumulating or storing such auto materials in the
village.
   (B)   Application permit.  The application and permit shall designate the
premises to be permitted. The permit may be amended without charge if the
permittee changes premises in the village. However, the permit is not
transferable from one person to another. The application and permit shall
contain the following:
      (1)   The name of the applicant;
      (2)   The address of the commercial premises;
      (3)   The commercial premises telephone number, if any, and the
residential telephone number of the applicant, if any;
      (4)   The age of the applicant;
      (5)   A description of the commercial premises;
      (6)   The quantity and manner of storing such junk; and
      (7)   The projected number of years for accumulation, storage and removal
of these vehicles.
   (C)   Exemptions. Certain persons will be exempt from this permit
requirement if they meet the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 175.25(4). Moreover,
any person with less than four unlicensed automobiles stored on premises shall
be exempt from this chapter.
   (D)   Ordinance/permit.
      (1)   The person subject to this chapter shall comply with Wis. Stats. §§
84.31 and 175.25 and this chapter.
      (2)   The Village Clerk shall provide copies of this chapter at no cost
to any applicant requesting copies under this chapter.
      (3)   The applicant and any other person subject to this chapter shall
comply as follows.
         (a)   No person shall be issued or reissued a junkyard permit in the
village until the appropriate fee has been paid to the Village Clerk.
         (b)   No person shall be issued or reissued a junkyard permit in the
village who has failed to properly and fully complete and submit to the Village
Clerk the application form as developed by the village.
         (c)   No person shall be issued or reissued a junkyard permit in the
village if the applicant for the junkyard permit:
            1.   Fails to install and maintain fences as determined by the
Village Board;
            2.   Fails to install and maintain adequate fire safety equipment
as determined by the Fire Inspector;
            3.   Fails to install, provide and maintain adequate and necessary
physical structures and equipment as determined by the Village Board and fails
to comply with conditions, rules and safeguards as determined by the Village
Board to prevent public nuisances and to protect the public health and safety
to persons residing near the junkyard premises or persons entering the junkyard
premises, including public nuisances associated with noise, dust, odors, fires,
explosions, water pollution, air pollution and erosion;
            4.   Fails to comply as determined by the Village Board;
            5.   Fails to prevent open fires or the burning of solid waste or
hazardous waste at the junkyard premises. This includes the burning of
automobiles and parts thereof;
            6.   Fails to install, provide and maintain adequate landscaping
surrounding the junkyard premises as determined by the Village Board;
            7.   Fails to provide and maintain adequate security and
operational personnel to prevent trespassing onto the junkyard premises;
            8.   Fails to install and maintain adequate physical structures and
operational controls to prevent trespassing, littering and to prevent private
nuisances on private and public lands adjacent to the junkyard location; and
            9.   Fails to allow physical access to the junkyard location by the
Village Board or designee for inspection purposes upon 24 hours’ notice to the
applicant or permittee.
   (E)   Other.  Other provisions (list and describe):
                                                                   .
(Prior Code, § 10.08) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
CHAPTER 111: CABLE TV
Section
   
111.01   Grant of franchise
   
111.02   Franchise rights subject to police powers
§ 111.01 GRANT OF FRANCHISE.
   Pursuant to this chapter, the village may create in a franchise grantee, its
successors and assigns, a nonexclusive franchise to install, maintain and
operate a cable television system for the distribution of television signals,
frequency modulated radio signals and closed-circuit television programs for a
term of ten years, provided that the franchise grantee conforms to the
conditions, limitations and requirements of this chapter. This chapter may be
amended from time to time by the village through the enactment of amendments
hereto and will be subject to state and federal laws.
(Prior Code, § 10.05(1)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 111.02 FRANCHISE RIGHTS SUBJECT TO POLICE POWERS.
   In accepting this franchise, the grantee acknowledges that its rights
hereunder are subject to the police power of the village to adopt and enforce
general and specific ordinances necessary to the health, safety and welfare of
the public; and it agrees to comply with all applicable general and specific
laws enacted by the village pursuant to such powers.
(Prior Code, § 10.05(2)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   PUBLIC SAFETY/PUBLIC ORDER
CHAPTER 130: PUBLIC SAFETY/PUBLIC ORDER
Section
General Provisions
   
130.001   General provisions
   
130.002   Obedience to officers
   
130.003   Impersonating police officers
Alcoholic Beverages
   
130.015   Intoxication/drunkenness
   
130.016   Beer or liquor on streets prohibited
   
130.017   Procedure upon application of operator license
Public Health and Safety
   
130.030   Assault and battery
   
130.031   Offenses against the public health and safety
   
130.032   Abandoned or unattended refrigerators and the like
   
130.033   Loud and unnecessary noise prohibited
Conduct and Morals
   
130.045   Offenses endangering public morals and decency
   
130.046   Indecent conduct and language prohibited
Public and Private Property
   
130.060   Village park hours and permits
   
130.061   Open burning prohibited
   
130.062   Offense against public and private property; destruction of property
prohibited
Minors
   
130.075   Curfew
   
130.076   Responsibility for possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages
by underage persons
   
130.077   Possession and purchase of tobacco products and nicotine products
   
130.078   Use of tobacco products and/or nicotine products on school property
   
130.079   Truancy
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 130.001 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   The provisions of Wis. Stats. Chapters 942, 943, 944, 945, 946, 947, 948 and
961 are adopted by reference.
(Prior Code, § 13.01(1)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009)
§ 130.002 OBEDIENCE TO OFFICERS.
   No person shall, without reasonable excuse or justification, resist or in
any way interfere with any officer of the village while such officer is doing
any act in his or her official capacity and with lawful authority.
(Prior Code, § 13.01(13)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.003 IMPERSONATING POLICE OFFICERS.
   No person shall impersonate a police officer or peace officer within the
village.
(Prior Code, § 13.01(16)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 130.015 INTOXICATION/DRUNKENNESS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to be so intoxicated that he or
she is a nuisance to others, or is unable to care for his or her own safety in
a public place in the village.
   (B)   In accordance with Wis. Stats. § 51.45, a person who appears to be
incapacitated by alcohol shall be placed in protective custody pursuant to Wis.
Stats. § 51.45(11) and (12).
(Prior Code, § 13.01(3)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.016 BEER OR LIQUOR ON STREETS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall possess open containers of or consume fermented
malt beverages or intoxicating liquor as defined by Wis. Stats. Chapter 125,
which definitions are incorporated herein by reference, upon any street,
sidewalk, alley, boulevard, parking lot or other public way within the village,
except at such times and in such places as may be specifically exempted
temporarily from the provisions of this section by the Village Board in
connection with public celebrations or other activities.
      (2)   Also specifically exempted are premises within the village park.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any individual under the legal drinking age, not
accompanied by his or her parent or guardian or a chaperon, to possess a
fermented malt beverage outside of a licensed premises. A CHAPERON is defined
to be a mature responsible adult who is present to ensure propriety at the
gathering of young persons.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person under the legal drinking age to procure,
seek to procure or consume in public any intoxicating liquor.
   (D)   It is the intent of the village that Wis. Stats. §§ 125.07(4) and
125.09 are hereby adopted and incorporated in this section.
   (E)   The words “fermented malt beverages” and “intoxicating liquor” are to
be defined the same as they are defined in the Wisconsin Statutes. For purposes
of this section, LEGAL DRINKING AGE shall be defined as the legal drinking age
established by the state as the same may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 13.01(14)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.017 PROCEDURE UPON APPLICATION OF OPERATOR LICENSE.
   (A)   The Clerk may issue a license known as an "operator's license," which
shall be granted pursuant to the village's discretion and upon application in
writing filed with the Village Clerk. Licenses shall be granted only to persons
18 years of age and over. An operator's license shall be operative only within
the limits of the village.
   (B)   The village Police Chief must screen all new applicants before any
license is issued.
   (C)   Licenses shall be issued and numbered in the order they are granted
and shall give the applicant's name and the expiration date of said license.
   (D)   All fees to be collected at the time of application.
   (E)   A list of issued operator licenses to be provided to the Village Board
at subsequent Board meetings.
(Ord. 130.17, passed 8-12-2020)
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
§ 130.030 ASSAULT AND BATTERY.
   No person shall commit an assault and battery upon another.
(Prior Code, § 13.01(4)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.031 OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
   (A)   Regulations and use of firearms and other weapons.
      (1)   Discharging firearms and other weapons. No person except a peace
officer shall discharge any pistol, revolver, rifle, shotgun or other firearm
within the village, except where the use of such firearm or arms are required
for the protection of person and property, where used in hunting areas
designated by the Village Board, where fired for test purposes in bona fide
repair shops, or when written permission is obtained from the Village Law
Enforcement Officer for varmint control.
      (2)   Possession of firearms in public buildings, business establishments
and public areas.
         (a)   FIREARM means any rifle, shotgun, handgun or spring gun.
         (b)   LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER means any person employed by the state
or any political subdivision of the state, for the purpose of detecting and
preventing crime and enforcing laws or ordinances and who is authorized to make
arrests for violations of the laws or ordinances he or she is employed to
enforce.
         (c)   No invitee, except a law enforcement officer acting in the scope
of his or her employment shall have in his or her possession, carry or bear any
firearm within any publicly owned building within the village.
         (d)   This section shall not be construed to prohibit the sale,
purchase, trade or repair firearms by a retail business establishment doing so
in the course of its regular business in accord with state and federal law, nor
to hinder a prospective customer from attempting to buy, sell, trade or having
repaired firearms to, from or by a retailer.
   (B)   Exceptions.
      (1)   This section shall not apply to a law enforcement investigator,
watchman, guard, security or military personnel who are permitted by law to
carry or bear a firearm, when acting in the line of duty.
      (2)   This section shall not apply to the carrying or bearing of a
firearm in a bona fide safety or training course or practice firing held at a
location approved by the village or other governmental agency.
(Prior Code, § 13.01(8)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.032 ABANDONED OR UNATTENDED REFRIGERATORS AND THE LIKE.
   Wis. Stats. § 167.25 is adopted by reference.
(Prior Code, § 13.01(9)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.033 LOUD AND UNNECESSARY NOISE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Prohibited. No person shall make or cause to be made loud, disturbing
or unnecessary sound or noise such as tend to annoy or disturb another in or
about any public street, alley or park of any private residence.
   (B)   Operation of motor vehicles. No person shall operate a motor vehicle
so as to cause unreasonable and excessive noise levels within the corporate
limits of the village, whether by excessive acceleration or braking causing the
tires to squeal, by excessive deceleration due to engine braking (Jake
braking), by excessive horn blowing, by loud music, by excessive racing of the
motor, by having a modified or inadequately maintained exhaust or braking
system, or by any other means.
   (C)   Emergency situation. Excessive noise caused by emergency situation
maneuvers will not be ticketed when the operator is attempting to avoid a
collision with a pedestrian, animal, fixed object or other motor vehicle.
EMERGENCY SITUATIONS are defined as circumstances that could not reasonably be
foreseen by an alert motor vehicle operator.
(Prior Code, § 13.01(12)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
CONDUCT AND MORALS
§ 130.045 OFFENSES ENDANGERING PUBLIC MORALS AND DECENCY.
   (A)   Gambling, lotteries, fraudulent devices and practices prohibited. All
forms of gambling, lotteries and fraudulent devices and practices are
prohibited within the village. Any peace officer or police officer of the
village is hereby authorized to seize anything devised solely for gambling or
found in actual use of gambling within the village and to dispose thereof after
a judicial determination that said device was used solely for gambling or found
in actual use for gambling.
   (B)   Disorderly houses prohibited. No person shall keep a disorderly house
or house of prostitution with the village.
   (C)   Loitering.
      (1)   Loitering or prowling prohibited, generally. No person shall loiter
or prowl in a place, at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding
individuals under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or
property in the vicinity.
      (2)   Obstruction of traffic by loitering. No person shall loiter upon
any public streets, alleys, sidewalks, street crossings or bridges or in any
other public place within the village in such a manner as to prevent, interfere
with or obstruct the ordinary free use of such public streets, alleys,
sidewalks, street crossings or bridges or other public places by persons
passing along and over the same. It shall be an offense under this division (C)
(2) for a person to refuse to discontinue such loitering after a request to do
so by a police officer.
      (3)   Obstruction of entryways by loitering. No person shall loiter upon
the public streets, private driveways or sidewalks or in adjacent doorways or
entrances so as to obstruct the free entry of persons to the adjacent property,
driveways or other entrances to such property. It shall be an offense under
this division (C)(3) for a person to refuse to discontinue such loitering after
being requested to do so by a police officer.
      (4)   Loitering in places of public assembly or use.  No person shall by
loitering interfere with the free use of any place of public assembly, or
public use or other such place of assembly. It shall be an offense under this
division (C)(4) for a person to refuse to discontinue such loitering after a
request to do so by a police officer or by the person in charge of the place of
public assembly.
      (5)   Loitering on private premises without invitation. No person shall
loiter on private premises without invitation from the owner or occupant. It
shall be an offense under this division (C)(5) for a person to refuse to
discontinue such loitering after being requested to do so by a police officer
or by the owner or occupant.
(Prior Code, § 13.01(18)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.046 INDECENT CONDUCT AND LANGUAGE PROHIBITED.
    No person shall use an indecent, vile, profane or obscene language or
conduct himself or herself in any indecent lewd, lascivious or obscene manner
within the village. It shall be a violation of this section for any person to
sell, give away or distribute within the village any obscene show or
exhibition.
(Prior Code, § 13.01(19)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
§ 130.060 VILLAGE PARK HOURS AND PERMITS.
   (A)   Overnight closure. All park areas except recognized camping areas
shall be closed to public use between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
each day of the year.
   (B)   Time. The time referred to in this section shall be the official time
used in the state at the time of the alleged violation.
   (C)   Permits for night use.  The Village Board of Trustees may, if it finds
that no vandalism or loud or disorderly conduct is likely to occur, grant to
any group permission to use a specific park or beach for a specific night or
nights. As a condition of granting such permission, the Village Board may
require the posting of a reasonable bond, or the presence of a police officer
or deputy sheriff, to be paid by the group seeking the permit. The permit may
be revoked at any time by the Village Board authorized to oversee or inspect
the permitted use.
(Prior Code, § 13.01(23)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.061 OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED.
   A dangerous activity during the igniting, burning, blowing around of, or
after the turning of garbage or debris.
(Prior Code, § 13.01(25)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.062 OFFENSE AGAINST PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY; DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY
PROHIBITED.
   No person shall willfully injure or intentionally deface, destroy or
unlawfully remove, take or meddle with any property belonging to the village or
its departments or to any private person without the consent of the owner or
proper authority. Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall
also be required to make full restitution for the amount of any damages caused
to such property.
(Prior Code, § 13.01(21)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
MINORS
§ 130.075 CURFEW.
   No child 16 years of age or under shall loiter, idle or remain, and no
parent or guardian shall knowingly permit his or her child or ward of such age
to loiter, idle or remain in or upon any streets, alleys or public places in
the village between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless such child is
accompanied by a parent, guardian or some person of lawful age having legal
custody of such child. This division (A) shall not prohibit such child from
performing an errand of duty if directed by his or her parent or guardian or of
urgent necessity or from pursuing the duties of his or her employment in an
expeditious and orderly manner or from going to or from places of business or
amusement or private home. This division (A) shall not prohibit such child from
riding in an automobile on village streets.
(Prior Code, § 13.01(20)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.076 RESPONSIBILITY FOR POSSESSION OR CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
BY UNDERAGE PERSONS.
   (A)   No person who has attained the legal drinking age may knowingly permit
or fail to take action to prevent the illegal consumption of fermented malt
beverages or intoxicating liquor by any underage person on the premises owned
by the person or under the person’s control.
   (B)   No person who has attained the legal drinking age may intentionally
encourage or contribute to a violation of any state or village ordinance
relating to the possession or consumption of fermented malt beverages or
intoxicating liquor by any underage person.
   (C)   For purposes of this section, UNDERAGE PERSON shall be defined as an
individual who has not attained the age of 21 years.
(Prior Code, § 13.01(17)) (Ord. passed 3-11-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.077 POSSESSION AND PURCHASE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND NICOTINE PRODUCTS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CIGARETTE. The meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 139.30(1).
      LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 30.50(4s).
      NICOTINE PRODUCTS. The meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 134.66(1)(f).
      TOBACCO PRODUCTS. The meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 139.75(12).
   (B)   Except as provided in division (C) of this section, no students may do
any of the following:
      (1)   Buy or attempt to buy any cigarette, tobacco product, or nicotine
product;
      (2)   Falsely represent his or her age for the purpose of receiving any
cigarette, tobacco product, or nicotine product; or
      (3)   Possess any cigarette, tobacco product, or nicotine product.
   (C)   A person under the age of 18 years may purchase or possess cigarettes,
tobacco products, or nicotine products for the sole purpose of resale in the
course of employment during his or her working hours, if employed by a retailer
licensed under Wis. Stats. § 134.65(1).
   (D)   A law enforcement officer shall seize any cigarette, tobacco product,
or nicotine product involved in any violation of division (B) of this section
in his or her presence.
   (E)   For penalties of this section, consult the Uniform Deposit Schedule,
on file in the village offices.
(Ord. passed 12-8-2021)
§ 130.078 USE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND/OR NICOTINE PRODUCTS ON SCHOOL PROPERTY.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      NICOTINE PRODUCTS. Adopting by reference the definition given in Wis.
Stats. § 134.66(1)(f).
      SCHOOL PROPERTY. Any property, building, and/or grounds which is owned,
rented, or leased or under the control of the Gilman Area Public School
District.
      SMOKING. Carrying a lighted cigar, cigarette, electronic cigarette, pipe,
or any other lighted smoking equipment.
      TOBACCO PRODUCTS. Any tobacco which is used by means other than smoking,
including, but not limited to, smokeless tobacco and chewing tobacco.
   (B)   It is recognized by the Common Council, the Gilman Area Public School
Board and the State of Wisconsin in Wis. Stats. § 120.12(20), that smoking of
tobacco-related products is hazardous to an individual's health and may effect
the health of non-smokers when in the presence of smokers in public places.
This section is adopted at the request of the School Board for the purpose of
protecting the public health, safety, comfort, and welfare of the students,
teachers, and others who enter upon school property in the village, especially
recognizing the rights of non-smokers who constitute the majority of the
population.
   (C)   All school property located within the village is hereby declared non-
smoking areas in which no smoking or use of tobacco products or nicotine
products shall be permitted.
   (D)   No person may smoke or use tobacco-related products or nicotine
products on any school property located within the village.
   (E)   A student on school property is prohibited from possessing any
tobacco, tobacco-related product, or nicotine product. Such products include
any form of cigarette, cigar or tobacco, electronic cigarettes, and/or tobacco
or nicotine paraphernalia of any kind, including, but not limited to, cigarette
paper, cigarette wrappers, e-liquid, e-cartridges or batteries, or look-alike
cigarette paraphernalia, and hookahs or similar paraphernalia, whether
electronic or otherwise.
   (F)   The Police Department is authorized to use the village ordinance
citation and complaint form as a vehicle of enforcement of this section. In
addition to other enforcement procedures, police may enforce the provisions of
this section upon receipt of a written, signed statement from a school
official. In this section, SCHOOL OFFICIAL shall mean any person designated by
the District Administrator to report such violations.
   (G)   For penalties of this section, consult the Uniform Deposit Schedule,
on file in the village offices.
(Ord. passed 12-8-2021)
§ 130.079 TRUANCY.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:
      HABITUAL TRUANT. A pupil who is absent from school without an acceptable
excuse under Wis. Stats. § 118.15(4) for part or all of five or more days on
which school is held during a school semester.
      TRUANT. A student who is absent for part of or all of one or more days
from school during which the school attendance officer, principal, or teacher
has not been notified of the legal cause of such absence by the parent or
guardian of the absent pupil, and also means intermittent attendance carried on
for the purpose of defeating the intent of the compulsory school attendance
laws of Wis. Stats. § 118.15.
   (B)   Truancy prohibited. Any school-age child is prohibited from being a
truant and/or a habitual truant.
   (C)   First offense. The court is authorized to order the following
disposition upon a finding of truancy:
      (1)   An order for the person to attend school;
      (2)   For a first violation, a forfeiture of not more than $50 plus
statutorily authorized costs, assessments, surcharges and fees;
      (3)   For a second or subsequent violation committed within 12 months of
a previous violation, a forfeiture of no more than $100 plus statutorily
authorized costs, assessments, surcharges and fees, subject to a maximum
cumulative forfeiture amount of not more than $500 for all violations committed
during a school semester; and
      (4)   All or part of the forfeiture plus costs, assessments, surcharges
and fees may be assessed against the person, the parents or guardian of the
person, or both.
   (D)   Habitual truancy. The court is authorized to order any of the
following dispositions upon a finding of habitual truancy:
      (1)   Suspension of the child's operating privilege, as defined in Wis.
Stats. § 340.01(4), for neither less than 30 days or more than 90 days. The
court shall immediately take possession of any suspended license and forward it
to the Department of Transportation together with a notice stating the reason
for and the duration of the suspension;
      (2)   An order for the child to participate in counseling, community
service, or a supervised work program as provided under Wis. Stats. § 48.34(9);
      (3)   An order for the child to remain at home except during hours in
which the child is attending religious worship or a school program, including
travel time required to get to and from the school program or place of worship.
The order may permit a child to leave his/her home if the child is accompanied
by a parent or guardian;
      (4)   An order for the child to attend an educational program as
described in Wis. Stats. § 938.34(5g);
      (5)   Any order for the Department of Workforce Development to revoke,
under Wis. Stats. § 103.72, a permit under Wis. Stats. § 103.70 authorizing the
employment of the person;
      (6)   An order for the person to be placed in a teen court program as
described in Wis. Stats. § 938.342(1g)(f);
      (7)   A forfeiture of not more than $500 plus costs, assessments,
surcharges and fees, subject to Wis. Stats. § 938.37. All or part of the
forfeiture may be assessed against the person, the parents or guardian of the
person, or both;
      (8)   Any other reasonable conditions consistent with Wis. Stats. §
118.163, including a curfew, restrictions as to going to or remaining on
specified premises and restrictions on associating with other children or
adults;
      (9)   An order placing the person under formal or informal supervision,
as described in Wis. Stats. § 938.34(2), for up to one year; and
      (10)   An order for the person's parent, guardian or legal custodian to
participate in counseling at the parent's, guardian's or legal custodian's own
expense or to attend school with the person, or both.
   (E)   School attendance. No person shall, having under his/her control a
child who is between the ages of 6 and 18 years, allow that child to be in
noncompliance with Wis. Stats. § 118.15.
   (F)   Contribution to truancy. No person, 18 years of age or older who, by
any act or omission, shall knowingly encourage or contribute to the truancy of
a child, as defined under Wis. Stats. § 118.16(1)(c). An act or omission
contributes to the truancy of a child, whether or not the child is adjudged to
be in need of protection or services, if the natural and probable consequences
of that act or omission would be to cause the child to be truant.
   (G)   Penalty.
      (1)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which
another penalty is not provided shall be subject to a penalty in accordance
with § 1.1.99.
      (2)   Any person, partnership, or corporation who violates any of the
provisions of § 13.1.10 shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $100,
and not more than $500 per violation. A separate offense and violation shall be
deemed committed on each day on which a violation occurs or continues. In
addition, violation of this chapter constitutes sufficient grounds for
suspending, revoking or non-renewing an alcohol beverage under Wis. Stats. §
125.12.
      (3)   Any person violating division (D) shall forfeit not more than $500,
and in default of payment, shall be confined in the Taylor County Jail until
the forfeiture is paid, but not to exceed 30 days, after evidence has been
provided by the school attendance officer that the activities under Wis. Stats.
§ 118.16(5) have been completed. The penalty section does not apply to a person
who has under his/her control a child who has been sanctioned under Wis. Stats.
§ 49.50(7)(h).
      (4)   Any person violating division (E) shall forfeit not more than $500,
and in default of payment, shall be confined in the Taylor County Jail until
the forfeiture is paid, but not to exceed 30 days. This penalty section does
not apply to a person who has under his/her control a child who has been
sanctioned under Wis. Stats. § 49.50(7)(h).
      (5)   Any person violating § 13.1.13 is subject to a forfeiture up to
$250 for each violation.
(Ord. 27, passed 10-9-2012)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   PLANNING GENERALLY
      
151.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
152.   MOBILE HOMES/PARKS
      
153.   FLOODPLAINS
      
154.   SHORELAND/WETLANDS
      
155.   LAND SUBDIVISION AND REGULATIONS
      
156.   ADULT ORIENTED USES; ZONING AND RELATED REGULATIONS
      
157.   ZONING
CHAPTER 150: PLANNING GENERALLY
Section
Adopting Comprehensive Plan
   
150.01   Title and purpose
   
150.02   Authority
   
150.03   Adoption of ordinance
   
150.04   Public participation
   
150.05   Public hearing
   
150.06   Village Plan Commission recommendation
   
150.07   Adoption of village comprehensive plan
   
150.08   Effective date
ADOPTING COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
§ 150.01 TITLE AND PURPOSE.
   The title of this subchapter is the “Village of Gilman Comprehensive Plan.”
The purpose of this subchapter is for the Village of Gilman, Taylor County,
Wisconsin, to lawfully adopt a comprehensive plan as required under Wis. Stats.
§ 66.1001(4)(c).
(Ord. 150-2025, passed 5-14-2025)
§ 150.02 AUTHORITY.
   The Village Board of Trustees of the Village of Gilman, Taylor County,
Wisconsin, has authority under its town powers under Wis. Stats. § 60.22 to
appoint a Village Plan Commission under Wis. Stats. § 60.62(4) and 62.23(1),
and under Wis. Stats. § 66.1001(4), to adopt this subchapter. The Comprehensive
Plan of the Village of Gilman must be in compliance with Wis. Stats. § 66.1001
(4)(c) in order for the Village Board to adopt this subchapter.
(Prior Code, Ch. 25, § 1) (Ord. 25, passed - -2008; Ord. 150-2025, passed 5-14-
2025)
§ 150.03 ADOPTION OF ORDINANCE.
   This subchapter, adopted by a majority of the Village Board of Trustees on a
roll call vote with a quorum present and voting and proper notice having been
given, provides for the adoption by the village of a comprehensive plan under
Wis. Stats. § 66.1001(4).
(Ord. 150-2025, passed 5-14-2025)
§ 150.04 PUBLIC PARTICIPATION.
   The Village Board of Trustees has adopted written procedures designed to
foster public participation in every stage of the preparation of a
comprehensive plan as required by Wis. Stats. § 66.1001(4)(a).
(Prior Code, Ch. 25, § 2) (Ord. 25, passed - -2008; Ord. 150-2025, passed 5-14-
2025)
§ 150.05 PUBLIC HEARING.
   The Village of Gilman has held at least one public hearing on this
subchapter, with notice in compliance with the requirements of Wis Stats. §
66.1001(4)(d).
(Prior Code, Ch. 25, § 3) (Ord. 25, passed - -2008; Ord. 150-2025, passed 5-14-
2025)
§ 150.06 VILLAGE PLAN COMMISSION RECOMMENDATION.
   The Plan Commission of the Village of Gilman, by a majority vote of the
entire commission, recorded in its official minutes, has adopted a resolution
recommending to the Village Board of Trustees the adoption of the Village of
Gilman Comprehensive Plan, which contains all of the elements specified in Wis.
Stats. § 66.1001(2).
(Prior Code, Ch. 25, § 4) (Ord. 25, passed - -2008; Ord. 150-2025, passed 5-14-
2025)
§ 150.07 ADOPTION OF VILLAGE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   The Village Board of Trustees, by the enactment of this subchapter, formally
adopts the document
entitled Village of Gilman Comprehensive Plan Ordinance under Wis. Stats. §
66.1001(4)(c).
(Prior Code, Ch. 25, § 5) (Ord. 25, passed - -2008; Ord. 150-2025, passed 5-14-
2025)
§ 150.08 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter is effective on publication or posting. The Village Clerk
shall properly post or publish this subchapter as required under Wis. Stats. §
60.80, and a copy of the ordinance and the comprehensive plan shall be filed
with at least all of the entities specified under Wis. Stats. § 66.1001(4)(b).
(Prior Code, Ch. 25, § 6) (Ord. 25, passed - -2008; Ord. 150-2025, passed 5-14-
2025)
CHAPTER 151: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
Uniform Dwelling Code
   
151.01   Authority
   
151.02   Purpose
   
151.03   Scope
   
151.04   Code adopted
   
151.05   Building Inspector
   
151.06   Building permit fee
   
151.07   Effective date
   
151.08   Log of inspections
   
151.09   Enforcement
Building Regulations
   
151.20   Applicability of regulations
   
151.21   Building permits
   
151.22   Definitions
   
151.23   Permit required
   
151.24   Plans to be submitted
   
151.25   Waiver of plans
   
151.26   Approval of plans; alterations
   
151.27   Minor repairs
   
151.28   Unsafe buildings
   
151.29   Applications for permits
   
151.30   Permit fees
   
151.31   Issuance of permits
   
151.32   Lapse of permit
   
151.33   Revocation of permit
   
151.34   Report of violations
   
151.35   Gas appliances and installations
   
151.36   Appeal from order of Village Clerk
   
151.37   Non-liability of the village
   
151.38   Portable storage units; commercial shipping containers
 
   
151.99   Penalty
UNIFORM DWELLING CODE
§ 151.01 AUTHORITY.
   These regulations are adopted under the authority granted by Wis. Stats. §
101.65.
(Prior Code, Ch. 26 § 1.1) (Ord. 26, passed - -)
§ 151.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to promote the general health, safety and
welfare and to maintain required local uniformity with the administrative and
technical requirements of the Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code.
(Prior Code, Ch. 26 § 1.2) (Ord. 26, passed - -) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.03 SCOPE.
   The scope of this subchapter includes the construction and inspection of all
new one- and two- family dwellings and additions to all one- and two-family
dwellings if said additions satisfy the criteria described in §
151.20(A)(1).
(Prior Code, Ch. 26 § 1.3) (Ord. 26, passed - -; Ord. 2023-03, passed 8-9-2023)
§ 151.04 CODE ADOPTED.
   The Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code, Wis. Adm. Code Chapters SPS 320 - 325
and all amendments thereto is adopted and incorporated by reference and shall
apply to all buildings within the scope of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, Ch. 26 § 1.4) (Ord. 26, passed - -) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.05 BUILDING INSPECTOR.
   There is hereby created the position of Building Inspector, who shall
administer and enforce this subchapter and shall be certified by the Department
of Safety and Professional Services, as specified by Wis. Stats. § 101.66(2),
in the category of Uniform Dwelling Code Construction Inspector. Additionally,
this or other assistant inspectors shall possess the certification categories
of UDC HVAC, UDC Electrical and UDC Plumbing. (Contact the Department of Safety
and Professional Services.)
(Prior Code, Ch. 26 § 1.5) (Ord. 26, passed - -; Ord. 2023-03, passed 8-9-2023)
Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.06 BUILDING PERMIT FEE.
   The building permit fees shall be determined by resolution.
(Prior Code, Ch. 26 § 1.6) (Ord. 26, passed - -; Ord. 2023-03, passed 8-9-2023)
§ 151.07 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall be effective February 18, 2010, upon passage and
publication as provided by law.
(Prior Code, Ch. 26 § 1.8) (Ord. 26, passed - -)
§ 151.08 LOG OF INSPECTIONS.
   The Building Inspector(s) shall keep a log of all inspections completed.
(Prior Code, Ch. 26 § 1.9) (Ord. 26, passed - -)
§ 151.09 ENFORCEMENT.
   The enforcement of this section and all other laws and ordinances relating
to building shall be by means of the withholding of building permits,
imposition of forfeitures and injunctive action. Forfeitures shall be not less
than $25 nor more than $1,000 for each day of noncompliance.
BUILDING REGULATIONS
§ 151.20 APPLICABILITY OF REGULATIONS.
   (A)   One- and two-family dwellings.
      (1)   The village requires Uniform Dwelling Code permits and inspections
for all new one- and two-family dwellings, and additions to one- and two-family
dwellings if the addition will increase the footprint of the dwelling, and if
the total cost of said addition will exceed $50,000. Except as provided in §
151.27, a local building permit is required for all remodeling, revising, and
additions to existing dwellings.
      (2)   Individuals contracting for remodeling or revising one- and two-
family dwellings remain subject to Wis. Stats. Chapter 101, and are subject to
construction standards mandated by the state.
      (3)   In addition to the Uniform Dwelling code permit required by the
state, the village requires a local building permit to facilitate enforcement
of zoning laws, laws requiring connection to municipal water and sewer systems,
laws regulating sidewalks and driveway openings, and other laws not related to
construction standards (which are preempted by state regulation in Wis. Stats.
Chapter 101).
   (B)   Public buildings, public structures and places of employment. For
public buildings, public structures and places of employment, a local permit is
required. A local building permit cannot be granted until the applicant shows
that required drawings and calculations have been examined by the Department of
Safety and Professional Services.
   (C)   All other buildings. All other buildings are subject to this
subchapter, unless jurisdiction to regulate is specifically reserved by state
statute or federal law.
(Prior Code, § 16.0) (Ord. 2023-03, passed 8-9-2023)
§ 151.21 BUILDING PERMITS.
   (A)   Local building permits issued by the Clerk. Local building permits for
the village shall be issued by the Village Clerk. Fees for such permits shall
be established by resolution from time to time and set forth on the Fee Charge
Schedule codified in
Chapter 34.
   (B)   Enforcement of building regulations. The Village Clerk, the Building
Inspector, and the Village Police Chief shall enforce the provision of this
chapter and all ordinances of the village.
   (C)   Access to premises. The Village Clerk or the Building Inspector and
his or her designees may at all reasonable times, for any proper purpose, enter
upon any public or private premises and may make inspection thereof and require
the production of the permit for any building or the required license therefor.
   (D)   Interference with Inspector. No person shall interfere with the
Village Clerk, the Building Inspector or Village Policemen in the performance
of their duties.
   (E)   Records. The Village Clerk shall keep a record of all applications for
building permits in a book for such purpose, and regularly number each permit
in the order of its issue.
(Prior Code, § 16.02) (Ord. 2023-03, passed 8-9-2023) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.22 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING. Includes any building or structure; any enlargement, alteration,
repairing, moving or demolishing of any building or structure, any new heating
or ventilating installation or any material alteration at any of such existing
installations and includes portable structures such as semi-trailers and milk
truck boxes converted into building use.
   DWELLING. Includes every building occupied exclusively as a residence by not
more than two families.
(Prior Code, § 16.03)
§ 151.23 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No building or structure or any part thereof shall hereafter be built,
enlarged, improved, altered or moved within the village, except as hereinafter
provided, unless a permit required by this code shall first be obtained by the
owner or his or her agent from the Village Clerk as provided in this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 16.04) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.24 PLANS TO BE SUBMITTED.
   If requested by the Village Clerk, with an application for a building
permit, there shall be submitted to the Village Clerk a complete set of plans
and specifications furnished by the owner. Drawings that do not show all
necessary details to enable the Village Clerk or the Building Inspector to
intelligently inspect the same shall be rejected. Plans for buildings required
to comply with the State Building Code shall bear a stamp of approval from the
Department of Safety and Professional Services. Prior to submission of an
application for a building permit, each lot or site on which the proposed
building is to be erected shall be properly surveyed and staked by a certified
surveyor, if a survey is specifically demanded by the Village Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 16.05) (Ord. 2023-03, passed 8-9-2023)
§ 151.25 WAIVER OF PLANS.
   If in the opinion of the Village Clerk, the character of the work is
sufficiently described in the application, he or she may waive the filing of
plans.
(Prior Code, § 16.06) (Ord. 2023-03, passed 8-9-2023)
§ 151.26 APPROVAL OF PLANS; ALTERATIONS.
   If the Village Clerk finds that the proposed building will comply in every
respect with all ordinances of the village and all laws and lawful orders of
the state (except Wis. Stats. § 101.65 and code provisions relating thereto)
and the applicant has any required permits for private domestic sewage
treatment and disposal systems from the pertinent county zoning office, he or
she shall officially approve one set of the plans and return them to the owner
and shall issue a building permit therefor, which shall be kept at the site of
the proposed building. After being approved, the plans and specifications shall
not be altered in any respect which involves the safety of the building, except
with a written consent of the Village Clerk. In case adequate plans are
presented, the Village Clerk may at his or her discretion issue a permit for a
part of the building before receiving the plans and specifications for the
entire building. It shall be unlawful to commence work on any building or
alteration before the building permit has been issued.
(Prior Code, § 16.07) (Ord. 2023-03, passed 8-9-2023) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.27 MINOR REPAIRS.
   No building permit shall be required for any minor repairs or alterations
which do not change the occupancy, area, structural strength, fire protection,
exits or ventilation of the building and which cost less than $2,000.
(Prior Code, § 16.08)
§ 151.28 UNSAFE BUILDINGS.
   Whenever the Building Inspector finds any building or part thereof within
the village to be in his or her judgment so old, dilapidated or out of repair,
to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation,
occupancy or use, and so that it would be unreasonable to repair the same, he
or she shall order the owner to raze or remove such building or part thereof,
or if it can be made safe by repairs, to be repaired, make safe and sanitary,
or to raze and remove at the owner’s option.
(Prior Code, § 16.09) (Ord. 2023-03, passed 8-9-2023)
§ 151.29 APPLICATIONS FOR PERMITS.
   (A)   All applications for building permits shall be in writing and filed
with the Village Clerk on forms furnished by him or her.
   (B)   Each application shall contain the following information as well as
such other information as may be required by the Village Clerk.
      (1)   Local building permit applications. Each application for a building
permit shall state the name and address of the applicant, the name and address
of the owner of the land on which the building is situated or is to be
constructed, the name and address of the owner of the building, if different
from that of the land owner, the legal description of the land and the name and
address of the designer. Plans required under §
151.24 shall be submitted with each application.
      (2)   Uniform Dwelling Code one- and two-family dwelling permit
applications. Each application for a permit required by this chapter shall
state clearly the name and address of the applicant, the address of the
premises, the nature of the work planned, the alterations to be made thereon,
and the materials and equipment to be used, as requested by the Village Clerk
or the Building Inspector. The application shall be accompanied by a plan or
sketch showing the detailed work to be done. The Uniform Dwelling Code permit
used shall be in the form required by the Department of Safety and Professional
Services from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 16.10) (Ord. 2023-03, passed 8-9-2023)
§ 151.30 PERMIT FEES.
   Each applicant for a building permit shall pay to the Village Treasurer a
fee for each building permit. Fees shall be noted in the Fee Charge Schedule
codified in §
34.02 (residential building permits).
(Prior Code, § 16.11)
§ 151.31 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
   (A)   Upon approval by the Village Clerk of the application and upon
compliance by the applicant with all requirements and payment of the required
fee, a permit shall be issued by the Clerk to the owner or his or her agent for
the work set forth in the application.
   (B)   The Village Clerk may not issue a building permit for the remodeling,
replacement or reconstruction of a mobile home such that the mobile home will
become a permanent residence, but shall transmit the application to the Village
Board with his or her recommendations regarding issuance thereon. The Village
Board shall determine whether or not such permit shall be issued. If the
Village Board decides to issue such permit, it may issue the permit subject to
conditions which will ensure the safety, permanence and residential character
of the proposed reconstruction.
(Prior Code, § 16.12) (Ord. 2023-03, passed 8-9-2023)
§ 151.32 LAPSE OF PERMIT.
   A building permit shall have lapsed and be void unless operations under the
permit are commenced within one year from the date the permit was issued,
unless an extension of time shall be granted by the Village Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 16.13)
§ 151.33 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   If the Village Clerk finds at any time that the sections of this code are
not being complied with, he or she revoke the building permit by written notice
posted at the site of work. When any such permit is revoked, it shall be
unlawful to do any further work upon such building until the permit is
reissued, excepting work as the Village Clerk shall order to be done as a
condition precedent to the re-issuance of the permit, or as he or she may
require for the preservation of human life and safety.
(Prior Code, § 16.14) (Ord. 2023-03, passed 8-9-2023) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.34 REPORT OF VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be the duty of the Village Policeman to report at once to the
Village Clerk who will report to the Village Board any building work being
carried on without a permit as required by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 16.15) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.35 GAS APPLIANCES AND INSTALLATIONS.
   (A)   Sale of appliances.
      (1)   All gas appliances and accessories hereafter installed, sold or
offered for sale shall conform to reasonable standards of safety.
      (2)   The presence on a gas appliance or accessory of a safety seal or
label of a nationally recognized testing agency or a certificate or letter
approval from such agency or the inclusion of an appliance or accessory in an
approved listing by such agency shall be prima facie evidence that such
appliance or accessory conforms to reasonable standards of safety. Such
nationally recognized testing agency shall be one qualified and equipped to
perform and one that does perform periodic inspections of current models of gas
appliances and accessories.
   (B)   Installation of appliances.
      (1)   All gas appliances, accessories and piping systems shall be
installed to conform to reasonable standards of safety.
      (2)   Installation of appliances, accessories and piping that complies
with the standards recommended by the American Standards Association in its
manual entitled Installation of Gas Appliances and Gas Piping, 1969 edition (as
amended, updated or replaced) shall be considered prima facie as conforming to
reasonable standards of safety.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, excepting
any authorized agent or employee of the gas supplier, to turn on or reconnect
gas services in or on any premises where and when gas service is not at the
time being rendered. This shall not prohibit an installer from turning on the
supply of gas temporarily for the purpose of connecting an appliance or make
repairs.
      (4)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to install
any gas appliance for the purpose of space heating without first determining
from the gas supplier that adequate facilities are present to supply gas to
such appliances in quantities that will assure reasonably safe and
uninterrupted operation.
   (C)   Enforcement. No person shall sell or offer for sale or install any gas
appliance or accessories or gas piping which does not conform to the
requirements of this section on which may be found defective and in such
condition as to endanger life or property. Where such disconnection has been
made, a notice shall be attached to such appliance, accessory or gas piping
which shall state that it has been disconnected and the reasons therefor, and
such notice shall not be removed not shall the appliance, accessory or gas
piping be reconnected until it shall have been made to conform with the
requirements of this section and its reconnection has been authorized by the
Village Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 16.16) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.36 APPEAL FROM ORDER OF VILLAGE CLERK.
   Any person feeling himself or herself aggrieved by an order or ruling of the
Village Clerk may file a written appeal from such order or ruling to the
Village Board within five days after written notice of such order or ruling
shall have been received by him or her. Such appeal shall set forth the order
appealed from and shall be filed with the Village Clerk. The notice of appeal
shall state clearly and briefly the grounds of complaint and be accompanied by
originals or copies of all papers and drawings submitted to the Clerk as well
as all decisions, notices or orders issued by him or her. Upon the hearing of
the appeal, the Village Board shall make such decision and disposal of the
matter as it deems just. Where a situation requires an immediate decision, that
of the Village Clerk shall be final and conclusive.
(Prior Code, § 16.17)
§ 151.37 NON-LIABILITY OF THE VILLAGE.
   This chapter shall not be construed as assuming any liability on the part of
the village for damages to anyone injured or for any property destroyed by any
defect in any building or equipment, or in any gas appliance or installation,
or by reason of any inspections made or not made, or permits issued.
(Prior Code, § 16.18)
§ 151.38 PORTABLE STORAGE UNITS; COMMERCIAL SHIPPING CONTAINERS.
   (A)   Scope of provisions.
      (1)   Portable storage container units. A portable storage unit may be
either:
         (a)   Any container, shed-like container, or other portable structure,
typically enclosed or open only on the top of the unit, no larger in dimension
than ten feet wide, ten feet in height and 20 feet in length, and transported
to a residential location for temporary storage purposes (typically known as
PODs, MODs, etc.). Such units or containers are designed or intended to be used
for the storage of personal property and are located for such purposes outside
of an enclosed building; or
         (b)   Non self-propelled, fully enclosed trailers that are designed or
used to transport materials, goods and equipment and are temporarily placed on
property zoned or used for residential purposes (semi-trailers) for storage
purposes.
      (2)   Units excluded; limitations. Commercial shipping containers of the
kind used to ship goods and materials by rail, ship or truck shall not be
placed or used for storage in any R-1 Residential or R-2 Residential Districts.
Commercial shipping containers are only allowed in other village districts with
a conditional use permit obtained through §
157.133 of the Village Zoning Code.
   (B)   Permissible portable storage unit use. The use of portable storage
units on a residential parcel is allowed under the following conditions:
      (1)   Authorization. Authorization has been obtained from the Building
Inspector pursuant to division (C) below for temporary placement on a property;
      (2)   Number. There shall be no more than one portable storage unit per
residential property. No other type of temporary storage or shipping container
may also be located on the property; and
      (3)   Duration. A portable storage unit shall not remain on a residential
property for more than 60 consecutive days, and must not be placed on any one
property in a zoning district in excess of 60 days in a 12-month period.
      (4)   Placement location.
         (a)   The portable storage unit shall be placed within the buildable
area of the lot and be on a concrete, asphalt or similar hard surface.
         (b)   If a portable storage unit is placed in the required front yard,
the unit shall be located only in the area primarily used for vehicular ingress
and egress and shall be located a minimum of ten feet from the edge of the
curb. Where no curb exists, the portable storage unit shall have a 15 foot
setback from the edge of the pavement.
         (c)   If a portable storage unit is placed in a rear or side yard, the
setback requirements for accessory buildings for that zoning district shall be
complied with.
      (5)   Prohibited materials. Portable storage units shall not be used to
store materials and substances including or of a similar nature: contractor's
materials and equipment, nonresidential items and equipment, solid waste,
refuse, hazardous materials, explosives, flammable liquids, and other harmful
or illegal substances and materials.
      (6)   Construction site exception. Portable storage units for the
temporary storage of personal property associated with and made necessary by
construction at a residential property are exempt from the aforementioned
conditions. Portable storage units associated with construction activities at a
site where a building permit has been issued are permitted for the duration of
the construction and shall be removed from the site within 15 days of the end
of construction.
   (C)   Authorization procedures.
      (1)   Notification. The owner or occupant of a residential lot or parcel
on which a portable storage unit will be placed is responsible for providing
notice to the Building Inspector within 24 hours of placement. The owner or
occupant shall provide his/her name, property address, contact telephone number
(s), and email address.
      (2)   Authorization. The Building Inspector will respond by mail or email
with a written authorization if the owner or occupant has provided sufficient
information. Upon request, the Building Inspector may grant a time extension
upon a showing of good cause and there have been no violations of the
requirements under this section.
(Ord. 151-2025, passed 7-9-2025)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   The enforcement of §§
151.01 through
151.08 and all other laws and ordinances relating to building shall be by means
of the withholding of building permits, imposition of forfeitures and
injunctive action. Forfeitures shall be not less than $25 nor more than $1,000
for each day of noncompliance.
(Prior Code, Ch. 26 § 1.7)
   (C)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
151.20 through
151.37 shall be subject to forfeiture as prescribed in §
10.99. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. In any such
action, the fact that a permit was issued shall not constitute a defense, nor
shall any error, oversight or dereliction of duty on the part of the Village
Clerk constitute a defense.
(Prior Code, § 16.19)
(Ord. 26, passed - -)
CHAPTER 152: MOBILE HOMES/PARKS
Section
   
152.01   General requirement
   
152.02   Establishment
   
152.03   Building permit; Board approval
   
152.04   Age/value requirement
   
152.05   Land owner required to furnish information
   
152.06   Monthly fee
   
152.07   License required for mobile home park
   
152.08   Fee payment required
   
152.09   Effective date
 
   
152.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Special regulations for mobile home parks, see §§
157.075 through
157.078
§ 152.01 GENERAL REQUIREMENT.
   Except as otherwise specifically authorized, no mobile home intended for
occupancy shall be located within the village except in a mobile home park.
(Prior Code, Ch. 18) (Ord. passed 5-9-2012; Ord. passed 10-9-2013)
§ 152.02 ESTABLISHMENT.
   Provisions of Wis. Stats. § 66.0435, the village and the county hereby
establish the following policy and procedure for mobile homes in the village.
(Prior Code, Ch. 18 § 1) (Ord. passed 5-9-2012; Ord. passed 10-9-2013)
§ 152.03 BUILDING PERMIT; BOARD APPROVAL.
   There is hereby imposed a requirement that before a mobile home can be
brought into the village, the Village Board must be informed by building permit
application where this mobile home will be parked. The applicant/trailer court
owner must provide a copy of mobile home title, a copy of the bill of sale and
photographs for the Assessor. The Village Board must also approve parking the
mobile home in the village.
(Prior Code, Ch. 18 § 2) (Ord. passed 5-9-2012; Ord. passed 10-9-2013)
§ 152.04 AGE/VALUE REQUIREMENT.
   Qualifications for village mobile parks shall have sloped roofs, vinyl
siding and manufactured skirting. Mobile homes shall be inspected and approved
before being allowed into a village mobile home park. The value shall be
determined by the Village Assessor.
(Prior Code, Ch. 18 § 3) (Ord. passed 5-9-2012; Ord. passed 10-9-2013) Penalty,
see §
152.99
§ 152.05 LAND OWNER REQUIRED TO FURNISH INFORMATION.
   Licenses of mobile home parks and owners of land on which mobile homes are
parked any occupied, nonexempt mobile homes shall furnish information to the
Village Clerk and Village Assessor on such homes added to their park or land
within five days after arrival of such home on forms furnished by the Village
Clerk in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 66.0435(3)(c)2.
(Prior Code, Ch. 18 § 4) (Ord. passed 5-9-2012; Ord. passed 10-9-2013)
§ 152.06 MONTHLY FEE.
   (A)   There is hereby imposed on each occupied, nonexempt mobile home
located in the village a monthly parking fee as determined in accordance with
Wis. Stats. § 66.0435(3)(c)1. Said fees shall be paid to the Village Treasurer
on or before the tenth day of the month following the month for which such fees
are due.
   (B)    Owners of nonexempt, occupied mobile homes, upon receipt of notice
from the Village Treasurer of their liability for the monthly parking permit
fee, shall remit to the Village Treasurer a cash deposit of an amount which can
be found at the office of the Village Clerk to guarantee payment of such fees
when due to the Village Treasurer. It shall be the full and complete
responsibility of the licensee of a mobile home park to collect such cash
deposits from each occupied, nonexempt mobile home therein and remit such
deposits to the Village Treasurer. Upon receipt of notice from the owner or
licensee that the nonexempt, occupied mobile home has been or is about to be
removed from the village, the Village Clerk shall direct the Village Treasurer
to apply said cash deposit to reduce any monthly parking permit fees for which
said owner is liable and refund the balance, if any to said owner.
(Prior Code, Ch. 18 § 5) (Ord. passed 5-9-2012; Ord. passed 10-9-2013) Penalty,
see §
152.99
§ 152.07 LICENSE REQUIRED FOR MOBILE HOME PARK.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to establish or operate upon
property owned or controlled by him or her within the village a mobile home
park without having first secured a license therefor from the Village Clerk.
The application for such license shall be accompanied by a fee for a park of 50
spaces or less and a surety bond in an amount which can be found at the office
of the Village Clerk. This bond shall guarantee the collection by license of
the monthly parking permit fee provided for in this chapter and the payment of
such fees to the Village Treasurer, the payment by the licensee of any fine or
forfeiture including legal costs imposed upon or levied against said licensee
for the violation of the ordinances of the said village pursuant to which said
license is granted, and shall also be for the use and benefit and may be
prosecuted and recovery had thereon by any person who may be injured or damaged
by reason of the licensee violating the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   A fee of an amount which can be found at the office of the Village
Clerk shall be paid for each transfer of license.
(Prior Code, Ch. 18 § 6) (Ord. passed 5-9-2012; Ord. passed 10-9-2013) Penalty,
see §
152.99
§ 152.08 FEE PAYMENT REQUIRED.
   No person shall be issued or re-issued a mobile home park license in the
village until the appropriate fee is paid to the Village Clerk.
(Prior Code, Ch. 18 § 7) (Ord. passed 5-9-2012; Ord. passed 10-9-2013)
§ 152.09 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall take effect upon publication and all ordinances or parts
of ordinances inconsistent with or contrary hereto are hereby repealed, except
nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to conflict with state laws
or orders regulation mobile homes or mobile home parks or any of the
requirements of any ordinance of the village not mentioned or made inapplicable
by the express terms of this chapter.
(Prior Code, Ch. 18 § 9) (Ord. passed 5-9-2012; Ord. passed 10-9-2013)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with any provision of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit no less than $10 nor more
than $100 and the cost of prosecution for each violation and in default or
payment thereof shall be imprisoned in the County Jail of this county, until
payment of such forfeiture and costs, but not exceeding 30 days, provided that
the maximum forfeiture for violation of §
152.05(A) shall be $25.
(Prior Code, Ch. 18 § 8) (Ord. passed 5-9-2012; Ord. passed 10-9-2013)
CHAPTER 153: FLOODPLAINS
Section
General Provisions
   
153.001   Statutory authorization
   
153.002   Finding of fact
   
153.003   Statement of purpose
   
153.004   Title
General Regulations
   
153.015   Areas to be regulated
   
153.016   Official maps and revisions
   
153.017   Establishment of floodplain zoning districts
   
153.018   Locating floodplain boundaries
   
153.019   Removal of lands from floodplain
   
153.020   Compliance
   
153.021   Municipalities and state agencies regulated
   
153.022   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
153.023   Interpretation
   
153.024   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
153.025   Annexed areas for cities and villages
   
153.026   General development standards
General Standards Applicable to all Floodplain Districts
   
153.040   Hydraulic and hydrologic analyses
   
153.041   Watercourse alterations
   
153.042   Wis. Stats. Chapters 30, 31, development
   
153.043   Public or private campgrounds
   
153.044   Nonconforming uses generally
   
153.045   Floodway areas
   
153.046   Floodfringe areas
Districts
   
153.060   Floodway District (FW)
   
153.061   Floodfringe District (FF)
   
153.062   General Floodplain District (GFP)
Administration
   
153.075   Generally
   
153.076   Zoning Administrator
   
153.077   Zoning Agency
   
153.078   Board of Appeals
   
153.079   To review appeals of permit denials
   
153.080   Floodproofing standards
   
153.081   Public information
   
153.082   Amendments
   
153.083   Definitions
 
   
153.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.001 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
    This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authorization in Wis. Stats. §
61.35 and § 62.23, for villages and cities and the requirements in Wis. Stats.
§ 87.30.
(Prior Code, Ch. 19 § 1.1) (Ord. passed 7-8-2009; Ord. passed 1-10-2024)
§ 153.002 FINDING OF FACT.
    Uncontrolled development and use of the floodplains and rivers of this
municipality would impair the public health, safety, convenience, general
welfare and tax base.
(Prior Code, Ch. 19 § 1.2) (Ord. passed 7-8-2009; Ord. passed 1-10-2024)
§ 153.003 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   This chapter is intended to regulate floodplain development to:
   (A)   Protect life, health and property;
   (B)   Minimize expenditures of public funds for flood control projects;
   (C)   Minimize rescue and relief efforts undertaken at the expense of the
taxpayers;
   (D)   Minimize business interruptions and other economic disruptions;
   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities in the floodplain;
   (F)   Minimize the occurrence of future flood blight areas in the
floodplain;
   (G)   Discourage the victimization of unwary land and homebuyers;
   (H)   Prevent increases in flood heights that could increase flood damage
and result in conflicts between property owners; and
   (I)   Discourage development in a floodplain if there is any practicable
alternative to locate the activity, use or structure outside of the floodplain.
(Prior Code, Ch. 19 § 1.3) (Ord. passed 7-8-2009 ; Ord. passed 1-10-2024)
§ 153.004 TITLE.
    This chapter shall be known as the “Floodplain Zoning Ordinance for The
Village of Gilman, Wisconsin”.
(Prior Code, Ch. 19 § 1.4) (Ord. passed 7-8-2009; Ord. passed 1-10-2024)
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 153.015 AREAS TO BE REGULATED.
    This chapter regulates all areas of special flood hazard identified as
Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, or AE on the Flood Insurance Rate Map. Additional areas
identified on maps approved by the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and
local community may also be regulated under the provisions of this chapter,
where applicable.
(Prior Code, Ch. 19 § 1.5(1)) (Ord. passed 7-8-2009; Ord. passed 1-10-2024)
§ 153.016 OFFICIAL MAPS AND REVISIONS.
   (A)   Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA) are designated as Zones A, A1-30,
AE, AH, or AO on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) based on flood hazard
analyses summarized in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) listed in division (B)
below. Additional flood hazard areas subject to regulation under this chapter
are identified on maps based on studies approved by the DNR and listed in
division (C) below. These maps and revisions are on file in the office of the
Village Zoning Administrator, Village of Gilman.
   (B)   Official maps based on the Flood Insurance Study (FIS):
      (1)   Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), panel numbers 55119C0437D,
55119C0440D, 55119C0441D, and 55119C0445D, dated March 13, 2024;
      (2)   Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Village of Gilman (Taylor County),
55119CV000A, dated March 13, 2024; approved by the DNR and FEMA.
   (C)   Official maps based on other studies. Any maps referenced in this
section must be approved by the DNR and be more restrictive than those based on
the FIS at the site of the proposed development.
      (1)   Chequamegon Waters (Miller) Dam Failure analysis approved by the
Department of Natural Resources on March 16, 1993, including:
         (a)   Map dated January 1992 and titled Hydraulic Shadow.
         (b)   Floodway data table dated January 1992 and titled Table 2 Flood
Crest Summary – Breach Profile.
         (c)   Flood profiles dated January 1992 and titled Chequamegon Waters
Dam Flood Profiles – Breach Profile.
(Prior Code, Ch. 19 § 1.5(2)) (Ord. passed 7-8-2009; Ord. passed 1-10-2024)
§ 153.017 ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The flood hazard areas regulated by this chapter are divided into districts
as follows:
   (A)   The Floodway District (FW), is the channel of a river or stream and
those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the
regional floodwaters, within AE Zones as shown on the FIRM, or within A Zones
shown on the FIRM when determined according to §
153.062(E).
   (B)   The Floodfringe District (FF) is that portion of a riverine special
flood hazard area outside the floodway within AE Zones on the FIRM, or, when
floodway limits have been determined according to §
153.062(E), within A Zones shown on the FIRM.
   (C)   The General Floodplain District (GFP) is those riverine areas that may
be covered by floodwater during the regional flood in which a floodway boundary
has not been delineated on the FIRM and also includes shallow flooding areas
identified as AH and AO Zones on the FIRM.
(Prior Code, Ch. 19 § 1.5(3)) (Ord. passed 7-8-2009; Ord. passed 1-10-2024)
§ 153.018 LOCATING FLOODPLAIN BOUNDARIES.
   (A)   Discrepancies between the exterior boundaries of Zones A1-30, AE, AH,
or A on the official floodplain zoning map and actual field conditions may be
resolved using the criteria in division (B)(1) or (B)(2) below. If a
significant difference exists, the map shall be amended according to §
153.082 Amendments. The Zoning Administrator can rely on a boundary derived
from a profile elevation to grant or deny a land use permit, whether or not a
map amendment is required. The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for
documenting actual pre-development field conditions and the basis upon which
the district boundary was determined. Disputes between the Zoning Administrator
and an applicant over the district boundary line shall be settled according to
§
153.078(C) and the criteria in (B)(1) and (B)(2) below. Where the flood
profiles are based on established base flood elevations from a FIRM, FEMA must
approve any map amendment or revision pursuant to §
153.082 Amendments.
   (B)   (1)   If flood profiles exist, the map scale and the profile
elevations shall determine the district boundary. The regional or base flood
elevations shall govern if there are any discrepancies.
      (2)   Where flood profiles do not exist for projects, including any
boundary of Zone A or AO the location of the boundary shall be determined by
the map scale.
(Prior Code, Ch. 19 § 1.5(4)) (Ord. passed 7-8-2009; Ord. passed 1-10-2024)
§ 153.019 REMOVAL OF LANDS FROM FLOODPLAIN.
   (A)   Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall not be grounds
for removing land from the floodplain unless it is filled at least two feet
above the regional or base flood elevation, the fill is contiguous to land
outside the floodplain, and the map is amended pursuant to §
153.082 Amendments.
   (B)   The delineation of any of the Floodplain Districts may be revised by
the community where natural or man-made changes have occurred and/or where more
detailed studies have been conducted. However, prior to any such change,
approval must be obtained from the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
and Federal Emergency Management Agency. A completed letter of map revision is
a record of this approval. The Floodplain Administrator shall not sign a
community acknowledgment form unless all criteria set forth in the following
divisions are met:
      (1)   The land and/or land around the structure must be filled at least
two feet above the regional or base flood elevation;
      (2)   The fill must be contiguous to land outside the floodplain;
applicant shall obtain floodplain development permit before applying for a LOMR
or LOMR-F;
   (C)   Removal of lands from the floodplain may also occur by operation of
Wis. Stats. § 87.30(1)(e) if a property owner has obtained a letter of map
amendment from the federal emergency management agency under 44 C.F.R. 70.
(Prior Code, Ch. 19 § 1.5(5)) (Ord. passed 7-8-2009; Ord. passed 1-10-2024)
§ 153.020 COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   No structure or use within areas regulated by this chapter shall
hereafter be located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, repaired, extended,
converted, enlarged, or altered without full compliance with the terms of these
regulations and all other applicable regulations that apply to uses within the
jurisdiction of these regulations.
   (B)   Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit shall be a violation
of these regulations and shall be punishable in accordance with §
153.999.
   (C)   Floodplain development permits issued on the basis of plans and
applications approved by the Floodplain Administrator authorize only the use,
and arrangement, set forth in such approved plans and applications, or
amendments thereto if approved by the Floodplain Administrator. Use,
arrangement, or construction contrary to that authorized shall be deemed a
violation of these regulations and punishable in accordance with §
153.999.
(Prior Code, Ch. 19 § 1.5(6)) (Ord. passed 7-8-2009; Ord. passed 1-10-2024)
§ 153.021 MUNICIPALITIES AND STATE AGENCIES REGULATED.
   Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns, and
counties are required to comply with this chapter and obtain all necessary
permits. State agencies are required to comply if Wis. Stats § 13.48(13)
applies. The construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state
highways and bridges by the Wisconsin Department of Transportation is exempt
when Wis. Stats. § 30.2022 applies. Although exempt from a local zoning permit
and permit fees, DOT must provide sufficient project documentation and analysis
to ensure that the community is in compliance with federal, state, and local
floodplain standards. If a local transportation project is located within a
Zone A floodplain and is not a WisDOT project under Wis. Stats. § 30.2022, then
the road project design documents (including appropriate detailed plans and
profiles) may be sufficient to meet the requirements for issuance of a local
floodplain permit if the following apply: The applicant provides documentation
to the Floodplain Administrator that the proposed project is a culvert
replacement or bridge replacement under 20-foot span at the same location, the
project is exempt from a DNR permit under Wis. Stats. § 30.123(6)(d), the
capacity is not decreased, the top road grade is not raised, and no floodway
data is available from a federal, state, or other source. If floodway data is
available in the impacted area from a federal, state, or other source that
existing data must be utilized by the applicant in the analysis of the project
site.
(Prior Code, Ch. 19 § 1.5(7)) (Ord. passed 7-8-2009; Ord. passed 1-10-2024)
§ 153.022 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   This chapter supersedes all the provisions of any municipal zoning
ordinance enacted under Wis. Stats. § 61.35 for villages; or Wis. Stats. §
87.30, which relate to floodplains. A more restrictive ordinance shall continue
in full force and effect to the extent of the greater restrictions, but not
otherwise.
   (B)   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing deed restrictions, covenants, or easements. If this chapter imposes
greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail.
(Prior Code, Ch. 19 § 1.5(8)) (Ord. passed 7-8-2009; Ord. passed 1-10-2024)
§ 153.023 INTERPRETATION.
   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter are
the minimum requirements liberally construed in favor of the governing body and
are not a limitation on or repeal of any other powers granted by the Wisconsin
Statutes. If a provision of this chapter, required by Wis. Adm. Code Chapter NR
116, is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of the standards
in effect on the date of the adoption of this chapter or in effect on the date
of the most recent text amendment to this chapter.
(Prior Code, Ch. 19 § 1.5(9)) (Ord. passed 7-8-2009 ; Ord. passed 1-10-2024)
§ 153.024 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
    The flood protection standards in this chapter are based on engineering
experience and research. Larger floods may occur or the flood height may be
increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply or
guarantee that non-floodplain areas or permitted floodplain uses will be free
from flooding and flood damages. This chapter does not create liability on the
part of, or a cause of action against, the municipality or any officer or
employee thereof for any flood damage that may result from reliance on this
chapter.
(Prior Code, Ch. 19 § 1.5(10)) (Ord. passed 7-8-2009; Ord. passed 1-10-2024)
§ 153.025 ANNEXED AREAS FOR CITIES AND VILLAGES.
    The Taylor County floodplain zoning provisions in effect on the date of
annexation shall remain in effect and shall be enforced by the municipality for
all annexed areas until the municipality adopts and enforces an ordinance which
meets the requirements of Wis. Adm. Code Chapter NR 116 and 44 CFR 59-72,
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). These annexed lands are described on
the municipality's official zoning map. County floodplain zoning provisions are
incorporated by reference for the purpose of administering this section and are
on file in the office of the Municipal Zoning Administrator. All plats or maps
of annexation shall show the regional flood elevation and the floodway
location.
(Prior Code, Ch. 19 § 1.5(12)) (Ord. passed 7-8-2009; Ord. passed 1-10-2024)
§ 153.026 GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
    The community shall review all permit applications to determine whether
proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding and assure that
all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies whose
approval is required by federal or state law.
   (A)   If a proposed building site is in a flood-prone area, all new
construction and substantial improvements shall:
      (1)   Be designed and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy;
      (2)   Be constructed with flood-resistant materials;
      (3)   Be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood
damages; and
      (4)   Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated to or above the
flood protection elevation.
   (B)   (1)   If a subdivision or other proposed new development is in a
flood-prone area, the community shall assure that:
         (a)   Such proposed subdivision or other proposed new development is
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the flood-prone area;
         (b)   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical,
and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage; and
         (c)   Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
      (2)   All subdivision proposals (including manufactured home parks) shall
include regional flood elevation and floodway data for any development that
meets the subdivision definition of this chapter and all other requirements in
§
153.076(B).
(Prior Code, Ch. 19 § 1.5(13)) (Ord. passed 7-8-2009; Ord. passed 1-10-2024)
GENERAL STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS
§ 153.040 HYDRAULIC AND HYDROLOGIC ANALYSES.
   (A)   No floodplain development shall:
      (1)   Obstruct flow, defined as development which blocks the conveyance
of floodwaters by itself or with other development, causing any increase in the
regional flood height; or
      (2)   Cause any increase in the regional flood height due to floodplain
storage area lost.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator shall deny permits if it is determined the
proposed development will obstruct flow or cause any increase in the regional
flood height, based on the officially adopted FIRM or other adopted map, unless
the provisions of §
153.082 Amendments are met.
(Prior Code, Ch. 19 § 2.1) (Ord. passed 7-8-2009; Ord. passed 1-10-2024)
§ 153.041 WATERCOURSE ALTERATIONS.
   (A)   No land use permit to alter or relocate a watercourse in a mapped
floodplain shall be issued until the local official has notified in writing all
adjacent municipalities, the Department and FEMA regional offices, and required
the applicant to secure all necessary state and federal permits. The standards
of §
153.040 must be met and the flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated
watercourse shall be maintained.
   (B)   As soon as is practicable, but not later than six months after the
date of the watercourse alteration or relocation and pursuant to §
153.082 Amendments, the community shall apply for a letter of map revision
(LOMR) from FEMA. Any such alterations must be reviewed and approved by FEMA
and the DNR through the LOMC process.
(Prior Code, Ch. 19 § 2.2) (Ord. passed 7-8-2009; Ord. passed 1-10-2024)
§ 153.042 WIS. STATS. CHAPTERS 30, 31, DEVELOPMENT.
    Development which requires a permit from the Department, under Wis. Stats.
Chapters 30 and 31, such as docks, piers, wharves, bridges, culverts, dams, and
navigational aids, may be allowed if the necessary permits are obtained and
amendments to the floodplain zoning ordinance are made according to §
153.082 Amendments.
(Prior Code, Ch. 19 § 2.3) (Ord. passed 7-8-2009; Ord. passed 1-10-2024)
§ 153.043 PUBLIC OR PRIVATE CAMPGROUNDS.
    Public or private campgrounds shall have a low flood damage potential and
shall meet the following provisions:
   (A)   The campground is approved by the Department of Agriculture, Trade and
Consumer Protection;
   (B)   A land use permit for the campground is issued by the Zoning
Administrator;
   (C)   The character of the river system and the campground elevation are
such that a 72-hour warning of an impending flood can be given to all
campground occupants;
   (D)   There is an adequate flood warning procedure for the campground that
offers the minimum notice required under this section to all persons in the
campground. This procedure shall include a written agreement between the
campground owner, the Floodplain Zoning Agency or Zoning Administrator, the
Municipal Emergency Government Coordinator and the Chief Law Enforcement
Official which specifies the flood elevation at which evacuation shall occur,
personnel responsible for monitoring flood elevations, types of warning systems
to be used and the procedures for notifying at-risk parties, and the methods
and personnel responsible for conducting the evacuation;
   (E)   This agreement shall be for no more than one calendar year, at which
time the agreement shall be reviewed and updated—by the officials identified in
division (D)—to remain in compliance with all applicable regulations, including
those of the State Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection and
all other applicable regulations;
   (F)   All mobile recreational vehicles placed on site must meet one of the
following:
      (1)   Be fully licensed, if required, and ready for highway use; or
      (2)   Not occupy any site in the campground for more than 180 consecutive
days, at which time the recreational vehicle must be removed from the
floodplain for a minimum of 24 hours; or
      (3)   Meet the requirements in either §§
153.060,
153.061, or
153.062 for the floodplain district in which the structure is located;
      (4)   A mobile recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on
its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect
utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions.
   (G)   All camping units that remain on site for more than 30 days shall be
issued a limited authorization by the campground operator, a written copy of
which is kept on file at the campground. Such authorization shall allow
placement of a camping unit consistent with division (F) and shall ensure
compliance with all the provisions of this section;
   (H)   The municipality shall monitor the limited authorizations issued by
the campground operator to assure compliance with the terms of this section;
   (I)   The campground shall have signs clearly posted at all entrances
warning of the flood hazard and the procedures for evacuation when a flood
warning is issued; and
   (J)   All service facilities, including but not limited to refuse
collection, electrical service, gas lines, propane tanks, sewage systems and
wells shall be properly anchored and placed at or floodproofed to the flood
protection elevation;
   (K)   Standards for structures in a campground; and:
      (1)   All structures must comply with this section or meet the applicable
requirements in §§
153.060,
153.061, or
153.062 for the floodplain district in which the structure is located;
      (2)   Deck/landing. A portable landing may be allowed for a camping unit
for each entry provided that the landing is not permanently attached to the
ground or camping unit, is no more than 200 square feet in size, shall be
portable, contain no walls or roof, and can be removed from the campground by a
truck and/or trailer. Sections of such portable landings may be placed together
to form a single deck not greater than 200 square feet at one entry point.
Provisions for the removal of these temporary landings during flood events must
be addressed within the written agreement with the municipality compliant with
§
153.043(D). Any such deck/landing structure may be constructed at elevations
lower than the flood protection elevation but must not obstruct flow of flood
waters or cause any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the
regional flood.
      (3)   Decks/patios that are constructed completely at grade may be
allowed but must also comply with applicable shoreland zoning standards.
      (4)   Camping equipment and appurtenant equipment in the campground may
be allowed provided that the equipment is not permanently attached to the
ground or camping unit, is not used as a habitable structure, and must not
obstruct flow of flood waters or cause any increase in flood levels during the
occurrence of the regional flood. Provisions for the removal of this equipment
during flooding events shall be addressed within the written agreement with the
municipality compliant with §
153.043(D).
      (5)   Once a flood warning in the written agreement has been issued for
the campground, the campground owner or the designated operator shall ensure
that all persons, camping units, decks, camping equipment and appurtenant
equipment in the campground shall be evacuated within the timelines specified
within the written agreement with the municipality compliant with §
153.043(D).
   (L)   A land use permit shall be obtained as provided under §
153.076(B) before any development; repair, modification, or addition to an
existing structure; or change in the use of a building or structure, including
sewer and water facilities, may be initiated.
(Prior Code, Ch. 19 § 2.4) (Ord. passed 7-8-2009; Ord. passed 1-10-2024)
§ 153.044 NONCONFORMING USES GENERALLY.
   (A)   Applicability.
      (1)   The standards in this section shall apply to all uses and buildings
that do not conform to the provisions contained within a floodplain zoning
ordinance or with Wis. Stats. § 87.30, and Wis. Adm. Code NR 116.12-14 and 44
CFR 59-72, these standards shall apply to all modifications or additions to any
nonconforming use or structure and to the use of any structure or premises
which was lawful before the passage of this section or any amendment thereto. A
party asserting existence of a lawfully established nonconforming use or
structure has the burden of proving that the use or structure was compliant
with the floodplain zoning ordinance in effect at the time the use or structure
was created.
      (2)   As permit applications are received for additions, modifications,
or substantial improvements to nonconforming buildings in the floodplain,
municipalities shall develop a list of those nonconforming buildings, their
present equalized assessed value, and a list of the costs of those activities
associated with changes to those buildings.
   (B)   The existing lawful use of a structure or its accessory use which is
not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter may continue subject to
the following conditions:
      (1)   No modifications or additions to a nonconforming use or structure
shall be permitted unless they comply with this chapter. The words MODIFICATION
and ADDITION include, but are not limited to, any alteration, addition,
modification, structural repair, rebuilding or replacement of any such existing
use, structure or accessory structure or use. Maintenance is not considered a
modification; this includes painting, decorating, paneling and other
nonstructural components and the maintenance, repair or replacement of existing
private sewage or water supply systems or connections to public utilities. Any
costs associated with the repair of a damaged structure are not considered
maintenance. The construction of a deck that does not exceed 200 square feet
and that is adjacent to the exterior wall of a principal structure is not an
extension, modification, or addition. The roof of the structure may extend over
a portion of the deck in order to provide safe ingress and egress to the
principal structure.
      (2)   If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is
discontinued for 12 consecutive months, it is no longer permitted and any
future use of the property, and any structure or building thereon, shall
conform to the applicable requirements of this chapter;
      (3)   The municipality shall keep a record which lists all nonconforming
uses and nonconforming structures, their present equalized assessed value, the
cost of all modifications or additions which have been permitted, and the
percentage of the structure's total current value those modifications
represent;
      (4)   No modification or addition to any nonconforming structure or any
structure with a nonconforming use, which over the life of the structure would
equal or exceed 50% of its present equalized assessed value, shall be allowed
unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure
with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable requirements of this
chapter. Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential and
commercial uses in compliance with §
153.061(C)(1). The costs of elevating the lowest floor of a nonconforming
building or a building with a nonconforming use to the flood protection
elevation are excluded from the 50% provisions of this division;
      (5)   No maintenance on a per event basis to any nonconforming structure
or any structure with a nonconforming use, the cost of which would equal or
exceed 50% of its present equalized assessed value, shall be allowed unless the
entire structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure with a
conforming use in compliance with the applicable requirements of this chapter.
Contiguous dry land access must be provided for residential and commercial uses
in compliance with §
153.061(C)(1). Maintenance to any nonconforming structure, which does not
exceed 50% of its present equalized assessed value on a per event basis, does
not count against the cumulative calculations over the life of the structure
for substantial improvement calculations.
      (6)   If on a per event basis the total value of the work being done
under division (B)(4) and (B)(5) equals or exceeds 50% of the present equalized
assessed value, the work shall not be permitted unless the entire structure is
permanently changed to a conforming structure with a conforming use in
compliance with the applicable requirements of this chapter. Contiguous dry
land access must be provided for residential and commercial uses in compliance
with §
153.060(C)(1).
      (7)   Except as provided in division (B)(8), if any nonconforming
structure or any structure with a nonconforming use is destroyed or is
substantially damaged, it cannot be replaced, reconstructed, or rebuilt unless
the use and the structure meet the current chapter requirements. A structure is
considered substantially damaged if the total cost to restore the structure to
its pre-damaged condition equals or exceeds 50% of the structure’s present
equalized assessed value.
      (8)   For nonconforming buildings that are substantially damaged or
destroyed by a non-flood disaster, the repair or reconstruction of any such
nonconforming building shall be permitted in order to restore it to the size
and use in effect prior to the damage event, provided that the following
minimum requirements are met, and all required permits have been granted prior
to the start of construction:
         (a)   Residential structures.
            1.   Shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to
or above the base flood elevation using fill, pilings, columns, posts, or
perimeter walls. Perimeter walls must meet the requirements of §
153.080(B).
            2.   Shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy, and shall be constructed with methods and
materials resistant to flood damage.
            3.   Shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation,
plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are
designed and/or elevated so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
            4.   In A Zones, obtain, review, and utilize any flood data
available from a federal, state or other source.
            5.   In AO Zones with no elevations specified, shall have the
lowest floor, including basement, meet the standards in §
153.062(D).
            6.   In AO Zones, shall have adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from the structure.
         (b)   Nonresidential structures.
            1.   Shall meet the requirements of division (B)(8)(a)1.) through
6.).
            2.   Shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to or above the regional flood elevation; or, together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities, shall meet the standards in §
153.080(A) or (B).
            3.   In AO Zones with no elevations specified, shall have the
lowest floor, including basement, meet the standards in §
153.062(D).
   (C)   A nonconforming historic structure may be altered if the alteration
will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic
structure, the alteration will comply with §
153.060(C)(1), flood resistant materials are used, and construction practices
and floodproofing methods that comply with §
153.080 are used. Repair or rehabilitation of historic structures shall be
exempt from the development standards of division (B)(8)(a) if it is determined
that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure and is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
   (D)   Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary,
modifications, additions, maintenance, and repairs to a nonconforming building
shall not be prohibited based on cost and the building’s nonconforming use
shall be permitted to continue if:
      (1)   Any living quarters in the nonconforming building are elevated to
be at or above the flood protection elevation;
      (2)   The lowest floor of the nonconforming building, including the
basement, is elevated to or above the regional flood elevation;
      (3)   The nonconforming building is permanently changed to conform to the
applicable requirements of §
153.026;
      (4)   If the nonconforming building is in the floodway, the building is
permanently changed to conform to the applicable requirements of §§
153.060(C)(1),
153.060(C)(2)(b) through (e),
153.060(C)(3),
153.060(C)(4), and
153.045. Any development that adds additional fill or creates an encroachment
in the floodplain from beyond the original nonconforming structure’s 3-
D building envelope must determine the floodway in accordance with §
153.062(E). If the encroachment is in the floodway, it must meet the standards
in section §
153.060(C)(4);
      (5)   If the nonconforming building is in the floodfringe, the building
is permanently changed to conform to the applicable requirements of §
153.061(C) and §
153.046;
      (6)   Repair or reconstruction of nonconforming structures and
substantial improvements of residential buildings in Zones A1-30, AE, and AH
must have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base
flood elevation;
      (7)   Repair or reconstruction of nonconforming structures and
substantial improvements of nonresidential buildings in Zones A1-30, AE, and AH
must have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base
flood elevation, or (together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities)
be designed so that below the base flood elevation the building is watertight
with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with
structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads
and effects of buoyancy:
         (a)   Where a non-residential structure is intended to be made
watertight below the base flood elevation, a registered professional engineer
or architect must develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and
plans for the construction, and must certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting
the provisions of division (D)(7) above.
         (b)   The community must maintain a record of such certification
including the specific elevation to which each such structure is floodproofed;
      (8)   Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor of repair or
reconstruction of nonconforming structures and substantial improvements in
Zones A1-30, AE, and AH that are usable solely for parking of vehicles,
building access, or storage, must be designed to adequately equalize
hydrostatic forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Subsequent improvements to repaired or reconstructed nonconforming
structures must not increase the degree of their nonconformity. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, or meet the following criteria:
         (a)   A minimum of two openings into each enclosed area must be
located below the base flood elevation and provide a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area.
         (b)   The bottom of all openings must be no higher than one foot above
the adjacent grade.
         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings if they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
      (9)   Manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within
Zones A1-30, AE, and AH outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, in
a new manufactured home park or subdivision, in an expansion to an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision, or in an existing manufactured home park
or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as
a result of flood, must be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the
lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation,
and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement;
      (10)   Manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved
within Zones A1-30, AE, and AH on existing sites in an existing manufactured
home park that is not undergoing expansion and on which a manufactured home has
not incurred substantial damage as a result of flood must be elevated so that
either the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood
elevation, or the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or
other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than
36 inches in height above grade, and be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement;
      (11)   Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and
AE must either:
         (a)   Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or
         (b)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational
vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is
attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security
devices, and has no permanently attached additions); or
         (c)   Meet the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured
homes in division (D)(9) above;
      (12)   In a regulatory floodway that has been delineated on the FIRM in
Zone A1-30 or AE, encroachments, including repair or reconstruction of
nonconforming structures, substantial improvement, or other development
(including fill) must be prohibited unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard
engineering practice that the proposed encroachment will not result in any
increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base
flood discharge. Subsequent improvements to repair or reconstruct nonconforming
structures must not increase the degree of their nonconformity;
      (13)   In Zone A, the community must obtain, review, and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal,
state, or other source as criteria for requiring repair or reconstruction of
nonconforming structures, substantial improvement, and other development to
meet division (D)(6) through (D)(12) (inclusive) above. Any development that
adds additional fill or creates an encroachment in the floodplain from beyond
the original nonconforming structure’s 3-D building envelope must determine the
floodway in accordance with §
153.062(E). If the encroachment is in the floodway, it must meet the standards
in §
153.060(C)(4). Subsequent improvements to repair or reconstruct nonconforming
structures must not increase the degree of their nonconformity;
      (14)   In Zones A1-30 or AE where a regulatory floodway has not been
delineated on the FIRM, repair or reconstruction of nonconforming structures,
substantial improvement, or any development that adds additional fill or
creates an encroachment in the floodplain from beyond the original
nonconforming structure’s 3-D building envelope must determine the floodway in
accordance with §
153.062(E). If the encroachment is in the floodway, it must meet the standards
in §
153.060(C)(4). Subsequent improvements to repair or reconstruct nonconforming
structures must not increase the degree of their nonconformity;
      (15)   In Zone AO, repair or reconstruction of nonconforming structures
and substantial improvements of residential structures must have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least
as high as the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM (at least two feet if
no depth number is specified). Subsequent improvements to repair or reconstruct
nonconforming structures must not increase the degree of their nonconformity;
or
      (16)   In Zone AO, repair or reconstruction of nonconforming structures
and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures must have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least
as high as the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM (at least two feet if
no depth number is specified), or (together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities) be structurally dry-floodproofed to that level according to the
standard specified in division (D)(7) above. Subsequent improvements to repair
or reconstruct nonconforming structures must not increase the degree of their
nonconformity.
(Prior Code, Ch. 19 § 6.1) (Ord. passed 7-8-2009; Ord. passed 1-10-2024)
§ 153.045 FLOODWAY AREAS.
   (A)   No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming
structure or any structure with a nonconforming use in the Floodway District,
unless such modification or addition:
      (1)   Has been granted a permit or variance which meets all ordinance
requirements;
      (2)   Meets the requirements of §
153.044;
      (3)   Shall not increase the obstruction to flood flows or regional flood
height;
      (4)   Any addition to the existing structure shall be floodproofed,
pursuant to §
153.080, by means other than the use of fill, to the flood protection
elevation; and
      (5)   If any part of the foundation below the flood protection elevation
is enclosed, the following standards shall apply:
         (a)   The enclosed area shall be designed by a registered architect or
engineer to allow for the efficient entry and exit of flood waters without
human intervention. A minimum of two openings must be provided with a minimum
net area of at least one square inch for every one square foot of the enclosed
area. The lowest part of the opening can be no more than 12 inches above the
adjacent grade;
         (b)   The parts of the foundation located below the flood protection
elevation must be constructed of flood-resistant materials;
         (c)   Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or
floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation; and
         (d)   The use must be limited to parking, building access or limited
storage.
   (B)   No new on-site sewage disposal system, or addition to an existing on-
site sewage disposal system, except where an addition has been ordered by a
government agency to correct a hazard to public health, shall be allowed in the
Floodway District. Any replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing on-
site sewage disposal system in a floodway area shall meet the applicable
requirements of all municipal ordinances, §
153.080(C) and Wis. Adm. Code Chapter SPS 383.
   (C)   No new well or modification to an existing well used to obtain potable
water shall be allowed in the Floodway District. Any replacement, repair, or
maintenance of an existing well in the Floodway District shall meet the
applicable requirements of all municipal ordinances, § 153.080(C) and Wis. Adm.
Code Chapters NR 811 and NR 812.
(Prior Code, Ch. 19 § 6.2) (Ord. passed 7-8-2009; Ord. passed 1-10-2024)
§ 153.046 FLOODFRINGE AREAS.
   (A)   No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming
structure or any structure with a nonconforming use unless such modification or
addition has been granted a permit or variance by the municipality and meets
the requirements of §
153.061(C) except where division (B) is applicable.
   (B)   Where compliance with the provisions of division (A) would result in
unnecessary hardship and only where the structure will not be used for human
habitation or be associated with a high flood damage potential, the Board of
Adjustment/Appeals, using the procedures established in §
153.078, may grant a variance from those provisions of division (A) for
modifications or additions using the criteria listed below. Modifications or
additions which are protected to elevations lower than the flood protection
elevation may be permitted if:
      (1)   No floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation for
residential or commercial structures;
      (2)   Human lives are not endangered;
      (3)   Public facilities, such as water or sewer, shall not be installed;
      (4)   Flood depths shall not exceed two feet;
      (5)   Flood velocities shall not exceed two feet per second; and
      (6)   The structure shall not be used for storage of materials as
described in §
153.061(C)(5).
   (C)   All new private sewage disposal systems, or addition to, replacement,
repair or maintenance of a private sewage disposal system shall meet all the
applicable provisions of all local ordinances, §
153.080(C) and Wis. Adm. Code Chapter SPS 383.
   (D)   All new wells, or addition to, replacement, repair, or maintenance of
a well shall meet the applicable provisions of this chapter, §
153.080(C) and Wis. Adm. Code Chapters NR 811 and NR.
(Prior Code, Ch. 19 § 6.3)
(Ord. passed 7-8-2009; Ord. passed 1-10-2024)
DISTRICTS
§ 153.060 FLOODWAY DISTRICT (FW).
   (A)   Applicability. This section applies to all floodway areas on the
floodplain zoning maps and those identified pursuant to §
153.062(E).
(Prior Code, Ch. 19 § 3.1)
   (B)   Permitted uses. The following open space uses are allowed in the
Floodway District and the floodway areas of the General Floodplain District,
if:
         (a)   They are not prohibited by any other ordinance;
         (b)   They meet the standards in division (C) and (D); and
         (c)   All permits or certificates have been issued according to §
153.076.
      (1)   Agricultural uses, such as: farming, outdoor plant nurseries,
horticulture, viticulture, and wild crop harvesting.
      (2)   Nonstructural industrial and commercial uses, such as loading
areas, parking areas and airport landing strips.
      (3)   Nonstructural recreational uses, such as golf courses, tennis
courts, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat ramps, swimming areas, parks,
wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting, trap, and
skeet activities, hunting and fishing areas and hiking and horseback riding
trails, subject to the fill limitations of division (C)(4).
      (4)   Uses or structures accessory to open space uses or classified as
historic structures that comply with division (C) and (D).
      (5)   Extraction of sand, gravel or other materials that comply with
division (C)(4).
      (6)   Functionally water-dependent uses, such as docks, piers or wharves,
dams, flowage areas, culverts, navigational aids and river crossings of
transmission lines, and pipelines that comply with Wis. Stats. Chapters 30 and
31.
      (7)   Public utilities, streets and bridges that comply with division (C)
(3).
(Prior Code, Ch. 19 § 3.2)
      (8)   Portable latrines that are removed prior to flooding and systems
associated with recreational areas and Department-approved campgrounds that
meet the applicable provisions of local ordinances and Wis. Adm. Code Chapter
SPS 383.
      (9)   Public or private wells used to obtain potable water for
recreational areas that meet the requirements of local ordinances and Wis. Adm.
Code Chapters NR 811 and NR 812.
      (10)   Wastewater treatment ponds or facilities permitted under Wis. Adm.
Code NR 110.15(3)(b).
      (11)   Sanitary sewer or water supply lines to service existing or
proposed development located outside the floodway that complies with the
regulations for the floodplain area occupied.
   (C)   Standards for development in the floodway.
      (1)   General.
         (a)   Any development in the floodway shall comply with §
153.026 and have a low flood damage potential.
         (b)   Applicants shall provide an analysis calculating the effects of
this proposal on the regional flood height to determine the effects of the
proposal according to §
153.040 and §
153.076(B)(3). The analysis must be completed by a registered professional
engineer in the State of Wisconsin.
         (c)   Any encroachment in the regulatory floodway is prohibited unless
the data submitted for division (C)(1)(b) above demonstrates that the
encroachment will cause no increase in flood elevations in flood events up to
the base flood at any location or removes the encroached area from the
regulatory floodway as provided in §
153.019.
      (2)   Structures. Structures accessory to permanent open space uses,
including utility and sanitary facilities, or functionally dependent on a
waterfront location may be allowed by permit if the structures comply with the
following criteria:
         (a)   Not designed for human habitation, does not have a high flood
damage potential and is constructed to minimize flood damage;
         (b)   Shall either have the lowest floor elevated to or above the
flood protection elevation or shall meet all the following standards:
            1.   Have the lowest floor elevated to or above the regional flood
elevation and be dry floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and completely dry to
the flood protection elevation without human intervention during flooding;
            2.   Have structural components capable of meeting all provisions
of division (B)(7); and
            3.   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, through the use of a Federal Emergency Management Agency
floodproofing certificate, that the design and methods of construction are in
accordance with division (B)(7).
         (c)   Must be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement;
         (d)   Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated to or above
the flood protection elevation; and
         (e)   Must not obstruct flow of flood waters or cause any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the regional flood.
         (f)   For a structure designed to allow the automatic entry of
floodwaters below the regional flood elevation, the applicant shall submit a
plan that meets division (B)(1) through (B)(5) and meets or exceeds the
following standards:
            1.   The lowest floor must be elevated to or above the regional
flood elevation;
            2.   A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding;
            3.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above the lowest adjacent grade; openings may be equipped with screens,
louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters, otherwise must remain open; and
            4.   The use must be limited to parking, building access or limited
storage.
         (g)   Certification. Whenever floodproofing measures are required, a
registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the following
floodproofing measures will be utilized, where appropriate, and are adequate to
withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and
other factors associated with the regional flood:
            1.   Reinforcement of floors and walls to resist rupture, collapse,
or lateral movement caused by water pressures or debris buildup;
            2.   Construction of wells, water supply systems and waste
treatment systems so as to prevent the entrance of flood waters in such systems
and must be in accordance with provisions in division (D)(4) and division (D)
(5);
            3.   Subsurface drainage systems to relieve external pressures on
foundation walls and basement floors;
            4.   Cutoff valves on sewer lines or the elimination of gravity
flow basement drains; and
            5.   Placement of utilities to or above the flood protection
elevation.
      (3)   Public utilities, streets and bridges. Public utilities, streets
and bridges may be allowed by permit, if:
         (a)   Adequate floodproofing measures are provided to the flood
protection elevation; and
         (b)   Construction meets the development standards of §
153.040.
      (4)   Fills or deposition of materials. Fills or deposition of materials
may be allowed by permit, if:
         (a)   The requirements of §
153.040 are met;
         (b)   No material is deposited in navigable waters unless a permit is
issued by the Department pursuant to Wis. Stats. Chapter 30, and a permit
pursuant to § 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of
1972, 33 U.S.C. 1344 has been issued, if applicable, and all other requirements
have been met;
         (c)   The fill or other materials will be protected against erosion by
riprap, vegetative cover, sheet piling or bulkheading; and
         (d)   The fill is not classified as a solid or hazardous material.
(Prior Code, Ch. 19 § 3.3)
   (D)   Prohibited uses. All uses not listed as permitted uses in division (B)
are prohibited, including the following uses:
      (1)   Habitable structures, structures with high flood damage potential,
or those not associated with permanent open-space uses;
      (2)   Storing materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, injurious
to property, water quality, or human, animal, plant, fish or other aquatic
life;
      (3)   Uses not in harmony with or detrimental to uses permitted in the
adjoining districts;
      (4)   Any private or public sewage systems, except portable latrines that
are removed prior to flooding and systems associated with recreational areas
and Department-approved campgrounds that meet the applicable provisions of
local ordinances and Wis. Adm. Code Chapter SPS 383;
      (5)   Any public or private wells which are used to obtain potable water,
except those for recreational areas that meet the requirements of local
ordinances and Wis. Adm. Code Chapters NR 811 and NR 812;
      (6)   Any solid or hazardous waste disposal sites;
      (7)   Any wastewater treatment ponds or facilities, except those
permitted under Wis. Adm. Code NR 110.15(3)(b); and
      (8)   Any sanitary sewer or water supply lines, except those to service
existing or proposed development located outside the floodway which complies
with the regulations for the floodplain area occupied.
(Prior Code, Ch. 19 § 3.4) (Ord. passed 7-8-2009; Ord. passed 1-10-2024)
§ 153.061 FLOODFRINGE DISTRICT (FF).
   (A)   Applicability. This section applies to all floodfringe areas shown on
the floodplain zoning maps and those identified pursuant to §
153.062(E).
(Prior Code, Ch. 19 § 4.1)
   (B)   Permitted uses. Any structure, land use, or development is allowed in
the Floodfringe District if the standards in division (C) are met, the use is
not prohibited by this, or any other ordinance or regulation and all permits or
certificates specified in §
153.076 have been issued.
(Prior Code, Ch. 19 § 4.2)
   (C)   Standards for development in floodfringe areas. Section
153.040 shall apply in addition to the following requirements according to the
use requested. Any existing structure in the floodfringe must meet the
requirements of §
153.044 Nonconforming Uses;
      (1)   Residential uses. Any structure, including a manufactured home,
which is to be newly constructed or moved into the floodfringe, shall meet or
exceed the following standards. Any existing structure in the floodfringe must
meet the requirements of §
153.044 Nonconforming Uses;
         (a)   All new construction, including placement of manufactured homes,
and substantial improvement of residential structures, shall have the lowest
floor elevated to or above the flood protection elevation on fill. The fill
around the structure shall be one foot or more above the regional flood
elevation extending at least 15 feet beyond the limits of the structure. No
area may be removed from the floodfringe district unless it can be shown to
meet §
153.019.
         (b)   Notwithstanding division (C)(1)(a), a basement or crawlspace
floor may be placed at the regional flood elevation if the basement or
crawlspace is designed to make all portions of the structure below the flood
protection elevation watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water and with structural components having the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. No floor
of any kind is allowed below the regional flood elevation;
         (c)   Contiguous dryland access shall be provided from a structure to
land outside of the floodplain, except as provided in division (C)(1)(d); and
         (d)   In developments where existing street or sewer line elevations
make compliance with division (C)(1)(c) impractical, the municipality may
permit new development and substantial improvements where roads are below the
regional flood elevation, if:
            1.   The municipality has written assurance from police, fire and
emergency services that rescue, and relief will be provided to the structure(s)
by wheeled vehicles during a regional flood event; or
            2.   The municipality has a DNR-approved emergency evacuation plan
that follows acceptable hazard mitigation planning guidelines.
      (2)   Accessory structures or uses. In addition to §
153.026, new construction and substantial improvements of accessory structures
shall be constructed on fill with the lowest floor at or above the regional
flood elevation.
      (3)   Commercial uses. In addition to §
153.025, any commercial structure which is erected, altered, or moved into the
floodfringe shall meet the requirements of division (C)(1). Subject to the
requirements of division (C)(5), storage yards, surface parking lots and other
such uses may be placed at lower elevations if an adequate warning system
exists to protect life and property.
      (4)   Manufacturing and industrial uses. In addition to §
153.026, any manufacturing or industrial structure which is erected, altered,
or moved into the floodfringe shall have the lowest floor elevated to or above
the flood protection elevation or meet the floodproofing standards in §
153.080. Subject to the requirements of division (C)(5), storage yards, surface
parking lots and other such uses may be placed at lower elevations if an
adequate warning system exists to protect life and property.
      (5)   Storage of materials. Materials that are buoyant, flammable,
explosive, or injurious to property, water quality or human, animal, plant,
fish, or aquatic life shall be stored at or above the flood protection
elevation or floodproofed in compliance with §
153.080. Adequate measures shall be taken to ensure that such materials will
not enter the water body during flooding.
      (6)   Public utilities, streets and bridges. All utilities, streets and
bridges shall be designed to be compatible with comprehensive floodplain
development plans; and
         (a)   When failure of public utilities, streets and bridges would
endanger public health or safety, or where such facilities are deemed
essential, construction or repair of such facilities shall only be permitted if
they are designed to comply with §
153.080.
         (b)   Minor roads or non-essential utilities may be constructed at
lower elevations if they are designed to withstand flood forces to the regional
flood elevation.
      (7)   Sewage systems. All sewage disposal systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood water into the system, pursuant to
§
153.080(C), to the flood protection elevation and meet the provisions of all
local ordinances and Wis. Adm. Code Chapter SPS 383.
      (8)   Wells. All wells shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of flood waters into the system, pursuant to § 153.080(C), to the
flood protection elevation and shall meet the provisions of Wis. Adm. Code
Chapters NR 811 and NR 812.
      (9)   Solid waste disposal sites. Disposal of solid or hazardous waste is
prohibited in floodfringe areas.
      (10)   Deposition of materials. Any deposited material must meet all the
provisions of this chapter.
      (11)   Manufactured homes.
         (a)   Owners or operators of all manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall provide adequate surface drainage to minimize flood damage,
and prepare, secure approval, and file an evacuation plan, indicating vehicular
access and escape routes, with local emergency management authorities.
         (b)   In existing manufactured home parks, all new homes, replacement
homes on existing pads, and substantially improved homes shall:
            1.   Have the lowest floor elevated to the flood protection
elevation; and
            2.   Be anchored so they do not float, collapse, or move laterally
during a flood.
         (c)   Outside of existing manufactured home parks, including new
manufactured home parks and all single units outside of existing parks, all
new, replacement and substantially improved manufactured homes shall meet the
residential development standards for the floodfringe in division (C)(1).
      (12)   Mobile recreational vehicles.
         (a)   All mobile recreational vehicles must be on site for less than
180 consecutive days and be either:
            1.   Fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
            2.   Shall meet the elevation and anchoring requirements in
division (C)(11)(b) and (c).
         (b)   A mobile recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is
on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-
disconnect utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached
additions.
(Prior Code, Ch. 19 § 4.3) (Ord. passed 7-8-2009; Ord. passed 1-10-2024)
§ 153.062 GENERAL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT (GFP).
   (A)   Applicability. The provisions for the General Floodplain District
shall apply to development in all floodplains mapped as A, AO, AH, and in AE
Zones within which a floodway is not delineated on the Flood Insurance Rate
Maps identified in §
153.016(B).
(Prior Code, Ch. 19 § 5.1)
   (B)   Floodway boundaries. For proposed development in Zone A, or in Zone AE
within which a floodway is not delineated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
identified in §
153.016(B), the boundaries of the regulatory floodway shall be determined
pursuant to division (E). If the development is proposed to encroach upon the
regulatory floodway, the development is subject to the standards of §
153.060. If the development is located entirely within the floodfringe, the
development is subject to the standards of §
153.061.
   (C)   Permitted uses. Pursuant to division (E) it shall be determined
whether the proposed use is located within the floodway or floodfringe. Those
uses permitted in the Floodway (§
153.060(B)) and Floodfringe (§
153.061(B)) Districts are allowed within the General Floodplain District,
according to the standards of division (D) provided that all permits or
certificates required under §
153.076 have been issued.
   (D)   Standards for development in the General Floodplain District. Section
153.060 applies to floodway areas, determined to pursuant to division (E);
section
153.061 applies to floodfringe areas, determined to pursuant to division (E).
      (1)   New construction and substantial improvement of structures in Zone
AO shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated:
         (a)   To or above the depth, in feet, as shown on the FIRM above the
highest adjacent natural grade; or
         (b)   If the depth is not specified on the FIRM, two above the highest
adjacent natural grade or higher.
      (2)   New construction and substantial improvement of structures in Zone
AH shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the
flood protection elevation.
      (3)   In AO/AH Zones, provide adequate drainage paths to guide
floodwaters around structures.
      (4)   All development in Zones AO and Zone AH shall meet the requirements
of §
153.061 applicable to floodfringe areas.
   (E)   Determining floodway and floodfringe limits. Upon receiving an
application for development within Zone A, or within Zone AE where a floodway
has not been delineated on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps, the Zoning
Administrator shall:
      (1)   Require the applicant to submit two copies of an aerial photograph
or a plan which shows the proposed development with respect to the general
floodplain district limits, stream channel, and existing floodplain
developments, along with a legal description of the property, fill limits and
elevations, building floor elevations and flood proofing measures and the flood
Zone as shown on the FIRM.
      (2)   Require the applicant to furnish any of the following information
deemed necessary by the Department to evaluate the effects of the proposal upon
flood height and flood flows, regional flood elevation and to determine
floodway boundaries.
         (a)   A hydrologic and hydraulic study as specified in §
153.076(B)(3).
         (b)   Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the
ground; pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations; size, location, and
layout of all proposed and existing structures on the site; location and
elevations of streets, water supply, and sanitary facilities; soil types and
other pertinent information.
         (c)   Specifications for building construction and materials,
floodproofing, filling, dredging, channel improvement, storage, water supply
and sanitary facilities.
(Prior Code, Ch. 19 § 5.3) (Ord. passed 7-8-2009; Ord. passed 1-10-2024)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 153.075 GENERALLY.
    Where a Zoning Administrator, planning agency or a board of appeals has
already been appointed to administer a zoning ordinance adopted under Wis.
Stats. §§ 59.69, 59.692 or 62.23(7), these officials shall also administer this
chapter.
(Prior Code, Ch. 19 § 7.0) (Ord. passed 7-8-2009; Ord. passed 1-10-2024)
§ 153.076 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Duties and powers. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to
administer this chapter and shall have the following duties and powers:
      (1)   Advise applicants of the ordinance provisions, assist in preparing
permit applications and appeals, and assure that the regional flood elevation
for the proposed development is shown on all permit applications.
      (2)   Issue permits and inspect properties for compliance with provisions
of this chapter and issue certificates of compliance where appropriate.
      (3)   Inspect and assess all damaged floodplain structures to determine
if substantial damage to the structures has occurred.
      (4)   Keep records of all official actions such as:
         (a)   All permits issued, inspections made, and work approved;
         (b)   Documentation of certified lowest floor and regional flood
elevations;
         (c)   Floodproofing certificates;
         (d)   Water surface profiles, floodplain zoning maps and ordinances,
nonconforming uses and structures including changes, appeals, variances and
amendments;
         (e)   All substantial damage assessment reports for floodplain
structures; and
         (f)   List of nonconforming structures and uses.
      (5)   Submit copies of the following items to the Department Regional
office:
         (a)   Within ten days of the decision, a copy of any decisions on
variances, appeals for map or text interpretations, and map or text amendments;
         (b)   Copies of case-by-case analyses and other required information;
and
         (c)   Copies of substantial damage assessments performed and all
related correspondence concerning the assessments.
      (6)   Investigate, prepare reports, and report violations of this chapter
to the Municipal Zoning Agency and attorney for prosecution. Copies of the
reports shall also be sent to the Department Regional office.
      (7)   Submit copies of amendments to the FEMA Regional office.
   (B)   Land use permit. A land use permit shall be obtained before any
development; repair, modification, or addition to an existing structure; or
change in the use of a building or structure, including sewer and water
facilities, may be initiated. Application to the Zoning Administrator shall
include:
      (1)   General information.
         (a)   Name and address of the applicant, property owner and
contractor; and
         (b)   Legal description, proposed use, and whether it is new
construction or a modification.
      (2)   Site development plan. A site plan drawn to scale shall be
submitted with the permit application form and shall contain:
         (a)   Location, dimensions, area and elevation of the lot;
         (b)   Location of the ordinary highwater mark of any abutting
navigable waterways;
         (c)   Location of any structures with distances measured from the lot
lines and street center lines;
         (d)   Location of any existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or
private water supply systems;
         (e)   Location and elevation of existing or future access roads;
         (f)   Location of floodplain and floodway limits as determined from
the official floodplain zoning maps;
         (g)   The elevation of the lowest floor of proposed buildings and any
fill using the vertical datum from the adopted study—either National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) or North American Vertical Datum (NAVD);
         (h)   Data sufficient to determine the regional flood elevation in
NGVD or NAVD at the location of the development and to determine whether or not
the requirements of §
153.060 or §
153.061 are met; and
         (i)   Data to determine if the proposed development will cause an
obstruction to flow or an
increase in regional flood height or discharge according to §
153.040. This may include any of the information noted in §
153.060(C)(1).
      (3)   Hydraulic and hydrologic studies to analyze development. All
hydraulic and hydrologic studies shall be completed under the direct
supervision of a professional engineer registered in the state. The study
contractor shall be responsible for the technical adequacy of the study. All
studies shall be reviewed and approved by the Department. Zone A floodplains
and in AE Zones within which a floodway is not delineated:
         (a)   Hydrology. The appropriate method shall be based on the
standards in Wis. Admin. Code Chapter NR 116.07(3), Hydrologic Analysis:
Determination of Regional Flood Discharge.
         (b)   Hydraulic modeling. The regional flood elevation shall be based
on the standards in Wis. Admin. Code Chapter NR 116.07(4), Hydraulic Analysis:
Determination of Regional Flood Elevation and the following:
            1.   Determination of the required limits of the hydraulic model
shall be based on detailed study information for downstream structures (dam,
bridge, culvert) to determine adequate starting WSEL for the study;
            2.   Channel sections must be surveyed;
            3.   Minimum four-foot contour data in the overbanks shall be used
for the development of cross section overbank and floodplain mapping;
            4.   A maximum distance of 500 feet between cross sections is
allowed in developed areas with additional intermediate cross sections required
at transitions in channel bottom slope including a survey of the channel at
each location;
            5.   The most current version of HEC-RAS shall be used;
            6.   A survey of bridge and culvert openings and the top of road is
required at each structure;
            7.   Additional cross sections are required at the downstream and
upstream limits of the proposed development and any necessary intermediate
locations based on the length of the reach if greater than 500 feet.
            8.   Standard accepted engineering practices shall be used when
assigning parameters for the base model such as flow, Manning’s N values,
expansion and contraction coefficients or effective flow limits. The base model
shall be calibrated to past flooding data such as high-water marks to determine
the reasonableness of the model results. If no historical data is available,
adequate justification shall be provided for any parameters outside standard
accepted engineering practices; and
            9.   The model must extend past the upstream limit of the
difference in the existing and proposed flood profiles in order to provide a
tie-in to existing studies. The height difference between the proposed flood
profile and the existing study profiles shall be no more than 0.00 feet.
         (c)   Mapping. A work map of the reach studied shall be provided,
showing all cross-section locations, floodway/floodplain limits based on best
available topographic data, geographic limits of the proposed development and
whether the proposed development is located in the floodway.
            1.   If the proposed development is located outside of the
floodway, then it is determined to have no impact on the regional flood
elevation.
            2.   If any part of the proposed development is in the floodway, it
must be added to the base model to show the difference between existing and
proposed conditions. The study must ensure that all coefficients remain the
same as in the existing model, unless adequate justification based on standard
accepted engineering practices is provided.
      (4)   Zone AE Floodplains.
         (a)   Hydrology. If the proposed hydrology will change the existing
study, the appropriate method to be used shall be based on Wis. Admin. Code
Chapter NR 116.07(3), Hydrologic Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood
Discharge.
         (b)   Hydraulic model. The regional flood elevation shall be based on
the standards in Wis. Admin. Code Chapter NR 116.07(4), Hydraulic Analysis:
Determination of Regional Flood Elevation and the following:
            1.   Duplicate Effective Model. The effective model shall be
reproduced to ensure correct transference of the model data and to allow
integration of the revised data to provide a continuous FIS model upstream and
downstream of the revised reach. If data from the effective model is available,
models shall be generated that duplicate the FIS profiles and the elevations
shown in the Floodway Data Table in the FIS report to within 0.1 foot;
            2.   Corrected Effective Model. The corrected effective model shall
not include any man-made physical changes since the effective model date but
shall import the model into the most current version of HEC-RAS for Department
review;
            3.   Existing (Pre-Project Conditions) Model. The existing model
shall be required to support conclusions about the actual impacts of the
project associated with the revised (post-project) model or to establish more
up-to-date models on which to base the revised (post-project) model;
            4.   Revised (Post-Project Conditions) Model. The revised (post-
project conditions) model shall incorporate the existing model and any proposed
changes to the topography caused by the proposed development. This model shall
reflect proposed conditions;
            5.   All changes to the duplicate effective model and subsequent
models must be supported by certified topographic information, bridge plans,
construction plans and survey notes; and
            6.   Changes to the hydraulic models shall be limited to the stream
reach for which the revision is being requested. Cross sections upstream and
downstream of the revised reach shall be identical to those in the effective
model and result in water surface elevations and top widths computed by the
revised models matching those in the effective models upstream and downstream
of the revised reach as required. The effective model shall not be truncated.
         (c)   Mapping. Maps and associated engineering data shall be submitted
to the Department for review which meet the following conditions:
            1.   Consistency between the revised hydraulic models, the revised
floodplain and floodway delineations, the revised flood profiles, topographic
work map, annotated FIRMs and/or Flood Boundary Floodway Maps (FBFMs),
construction plans, bridge plans;
            2.   Certified topographic map of suitable scale, contour interval,
and a planimetric map showing the applicable items. If a digital version of the
map is available, it may be submitted in order that the FIRM may be more easily
revised;
            3.   Annotated FIRM panel showing the revised 1% and 0.2% annual
chance floodplains and floodway boundaries;
            4.   If an annotated FIRM and/or FBFM and digital mapping data (GIS
or CADD) are used, then all supporting documentation or metadata must be
included with the data submission along with the universal transverse mercator
(UTM) projection and State Plane Coordinate System in accordance with FEMA
mapping specifications;
            5.   The revised floodplain boundaries shall tie into the effective
floodplain boundaries;
            6.   All cross sections from the effective model shall be labeled
in accordance with the effective map and a cross section lookup table shall be
included to relate to the model input numbering scheme;
            7.   Both the current and proposed floodways shall be shown on the
map; and
            8.   The stream centerline, or profile baseline used to measure
stream distances in the model shall be visible on the map.
      (5)   Expiration. All permits issued under the authority of this chapter
shall expire no more than 180 days after issuance. The permit may be extended
for a maximum of 180 days for good and sufficient cause. If the permitted work
has not started within 180 days of the permit date, the development must comply
with any regulation, including any revision to the FIRM or FIS, that took
effect after the permit date.
   (C)   Certificate of compliance. No land shall be occupied or used, and no
building which is hereafter constructed, altered, added to, modified, repaired,
rebuilt, or replaced shall be occupied until a certificate of compliance is
issued by the Zoning Administrator, except where no permit is required, subject
to the following provisions:
      (1)   The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or
premises or part thereof, and the proposed use, conform to the provisions of
this chapter;
      (2)   Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the
application for a permit;
      (3)   If all provisions are met, the certificate of compliance shall be
issued within ten days after written notification that the permitted work is
completed;
      (4)   The applicant shall submit a certification signed by a registered
professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor that the fill, lowest floor
and floodproofing elevations are in compliance with the permit issued.
Floodproofing measures also require certification by a registered professional
engineer or architect that the requirements of §
153.080 are met.
      (5)   Where applicable pursuant to §
153.062(D), the applicant must submit a certification by a registered
professional engineer or surveyor of the elevation of the bottom of the lowest
horizontal structural member supporting the lowest floor (excluding pilings or
columns), and an indication of whether the structure contains a basement.
      (6)   Where applicable pursuant to §
153.062(D), the applicant must submit certifications by a registered
professional engineer or architect that the structural design and methods of
construction meet accepted standards of practice as required by §
153.062(D).
   (D)   Other permits. Prior to obtaining a floodplain development permit the
applicant must secure all necessary permits from federal, state, and local
agencies, including but not limited to those required by the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers under § 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of
1972, 33 U.S.C. 1344.
(Prior Code, Ch. 19 § 7.1) (Ord. passed 7-8-2009; Ord. passed 1-10-2024)
§ 153.077 ZONING AGENCY.
   (A)   The Village Planning Committee shall:
      (1)   Oversee the functions of the Office of the Zoning Administrator;
      (2)   Review and advise the governing body on all proposed amendments to
this chapter, maps and text; and
      (3)   Publish adequate notice pursuant to Wis. Stats. Chapter 985,
specifying the date, time, place, and subject of the public hearing.
   (B)   The Village Planning Committee shall not:
      (1)   Grant variances to the terms of this chapter in place of action by
the Board of Adjustment/Appeals; or
      (2)   Amend the text or zoning maps in place of official action by the
governing body.
(Prior Code, Ch. 19 § 7.2) (Ord. passed 7-8-2009; Ord. passed 1-10-2024)
§ 153.078 BOARD OF APPEALS.
   (A)   Authorization. The Board of Appeals, under Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e),
for cities or villages, is hereby authorized or shall be appointed to act for
the purposes of this chapter. The Board shall exercise the powers conferred by
Wisconsin Statutes and adopt rules for the conduct of business. The Zoning
Administrator shall not be the secretary of the Board.
   (B)   Powers and duties. The Board of Appeals shall:
      (1)   Appeals. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an
error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an
administrative official in the enforcement or administration of this chapter;
      (2)   Boundary disputes. Hear and decide disputes concerning the district
boundaries shown on the official floodplain zoning map; and
      (3)   Variances. Hear and decide, upon appeal, variances from the
ordinance standards.
   (C)   Appeals to the Board.
      (1)   By whom. Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person aggrieved,
or by any officer or department of the municipality affected by any decision of
the Zoning Administrator or other administrative officer. Such appeal shall be
taken within 30 days unless otherwise provided by the rules of the Board, by
filing with the official whose decision is in question, and with the Board, a
notice of appeal specifying the reasons for the appeal. The official whose
decision is in question shall transmit to the board all records regarding the
matter appealed.
      (2)   Notice and hearing for appeals including variances.
         (a)   Notice. The Board shall:
            1.   Fix a reasonable time for the hearing;
            2.   Publish adequate notice pursuant to Wisconsin Statutes,
specifying the date, time, place and subject of the hearing; and
            3.   Assure that notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest
and the Department Regional office at least ten days in advance of the hearing.
         (b)   Hearing. Any party may appear in person or by agent. The Board
shall:
            1.   Resolve boundary disputes according to §
153.078(C);
            2.   Decide variance applications according to §
153.078(D); and
            3.   Decide appeals of permit denials according to §
153.079.
      (3)   Decision. The final decision regarding the appeal or variance
application shall:
         (a)   Be made within a reasonable time;
         (b)   Be sent to the Department regional office within ten days of the
decision;
         (c)   Be a written determination signed by the Chairman or Secretary
of the Board;
         (d)   State the specific facts which are the basis for the Board’s
decision;
         (e)   Either affirm, reverse, vary or modify the order, requirement,
decision or determination appealed, in whole or in part, dismiss the appeal for
lack of jurisdiction or grant or deny the variance application; and
         (f)   Include the reasons for granting an appeal, describing the
hardship demonstrated by the applicant in the case of a variance, clearly
stated in the recorded minutes of the Board proceedings.
   (D)   Boundary disputes. The following procedure shall be used by the Board
in hearing disputes concerning floodplain district boundaries.
      (1)   If a floodplain district boundary is established by approximate or
detailed floodplain studies, the flood elevations or profiles shall prevail in
locating the boundary.
      (2)   The person contesting the boundary location shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to present arguments and technical evidence to the
Board; and
      (3)   If the boundary is incorrectly mapped, the Board should inform the
Zoning Committee or the person contesting the boundary location to petition the
governing body for a map amendment according to §
153.082 Amendments.
   (E)   Variance.
      (1)   The Board may, upon appeal, grant a variance from the standards of
this chapter if an applicant convincingly demonstrates that:
         (a)   Literal enforcement of the chapter provisions will cause
unnecessary hardship;
         (b)   The hardship is due to adoption of the floodplain ordinance and
unique property conditions, not common to adjacent lots or premises. In such
case the ordinance or map must be amended;
         (c)   The variance is not contrary to the public interest; and
         (d)   The variance is consistent with the purpose of this chapter in §
153.003.
      (2)   In addition to the criteria in division (E)(1) above, to qualify
for a variance under FEMA regulations, the Board must find that the following
criteria have been met:
         (a)   The variance shall not cause any increase in the regional flood
elevation;
         (b)   The applicant has shown good and sufficient cause for issuance
of the variance;
         (c)   Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship;
         (d)   Granting the variance will not result in additional threats to
public safety, extraordinary expense, create a nuisance, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances; and
         (e)   The variance granted is the minimum necessary, considering the
flood hazard, to afford relief.
      (3)   A variance shall not:
         (a)   Grant, extend or increase any use prohibited in the zoning
district;
         (b)   Be granted for a hardship based solely on an economic gain or
loss;
         (c)   Be granted for a hardship which is self-created;
         (d)   Damage the rights or property values of other persons in the
area;
         (e)   Allow actions without the amendments to this chapter or map(s)
required in §
153.082 Amendments; and
         (f)   Allow any alteration of an historic structure, including its
use, which would preclude its continued designation as an historic structure.
      (4)   When a floodplain variance is granted, the Board shall notify the
applicant in writing that it may increase risks to life and property and flood
insurance premiums could increase up to $25 per $100 of coverage. A copy shall
be maintained with the variance record.
(Prior Code, Ch. 19 § 7.3) (Ord. passed 7-8-2009; Ord. passed 1-10-2024)
§ 153.079 TO REVIEW APPEALS OF PERMIT DENIALS.
   (A)   The Zoning Agency (§
153.077) or Board shall review all data related to the appeal. This may
include:
      (1)   Permit application data listed in §
153.076(B);
      (2)   Floodway/floodfringe determination data in §
153.062(E);
      (3)   Data listed in §
153.060(C)(1)(b) where the applicant has not submitted this information to the
Zoning Administrator; and
      (4)   Other data submitted with the application, or submitted to the
Board with the appeal.
   (B)   For appeals of all denied permits the Board shall:
      (1)   Follow the procedures of §
153.078;
      (2)   Consider Zoning Agency recommendations; and
      (3)   Either uphold the denial or grant the appeal.
   (C)   For appeals concerning increases in regional flood elevation the Board
shall:
      (1)   Uphold the denial where the Board agrees with the data showing an
increase in flood elevation. Increases may only be allowed after amending the
flood profile and map and all appropriate legal arrangements are made with all
adversely affected property owners as per the requirements of §
153.082 Amendments; and
      (2)   Grant the appeal where the Board agrees that the data properly
demonstrates that the project does not cause an increase provided no other
reasons for denial exist.
(Prior Code, Ch. 19 § 7.4) (Ord. passed 7-8-2009; Ord. passed 1-10-2024)
§ 153.080 FLOODPROOFING STANDARDS.
   (A)   No permit or variance shall be issued for a non-residential structure
designed to be watertight below the regional flood elevation until the
applicant submits a plan certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect that the floodproofing measures will protect the structure or
development to or above the flood protection elevation and submits a FEMA
floodproofing certificate. Floodproofing is not an alternative to the
development standards in §§
153.026,
153.060,
153.061, or
153.062.
   (B)   For a structure designed to allow the entry of floodwaters, no permit
or variance shall be issued until the applicant submits a plan either:
      (1)   Certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or
      (2)   Meeting or exceeding the following standards:
         (a)   A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding;
         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade; and
         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
   (C)   Floodproofing measures shall be designed, as appropriate, to:
      (1)   Withstand flood pressures, depths, velocities, uplift and impact
forces and other regional flood factors;
      (2)   Protect structures to the flood protection elevation;
      (3)   Anchor structures to foundations to resist flotation and lateral
movement;
      (4)   Minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters;
      (5)   Minimize or eliminate discharges into flood waters;
      (6)   Placement of essential utilities to or above the flood protection
elevation; and
      (7)   If any part of the foundation below the flood protection elevation
is enclosed, the following standards shall apply:
         (a)   The enclosed area shall be designed by a registered architect or
engineer to allow for the efficient entry and exit of flood waters without
human intervention. A minimum of two openings must be provided with a minimum
net area of at least one square inch for every one square foot of the enclosed
area. The lowest part of the opening can be no more than 12 inches above the
adjacent grade;
         (b)   The parts of the foundation located below the flood protection
elevation must be constructed of flood-resistant materials;
         (c)   Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or
floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation; and
         (d)   The use must be limited to parking, building access or limited
storage.
(Prior Code, Ch. 19 § 7.5) (Ord. passed 7-8-2009; Ord. passed 1-10-2024)
§ 153.081 PUBLIC INFORMATION.
   (A)   Place marks on structures to show the depth of inundation during the
regional flood.
   (B)   All maps, engineering data and regulations shall be available and
widely distributed.
   (C)   Real estate transfers should show what floodplain zoning district any
real property is in.
(Prior Code, Ch. 19 § 7.6) (Ord. passed 7-8-2009; Ord. passed 1-10-2024)
§ 153.082 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Obstructions or increases may only be permitted if amendments are made
to this section, the official floodplain zoning maps, floodway lines and water
surface profiles, in accordance with §
153.082.
      (1)   In AE Zones with a mapped floodway, no obstructions or increases
shall be permitted unless the applicant receives a conditional letter of map
revision from FEMA and amendments are made to this chapter, the official
floodplain zoning maps, floodway lines and water surface profiles, in
accordance with division (B). Any such alterations must be reviewed and
approved by FEMA and the DNR.
      (2)   In A Zones increases equal to or greater than one foot may only be
permitted if the applicant receives a conditional letter of map revision from
FEMA and amendments are made to this chapter, the official floodplain maps,
floodway lines, and water surface profiles, in accordance with division (B).
   (B)   Generally. The governing body shall change or supplement the
floodplain zoning district boundaries and this chapter in the manner outlined
in division (C). Actions which require an amendment to the chapter and/or
submittal of a letter of map change (LOMC) include, but are not limited to, the
following:
      (1)   Any fill or floodway encroachment that obstructs flow causing any
increase in the regional flood height;
      (2)   Any change to the floodplain boundaries and/or watercourse
alterations on the FIRM;
      (3)   Any changes to any other officially adopted floodplain maps listed
in §
153.016(B);
      (4)   Any floodplain fill which raises the elevation of the filled area
to a height at or above the flood protection elevation and is contiguous to
land lying outside the floodplain;
      (5)   Correction of discrepancies between the water surface profiles and
floodplain maps;
      (6)   Any upgrade to a floodplain zoning ordinance text required by Wis.
Adm. Code NR 116.05, or otherwise required by law, or for changes by the
municipality; and
      (7)   All channel relocations and changes to the maps to alter floodway
lines or to remove an area from the floodway or the floodfringe that is based
on a base flood elevation from a FIRM requires prior approval by FEMA.
   (C)   Procedures. Chapter amendments may be made upon petition of any party
according to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.23, for cities and villages.
The petitions shall include all data required by §
153.062(E) and §
153.076(B). The land use permit shall not be issued until a letter of map
revision is issued by FEMA for the proposed changes.
      (1)   The proposed amendment shall be referred to the Zoning Agency for a
public hearing and recommendation to the governing body. The amendment and
notice of public hearing shall be submitted to the Department Regional office
for review prior to the hearing. The amendment procedure shall comply with the
provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.23, for cities and villages.
      (2)   No amendments shall become effective until reviewed and approved by
the Department.
      (3)   All persons petitioning for a map amendment that obstructs flow
causing any increase in the regional flood height, shall obtain flooding
easements or other appropriate legal arrangements from all adversely affected
property owners and notify local units of government before the amendment can
be approved by the governing body.
(Prior Code, Ch. 19 § 8.2)
(Ord. passed 7-8-2009; Ord. passed 1-10-2024)
§ 153.083 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless specifically defined, words and phrases in this chapter shall have
their common law meaning and shall be applied in accordance with their common
usage. Words used in the present tense include the future, the singular number
includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular. The word
"may" is permissive, "shall" is mandatory and is not discretionary.
   A ZONES. Those areas shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map which would
be inundated by the regional flood. These areas may be numbered or unnumbered A
ZONES. The A ZONES may or may not be reflective of flood profiles, depending on
the availability of data for a given area.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE. A facility, structure, building or use which is
accessory or incidental to the principal use of a property, structure or
building. An ACCESSORY STRUCTURE shall not be used for human habitation.
   AH ZONE. See “area of shallow flooding”.
   ALTERATION. An enhancement, upgrade or substantial change or modification
other than an addition or repair to a dwelling or to electrical, plumbing,
heating, ventilating, air conditioning and other systems within a structure.
   AO ZONE. See "area of shallow flooding".
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO Zone on a
community’s flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a 1% or greater annual chance
of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined
channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where
velocity flood may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or
sheet flow.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year, as published by FEMA as part of a FIS and depicted on a FIRM.
   BASEMENT. Any enclosed area of a building having its floor sub-grade on all
sides.
   BUILDING. See “structure.”
   BULKHEAD LINE. A geographic line along a reach of navigable water that has
been adopted by a municipal ordinance and approved by the Department pursuant
to Wis. Stats. § 30.11, and which allows limited filling between this BULKHEAD
LINE and the original ordinary highwater mark, except where such filling is
prohibited by the floodway provisions of this chapter.
   CAMPGROUND. Any parcel of land which is designed, maintained, intended, or
used for the purpose of providing sites for nonpermanent overnight use by four
or more camping units, or which is advertised or represented as a camping area.
   CAMPING UNIT. Any portable device, no more than 400 square feet in area,
used as a temporary shelter, including but not limited to a camping trailer,
motor home, bus, van, pick-up truck, or tent that is fully licensed, if
required, and ready for highway use.
   CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE. A certification that the construction and the use
of land or a building, the elevation of fill or the lowest floor of a structure
is in compliance with all of the provisions of this chapter.
   CHANNEL. A natural or artificial watercourse with definite bed and banks to
confine and conduct  normal flow of water.
   CRAWLWAYS or CRAWL SPACE. An enclosed area below the first usable floor of a
building,  generally less than five feet in height, used for access to plumbing
and electrical utilities.
   DECK. An unenclosed exterior structure that has no roof or sides and has a
permeable floor which allows the infiltration of precipitation.
   DEPARTMENT. The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any artificial change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings, structures or
accessory structures; the construction of additions or alterations to
buildings, structures or accessory structures; the repair of any damaged
structure or the improvement or renovation of any structure, regardless of
percentage of damage or improvement; the placement of buildings or structures;
subdivision layout and site preparation; mining, dredging, filling, grading,
paving, excavation or drilling operations; the storage, deposition or
extraction of materials or equipment; and the installation, repair or removal
of public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities.
   DRYLAND ACCESS. A vehicular access route which is above the regional flood
elevation, and which connects land located in the floodplain to land outside
the floodplain, such as a road with its surface above regional flood elevation
and wide enough for wheeled rescue and relief vehicles.
   ENCROACHMENT. Any fill, structure, equipment, use or development in the
floodway.
   FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA). The federal agency that
administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). A map of a community on which the Federal
Insurance Administration has delineated both the floodplain and the risk
premium zones applicable to the community. This map can only be amended by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas caused by one of the following
conditions:
      (1)   The overflow or rise of inland waters;
      (2)   The rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source;
      (3)   The inundation caused by waves or currents of water exceeding
anticipated cyclical levels along the shore of Lake Michigan or Lake Superior;
or
      (4)   The sudden increase caused by an unusually high-water level in a
natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated
force of nature, such as a seiche, or by some similarly unusual event.
   FLOOD FREQUENCY. The probability of a flood occurrence which is determined
from statistical  analyses. The frequency of a particular flood event is
usually expressed as occurring, on the average once in a specified number of
years or as a percent chance of occurring in any given year.
   FLOODFRINGE. That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway which is
covered by flood waters during the regional flood and associated with standing
water rather than flowing water.
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP. A map designating approximate flood hazard areas.
Flood hazard areas are designated as unnumbered A Zones and do not contain
floodway lines or regional flood elevations. This map forms the basis for both
the regulatory and insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP) until superseded by a Flood Insurance Study and a Flood Insurance Rate
Map.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. A technical engineering examination, evaluation, and
determination of the local flood hazard areas. It provides maps designating
those areas affected by the regional flood and provides both flood insurance
rate zones and base flood elevations and may provide floodway lines. The flood
hazard areas are designated as numbered and unnumbered A Zones. Flood Insurance
Rate Maps, that accompany the FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY, form the basis for both
the regulatory and the insurance aspects of the National Flood Insurance
Program.
   FLOODPLAIN. Land which has been or may be covered by flood water during the
regional flood. It includes the floodway and the floodfringe and may include
other designated FLOODPLAIN areas for regulatory purposes.
   FLOODPLAIN ISLAND. A natural geologic land formation within the floodplain
that is surrounded, but not covered, by floodwater during the regional flood.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. Policy and procedures to ensure wise use of
floodplains, including mapping and engineering, mitigation, education, and
administration and enforcement of floodplain regulations.
   FLOOD PROFILE. A graph or a longitudinal profile line showing the
relationship of the water surface elevation of a flood event to locations of
land surface elevations along a stream or river.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural provisions, changes or
adjustments to properties and structures, water and sanitary facilities and
contents of buildings subject to flooding, for the purpose of reducing or
eliminating flood damage.
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION. An elevation of two feet of freeboard above the
Regional  Flood Elevation. (Also see: “freeboard”.)
   FLOOD STORAGE. Those floodplain areas where storage of floodwaters has been
taken into account during analysis in reducing the regional flood discharge.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the regional flood
discharge.
   FREEBOARD. A safety factor expressed in terms of a specified number of feet
above a calculated flood level. FREEBOARD compensates for any factors that
cause flood heights greater than those calculated, including ice jams, debris
accumulation, wave action, obstruction of bridge openings and floodways, the
effects of watershed urbanization, loss of flood storage areas due to
development and aggregation of the river or stream bed.
   HABITABLE STRUCTURE. Any structure or portion thereof used or designed for
human habitation.
   HEARING NOTICE. Publication or posting meeting the requirements of Wis.
Stats. Ch. 985. For appeals, a Class 1 notice, published once at least one week
before the hearing, is required. For all zoning ordinances and amendments, a
Class 2 notice, published twice, once each week consecutively, the last at
least seven days before the hearing. Local ordinances or bylaws may require
additional notice, exceeding these minimums.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HIGH FLOOD DAMAGE POTENTIAL. Damage that could result from flooding that
includes any danger to life or health or any significant economic loss to a
structure or building and its contents.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is either:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either
by an approved state program, as determined by the Secretary of the Interior,
or by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
   INCREASE IN REGIONAL FLOOD HEIGHT. A calculated upward rise in the regional
flood elevation greater than 0.00 foot, based on a comparison of existing
conditions and proposed conditions which is directly attributable to
development in the floodplain but not attributable to manipulation of
mathematical variables such as roughness factors, expansion and contraction
coefficients and discharge.
   LAND USE. Any nonstructural use made of unimproved or improved real estate.
(Also see “development”.)
   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE. Elevation of the lowest ground surface that touches
any of the exterior walls of a building.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The LOWEST FLOOR of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement).
   MAINTENANCE. The act or process of ordinary upkeep and repairs, including
redecorating, refinishing, nonstructural repairs, or the replacement of
existing fixtures, systems or equipment with equivalent fixtures, systems, or
structures.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME includes a mobile home but does not include a mobile
recreational vehicle.
   MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK, EXPANSION TO EXISTING. The preparation of
additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed. This includes installation of
utilities, construction of streets and either final site grading, or the
pouring of concrete pads.
   MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous
parcels)  of land, divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or
sale.
   MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION, EXISTING. A parcel of land,
divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale, on which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots is completed before the
effective date of this chapter. At a minimum, this would include the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads.
   MOBILE RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is built on a single chassis,
400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection,
designed to be self-propelled, carried or permanently towable by a licensed,
light-duty vehicle, is licensed for highway use if registration is required and
is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. Manufactured
homes that are towed or carried onto a parcel of land, but do not remain
capable of being towed or carried, including park model homes, do not fall
within the definition of MOBILE RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   MODEL, CORRECTED EFFECTIVE. A hydraulic engineering model that corrects any
errors that occur in the duplicate effective model, adds any additional cross
sections to the duplicate effective model, or incorporates more detailed
topographic information than that used in the current effective model.
   MODEL, DUPLICATE EFFECTIVE. A copy of the hydraulic analysis used in the
effective FIS and referred to as the effective model.
   MODEL, EFFECTIVE. The hydraulic engineering model that was used to produce
the current effective Flood Insurance Study.
   MODEL, EXISTING (PRE-PROJECT). A modification of the duplicate effective
model or corrected effective model to reflect any man-made modifications that
have occurred within the floodplain since the date of the effective model but
prior to the construction of the project for which the revision is being
requested. If no modification has occurred since the date of the effective
model, then this model would be identical to the corrected effective model or
duplicate effective model.
   MODEL, REVISED (POST-PROJECT). A modification of the existing or pre-project
conditions model, duplicate effective model or corrected effective model to
reflect revised or post-project conditions.
   MUNICIPALITY or MUNICIPAL. The county, city or village governmental units
enacting, administering, and enforcing this zoning chapter.
   NAVD or NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM. Elevations referenced to mean sea
level datum, 1988 adjustment.
   NGVD or NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM. Elevations referenced to mean sea
level datum, 1929 adjustment.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of a floodplain zoning regulation adopted by
this community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   NON-FLOOD DISASTER. A fire or an ice storm, tornado, windstorm, mudslide, or
other destructive act of nature, but excludes a flood.
   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE. An existing lawful structure or building which is
not in conformity with the dimensional or structural requirements of this
chapter for the area of the floodplain which it occupies. (For example, an
existing residential structure in the floodfringe district is a conforming use.
However, if the lowest floor is lower than the flood protection elevation, the
structure is nonconforming.)
   NONCONFORMING USE. An existing lawful use or accessory use of a structure or
building which is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter for the
area of the floodplain which it occupies. (Such as a residence in the
floodway.)
   OBSTRUCTION TO FLOW. Any development which blocks the conveyance of
floodwaters such that this development alone or together with any future
development will cause an increase in regional flood height.
   OFFICIAL FLOODPLAIN ZONING MAP. That map, adopted and made part of this
chapter, as described in §
153.016, which has been approved by the Department and FEMA.
   OPEN SPACE USE. Those uses having a relatively low flood damage potential
and not involving structures.
   ORDINARY HIGHWATER MARK. The point on the bank or shore up to which the
presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a distinctive
mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation,
predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized characteristic.
   PERSON. An individual, or group of individuals, corporation, partnership,
association, municipality, or state agency.
   PRIVATE SEWAGE SYSTEM. A sewage treatment and disposal system serving one
structure with a septic tank and soil absorption field located on the same
parcel as the structure. It also means an alternative sewage system approved by
the Department of Safety and Professional Services, including a substitute for
the septic tank or soil absorption field, a holding tank, a system serving more
than one structure, or a system located on a different parcel than the
structure.
   PUBLIC UTILITIES. Those utilities using underground or overhead transmission
lines such as electric, telephone and telegraph, and distribution and
collection systems such as water, sanitary sewer, and storm sewer.
   REASONABLY SAFE FROM FLOODING. Means base flood waters will not inundate the
land or damage structures to be removed from the floodplain and that any
subsurface waters related to the base flood will not damage existing or
proposed buildings.
   REGIONAL FLOOD. A flood determined to be representative of large floods
known to have occurred in Wisconsin. A REGIONAL FLOOD is a flood with a 1%
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, and if depicted on the
FIRM, the RFE is equivalent to the BFE.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. The date the building permit was issued, provided the
actual START OF CONSTRUCTION, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The
actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction on a
site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond initial excavation, or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling, nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For an alteration, the actual start of
construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other
structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. Any man-made object with form, shape and utility, either
permanently or temporarily attached to, placed upon or set into the ground,
stream bed or lakebed, including, but not limited to, roofed and walled
buildings, gas or liquid storage tanks, bridges, dams and culverts.
   SUBDIVISION. Has the meaning given in Wis. Stats. § 236.02(12).
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure, whereby
the cost of  restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the equalized assessed value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition or improvement of a building or structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds 50% of the equalized assessed value of the structure before the
improvement or repair is started. If the structure has sustained substantial
damage, any repairs are considered SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT regardless of the
work performed. The term does not include either any project for the
improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary or
safety code violations identified by the building official and that are the
minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or any alteration of a
historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure’s continued designation as a historic structure.
   UNNECESSARY HARDSHIP. Where special conditions affecting a particular
property, which were not self-created, have made strict conformity with
restrictions governing areas, setbacks, frontage, height, or density
unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes of the
chapter.
   VARIANCE. An authorization by the Board of Adjustment or Appeals for the
construction or maintenance of a building or structure in a manner which is
inconsistent with dimensional standards (not uses) contained in the floodplain
zoning chapter.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the floodplain zoning chapter. A structure or other development
without required permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, floodproofing
certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is presumed to be
in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
   WATERSHED. The entire region contributing runoff or surface water to a
watercourse or body of water.
   WATER SURFACE PROFILE. A graphical representation showing the elevation of
the water surface of a watercourse for each position along a reach of river or
stream at a certain flood flow. A WATER SURFACE PROFILE of the regional flood
is used in regulating floodplain areas.
   WELL. Means an excavation opening in the ground made by digging, boring,
drilling, driving or  other methods, to obtain groundwater regardless of its
intended use.
(Prior Code, Ch. 19 § 10.0) (Ord. passed 7-8-2009; Ord. passed 1-10-2024)
§ 153.999 PENALTY.
    Any violation of the provisions of this chapter by any person shall be
unlawful and shall be referred to the Municipal Attorney who shall
expeditiously prosecute all such violators. A violator shall, upon conviction,
forfeit to the municipality a penalty of not more than $50, together with a
taxable cost of such action. Each day of continued violation shall constitute a
separate offense. Every violation of this chapter is a public nuisance, and the
creation may be enjoined, and the maintenance may be abated by action at suit
of the municipality, the state, or any citizen thereof pursuant to Wis. Stats.
§ 87.30.
(Prior Code, Ch. 19 § 9.0) (Ord. passed 7-8-2009; Ord. passed 1-10-2024)
CHAPTER 154: SHORELAND/WETLANDS
Section
Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Statement of Purpose
   
154.01   Statutory authorization
   
154.02   Finding of fact and purpose
General Provisions
   
154.15   Compliance
   
154.16   Municipalities and state agencies regulated
   
154.17   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
154.18   Interpretation
   
154.19   Annexed areas
   
154.20   Definitions
Shoreland-Wetland Zoning District
   
154.35   Zoning maps
   
154.36   District boundaries
   
154.37   Permitted uses
   
154.38   Prohibited uses
   
154.39   Nonconforming structures and uses
Administrative Provisions
   
154.50   Zoning Administrator
   
154.51   Zoning permits
   
154.52   Certificates of compliance
   
154.53   Conditional use permits
   
154.54   Fees
   
154.55   Recording
   
154.56   Revocation
   
154.57   Board of Appeals
   
154.58   Amending regulations
   
154.59   Enforcement
 
   
154.99   Penalty
STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
§ 154.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authorization in Wis. Stats. §§
61.35 and 61.351 for villages or Wis. Stats. §§ 62.23 and 62.231 for cities,
and Wis. Stats. §§ 59.692, 87.30 and 281.91.
(Prior Code, Ch. 20 § 1.1) (Ord. 84, passed 9-9-1987; Ord. passed 3-11-1992)
§ 154.02 FINDING OF FACT AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   Uncontrolled use of the shoreland-wetlands and pollution of the
navigable waters of the municipality would adversely affect the public health,
safety, convenience and general welfare and impair the tax base.
   (B)   The Legislature of Wisconsin has delegated responsibility to all
municipalities to:
      (1)   Promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare;
      (2)   Maintain the storm and flood water storage capacity of wetlands;
      (3)   Prevent and control water pollution by preserving wetlands which
filter or store sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or organic compounds that
would otherwise drain into navigable waters;
      (4)   Protect fish, their spawning grounds, other aquatic life and
wildlife by preserving wetlands and other aquatic habitat;
      (5)   Prohibit certain uses detrimental to the shoreland-wetland area;
and
      (6)   Preserve shore cover and natural beauty by restricting the removal
of natural shoreland cover and controlling shoreland-wetland excavation,
filling and other earth moving activities.
(Prior Code, Ch. 20 § 1.2) (Ord. 84, passed 9-9-1987; Ord. passed 3-11-1992)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.15 COMPLIANCE.
   The use of wetlands and the alteration of wetlands within shoreland area of
the municipality shall be in full compliance with the terms of this chapter and
other applicable local, state or federal regulations. (However, see §
154.39 for the standards applicable to nonconforming uses.) All permitted
development shall require the issuance of a zoning permit unless otherwise
expressly excluded by a provision of this chapter.
(Prior Code, Ch. 20 § 2.1) (Ord. 84, passed 9-9-1987; Ord. passed 3-11-1992)
§ 154.16 MUNICIPALITIES AND STATE AGENCIES REGULATED.
   Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns and
counties are required to comply with this chapter and obtain all necessary
permits. State agencies are required to comply if Wis. Stats. § 13.48(13)
applies. The construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state
highways and bridges by the State Department of Transportation are exempt when
Wis. Stats. § 30.12 applies.
(Prior Code, Ch. 20 § 2.2) (Ord. 84, passed 9-9-1987; Ord. passed 3-11-1992)
§ 154.17 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   This chapter supersedes all the provisions of any municipal zoning
ordinance enacted under Wis. Stats. §§ 61.35, 62.23 or 87.30, which relate to
floodplains and shoreland-wetlands, except that where another municipal zoning
ordinance is more restrictive than this chapter, that ordinance shall continue
in full force and effect to the extent of the greater restrictions, but not
otherwise.
   (B)   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing deed restrictions, covenants or easements. However, where this chapter
imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail.
(Prior Code, Ch. 20 § 2.3) (Ord. 84, passed 9-9-1987; Ord. passed 3-11-1992)
§ 154.18 INTERPRETATION.
   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in
favor of the municipality and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any
other powers granted by the state statutes. Where a provision of this chapter
is required by a standard in Wis. Adm. Code Chapter NR 117, and where the
ordinance provision is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of
the Chapter NR 117 standards in effect on the date of the adoption of this
chapter or in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to this
chapter.
(Prior Code, Ch. 20 § 2.4) (Ord. 84, passed 9-9-1987; Ord. passed 3-11-1992)
§ 154.19 ANNEXED AREAS.
   The county shoreland zoning provisions in effect on the date of annexation
remain in effect administered by the municipality for all areas annexed by the
municipality after May 7, 1982. These annexed lands are described on the
municipality’s official zoning map. The county shoreland zoning provisions are
incorporated by reference for the purpose of administering this section and are
on file in the office of the municipal Zoning Administrator.
(Prior Code, Ch. 20 § 2.6) (Ord. 84, passed 9-9-1987; Ord. passed 3-11-1992)
§ 154.20 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of administering and enforcing this chapter, the terms
or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows. Words used in the present
tense include the future; words in the singular number include the plural
number; words in the plural number include the singular number. The word
“shall” is mandatory, not permissive. All distances, unless otherwise
specified, shall be measured horizontally.
   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE. A detached subordinate structure or a use
which is clearly incidental to, and customarily found in connection with, the
principal structure or use to which it is related and which is located on the
same lot as that of the principal structure or use.
      BOATHOUSE. As defined in Wis. Stats. § 30.121, means a permanent
structure used for the storage of watercraft and associated materials and
includes all structures which are totally enclosed, have roofs or walls or any
combination of structural parts.
      CLASS 2 PUBLIC NOTICE.  Publication of a public hearing notice under Wis.
Stats. Chapter 985, in a newspaper of circulation in the affected area.
Publication is required on two consecutive weeks, the last at least seven days
prior to the hearing.
      CONDITIONAL, USE. A use which is permitted by this chapter, provided that
certain conditions specified in this chapter are met and that a permit is
granted by the Board of Appeals or, where appropriate, the planning agency
designated by the municipal governing body.
      DEPARTMENT. The State Department of Natural Resources.
      DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to the construction of buildings, structures or
accessory structures; the construction of additions or substantial alterations
to buildings, structures or accessory structures, the placement of buildings or
structures; ditching, lagooning, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation
or drilling operations; and the disposition or extraction of earthen materials.
      DRAINAGE SYSTEM. One or more artificial ditches, tile drains or similar
devices which collect surface runoff or groundwater and convey it to a point of
discharge.
      ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL FACILITY. Any facility, temporary or permanent,
which is reasonably expected to abate, reduce or aid in the prevention,
measurement, control or monitoring of noise, air or water pollutants, solid
waste and thermal pollution, radiation or other pollutants, including
facilities installed principally to supplement or to replace existing property
or equipment not meeting or allegedly not meeting acceptably pollution control
standards or which are to be supplemented or replaced by other pollution
control facilities.
      FIXED HOUSEBOAT. As defined in Wis. Stats. § 30.121, a structure not
actually used for navigation which extends beyond the ordinary highwater mark
of a navigable waterway and is retained in place either by cables to the
shoreline or by anchors or spudpoles attached to the bed of the waterway.
      NAVIGABLE WATERS.  
         (a)   Lake Superior, Lake Michigan, all natural inland lakes within
this state, and all streams, ponds, sloughs, flowages and other waters within
the territorial limits of this state, including the Wisconsin portion of
boundary waters, which are navigable under the laws of this state. Under Wis.
Stats. §§ 59.692 and 281.91, notwithstanding any other provision of law or
administrative rule promulgated thereunder, shoreland ordinances required under
Wis. Stats.§ 61.351 and Wis. Adm. Code Chapter NR 117, do not apply to lands
adjacent to farm drainage ditches if:
            1.   Such lands are not adjacent to a natural navigable stream or
river;
            2.   Those parts of such drainage ditches adjacent to such lands
were not navigable streams before ditching; and
            3.   Such lands are maintained in nonstructural agricultural use.
         (b)   The state’s Supreme Court has declared navigable bodies of water
that have a bed differentiated from adjacent uplands and levels or flow
sufficient to support navigation by a recreational craft of the shallowest
draft on an annually recurring basis [Nuench v. Public Service Commission, 261
Wis. 492 (1952) and DeGaynor and Co., Inc., v. Department of Natural Resources,
70 Wis. 2d 936 (1975)]. For example, a stream which is navigable by skiff or
canoe during normal spring high water is navigable, in fact, under the laws of
this state though it may be dry during other seasons.
      ORDINARY HIGHWATER MARK. The point on the bank or shore up to which the
presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a distinctive
mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation,
predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily recognized characteristic.
      PLANNING AGENCY. The Municipal Plan Commission created under Wis. Stats.
§ 62.23(1), a board of public land commissioners or a committee of the
municipality’s governing body which acts on matters pertaining to planning and
zoning.
      SHORELANDS. Lands within the following distances from the ordinary
highwater mark of navigable waters; 1,000 feet from a lake, pond or flowage;
and 300 feet from a river or stream or to the landwards side of the floodplain,
whichever distance is greater.
      SHORELAND-WETLAND DISTRICT. The zoning district, created in this
shoreland-wetland zoning chapter, comprised of shorelands that are designated
as wetlands on the wetlands inventory maps which have been adopted and made a
part of this chapter.
      UNNECESSARY HARDSHIP. The circumstance where special conditions, which
were not self-created, affect a particular property and make strict conformity
with restrictions governing area, setbacks, frontage height or density
unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes of this
chapter.
      VARIANCE. An authorization granted by the Board of Appeals to construct
or alter a building or structure in a manner that deviates from the dimensional
standards of this chapter.
      WETLAND ALTERATION. Any filling, flooding, draining, dredging, ditching,
tiling, excavating, temporary water level stabilization measures or dike and
dam construction in a wetland area.
      WETLANDS. Those areas where water is at, near or above the land surface
long enough to support aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation and which have soils
indicative of wet conditions.
(Prior Code, Ch. 20 § 8.0) (Ord. 84, passed 9-9-1987; Ord. passed 3-11-1992)
SHORELAND-WETLAND ZONING DISTRICT
§ 154.35 ZONING MAPS.
   The following maps are hereby adopted and made part of this chapter and are
on file in the office of the Municipal Clerk:
   (A)   Wisconsin Wetland Inventory maps stamped “Final” on April 29, 1987;
   (B)   Floodplain zoning map titled “Flood Insurance Rate Map” and dated
January 5, 1989; and
   (C)   United States Geological Survey Maps dated 1973.
(Prior Code, Ch. 20 § 3.1) (Ord. 84, passed 9-9-1987; Ord. passed 3-11-1992)
§ 154.36 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   (A)   The Shoreland-Wetland Zoning District includes all wetlands in the
municipality are shown on the final Wetland Inventory Map that has been adopted
and made a part of this chapter and which are:
      (1)   Within 1,000 feet of the ordinary highwater mark of navigable
lakes, ponds or flowages. Lakes, ponds or flowages in the municipality shall be
presumed to be navigable if they are shown on the United States Geological
Survey quadrangle maps or other zoning base maps which have been incorporated
by reference and made a part of this chapter.
      (2)   Within 300 feet of the ordinary highwater mark of navigable rivers
or streams, or to the landward side of the floodplain, whichever distance is
greater. Rivers and streams shall be presumed to be navigable if they are
designated as either continuous or intermittent waterways on the United States
Geological Survey quadrangle maps or other zoning base maps which have been
incorporated by reference and made a part of this chapter. Floodplain zoning
maps adopted in §
154.35 shall be used to determine the extent of floodplain areas.
   (B)   Determinations of navigability and ordinary highwater mark location
shall initially be made by the Zoning Administrator. When questions arise, the
Zoning Administrator shall contact the appropriate district office of the
Department for a final determination of navigability or ordinary highwater
mark.
   (C)   When an apparent discrepancy exists between the Shoreland-Wetland
District boundary shown on the official zoning maps and actual field conditions
at the time the maps were adopted, the zoning administrator shall contact the
appropriate district office of the Department to determine if the Shoreland-
Wetland District boundary, as mapped, is in error. If Department staff concur
with the Zoning Administrator that a particular area was incorrectly mapped as
a wetland, the Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to immediately
grant or deny a zoning permit in accordance with the regulations applicable to
the correct zoning district. In order to correct wetland mapping errors shown
on the official shoreland-wetland zoning maps, the Zoning Administrator shall
be responsible for initiating a map amendment within a reasonable period.
(Prior Code, Ch. 20 § 3.2) (Ord. 84, passed 9-9-1987; Ord. passed 3-11-1992)
§ 154.37 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses are permitted subject to the provisions of Wis. Stats.
Chapters 30 and 31, and the provisions of other local, state and federal laws,
if applicable.
   (A)   Activities and uses which do not require the issuance of a zoning
permit, provided that no wetland alteration occurs:
      (1)   Hiking, fishing, trapping, hunting, swimming, snowmobiling and
boating;
      (2)   The harvesting of wild crops, such as marsh hay, ferns, moss, wild
rice, berries, tree fruits and tree seeds, in a manner that is not injurious to
the natural reproduction of such crops;
      (3)   The practice of silviculture, including the planting, thinning and
harvesting of timer;
      (4)   The pasturing of livestock;
      (5)   The cultivation of agricultural crops; and
      (6)   The construction and maintenance of duck blinds.
   (B)   Uses which do not require the issuance of a zoning permit and which
may involve wetland alterations only to the extent specifically provided below:
      (1)   The practice of silviculture, including limited, temporary water
level stabilization measures which are necessary to alleviate abnormally wet or
dry conditions that would have an adverse impact on the conduct of
silvicultural activities if not corrected;
      (2)   The cultivation of cranberries, including limited wetland
alterations necessary for the purpose of growing and harvesting cranberries;
      (3)   The maintenance and repair of existing drainage systems to restore
pre-existing levels of drainage, including the minimum amount of filling
necessary to dispose of dredged spoil, provided that the filling is otherwise
permissible and that dredged spoil is placed on existing spoil banks where
possible;
      (4)   The construction and maintenance of fences for the pasturing of
livestock, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such
construction or maintenance;
      (5)   The construction and maintenance of piers, docks, walkways,
observation decks and trail bridges built on pilings, including limited
excavating and filling necessary for such construction or maintenance;
      (6)   The installation and maintenance of sealed tiles for the purpose of
draining lands outside the Shoreland-Wetland Zoning District, provided that
such installation or maintenance is done in a manner designed to minimize
adverse impacts upon the natural functions of the shoreland-wetland listed in §
154.58(C); and
      (7)   The maintenance, repair, replacement and reconstruction of existing
highways and bridges, including limited excavating and filling necessary for
such maintenance, repair, replacement or reconstruction.
   (C)   Uses which are allowed upon the issuance of a conditional use permit
and which may include wetland alterations only to the extent specifically
provided below:
      (1)   The construction and maintenance of roads which are necessary for
the continuity of the municipal street system, the provision of essential
utility and emergency services or to provide access to uses permitted under
this section, provided that;
         (a)   The road cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the
wetland;
         (b)   The road is designed and constructed to minimize adverse impacts
upon the natural functions of the wetland listed in §
154.58(C);
         (c)   The road is designed and constructed with the minimum cross-
sectional area practical to serve the intended use;
         (d)   Road construction activities are carried out in the immediate
area of the roadbed only; and
         (e)   Any wetland alteration must be necessary for the construction or
maintenance of the road.
      (2)   The construction and maintenance of nonresidential buildings,
provided that:
         (a)   The building is used solely in conjunction with a use permitted
in the Shoreland-Wetland District or for the raising of waterfowl, minnows or
other wetland or aquatic animals;
         (b)   The building cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside
the wetland;
         (c)   The building does not exceed 500 square feet in floor area; and
         (d)   Only limited filling and excavating necessary to provide
structural support for the building is allowed.
      (3)   The establishment and development of public and private parks and
recreation areas, outdoor education areas, historic, natural and scientific
areas, game refuges and closed areas, fish and wildlife habitat improvement
projects, game bird and animal farms, wildlife preserves and public boat
launching ramps, provided that:
         (a)   Any private development allowed under this division (C) shall be
used exclusively for the permitted purpose;
         (b)   Only limited filling and excavating necessary for the
development of public boat launching ramps, swimming beaches or the
construction of park shelters or similar structures is allowed;
         (c)   The construction and maintenance of roads necessary for the uses
permitted under this division (C)(3) are allowed only where such construction
and maintenance meets the criteria in division (C)(1) above; and
         (d)   Wetland alterations in game refuges and closed areas, fish and
wildlife habitat improvement projects, game bird and animal farms and wildlife
preserves shall be for the purpose of improving wildlife habitat or to
otherwise enhance wetland values.
      (4)   The construction and maintenance of electric and telephone
transmission lines, water and gas distribution lines and sewage collection
lines and related facilities, and the construction and maintenance of railroad
lines, provided that:
         (a)   The utility transmission and distribution facilities and
railroad lines cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland;
         (b)   Only limited filling or excavating necessary for such
construction or maintenance is allowed; and
         (c)   Such construction or maintenance is done in a manner designed to
minimize adverse impacts upon the natural functions of the wetland listed in §
154.58(C).
(Prior Code, Ch. 20 § 3.3) (Ord. 84, passed 9-9-1987; Ord. passed 3-11-1992)
§ 154.38 PROHIBITED USES.
   (A)   Any use not listed in §
154.37 is prohibited, unless the wetland or a portion of the wetland has been
rezoned by amendment of this chapter in accordance with §
154.58.
   (B)   The use of a boathouse for human habitation and the construction or
placement of a boathouse or fixed houseboat below the ordinary highwater mark
of any navigable waters are prohibited.
(Prior Code, Ch. 20 § 3.4) (Ord. 84, passed 9-9-1987; Ord. passed 3-11-1992)
Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 154.39 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES AND USES.
   The lawful use of a building, structure or property which existed at the
time of this chapter, or an applicable amendment to this chapter took effect
and which is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, including
the routine maintenance of such a building or structure, may be continued,
subject to the following conditions.
   (A)   The shoreland-wetland provisions of this chapter authorized by Wis.
Stats. § 61.351 shall not limit the repair, reconstruction, renovation,
remodeling or expansion of a nonconforming structure or of any environmental
control facility related to such a structure in existence on the effective date
of the shoreland-wetland provisions. All other modifications to nonconforming
structures are subject to Wis. Stats. § 62.231, which limits total lifetime
structural repairs and alterations to 50% of current fair market value.
   (B)   If a nonconforming use of the use of a nonconforming structure is
discontinued for 12 consecutive months, any future use of the building,
structure or property shall conform to this chapter.
   (C)   Any legal nonconforming use of the property which does not involve the
use of a structure and which existed at the time of the adoption or subsequent
amendment of this chapter adopted under Wis. Stats. § 61.351 or § 62.23(7)(h)
may be continued although use does not conform with the provisions of this
chapter. However, such nonconforming use may not be extended.
   (D)   The maintenance and repair of nonconforming boathouses which are
located below the ordinary highwater mark of any navigable waters shall comply
with the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 30.121.
   (E)   Uses which are nuisances under common law shall not be permitted to
continue as nonconforming uses.
(Prior Code, Ch. 20 § 4.0) (Ord. 84, passed 9-9-1987; Ord. passed 3-11-1992)
Penalty, see §
154.99
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
§ 154.50 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   The Improvement and Services Committee will act as Zoning
Administrator and is designated to administer and enforce this chapter.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator shall have the following duties and powers:
      (1)   Advise applicants as to the provisions of this chapter and assist
them in preparing permit applications and appeal forms;
      (2)   Issue permits and certificates of compliance and inspect properties
for compliance with this chapter;
      (3)   Keep records of all permits issued, inspections made, work
approved, other official actions;
      (4)   Have access to any structure or premises between hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m. (or by other appointment) for the purpose of performing these
duties;
      (5)   Submit copies of decisions on variances, conditional use permits,
appeals if or a map or text interpretation, and map or text amendments within
ten days after they are granted or denied, to the appropriate district office
of the Department; and
      (6)   Investigate and report violations of this chapter to the
appropriate municipal planning agency (the Village Board) and the District
Attorney, corporation counsel or Municipal Attorney.
(Prior Code, Ch. 20 § 5.1) (Ord. 84, passed 9-9-1987; Ord. passed 3-11-1992)
§ 154.51 ZONING PERMITS.
   (A)   When required. Unless another section of this chapter specifically
exempts certain types of development from this requirement, a zoning permit
shall be obtained form the Zoning Administrator before any new development, as
defined in §
154.20, or any change in the use of an existing building or structure is
initiated.
   (B)   Application. An application for zoning permit shall be made to the
Zoning Administrator upon forms furnished by the village and shall include, for
the purpose of proper enforcement of these regulations, the following
information:
      (1)   General information.
         (a)   Name, address and telephone number of applicant, property owner
and contractor, where applicable;
         (b)   Legal description of the property and a general description of
the proposed use or development; and
         (c)   Whether or not a private water supply or sewage system is to be
installed.
      (2)   Site development plan. The site development plan shall be submitted
as a part of the permit application and shall contain the following information
drawn to scale:
         (a)   Dimensions and area of the lot;
         (b)   Location of any structures with distances measured from the lot
lines and centerline of all abutting streets or highways;
         (c)   Description of any existing or proposed on-site sewage systems
or private water-supply systems;
         (d)   Location of the ordinary highwater mark of any abutting
navigable waterways;
         (e)   Boundaries of all wetlands;
         (f)   Existing and proposed topographic and drainage features and
vegetative cover;
         (g)   Location of floodplain and floodway limits on the property as
determined form floodplain zoning maps;
         (h)   Location of existing or future access roads; and
         (i)   Specifications and dimensions for areas of proposed wetland
alteration.
   (C)   Expiration. All permits issued under the authority of this chapter
shall expire 12 months from the date of issuance.
(Prior Code, Ch. 20 § 5.2) (Ord. 84, passed 9-9-1987; Ord. passed 3-11-1992)
§ 154.52 CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   Except where no zoning permit or conditional use permit is required,
no land shall be occupied or used, and no building which is hereafter
constructed, altered, added to, modified, rebuilt or replaced shall be
occupied, until a certificate of compliance is issued by the Zoning
Administrator subject to the following provisions.
      (1)   The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or
premises or part thereof, and the proposed use thereof, conform to the
provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the
application for a zoning or conditional use permit.
      (3)   The certificate of compliance shall be issued within ten days after
notification of the completion of the work specified in the zoning or
conditional use permit, providing the building or premises and proposed use
thereof conform with all the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator may issue a temporary certificate of
compliance for a building, premises or part thereof pursuant to rules and
regulations established by the municipal governing body.
   (C)   Upon written request from the owner, the Zoning Administrator shall
issue a certificate of compliance for any building or premises existing at the
time of ordinance adoption, certifying, after inspection, the extent and type
of use made of the building or premises and whether or not such use conforms to
the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, Ch. 20 § 5.3) (Ord. 84, passed 9-9-1987; Ord. passed 3-11-1992)
§ 154.53 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.
   (A)   Application. Any use listed as a conditional use in this chapter shall
be permitted only after an application has been submitted to the Zoning
Administrator and a conditional use permit has been granted by the Board of
Appeals following the procedures in §
154.57(C), (D) and (E).
   (B)   Conditions. Upon consideration of the permit application and the
standards applicable to the conditional uses designated in §
154.37(C), the Board of Appeals shall attach such conditions to a conditional
use permit, in addition to those required elsewhere in this chapter, as are
necessary to further the purposes of this chapter as listed in §
154.02. Such conditions may include specifications for (without limitation
because of specific enumeration): type of shore cover; erosion controls;
increased setbacks; specific sewage disposal and water, supply facilities;
landscaping and planting screens; period of operation; operational control;
sureties; deed restrictions; location of piers, docks, parking areas and signs;
and type of construction. To secure information upon which to base its
determination, the Board of Appeals may require the applicant to furnish, in
addition to the information required for a zoning permit, other pertinent
information which is necessary to determine if the proposed use is consistent
with the purpose of this chapter.
(Prior Code, Ch. 20 § 5.4) (Ord. 84, passed 9-9-1987; Ord. passed 3-11-1992)
§ 154.54 FEES.
   The municipal governing body may, by resolution, adopt fees for the
following:
   (A)   Zoning permits;
   (B)   Certificates of compliance;
   (C)   Public hearings;
   (D)   Legal notice publications;
   (E)   Conditional use permits; and
   (F)   Rezoning petitions.
(Prior Code, Ch. 20 § 5.5) (Ord. 84, passed 9-9-1987; Ord. passed 3-11-1992)
§ 154.55 RECORDING.
   Where a zoning permit or conditional use permit is approved, an appropriate
record shall be made by the Zoning Administrator of the land use and structures
permitted.
(Prior Code, Ch. 20 § 5.6) (Ord. 84, passed 9-9-1987; Ord. passed 3-11-1992)
§ 154.56 REVOCATION.
   Where the conditions of a zoning permit or conditional use permit are
violated, the permit shall be revoked by the Board of Appeals.
(Prior Code, Ch. 20 § 5.7) (Ord. 84, passed 9-9-1987; Ord. passed 3-11-1992)
§ 154.57 BOARD OF APPEALS.
   (A)   Establishment. The Village President shall appoint a Board of Appeals
under Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e), consisting of five members subject to
confirmation by the municipal governing body. The Board of Appeals shall adopt
rules for the conduct of its business as required by Wis. Stats. § 63.23(7)
(e)3.
   (B)   Power and duties. The Board of Appeals:
      (1)   Shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in
any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative
official in the enforcement or administration of this chapter;
      (2)   Shall hear and decide applications for conditional use permits; and
      (3)   May authorize upon appeal a variance from the dimensional standard
of this chapter where an applicant convincingly demonstrates that:
         (a)   Literal enforcement of the terms of this chapter will result in
unnecessary hardship for the applicant;
         (b)   The hardship is due to special conditions unique to the property
and is not self-created or based solely on economic gain or loss; and
         (c)   Such variance is not contrary to the public interest as
expressed by the purpose of this chapter.
   (C)   Appeals to the Board. Appeals to the Board of Appeals may be taken by
any person aggrieved or by an officer, department, board or bureau of the
community affected by an order, requirement, decision or determination of the
Zoning Administrator or other administrative official. Such appeals shall be
taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the Board by filing
with the official whose decision is in question, and with the Board of Appeals,
a notice of appeal specifying the reasons for the appeal. The Zoning
Administrator or other official whose decision is in question shall transmit to
the Board all the papers constituting the record on the matter appealed.
   (D)   Public hearings.
      (1)   Before making a decision on an appeal or application, the Board of
Appeals shall, within a reasonable period of time, hold a public hearing. The
Board shall give public notice of the hearing by publishing a Class 2 notice
under Wis. Stats. Chapter 985, specifying the date, time and place of the
hearing and the matters to come before the Board. At the public hearing, any
party may present testimony in person, by agent or by attorney.
      (2)   A copy of such notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest
and the appropriate district office of the Department at least ten days prior
to all public hearings on issues involving shoreland-wetland zoning.
   (E)   Decisions.
      (1)   The final disposition of an appeal or application for a conditional
use permit before the Board of Appeals shall be in the form of a written
decision, made within a reasonable time after the public hearing and signed by
the Board Chairperson. Such decision shall state the specific facts which are
the basis of the Board’s determination and shall either affirm, reverse or
modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed, in whole or
in part; dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction or prosecution; or grant
the application for a conditional use.
      (2)   A copy of such decision shall be mailed to the parties in interest
and the appropriate district office of the Department within ten days after the
decision is issued.
(Prior Code, Ch. 20 § 5.8) (Ord. 84, passed 9-9-1987; Ord. passed 3-11-1992)
§ 154.58 AMENDING REGULATIONS.
   The municipal governing body may alter, supplement or change the district
boundaries and the regulations contained in this chapter in accordance with the
requirements of Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(d)2., Wis. Adm. Code NR 117 and the
following.
   (A)   A copy of each proposed text or map amendment shall be submitted to
the appropriate district office of the Department within five days of the
submission of the proposed amendment to the municipal planning agency.
   (B)   All proposed text and map amendments to the shoreland-wetland zoning
regulations shall be referred to the municipal planning agency, and a public
hearing shall be held after Class 2 notice. The Department of Natural Resources
shall be provided with written notice of the public hearing at least ten days
prior to such hearing.
   (C)   In order to ensure that this chapter will remain consistent with the
shoreland protection objectives of Wis. Stats. § 59.692 and 281.91, the
municipal governing body may not rezone a wetland in a Shoreland-Wetland Zoning
District, or any portion thereof, where the proposed rezoning may result in a
significant adverse impact upon any of the following wetland functions:
      (1)   Storm and flood water storage capacity;
      (2)   Maintenance of dry season stream flow or the discharge of
groundwater to a wetland, the recharge of groundwater from a wetland to another
area or the flow of groundwater through a wetland;
      (3)   Filtering or storage of sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or
organic compounds that would otherwise drain into navigable waters;
      (4)   Shoreline protection against erosion;
      (5)   Fish spawning, breeding, nursery or feeding grounds;
      (6)   Wildlife habitat; or
      (7)   Areas of special recreational, scenic or scientific interest,
including scarce wetland types and habitat of endangered species.
   (D)   Where the district office of the Department determines that a proposed
rezoning may have a significant adverse impact upon any of the criteria listed
in division (C) above, the Department shall so notify the municipality of its
determination either prior to or during the public hearing on the proposed
amendment.
   (E)   The appropriate district office of the Department shall be provided
with:
      (1)   A copy of the recommendation and report, if any, of the municipal
planning agency on a proposed text or map amendment, within ten days after the
submission of those recommendations to the municipal governing body; and
      (2)   Written notice of the action on the proposed text or map amendment
within ten days after the action is taken.
   (F)   If the Department notifies the municipal planning agency in writing
that a proposed amendment may have a significant adverse impact upon any of the
criteria listed in division (C) above, that proposed amendment, if approved by
the municipal governing body, shall not become effective until more than 30
days have elapsed since written notice of the municipal approval was mailed to
the Department, as required by division (E)(2) above. If within the 30-day
period, the Department notifies the municipality that the Department intends to
adopt a superseding shoreland-wetland zoning ordinance for the municipality as
provided by Wis. Stats. § 62.231(6) or § 61.351(6), the proposed amendment
shall not become effective until the ordinance adoption procedure under Wis.
Stats. § 62.231(6) or § 61.351(c) is completed or otherwise terminated.
(Prior Code, Ch. 20 § 6.0) (Ord. 84, passed 9-9-1987; Ord. passed 3-11-1992)
§ 154.59 ENFORCEMENT.
   Any development, building or structure or accessary building or structure
constructed, altered, added to, modified, rebuilt or replaced or any use or
accessory use established after the effective date of this chapter in violation
of the provisions of this chapter, by any person, firm, association,
corporation (including building contractors or their agents) shall be deemed a
violation. The Zoning Administrator shall refer violations to the municipal
planning agency and the District Attorney, corporation counsel or Municipal
Attorney who shall prosecute such violations.
(Prior Code, Ch. 20 § 7.0) (Ord. 84, passed 9-9-1987; Ord. passed 3-11-1992)
Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, association or corporation who violates or refuses to
comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a
forfeiture of not less than $10 nor more than $500 per offense, together with
the taxable costs of such action. Each day of continued violation shall
constitute a separate offense. Every violation of this chapter is a public
nuisance and the creation thereof may be enjoined’ and the maintenance thereof
may be abated by action at suit of the municipality, the state or any citizen
thereof pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 87.30(2).
(Prior Code, Ch. 20 § 7.0) (Ord. 84, passed 9-9-1987; Ord. passed 3-11-1992)
CHAPTER 155: LAND SUBDIVISION AND REGULATIONS
Section
   
155.01   Introduction and purpose
   
155.02   Definitions
   
155.03   General requirements
   
155.04   Procedure for subdividing
   
155.05   Required improvements
   
155.06   Design standards
   
155.07   Land development other than subdivision (lot divisions)
   
155.08   Subdivisions created by successive divisions
   
155.09   Replats
   
155.10   Variances
 
   
155.99   Penalty
§ 155.01 INTRODUCTION AND PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control the division of land
within the corporate limits of the village in order to promote the public
health, safety and general welfare of the community.
(Prior Code, § 17.01)
§ 155.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. All other
pertinent terms shall be defined in the Zoning Code of the village (see
Chapter 157) and in Wis. Stats. Chapter 236.
   ALLEYS. Those streets which are a secondary means of access for vehicular
service to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
   COLLECTOR STREETS.  Those streets which carry traffic from minor streets to
the major streets and highways and includes the principal entrance streets to
residential developments and streets for circulation within such development.
   DWELLING UNIT.  A self-contained place of residence, comprising the usual
kitchen, bath and sleeping facilities.
   EXTRA-TERRITORIAL PLAT APPROVAL JURISDICTION. The unincorporated area within
one and one-half miles of the corporate limits of the village.
   LOT DIVISION.  The division of a parcel of land into two lots or parcels,
any one of which is less than three acres in area, for the purpose of sale or
building development.
   MAJOR STREETS AND HIGHWAYS. Those streets which are used primarily for fast
or heavy through traffic.
   MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS.  Streets which are parallel and adjacent to major
streets and highways and which provide access to abutting properties and
protection from through traffic. Theses could also be called FRONTAGE STREETS.
   MASTER PLAN. The comprehensive plan for guiding and shaping the growth and
development of the village community, including all of its component parts as
set forth in the various maps, plats, charts and descriptive and explanatory
matters.
   MINOR STREETS.  Those streets which are used primarily for access to
abutting properties.
   OFFICIAL MAP. The map indicating the location, width and/or extent of
existing and proposed streets highways, parkways, parks and playgrounds as
adopted and amended by the Village Board pursuant to Wis. Stats. § 62.23.
   STREET. A way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street,
highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane and
place or however otherwise designated.
   SUBDIVIDER.  Any person, individual, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, estate, trust or any other group or combination acting as a unit,
dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision as
herein defined, and including any agent of the SUBDIVIDER.
   SUBDIVISION.  The division of a lot, parcel or tract of land by the owners
thereof or their agents for the purpose of sale or of building development
where:
      (1)   The act of division creates five or more parcels or buildings sites
of one and one-half acres each or less in area; or
      (2)   The act of division creates five or more parcels or building sites
of one and one-half acres each or less in area by successive divisions within a
period of five years.
(Prior Code, § 17.02)
§ 155.03 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Subdivisions. No person, firm or corporation shall divide any land
located within the corporate limits of the village or within the extra-
territorial plat approval jurisdiction thereof which shall result in a
subdivision as defined herein without complying with the provisions of Wis.
Stats. Chapter 236 and the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Requirements. The proposed subdivision shall conform to:
      (1)   The provisions of Wis. Stats. Chapter 236;
      (2)   All applicable ordinances of the village;
      (3)   The Master Plan and Official Map or any portion thereof;
      (4)   The rules of the State Department of Industry Labor and Human
Relations relating to lot size and lot elevation if the subdivision is not
served by a public sewer and provision for such service has not been made; and
      (5)   The rules of the State Department of Transportation, Division of
Highways relating to safety of access and the preservation of the public
interest and investment in the streets if the subdivision or any lot contained
therein abuts on a state trunk highway or connecting street.
   (C)   Specific conditions.
      (1)   Whenever a subdivision embraces any street, alley, easement,
watercourse or greenway designated in the Master Plan or Official Map of the
village, such part of such proposed public way shall be platted and dedicated
by the subdivider in the location and at the width indicated.
      (2)   Where any drainage easement or utility easement is in existence or
required, the developer shall include the limits of such easement on the final
plat.
      (3)   For subdivisions and lot division, lot sizes shall conform to the
area and width requirements of the zoning chapter. In commercial and industrial
districts where the Village Board deems that the minimum width and area
requirements under the zoning chapter should be enlarged due to the proposed
use and development contemplated, the Village Board shall consider the factors
relating to the health, safety, welfare and general aesthetics of the area
platted and the community generally.
      (4)   A lot grading plan for the entire subdivision shall be submitted
with the preliminary plat application.
   (D)   Exceptions. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
      (1)   Transfers of interests in the land by will or pursuant to court
order;
      (2)   Leases for a term not to exceed ten years, mortgages or easements;
or
      (3)   Sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining
properties, if additional lots are not thereby created, and if the resulting
lots are not reduced below the minimum sizes required by Wis. Stats. Chapter
236, or any ordinance of the village.
(Prior Code, § 17.03)
§ 155.04 PROCEDURE FOR SUBDIVIDING.
   In planning and developing a subdivision, the subdivider or his or her agent
shall in every case pursue the following course unless excused by the Village
Board.
   (A)   Pre-application procedure. Previous to the filing of an application
for preliminary plat, the subdivider may consult the Village Board and its
staff for advice and assistance. This step does not require formal application,
fee or filing of a plat, but is intended to informally inform the subdivider of
the objectives of these regulations and the Master Plan and Official Map and to
informally reach mutual conclusions regarding the general program and
objectives of the development.
      (1)   The subdivider shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plat and
supplementary materials by a state registered land surveyor and shall file with
the Village Clerk, a written application for conditional approval of said plat,
accompanied by five blueline prints, or other acceptable reproductions, at
least ten days prior to the meeting of the Village Board at which action is
desired.
      (2)   The preliminary plat shall cover the entire area owned by the
subdivider even though only a small portion is proposed for development at the
time. The Village Board may waive this requirement where it is unnecessary to
fulfill the purpose of this chapter and undue hardship would result from strict
application thereof.
      (3)   Following review of the preliminary plat and other material
submitted for conformity with all ordinances, administrative rules and
regulations, negotiations with the subdivider on changes deemed advisable and
the kind and extent of public improvements which will be required, the Village
Board shall within 90 days of the filing of the plat, in writing, approve,
approve conditionally or reject the plat. Such time may be extended by
agreement with the subdivider.
      (4)   The action of the Village Board shall be noted on three copies of
the preliminary plat, one copy to be returned to the subdivider with the data
and action endorsed thereon and, if approved conditionally or rejected, the
conditions or reasons thereof.
      (5)   Conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute
approval of the final plat; rather, it shall be deemed an expression of
approval or conditional approval of the layout submitted as a guide to the
preparation of the final plat which will be subject to further consideration of
the Village Board.
   (B)   Final plat procedure.
      (1)   The final plat, a written application for approval, and such copies
thereof as shall be required by the Village Board shall be submitted to the
Village Clerk within six months of approval of the preliminary plat and at
least seven days prior to the meeting of the Village Board at which action is
desired. The Village Board, may, however, waive compliance within the six
months’ time limit.
      (2)   The subdivider shall not submit the final plat until the approval
of the state as required by Wis. Stats. § 236.12, or of such other officer or
division of the state as shall from time to time be vested with the authority
to review and approve plats, shall have been first obtained. The Village Board
shall approve or reject the final plat within 60 days of its submission to the
Village Clerk, unless the time is extended by agreement with the subdivider.
Reasons for rejection shall be forwarded to the subdivider in writing.
      (3)   The final plat may constitute only that portion of the approved
preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to record at that time.
      (4)   If the original of the final plat has been filed with another
approving authority, the subdivider may file a true copy in lieu of the
original. However, before approval of the Village Board shall be inscribed on
the original of the final plat, the surveyor or the subdivider shall certify
the respects in which the original of the plat differs from the true copy and
all modifications must first be approved.
(Prior Code, § 17.04)
§ 155.05 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Monuments. The subdivision shall be monumented in accordance with the
requirements of Wis. Stats. § 236.15 and as may be required by the Village
Board. The Village Board may waive the placing of monuments for a reasonable
time on condition that the subdivider executes a surety bond to ensure placing
of such monuments. Required block corners shall be fully encased with minimum
of four inches of concrete and shall be set so that the top of the monument
shall be at the final sidewalk elevation. If the topography is such that
extensive grading is required at the block corners, the subdivider may, with
permission of the Village Board, place the monuments after the grading is
completed.
   (B)   Improvements. Unless alternative arrangements are made with the
village and such arrangements are approved by resolution of the Village Board,
before final approval of any residential plat located within the corporate
limits of the village, the subdivider shall install street and utility
improvements as hereinafter provided.
      (1)   Water. The subdivider shall have filed, prior to approval of the
final plat, a petition with the Village Clerk petitioning the village for
installation of water mains in the plat.
      (2)   Sanitary sewer. The subdivider shall have filed prior to approval
of the final plat a petition with the Village Clerk petitioning the village for
installation of sewers in the plat. If public sewer facilities are not
available, lot sizes shall be such that effective private disposal systems can
be provided on the individual premises, and shall be determined on the basis of
recommendations of the Village Board and the state. Approval of the county must
also be submitted.
      (3)   Street grading. The subdivider shall furnish drawings which
indicate the existing and proposed grades of streets shown on the plat. After
review and approval of the proposed grades by the Village Board, the subdivider
shall grade or cause to be graded the full width of the right-of-way of the
streets proposed to be dedicated. The bed for the roadways in the street right-
of-way shall be graded to subgrade. The subsoil condition shall be of adequate
bearing value for street construction or shall be undercut and backfilled with
select materials.
      (4)   Sidewalk grades. Sidewalk grades, whether sidewalks are
subsequently installed or not, shall be proposed and approved by the Village
Board at the same time as the street grades are proposed and approved.
      (5)   Sodding or mat-type seeding. Where lot grades exceed 10%, sodding
or mat-type seeding shall be required.
   (C)   Payments for improvements. Unless alternative arrangements are made
with the village and such arrangements are approved by resolution of the
Village Board, when filing a petition with the Village Clerk for the above-
mentioned water main, sanitary sewer and street improvements, the subdivider
shall accompany said petitions with a certified or cashier’s check for the
following items:
      (1)   The estimated cost, prepared by the Village Clerk, for construction
of water mains;
      (2)   The estimated cost, prepared by the Village Clerk, for construction
of sanitary sewer;
      (3)   The estimated cost, prepared by the Village Clerk, for providing
six-inch crushed stone base for the street; and
      (4)   Public sites and open spaces contributions shall be provided as
hereinafter specified in these regulations.
   (D)   Payments for improvements by contract. The payment provisions for the
installation of improvements, hereinabove set forth, shall not preclude the
village from entering into a contract with a subdivider or land developer for
construction of the required improvements at his or her own expense, provided
that the work is done pursuant to the requirements of these regulations and
under the supervision of the Village Board by contractor approved by the
village, and upon the filing with the Village Clerk of a performance bond
executed by the subdivider or his or her contractors and a corporate surety
licensed to do business in this state.
(Prior Code, § 17.05)
§ 155.06 DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Streets and alleys; general requirements. The streets shall be
designed and located in relation to existing and proposed streets, to the
topography, to economical utility service, to such natural features as streams
and tree growth to public convenience and safety, and to the proposed use of
the land to be served by such streets. The arrangements, width grade and
locations of all streets shall conform to the Official Map and Master Plan, and
where applicable, the plans of any political subdivision superseding the
authority of the village.
   (B)   Arrangement.
      (1)   Major streets and highways. Major streets and highways shall be
properly integrated with the existing and proposed system of major streets and
highways and insofar as practicable shall be continuous and in alignment with
existing planned or platted streets with which they are to connect.
      (2)   Collector streets. Collector streets shall be properly related to
the mass transit system, to special traffic generating from facilities such as
schools, churches and shopping centers, to population concentrations and to
major streets into which they feed.
      (3)   Minor streets. Minor streets shall be designed to conform to the
topography, to discourage use by through traffic, to permit the design of
efficient drainage and sewer system, and to require the minimum amount of
street necessary to provide convenient safe access to abutting property.
      (4)   Treatment of railroad right-of-way or limited-access highways.
Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or limited-
access highway right-of-way, the Village Board may require a street
approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way, at a distance
suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land as for park purposes,
in residential districts or for commercial or industrial purposes in other
districts. Location of minor streets immediately adjacent and parallel to
railroad rights-of-way shall be avoided.
      (5)   Protection of major streets and highways where a subdivision
borders on or contains a major street or highway. The Village Board may require
that marginal access streets be provided, or that the backs of lots (reversed
frontage) be provided with screen planting contained in a non-access
reservation along the real property line.
   (C)   Alleys. Alleys shall be provided in commercial or industrial districts
for off-street loading and service access unless otherwise required by the
Village Board but shall not be approved in residential districts. No dead-end
alleys shall be approved; nor shall any alley have its point of connection on a
major thoroughfare. The width of an alley shall not be less than 30 feet.
   (D)   Intersections.
      (1)   Streets shall intersect each other as nearly as possible at right
angles, as good design and topography permit.
      (2)   Not more than two streets shall intersect at one point unless
approved by the Village Board.
      (3)   Property lines at street intersections shall not be rounded except
in industrial areas or on major or collector streets when required by the
Village Board.
      (4)   Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
avoided. Where streets intersect major streets, their alignment shall be
continuous.
   (E)   Street width. The right-of-way and roadway of all streets shall be the
width specified on the Official Map or Master Plan. If no width is specified
thereon, they shall be not less than the width specified below, nor more than
the maximum grade also specified below:
 
Type of Street     R.O.W. Width Road Width Max. Grade
Major and highways 120          36x2       4%
Collector          80           44         6%
Minor              66           40         8%
Alleys             30           24         -
 
   (F)   Vertical curves. All changes in street grades shall be connected by
vertical curves of a minimum length equivalent in feet to 15 times the
algebraic difference in the rates of grade for arterial and collector streets,
and one-half this minimum for local streets.
   (G)   Radii of curvature. When a continuous street centerline deflects at
any one point more than five degrees, a circular curve shall be introduced
having a radius of curvature on said centerline of not less than the following:
 
Major streets     300 feet
Collector streets 200 feet
Minor streets     100 feet
 
   (H)   Tangents. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between
reverse curves on arterial and collector streets. On all streets at least 100
feet of tangent shall be provided between the curve and any intersection.
   (I)   Cul-de-sac or dead-end streets. Streets designed to have one end
permanently closed shall not exceed 500 feet in length and shall terminate with
a turnaround of not less than 120 feet in diameter of right-of-way and a
roadway turnaround of 94 feet in diameter.
   (J)   Half-streets. Where an existing half street is adjacent to the tract
bring subdivided, the other half of the street shall be dedicated by the
subdivider.
   (K)   Reverse strip. There shall be no reverse strips controlling access to
streets except where control of such strips is definitely place in the village
under conditions approved by the Village Board.
      (1)   Cluster development. The standards application to street right-of-
way and roadway widths may be waived by consent of the Village Board for
special situations such as cluster developments, where other well-planned
interior street systems are provided.
      (2)   Easements.
         (a)   Easements of widths deemed adequate by the Village Board for the
intended purpose across lots or on rear or side lot lines shall be provided
where necessary for the construction and maintenance of telephone, electric,
gas, water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer and utilities deemed necessary by the
Village Board.
         (b)   Where a subdivision is traversed by watercourse drainage way,
channel or stream, an adequate drainage way or easement shall be provided as
required by the Village Board, conforming substantially with the lines of such
watercourse. The location, width, alignment and improvement of such drainage
way or easement shall be subject to approval of the Village Board.
      (3)   Blocks.
         (a)   The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be compatible to
the planned use of the land and the type of development contemplated.
         (b)   Facilities for distribution of electric, telephone and gas
utility services located within a subdivision shall be installed underground
except where the Village Board finds that adverse soil conditions or problems
of utility distribution make such installation prohibitively expensive or
impractical. Transformers, junction boxes, meter points or similar equipment
may be installed upon the ground surface, if the location and utility-approved
landscape-screening plan therefor have been approved by the Village Board.
      (4)   Lots.
         (a)   The size, shape and orientation of the lots shall be appropriate
for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use
contemplated.
         (b)   Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements of the zoning
chapter.
         (c)   Residential lots, fronting on major streets and highways, shall
be platted with extra depth to permit generous distances between the buildings
and such traffic ways.
         (d)   Excessive depth in relation to width shall be avoided and a
proportion of 2:1 shall normally be considered as a desirable maximum for lots
of 80 feet or more.
         (e)   Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for
commercial or industrial use shall be adequate to provide for the off-street
service and parking facilities required by the type of use and development
contemplated.
         (f)   Every lot shall front or abut on a public street.
         (g)   Side lot lines shall be right angles to straight street lines or
radii to curved street lines on which the lots face, whenever possible.
         (h)   Corner lots shall have an extra width of ten feet to permit
adequate building setbacks from side streets.
         (i)   In cedes a tract is divided into large parcels, such parcels
shall be arranged as to allow the re-subdivision on any such parcels into
normal lots in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
         (j)   Lots shall follow municipal boundary lines rather than cross
them.
         (k)   Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be prohibited
except where necessary to provide separation of residential development from
through traffic or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and
orientation.
(Prior Code, § 17.06) Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.07 LAND DEVELOPMENT OTHER THAN SUBDIVISION (LOT DIVISIONS).
   (A)   Procedure. The application for a lot or land development shall file a
certified survey map with the Village Board, which shall within 40 days
approve, approve conditionally or reject the proposed lot division. The
applicant shall be notified in writing of any reasons for rejection.
   (B)   Requirements.
      (1)   As a condition of approval the Village Board may require compliance
with the provisions of §§
155.03,
155.05 and
155.06 so far as applicable.
      (2)   The survey shall be performed and the map prepared by a registered
land surveyor and shall comply with the requirements of Wis. Stats. § 236.34,
which is hereby adopted by reference. In addition, the map shall show all
existing buildings, watercourses, drainage ditches and other features pertinent
to proper division.
      (3)   The map shall be prepared in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 236.20
(2)(a) through (l). All lines shall be made on the map with non-fading ink.
      (4)   The approval of the Village Board shall be typed, lettered or
otherwise reproduced legibly on the face of the map with non-fading ink.
      (5)   The map shall include the affidavit of the surveyor who surveyed
and mapped the parcel, typed, lettered or reproduced legibly with non-fading
ink, giving a clear and concise description of the land surveyed by bearings
and distances, commencing with some corner marked and established in the U.S.
Public Land Survey. Such affidavit shall include the statement of the surveyor
to the effect that he or she has fully complied with the requirements of this
section.
      (6)   The map shall be filed by the subdivider for record with the
Register of Deeds except in those cases when the proposed division lies within
a duly recorded subdivision.
(Prior Code, § 17.07)
§ 155.08 SUBDIVISIONS CREATED BY SUCCESSIVE DIVISIONS.
   (A)   Where it is not practicable to require that a final plat of a
subdivision created by successive lot developments to be filed in accordance
with this chapter, the Village Board may in lieu thereof require as assessor’s
plat to be made under Wis. Stats. Chapter 236, and may assess the cost thereof
as provided in such section or to the subdivider.
   (B)   Regardless of the type of plat filed, any such subdivision shall
comply with all provisions of this chapter to the extent that they may
reasonably be applied.
(Prior Code, § 17.08)
§ 155.09 REPLATS.
   Whenever it is proposed to replat a recorded subdivision or any part of a
recorded subdivision, the Village Board shall hold a public hearing on the
proposed replat. The Village Board shall hold a public hearing and the Village
Clerk shall mail notices of the scheduled hearing thereon at least ten days
prior to the time of such hearing to the owners of all properties situated
within the limits of the proposed replat, and to the owners of all properties
within a radius of 200 feet of the exterior boundaries of the proposed replat.
(Prior Code, § 17.09)
§ 155.10 VARIANCES.
   When in the judgment of the Village Board it would be inappropriate to apply
literally a provision of this chapter because the subdivision is located
outside the corporate limits or because extraordinary hardships would result,
it may waive or vary such provision so that substantial justice may be done and
the public interest secured.
(Prior Code, § 17.10)
§ 155.99 PENALTY.
   Failure to comply with the requirements of these regulations shall
invalidate purported transfers of title at the option of the purchaser, in
accordance with the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 236.31(3). Any subdivider or
other person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of these regulations
shall be subject to a penalty as prescribed by §
10.99. Building permits shall be refused or construction on all sites created
in violation of these regulations or any of them.
(Prior Code, § 17.12)
CHAPTER 156: ADULT ORIENTED USES; ZONING AND RELATED REGULATIONS
Section
   
156.01   Nude dancing
§ 156.01 NUDE DANCING.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
   LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT. Any establishment licensed by the Village Board to
sell alcoholic beverages pursuant to Wis. Stats. Ch. 125.
   LICENSEE. The holder of a retail “Class A”, “Class B”, Class “B”, Class “A”
or “Class C” license granted by the Village Board pursuant to Wis. Stats. Ch.
125.
   (B)   Nude dancing in licensed establishments prohibited. It is unlawful for
any person to perform or engage in, or for any licensee or manager or agent of
the licensee to permit any person, employee, entertainer or patron to perform
or engage in any live act, demonstration, dance or exhibition on the premises
of a licensed establishment which:
      (1)   Show his or her genital, pubic area, vulva, anus and clef or
cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering;
      (2)   Shows any portion of the female breast below a point immediately
above the top of the areola; or
      (3)   Shows the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
   (C)   Exemptions. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the
following licensed establishments: theaters, performing arts centers, civic
centers, and dinner theaters where live dance, ballet, music and dramatic
performances of serious artistic merit are offered on a regular basis and in
which the predominant business or attraction is not the offering to customers
of entertainment which is intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual
gratification to such customers and where the establishment is not
distinguished by an emphasis on, or the advertising or promotion of, employees
engaging in nude erotic dancing.
CHAPTER 157: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
157.001   Title
   
157.002   Intent and purpose
   
157.003   Relationships with other laws
   
157.004   Scope of regulations
   
157.005   Minimum requirements
   
157.006   Effect on existing agreements
   
157.007   Separability
   
157.008   Repeal
   
157.009   General interpretation
   
157.010   Definitions
Lots and Structures; Uses; Regulations
   
157.025   Compliance
   
157.026   Lot provisions
   
157.027   Yard regulations
   
157.028   Height regulations
   
157.029   Accessory buildings, uses of structures and use of required yards
   
157.030   Nonconforming buildings, structures and uses
   
157.031   Traffic visibility triangle
   
157.032   Home occupations
   
157.033   Classification of unlisted uses
   
157.034   Sanitary sewer provision
   
157.035   Parking and loading
Zoning Districts
   
157.050   Districts established
   
157.051   Zoning district map
   
157.052   District boundaries
   
157.053   Zoning of right-of-way
   
157.054   R-1 Single-Family Residence District
   
157.055   R-2 Multiple-Family Residence District
   
157.056   RD Rural Development District
   
157.057   C-1 Central Business District
   
157.058   C-2 General Commercial District
   
157.059   ID Industrial District
   
157.060   PI Public and Institutional District
   
157.061   W Conservancy District
   
157.062   GWP Groundwater Protection Overlay District
Special Regulations for Mobile Homes
   
157.075   Purpose
   
157.076   Occupancy
   
157.077   Special regulations for mobile home parks
   
157.078   Manufactured homes exempted
Board of Appeals
   
157.090   Establishment
   
157.091   Membership
   
157.092   General rules
   
157.093   Powers
   
157.094   Appeals and applications
   
157.095   Hearings
   
157.096   Findings
   
157.097   Decision
   
157.098   Review by court of record
Changes and Amendments
   
157.110   Authority
   
157.111   Initiation
   
157.112   Petitions
   
157.113   Planning Committee review and recommendation
   
157.114   Hearing
   
157.115   Village Board action
   
157.116   Protest
Administration
   
157.130   Zoning Administrator designation
   
157.131   Building permit
   
157.132   Planning Committee
   
157.133   Conditional use permit
   
157.134   Fees for permits, variances, rezonings, conditional uses and signs
   
157.135   Public hearings
   
157.136   Annexations
   
157.137   Municipalities and state agencies regulated
   
157.138   Violations
   
157.139   Effective date
 
   
157.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Adult establishments, zoning, see
Chapter 156
   Mobile homes/parks, see also
Chapter 152
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 157.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as, referred to and cited as the “Village of
Gilman Zoning Ordinance” and is hereinafter referred to as the “ordinance” or
“this chapter”.
(Prior Code, § 22.01) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.002 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   The general intent and purpose of this chapter is to:
   (A)   Promote the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general
welfare of the citizens of the village;
   (B)   To protect and conserve the natural resources of the village by the
most appropriate use of land;
   (C)   To protect and conserve the social character and economic stability
and preserve property values;
   (D)   To prevent the overcrowding of land and undue congestion of
population;
   (E)   To provide adequate light, air and convenient access to property by
regulating the use of land and buildings and the bulk of structures in
relationship to surrounding properties;
   (F)   To provide adequate and efficient public services such as roads, water
and sewer, schools, and police and fire protection;
   (G)   To encourage the use of land and buildings which are compatible with
nearby existing and planned land uses, and to prohibit and control existing
land uses deemed incompatible with nearby land uses;
   (H)   To prevent harm to persons and property by flood, fire, explosion,
toxic fumes or other hazards;
   (I)   To protect the traffic-carrying capacity of existing and proposed
arterial streets and highways; and
   (J)   To regulate parking and loading so as to lessen congestion and promote
the safety and efficiency of streets and highways.
(Prior Code, § 22.02) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.003 RELATIONSHIPS WITH OTHER LAWS.
   Where the conditions imposed by any part of this chapter upon the use of
land or buildings or upon the bulk of buildings are either more restrictive or
less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provisions of
this chapter or any other laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules or regulations
of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive (or impose higher
standards of requirements) shall be enforced.
(Prior Code, § 22.03) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.004 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   No building, structure or land shall hereafter be erected, converted,
enlarged, constructed, moved or structurally altered unless in conformity with
all the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located.
(Prior Code, § 22.04) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.005 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements
for carrying out the intent and purpose as defined in §
157.002.
(Prior Code, § 22.05) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.006 EFFECT ON EXISTING AGREEMENTS.
   It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, annul, impair or interfere
with any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions, written agreements,
ordinances (except as specified in §
157.008), rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant
to law. However, wherever this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the
provisions of this chapter shall govern.
(Prior Code, § 22.06) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.007 SEPARABILITY.
   It is hereby declared to be the intention of this village that the several
provisions of this chapter are separable, in accordance with the following:
   (A)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare any provisions of
this chapter to be invalid, such ruling shall not affect any other provisions
of this chapter not specifically included in such ruling; and
   (B)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare invalid the
application of any provision of this chapter to a particular property, building
or other structure, such ruling shall not affect the application of such
provisions to any other property, building or structure not specifically
included in such ruling.
(Prior Code, § 22.07) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.008 REPEAL.
   All other ordinances or parts of ordinances of the village inconsistent or
conflicting with the provisions of this chapter, to the extent of the
inconsistency only, are hereby repealed.
(Prior Code, § 22.08) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.009 GENERAL INTERPRETATION.
   The following rules of construction apply to this chapter: words used in the
present tense include the future, words in the singular number include the
plural number include the singular number; the word “shall” is mandatory and
not discretionary. The word “person” includes an individual, all partnerships,
associations and bodies political and corporate. The word “lot” includes the
word “plot” or “parcel” or “tract”. The word “used” or “occupied” as applied to
any land or building shall be construed to include the words “intended”,
“arranged” or “designed to be used or occupied”.
(Prior Code, § 22.09) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABUTTING. Have a common property line or district line.
   ACCESSORY APARTMENT. A separate complete housekeeping unit that is
substantially contained within the structure of a single-family dwelling, but
can be isolated from it.
   ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE.  A use or detached structure subordinate to the
principal use of a structure, land or water and located on the same lot or
parcel, and serving a purpose customarily incidental to the principal use or
the principal structure. (See also “minor structure”.)
   ACRE, NET. The actual land devoted to the land use, excluding public
streets, public lands or unusable lands, and school sites contained within
43,560 square feet.
   ALLEY.  A public way which affords only a secondary means of access to
abutting property.
   ANTENNA. A device used to receive or send broadcasts either as over the air
signals from transmitters, including fixed television or radio signals, or
microwave signals from earth orbiting communication satellites.
   ANTENNA, EARTH STATION DISH. A dish-shaped antenna designed to receive
television broadcasts relayed by microwave signals from earth-orbiting
communication satellites.
   APARTMENT. A suite of rooms or a room in a multiple dwelling, which suite or
room is arranged, intended or designed to be occupied as a residence of a
single family, individual or group of individuals, with separate facilities and
utilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking
and eating.
   AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD. Any premises on which two or more self-propelled
vehicles not in running order or operating condition are stored in the open.
   BASEMENT. A portion of a building with the floor located below the mean
grade level. For the purpose of this chapter, any such BASEMENT with more than
four feet above grade level shall be counted as a story.
   BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT.  An owner-occupied, single-family dwelling
unit at which overnight sleeping accommodations are offered to travelers by the
owner.
   BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets and
public parks or other recognized lines of demarcation.
   BOARD. The Board of Appeals, as provided in §§
157.090 through
157.098.
   BOARDING HOUSE. A building other than a hotel or restaurant where meals or
lodging are regularly furnished by pre-arrangement for compensation for three
or more persons not members of a family, but not exceeding 12 persons and not
open to transient customers.
   BUFFER ZONE. A designated neutral area designed to separate conflicting land
uses. A natural vegetative screening of trees, shrubs or other plantings is
usually employed in such a designated area.
   BUILDABLE LOT AREA. The portion of a lot remaining after required yards have
been provided.
   BUILDING. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls used or
intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals,
equipment, machinery or materials. When a BUILDING is divided into separate
parts by unpierced walls extending from the ground up, each part shall be
deemed a separate BUILDING.
   BUILDING, DETACHED OR ACCESSORY. A building surrounded by open space on the
same lot.
   BUILDING, HEIGHTS OF. The vertical distance from the average curb level in
front of the lot or the finished grade at the building line, whichever is
higher, to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, to the deck line of
a mansard roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a gambrel, hip
or pitch roof.
   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A building in which the principal use of the lot on
which it is located is conducted.
   BUSINESS.  An occupation, employment or enterprise which occupies time,
labor and materials, or wherein merchandise is exhibited or sold, or where
services are offered.
   CARPORT. An automobile shelter having one or more sides open.
   CHANNEL. Those woodlands normally occupied by a stream of water under
average annual highwater flow conditions while confined within generally well-
established banks.
   CLINIC. An establishment for medical examination and treatment of patients,
but without provisions for keeping such patients overnight on the premises
(except for veterinary clinics). For purpose of this chapter, a doctor’s or
dentist’s office in residence, when it complies with the requirements of this
chapter relating to such office, shall not be considered a CLINIC, but any
doctor’s or dentist’s office which is not part of his or her home, or the
office of two or more doctors or dentists, whether in a residence or not, shall
be considered a CLINIC.
   CLUB or LODGE. A building or portion thereof or premises owned by a
corporation, association, person or persons for a social, educational or
recreational purpose, but not primarily for profit or to render a service which
is customarily carried on as a business.
   COMMUNITY LIVING ARRANGEMENT. The following facilities licensed or operated
or permitted under the authority of the state statutes: child welfare agencies
under Wis. Stats. § 48.60, group foster homes for children under Wis. Stats. §
48.02(6) and (7) and community-based residential facilities under Wis. Stats. §
50.01, but does not include day care centers, nursing homes, general hospitals,
special hospitals, prisons and jails. The establishment of a community living
arrangement shall be in conformance with applicable sections of the state
statutes, including Wis. Stats. §§ 46.03(22), 62.23(7)(i) and 62.23(7), and
amendments thereto, and also the Wisconsin Administrative Code.
   CONDITIONAL USE. A use, either public or private, which because of its
unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified as a permitted use in a
particular district or districts, and therefore, may be permitted in such
district or districts only by CONDITIONAL USE permit.
   CONSERVATION STANDARDS. Guidelines and specifications for soil and water
conservation practices and management enumerated in the Technical Guide,
prepared by the USDA Soil Conservation Service for this county, adopted by the
County Soil and Water Conservation District Supervisors, and containing
suitable alternatives for the use and treatment to land based upon its
capabilities from which the land owner selects that alternative which best
meets his or her needs in developing his or her soil and water conservation.
   CONTROLLED ACCESS ARTERIAL STREET. The condition in which the right of
owners or occupants of abutting land or other persons to access, light, air or
view in connection with an arterial street is fully or partially controlled by
public authority.
   CSM. A certified survey map is a map of a land split prepared in accordance
with Wis. Stats. Chapter 236 and §
155.07.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to constructions of or additions or substantial
improvements to buildings, other structure, or accessory uses, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
disposition of materials.
   DISTRICT, BASIC. A part or parts of the village for which the regulations of
this chapter governing the use and location of land and building are uniform.
   DISTRICT, OVERLAY.  OVERLAY DISTRICTS, also referred to herein as REGULATORY
AREAS, provide for the possibility of superimposing certain additional
requirements upon a basic zoning district without disturbing the requirements
of the basic district. In the instance of conflicting requirements, the more
strict of the conflicting requirements shall apply.
   DWELLING. A building designed or used exclusively as a residence or sleeping
place, but does not include boarding or lodging houses, motels, hotels, tents,
cabins or mobile homes.
   DWELLING, EFFICIENCY. A dwelling unit consisting of one principal room with
no separate sleeping rooms.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A building or portion thereof used or designated
as a residence of three or more as separate housekeeping units, including
apartments, apartment hotels and townhouses.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A detached building designed for or occupied by one
family.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A detached building containing two separate dwelling
(or living) units, including apartments, apartment hotels and townhouses.
   DWELLING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and
forming a single habitable unit, with facilities which are used or are intended
to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
   ESSENTIAL SERVICES. Services provided by public and private utilities,
necessary for the exercise of the principal use or service of the principal
structure. These services include underground, surface or overhead gas,
electrical, steam, water, sanitary sewerage, storm water drainage and
communicational systems and accessories thereto, such as poles, towers, wires,
mains, drains, vaults, culverts, laterals, sewers, pipes, catch basins, water
storage tanks, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic
signals, pumps, lift stations and hydrants, but not including buildings.
   FAMILY. The body of persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, or not
more than four unrelated persons who live together in one dwelling unit as a
single housekeeping entity.
   FLOOR AREA (BUSINESS AND MANUFACTURING BUILDINGS). For the purpose of
determining off-street parking and off-street loading requirements, the sum of
the gross horizontal areas of the floors of the building, or portion thereof,
devoted to a use requiring off-street parking or loading. This area shall
include elevators and stairways, accessory storage areas located within selling
or working space occupied by counters, racks or closets and any basement floor
area devoted to retailing activities, to the production and processing of
goods, or to business or professional offices. However, FLOOR AREA, for the
purposes of determining off-street parking spaces, shall not include FLOOR AREA
devoted primarily to storage purposes except as otherwise noted herein.
   FOSTER FAMILY HOME.  The primary domicile of a foster parent which is four
or fewer foster children and which is licensed under Wis. Stats. § 48.62 and
amendments thereto.
   FRONTAGE. All the property abutting on one side of a street between two
intersecting streets or all of the property abutting on one side of a street
between an intersecting street and the dead end of a street.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE. A detached accessory building or portion of the principal
building, designed, arranged, used or intended to be used for storage of
automobiles of the occupant of the premises. Carports are considered GARAGES.
   GARAGE, PUBLIC. Any building or portion thereof, not accessory to a
residential building or structure, used for equipping, servicing, repairing,
leasing or public parking of motor vehicles.
   GASOLINE STATION. Any area of land, including structures thereon, that is
used for the sale of gasoline or other motor vehicle fuel, and oil or other
lubrication substances; sale of motor vehicle accessories; which may include
facilities used or designed to be used for polishing, greasing, washing,
spraying, dry cleaning or otherwise cleaning such vehicles.
   GRADE. When used as a reference point in measuring height of building, the
GRADE shall be the average elevation of the finished ground at the exterior
walls of the main building.
   GROSS FLOOR AREA (RESIDENTIAL). The square footage of each story of a
dwelling. The basement area of a dwelling can be considered in the floor area
calculation if the basement floor has an at-grade access.
   GROUP FOSTER HOME. Any facility operated by a person required to be licensed
by this state under Wis. Stats. § 48.62 for the care and maintenance of five to
eight foster children.
   HOME OCCUPATIONS. Any occupation for gain or support conducted entirely
within a building by resident occupants and no more than one nonresident
person, which is incidental to the principal use of the premises; does not
exceed 50% of the area of any above-ground living area; has no article offered
for sale except such as is produced by such HOME OCCUPATION; and meets all of
the conditions of §
157.032. Examples of HOME OCCUPATIONS are: child care, millinery, canning,
dressmaking, dentists, architects, landscape architects, registered land
surveyors, lawyers and teachers.
   HOSPITAL. An institution intended primarily for the medical diagnosis,
treatment and care of patients being given medical treatment. A HOSPITAL shall
be distinguished from a clinic by virtue of providing for 24-hour patient care.
   HOTEL. A building in which lodging, with or without meals, is offered to
transient guests for compensation and in which there are more than five
sleeping rooms with no cooking facilities in any individual room or apartment.
   HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY. A dwelling unit or units designed and constructed
to be occupied by elderly persons. An ELDERLY PERSON is a person who is 62
years of age or older on the date such person intends to occupy the premises,
or a family, the head of which, or his or her spouse, is an ELDERLY PERSON as
defined herein.
   INSTITUTION. A building occupied by a nonprofit corporation or a nonprofit
establishment for public use.
   INTERCHANGE. A grade-separated intersection with one or more direct
connections for vehicular travel between the intersecting streets or highways.
   JUNK. Any scrap, waste, reclaimable material or debris, whether or not
stored or used in conjunction with dismantling, processing, salvage, storage,
baling, disposal or other use or disposition. JUNK includes but is not limited
to vehicles, tires, vehicle parts, equipment, paper, rags, metal, glass,
building materials, household appliances, brush, wood and lumber.
   JUNKYARD. Any area, lot, land, parcel, building or structure or part thereof
used for storage, collecting, processing, purchase, sale or abandonment of
wastewater, rags, scrap metal or other scrap or discarded goods, materials,
machinery or two or more unregistered, inoperable motor vehicles or other type
of junk.
   LAND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY. The construction of buildings, roads, parking
lots, paved storage areas and similar facilities.
   LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY. Any human-made change of the land surface,
including removing vegetation cover, excavating, filling and grading, but not
including agricultural activities such as planting, growing, cultivating and
harvesting of crops; growing and tending of gardens; harvesting of trees; and
landscape modifications.
   LANDOWNER. Any person holding title to or having an interest in land.
   LAND USER. Any person operating, leasing, renting or having made other
arrangements with the landowner by which the landowner authorizes use of his or
her land.
   LOADING AREA.  A completely off-street space or berth on the same lot for
the loading or unloading of freight carriers, having adequate ingress and
egress to a public street or alley.
   LODGING HOUSE. A building where lodging only is provided for compensation
for not more than three persons not members of the family.
   LOT. A division of land occupied or designed to be occupied by one building
and its accessory buildings or uses, including open spaces required by this
chapter.
      (1)   A LOT may be a parcel of land designated in a plat laid out prior
to the effective date of this definition, whether or not such division abuts a
public street or other officially approved place recorded in the office of the
Register of Deeds, or any part of a larger division when such parts comply with
the requirements of this chapter as to width and area for the district in which
it is located. No land included in any street, highway or railroad right-of-
way, dedicated to the public or reserved for roadway purposes, shall be
included in the computation of LOT size.
      (2)   A LOT, for purposes of this chapter, may differ from a “lot” as
shown on a plat. Example: platted lots may be subdivided or combined by
certified survey map pursuant to §
155.07. Thereafter, the lot created by such lot divisions shall be considered a
LOT for purposes of this chapter.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot abutting two or more streets at their intersection
provided that the corner of such intersection shall have an angle of one
hundred thirty-five degrees (153 degrees) or less, measured on the lot side.
   LOT COVERAGE (except residential). The area of a lot occupied by the
principal building or buildings and accessory buildings, including any
driveways, parking areas, loading areas, storage areas and walkways.
   LOT COVERAGE, RESIDENTIAL. The area of a lot occupied by the principal
building and accessory building.
   LOT, INTERIOR.  A lot situated on a single street which is bounded by
adjacent lots along each of its other lines and is not a corner lot.
   LOT LINE. A property boundary line of any lot held in a single or separate
ownership, except that where any portion of the lot extends into the abutting
street or alley, the LOT LINE shall be deemed to be the abutting street or
alley right-of-way line.
   LOT LINES AND AREA. The peripheral boundaries of a parcel of land and the
total area lying within such boundaries.
   LOT OF RECORD.  A platted lot of a recorded subdivision, certified survey
map or parcel of land for which the deed, prior to the adoption of this
chapter, is on record with the County Register of Deeds and which exists as
described therein.
   LOT, SUBSTANDARD. A parcel of land held in separate ownership having
frontage on a public street, or other approved means of access, occupied or
intended to be occupied by a principal building or structure, together with
accessory buildings and uses, having insufficient size to meet the lot width,
lot area, yard, off-street parking areas or other open space provisions of this
code as pertaining to the district wherein located.
   LOT, THROUGH. A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines along two
substantially parallel streets and which is not a corner lot. On a THROUGH LOT,
both street lines shall be deemed front lines.
   LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at
the building setback line.
   MINOR STRUCTURES. Any small movable accessory erection or construction such
as birdhouses, tool houses, pet houses, play equipment, arbors and walls and
fences under four feet in height.
   MOBILE HOME. A manufactured home that is HUD certified and labeled under the
National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42
U.S.C. Chapter 70). A MOBILE HOME is a structure, which is, or was as
originally constructed, designed to be transportable in one or more sections,
which in traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or
more in length, or, when erected on-site, is 320 or more square feet, and which
is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or
without permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and
includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems
contained therein and any additions, attachments, annexes, foundations and
appurtenances. See §
157.078 for manufactured home exemption.
   MOBILE HOME LOT.  A parcel of land for the placement of a single mobile home
and the exclusive use of its occupants.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. A parcel of land which has been developed for the
placement of mobile homes and is owned by an individual, a firm, trust,
partnership, public or private association, or corporation, and where
individual lots are rented to individual mobile home users. A MOBILE HOME PARK
is also any lot on which two or mobile homes are parked for the purpose of
permanent habitation, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such
accommodation, and including any associated service, storage, recreation and
other community service facilities designed for the exclusive use of park
occupants.
   MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION. A land subdivision, as defined by Wis. Stats.
Chapter 236 and any section of these regulations, with lots intended for the
placement of individual mobile home units. Individual home sites are in
separate ownership as opposed to the rental arrangements in mobile home parks.
   MODULAR UNIT. A factory-fabricated, transportable building unit designed to
be used by itself or to be incorporated with similar units at a building site
into a modular structure to be used for residential, commercial, educational or
industrial purposes.
   MOTEL. A building or group of buildings containing rooms which are offered
for compensation for the temporary accommodation of travelers or tourists.
   NONCONFORMING USES. Any structure, use of land, use of land and structure in
combination or characteristics of use which was existing at the time of the
effective date of this code or amendments thereto and which is not in
conformance with this code. Any such structure conforming in respect to use but
not in respect to frontage, width, height, area, yard, parking loading or
distance requirements shall not be considered a NONCONFORMING USE, but shall be
considered nonconforming with respect to those characteristics.
   NURSING HOME. An establishment used as a dwelling place by the aged, infirm,
chronically ill or incurably afflicted, in which not less than three persons
live or are kept or provided for on the premises for compensation, excluding
clinics and hospitals and similar institutions devoted to the diagnosis,
treatment or the care of the sick or injured. A NURSING HOME is subject to
state-level licensing and operational limitations as set forth in Wis. Stats.
Chapter 50.
   OPEN SALES AREA. Any open land or area used or occupied for the purpose of
displaying for sale new or secondhand merchandise, including but not limited to
passenger cars or trucks, farm machinery, construction machinery, motor
scooters or motorcycles, boats, trailers, aircraft and monuments. No repair
work is done in such area except for incidental repair of items to be displayed
and sold on the premises.
   OUTDOOR STORAGE AREAS.  Any open land or area used for the purpose of
storage of any product or part of a product either before, during or after
manufacture, servicing or repair, and not displayed for retail sale. This does
not include open sales areas.
   PARKING LOT.  A structure or premises containing five or more parking spaces
open to the public.
   PARKING SPACE. An off-street space available for the parking of a motor
vehicle and which is held to be an area the dimensions of which are ten feet by
18 feet or which covers 180 square feet, exclusive of passageways and driveways
appurtenant thereto and giving access thereto.
   PARTIES IN INTEREST. Includes all abutting property owners, all property
owners within 100 feet and all property owners with opposite frontages.
   PLACES OF ASSEMBLY. Places where people gather or congregate for amusement,
worship, learning and the like. This includes schools, churches, theaters,
playgrounds and the like.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A tract of land which contains or will contain two
or more principal buildings, developed under single ownership or control, the
development of which is unique and of a substantially different character than
that of surrounding areas. A PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT allows for flexibility
not available under normal zoning district requirements.
   PLANNING COMMITTEE. Where the phrase “Planning Committee” appears, this
refers to the Village Planning Committee. The Planning Committee consists of
members appointed under §
30.01 of this code. (See Wis. Stats. §§ 61.35 and 62.23(7)(d).)
   PREMISES. The area of land surrounding a structure and forming one enclosure
with it.
   PROFESSIONAL HOME OFFICES. Residences of doctors of medicine, practitioners,
dentists, clergy, architects, landscape architects, professional engineers,
registered land surveyors, lawyers, artists, teachers, authors, musicians or
other recognized professionals, used to conduct their professions where the
office does not exceed one-half the area of only one floor of the residence and
only one nonresident person is employed.
   PUBLIC AIRPORT. Any airport which complies with the definition contained in
Wis. Stats. § 114.002(18m), or any airport which serves or offers to serve
common carriers engage in air transport.
   REAR YARD.  A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of
which shall be the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and a
line parallel thereto through the nearest point of the principal structure.
This yard is opposite the street yard or one of the street yards on a corner
lot.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Any vehicle or structure designed and used for
temporary, seasonal human living quarters which meets all of the following
qualifications:
      (1)   It is not used as the permanent residence of the owner or occupant;
      (2)   It is used for temporary living quarters by the owner or occupant
while engaged in recreation or vacation activities; and
      (3)   Examples of such vehicles include van campers, tent camping
trailers, self-contained travel trailers, pickup campers, camping buses and
self-contained, self-propelled truck chassis mounted vehicles providing living
accommodations.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE CAMP. A park, court, campsite, lot, parcel or tract of
land designed, maintained or intended for the purpose of supplying the location
or accommodations for any recreational vehicles as defined herein, and upon
which said recreational vehicles are parked.
   RESTAURANT. A business establishment consisting of a kitchen and dining
room, whose primary purpose is to prepare and serve food to be eaten by
customers seated in the dining room.
   RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN. A business establishment consisting of a kitchen, with
without a dining room, where food is prepared and packaged to be eaten either
off the premises or within automobiles parked on the premises.
   RETAIL.  The sale of goods or merchandise in a small quantities to the
consumer.
   ROADSIDE STAND. A structure having a ground area of not more than 300 square
feet, not permanently fixed to the ground, readily removable in its entirety,
not fully enclosed and to be used solely for the sale of farm products produced
on the premises.
   ROOMING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit
used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or
eating purposes.
   SCHOOL. A building or group of buildings maintained by the public or by a
private organization for the purpose of education and which is accredit by the
state. SCHOOLS include pre-school and grades kindergarten through 12, but not
trade schools that do not teach the state required courses for high school
graduation in addition to the vocational instruction.
   SCHOOL, COMMERCIAL. A school limited to special instructions such as
business, art, music, trades, handicraft, dancing or riding.
   SETBACK. A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of
which shall be the minimum horizontal distance between the existing or proposed
street or highway line and a line parallel thereto through the nearest point of
the principal structure. Corner lots and double frontage lots have two such
yards. Uncovered steps shall not be included in measuring the SETBACK.
   SHELTERED CARE FACILITY. A private home which provides separate sleeping
accommodations and kitchen facilities for its occupants, but also maintains
some means of contact with a central control office or building. This facility
may include joint recreational and eating facilities.
   SHOPPING CENTER.  A concentration of retail stores and service
establishments in a suburban area with generous parking space and planned to
serve the community or a neighborhood.
   SIGNS. Any medium, including its structure, words, letters, figures,
numerals, phrases, sentences, emblems, devices, designs, trade names or
trademarks by which anything is made known and which are used to advertise or
promote an individual, firm, association, corporation, profession, business,
commodity or product and which is visible from any public street or highway.
   STORY. The portion of a building including between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the next floor and the ceiling next above it. Any portion of
a story exceeding 14 feet in height shall be considered as an additional STORY
for each 14 feet or fraction thereof. A basement having one-half or more of its
height above grade shall be deemed a STORY for purposes of height regulation.
   STORY, HALF. The portion of a building under a gable, hip or mansard roof,
the wall plates of which, on at least two opposite exterior walls, are not more
than four and one-half feet above the finished floor of such story. In case of
one-family dwellings, two-family dwellings and multi-family dwellings less than
three stories in height, a HALF STORY in a sloping roof shall not be counted as
a story for the purposes of this code.
   STREET. Property other than an alley or private thoroughfare or travelway
which is subject to public easement or right-of-way for use as a thoroughfare
and which is 21 feet or more in width.
   STREET, ARTERIAL. A public street or highway intended to be used primarily
for fast or heavy through traffic. ARTERIAL STREETS and highways shall include
freeways and expressways, as well as major thoroughfares, highways and
parkways.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS.  Any change in the supporting members of a
structure, such as foundations, bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
   STRUCTURE.  Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a
permanent location on the ground or attached to something having a permanent
location on the ground.
   TEMPORARY STRUCTURE. A movable structure not designed for human occupancy
nor for the protection of goods or chattels and not forming an enclosure, such
as billboards.
   UNNECESSARY HARDSHIP. The circumstances where special conditions, which were
not self-created, affect a particular property and make strict conformity with
the restrictions governing dimensional standards (such as lot area, lot width,
setbacks, yard requirements or building height) unnecessarily burdensome or
unreasonable in light of the purpose of this chapter. UNNECESSARY HARDSHIP is
present only where, in the absence of a variance, no feasible use can be made
of the property.
   USE. The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereof is
designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
   USE, ACCESSORY. A subordinate building or use which is located on the same
lot on which the principal building or use is situated and which is reasonably
necessary and incidental to the conduct of the primary use of such building or
main use, when permitted by district regulations. See also the definition of
“accessory use or structure”.
   USE, PERMITTED. A use which maybe lawfully established in a particular
district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations
and standards of such district.
   USE, PRINCIPAL. The main use of land or building as distinguished from
subordinate or accessory use.
   UTILITIES.  Public and private facilities, such as water wells, water and
sewage pumping stations, water storage tanks, electrical power substations,
static transformer stations, telephone and telegraphic exchanges, microwave
radio relays and gas regulation stations, inclusive of associated transmission
facilities, but not including sewage disposal plants, municipal incinerators,
warehouses, shops, storage yards and power plants.
   VARIANCE. A departure from the terms of this chapter as applied to a
specific building, structure or parcel of land, which the Board of Appeals may
permit, contrary to the regulations of this chapter for the district in which
such buildings, structure or parcel of land is located, when the Board of
Appeals finds that a literal applications of such regulation will affect a
limitation on the use of the property which does not generally apply to other
property and does not endanger the public health, safety or welfare.
   VILLAGE BOARD. The Village Board of Trustees.
   VISION SETBACK AREA. An unoccupied triangular space at the intersection of
highways or streets with other highways or streets or at the intersection of
highways or streets with railroads. Such vision clearance triangle shall be
bounded by the intersecting highway, street railroad right-of-way lines and a
setback line connection points located on such right-of-way lines by
measurement from the intersection as specified in this chapter.
   YARD. An open space on the same lot with a structure, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward except the vegetation. The street and rear
YARDS extend the full width of the lot.
   YARD, FRONT. A yard extending the full width of the lot between the front or
street lot line and the nearest part of the principal building, including
eaves, but excluding uncovered steps. Corner lots shall have two FRONT YARDS.
   YARD, REAR. A yard extending the full width of the lot between the rear lot
line to the nearest part of the principal building, including eaves. On corner
lots there shall be no REAR YARD.
   YARD, SIDE. A yard on each side of the principal building extending from the
nearest part of the principal building, including eaves, to the lot line and
from the front yard line to the rear yard line.
   ZERO LOT LINE. The concept whereby two respective dwelling units within a
building shall be on separate and abutting lots and shall meet on the common
property line between them, thereby having zero space between said units.
   ZONING PERMIT. A permit issued by the Zoning Administrator to certify that
the use of lands, structure, air and waters subject to this chapter are or
shall be used in accordance with the provisions of said ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 22.10) (Ord. passed - -2011; Ord. 2023-02, passed 7-12-2023)
LOTS AND STRUCTURES; USES; REGULATIONS
§ 157.025 COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   Within the village, the use of any land; the size, shape and placement
of lots; the use, size, height, location and types of structures thereon; and
the provision of open spaces shall be in compliance with the regulations
established herein and made applicable to the district or districts in which
such land or structure is located.
   (B)   Where a building permit for a structure has been issued in accordance
with law prior to the effective date of this chapter, and provided that
construction is completed within 12 months of such effective date, such
structure may be completed in accordance with the approved plans on the basis
of which the building permit has been issued, and further may upon completion
be occupied by the use for which originally designated. An extension of up to
12 months may be allowed by the Village Board provided good cause is shown.
(Prior Code, § 22.11) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.026 LOT PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Principal structures.  
      (1)   All principal structures shall be located on a lot, and only one
principal structure shall be located, erected or moved onto a lot in the
single-family residential districts.
      (2)   The Planning Committee may permit more than one principal structure
per lot in other districts where more than one principal structure is needed
for the orderly development of the parcel. When additional structures are
permitted, the Planning Committee may impose additional yard requirements or
parking requirements, or may require a minimum separation distance between
principal buildings. See §
155.07 for certified survey requirements if no subdivision.
   (B)   Existing substandard lots.
      (1)   A lot located in a residential district which does not contain
sufficient area to conform to the dimensional requirements of this chapter, but
which at least 50 feet wide and 6,000 square feet in area, may be used as a
single building site, provided that the use is permitted in the zoning district
prior to the effective date of this chapter.
      (2)   A lot located in a business or manufacturing district which does
not contain sufficient area to conform to the dimensional requirements of this
chapter may be used as a building site, provided that the lot is a lot of
record in the County Register of Deeds office prior to the effective date of
this chapter.
      (3)   Substandard lots granted permits under this section shall be
required to meet the setback and other yard requirements of this chapter. A
building permit for the improvement of a lot with lesser dimensions and
requisites than those stated above shall be issued only after a variance is
granted by the Board of Appeals.
   (C)   Roadway. All lots shall abut a public street or approved private road
or way which is constructed to applicable standards.
   (D)   Minimum yard. No yard or other open space existing on the effective
date of this chapter shall be reduced below the minimum required by this
chapter.
   (E)   Conflicting allocations. No yard or other open space allocated to a
structure or parcel of land shall be used to satisfy yard, other open spaces or
minimum lot area requirements for any other structure or parcel.
(Prior Code, § 22.12) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.027 YARD REGULATIONS.
   Measurements shall be taken from the nearest point of building to the lot
line in question, subject to the following:
   (A)   On lots having double frontage (through lots), the required front yard
shall be provided on both street sides; and
   (B)   On a corner lot, the width of the yard along the side street shall not
be less than any required front yard on any such street, provided the buildable
width of a lot of record shall not be reduced to less than 28 feet nor closer
than six feet to any side lot line. In no case shall the setback required for a
side yard abutting a street be reduced to less than 30 feet.
(Prior Code, § 22.13) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.028 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   Except as provided below, all buildings and structures shall conform to the
height regulations for the zoning district in which they are located.
   (A)   Architectural projections, such as spires, steeples, belfries, parapet
walls, cupolas, domes, flues and chimneys are exempt from the height
limitations of this chapter.
   (B)   Special structures, such as elevator penthouses, tanks, grain
elevators, silos, observation towers, manufacturing equipment and necessary
mechanical appurtenances, cooling towers, fire towers, substations and
smokestacks are exempt from the height limitations of this chapter.
   (C)   Essential services, utilities, water towers, electric power and
communication transmission lines are exempt from the height limitations of this
chapter.
   (D)   Communication structures, such as radio and television transmission
and relay towers, aerials, radio and television receiving and transmitting
antennas are exempt from the height limitations of this chapter.
   (E)   Public or semi-public facilities, such as schools, churches,
hospitals, monuments, sanatoriums, libraries, government offices and stations,
may be erected to a height of 60 feet, provided all required yards are
increased not less than one foot for each foot the structures exceeds the
district’s maximum height requirement.
(Prior Code, § 22.14) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.029 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, USES OF STRUCTURES AND USE OF REQUIRED YARDS.
   Any accessory building, use or structure shall conform to the applicable
regulations of the district in which it is located except as specifically
otherwise provided hereinafter.
   (A)   Any permanent roofed structure serving an accessory use, if attached
to the principal building, shall be considered as part of such a principal
building for all regulatory purposes.
   (B)   Accessory building and structures are permitted in the rear yard and
side yard; however, when an accessory building or structure is located forward
of the rear building line of the principal building, it shall satisfy the same
side yard requirements as the principal building.
   (C)   Detached accessory building and structures shall not exceed 1,000
square feet and not occupy more than 30% in the rear area in all districts
except the Rural (RD), Commercial (CD), Industrial (ID), Public and
Institutional (PI) and in which such uses and structures may exceed 1,000
square feet, but shall not occupy more than 50% of the rear yard area. Private
swimming pools shall be exempt from the 30% rear yard occupancy limitation in
residential districts.
   (D)   Detached accessory buildings and structures shall not be closer than
five feet to the principal structure nor closer than three feet to an alley or
platted easement, except that when the accessory building is a garage that has
its entrance facing the alley, the rear yard setback shall be 20 feet for the
garage.
   (E)   Uncovered stairs, porches, landings and fire escapes may project into
any yard, but not to exceed six feet and not closer than six feet to any lot
line.
   (F)   Residential fences are permitted on the property lines in residential
districts, but shall not in any case exceed a height of eight feet.
   (G)   Security fences are permitted on the property lines in all districts
except residential districts, but shall not exceed ten feet in height and shall
be of an open type similar to woven wire or wrought iron fencing.
(Prior Code, § 22.15) (Ord. passed - -2011; Ord 157-2025, passed 5-14-2025)
§ 157.030 NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to minimize the hardships that
may unintentionally occur to citizens whose present use of their lots,
buildings and structures thereon do not conform wholly with the provisions of
this chapter. Only uses which are lawful under the existing ordinance before
the adoption of this chapter are protected by the provisions of this section.
   (B)   General provisions.
      (1)   Any lawfully established use of a building, structure or land, on
the effective date of this chapter or of amendments hereto, that does not
conform to the use regulations for the district in which it is located, shall
be deemed to be a legal nonconforming use and may be continued except as
otherwise provided herein.
      (2)   A legal nonconforming use of a building, structure or land use
existing on the effective date of this chapter may be continued, provided no
such nonconforming building, structure or use shall be in any way expanded or
extended, either on the same or adjoining property.
      (3)   Total lifetime structural repairs or alterations to a nonconforming
building or structure, or to the building or structure of a nonconforming use,
shall not exceed 50% of the municipality’s equalized value of the structure at
the date of adoption of this chapter unless permanently changed to a conforming
building, structure or use.
      (4)   To prevent deterioration of a nonconforming structure or use and to
promote an orderly and efficient change to conforming uses, buildings or
structures, the Village Board may allow changes or structural repairs and
alterations in a nonconforming use, of an amount over 50% of the municipality’s
equalized value of the structure at the date of adoption of this chapter on a
conditional use basis, provided that such total repair or deterioration is not
over 50% of the current equalized value as of date of application for
conditional use permit under §
157.133.
   (C)   Changes and substitutions.
      (1)   When any legal nonconforming use of a building, structure or land
in any district has been changed to a conforming use, it shall not thereafter
be changed to any nonconforming use.
      (2)   If no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming use of a
building, structure or land may be changed to another nonconforming use of the
same or a more restricted classification. Whenever a nonconforming use has been
changed to a more restricted nonconforming use, such use shall not thereafter
be changed to a less restricted use. For the purpose of this regulation, uses
permitted in the R-1 Single-Family District shall be deemed to be those in the
most restricted classification.
   (D)   Repair of damages and/or discontinuance.
      (1)   When a nonconforming building or structure is damaged by fire,
explosion, flood or other calamity, to the extent of more than 50% of its
current fair market value, it shall not be restored except so as to comply with
the regulations of the district in which such building is located (see
exception noted in §
157.057(B)(16)). See conditional use alternative in division (B)(4) above.
      (2)   Whenever a nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of 12
consecutive months, any future use of the building, structure or land shall
conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located.
(Prior Code, § 22.16) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.031 TRAFFIC VISIBILITY TRIANGLE.
   Vision setback lines at the intersection of public streets are hereby
established as follows.
   (A)   Across each sector between intersecting streets, a vision setback line
shall be established by a straight line connecting two points of the
intersecting street right-of-way lines, which points are located 20 feet from
the intersection of said right-of-way lines.
   (B)   In the vision setback area, no structure of any kind shall be
permitted which exceeds a height of two feet above the elevation of the center
of the intersection, except for necessary highway and traffic signs and public
utility lines, nor shall any plant material or natural growth be permitted
which obscures safe vision of the approaches to the intersection.
   (C)   The requirements for vision setback lines shall not apply within the
Central Business District.
(Prior Code, § 22.17) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.032 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the conditions
under which occupations may not undermine the general intent and purpose of
this chapter and the specific purposes of the residential districts. The
standards for home occupations in this chapter are intended to ensure
compatibility with other permitted uses and with the residential character of
the neighborhood, plus a clearly secondary or incidental status in relation to
the residential use of the main building as the criteria for determining
whether a proposed accessory use qualifies as a home occupation.
   (B)   Standards. Home occupations shall be subject to the following
standards.
      (1)   The occupation or profession shall be carried on wholly within the
principal building or other structure accessory thereto, and it shall utilize
no more than 50% of the gross floor area of the building.
      (2)   The home occupation is to be conducted only by members of the
family residing in the dwelling unit, plus no more than six nonresident
assistants or employees employed on the premises at any one time. Persons
engaged in building trades, similar fields and other activities using their
dwelling units or residential premises as an office for business activities
carried on off the premises, may have more employees than the limitations set
forth in this division (B)(2) if they are not employed on the premises.
      (3)   The home occupation shall be incidental and subordinate to its use
for residential purposes.
      (4)   In no way shall the appearance of the structure be altered or the
occupation within the residence be conducted in a manner which would cause the
premises to differ from its residential character either by the use of
materials, construction and lighting.
      (5)   No home occupation shall create noise, dust, vibration, smell,
smoke, glare, electrical interference, fire hazard or any other hazard of
nuisance beyond what normally occurs in the applicable zoning district.
      (6)   There shall not be outside storage of any kind related to the home
occupation.
      (7)   The home occupation shall not involve the use of commercial
vehicles, other than those owned by the applicant for delivery of products or
materials to and from the premises. This shall not be interpreted to include
delivery and/or pickup services such as United Parcel Service, Federal Express
and the like, in the conduct of their normal operations.
      (8)   Activities which involve the manufacture, utilization, processing
or storage of chemicals or inflammable and explosive material shall not be
permitted.
   (C)   Permitted home occupations. Permitted home occupations include but are
not necessarily limited to the following:
      (1)   Artists or sculptors;
      (2)   Authors or composers;
      (3)   Home crafts such as model making, rug weaving and cabinet making;
      (4)   Office facility of a minister, rabbi or priest;
      (5)   Office facility of an attorney architect, professional engineer,
surveyor, landscape architect, insurance agent or real estate agent;
      (6)   Private tutoring;
      (7)   Musical instruction limited to two pupils at a time; and
      (8)   Dressmaking.
   (D)   Home occupations not permitted. The following uses, by the nature of
the investment or operation, have a pronounced tendency once started to rapidly
increase beyond the limits permitted for home occupations and thereby impair
the use and value of a residentially zoned area for residence purposes.
Therefore, home occupations not permitted include but are not necessarily
limited to:
      (1)   Barber shops and beauty salons;
      (2)   Antique shops;
      (3)   Stables and kennels;
      (4)   Medical offices, including but not necessarily limited to
physicians, surgeons, dentists, chiropractors or optometrists for the general
practice of the profession, except for consultation or emergency treatment;
      (5)   Automobile repair or paint shops; and
      (6)   Restaurants and bakeries.
   (E)   Conditional use. Any proposed home occupation that is neither
specifically permitted by division (C) above nor specifically prohibited by
division (D) above shall be considered a conditional use and be granted or
denied by the Village Board upon consideration of those standards contained in
division (B) above and in accordance with the procedures as required in §
157.133.
(Prior Code, § 22.18) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.033 CLASSIFICATION OF UNLISTED USES.
   (A)   Any use not specifically listed as a permitted use or a conditional
use in the districts established in §§
157.050 through
157.061 shall be considered to be prohibited except as may be otherwise
specifically provided hereinafter.
   (B)   In case of question as to the classification of an unlisted use, the
question shall be submitted to the Planning Committee for determination in
accordance with the following procedure.
      (1)   Application. Application for determination for classification of an
unlisted use shall be made in writing to the Planning Committee and shall
include a detailed description of the proposed use and such other information
as may be required by the Planning Committee to facilitate the determination.
      (2)   Investigation. The Planning Committee shall make or have made such
investigations as it deems necessary in order to compare the nature and
characteristics of the proposed use with those of the uses specifically listed
in this chapter and to determine its classification.
      (3)   Public hearing. The Planning Committee shall fix a reasonable time
and place for a public hearing following the receipt of an application for the
determination of a classification of an unlisted use, publish a Class 2 notice
thereof and shall give due notice to the parties in interest and the Zoning
Administrator.
      (4)   Determination. The determination of the Planning Committee shall be
rendered in writing within 40 days from the date of the public hearing and
shall include findings supporting the conclusion. The Planning Committee shall
determine if the classification of the unlisted use is a permitted use,
conditional use or prohibited use in one or more of the districts established
in §
157.050.
      (5)   Effective date of determination. At the time of the determination
of the classification of the unlisted use shall become effective.
(Prior Code, § 22.19) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.034 SANITARY SEWER PROVISION.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to maximize public investment
in sanitary sewer and sewage treatment infrastructure, and protect surface and
ground water, in the interest of public health, safety and welfare.
   (B)   Standard. Soils, geologic and hydrogeologic conditions within the
village are not suitable for on-site sewage treatment systems and holding
tanks. The village has made a substantial investment in its sanitary
significant capacity for future growth. Therefore, no building, structure,
activity or use shall be allowed to employ on-site sewage treatment systems and
holding tanks within the village, unless exempted by specific action of the
Village Board.
(Prior Code, § 22.20) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.035 PARKING AND LOADING.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote public safety and
welfare by reducing congestion on public streets and roads by requiring on each
lot sufficient parking and loading space to accommodate the traffic generated
by the use of the lot.
   (B)   Scope of these regulations. The off-street parking and loading
provisions of this chapter shall apply as follows: for all buildings and
structures erected after the effective date of this chapter, accessory parking
and loading shall be according to the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   General provisions.
      (1)   Minimum size regulations. Each parking space shall not be less than
180 square feet in area, 18 feet in length and ten feet in width, exclusive of
aisles and access drives.
      (2)   Access. Each off-street parking space shall open directly upon an
aisle or driveway designed to provide safe and efficient means of vehicular
access to such parking space. All off-street parking facilities shall be
designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a
manner which will least interfere with traffic movement.
      (3)   Computing requirements. In computing the number of spaces required,
the following rules shall govern:
         (a)   Floor space shall mean the gross floor area of the specific use.
See §
157.010; and
         (b)   Provision of parking stalls, shared jointly by several persons
in the same block or in the same vicinity is permissible, in which case the
number of stalls required shall be the sum total of the individual
requirements, provided that where it is found by the Planning Committee, upon
application thereto, that the parking demand generated by the different uses
included in any joint arrangement to provide parking stalls required herein
occurs at distinctly different times, as in the case of a theater generating
demand for parking after normal daytime business hours and a store generating
demand for parking during such daytime hours, and in similar cases, the
Planning Committee may reduce the total number of parking stalls to be jointly
provided.
      (4)   Location of parking facilities. All parking spaces required herein
shall be located on the same lot with the building or use served, except that
where the number of spaces are provided collectively or used jointly by two or
more buildings or establishments, the required spaces may be located not to
exceed 300 feet from any building served.
      (5)   Lighting. Lights provided in any parking area shall be hooded or
beamed so as not to create undesirable glare or illumination on adjacent
residential property.
      (6)   Surfacing. Any off-street parking area, other than that provided
for single- and two-family dwelling units, having a capacity for more than four
vehicles shall be concrete, blacktop or gravel.
   (D)   Parking space requirements. The Village Board chooses not to impose
particular off-street parking requirements at this time. If off-street parking
is provided, it shall conform to this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 22.22) (Ord. passed - -2011)
ZONING DISTRICTS
§ 157.050 DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.
   For the purpose and administration of this chapter, the village is hereby
organized into the following zoning districts:
   (A)   Residential districts:
      (1)   R-1 Single-Family Residence District; and
      (2)   R-2 Multiple-Family Residence District.
   (B)   Rural Development District RD;
   (C)   Commercial Districts CD;
   (D)   Industrial District ID;
   (E)   Public and Institutional District PI;
   (F)   Conservancy District W; and
   (G)   Wellhead Protection Overlay District WP.
(Prior Code, § 22.21(1)) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.051 ZONING DISTRICT MAP.
   The boundaries of the aforesaid zoning districts are hereby established as
shown on the “Village of Gilman Official Zoning Map”. The Official Map and all
notations, references and other information shown thereon are a part of this
chapter and shall have the same force and effect as if the matters and
information set forth by said map were fully described herein. An official copy
of this map, together with a copy of this chapter, shall be kept at the office
of the Village Clerk. Any changes in zoning district boundaries shall be
recorded on the map.
(Prior Code, § 22.21(2)) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.052 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   (A)   The district boundaries are either streets or alleys unless otherwise
shown, and where the designation on the map indicates that the various
districts are approximately bounded by a street or alley line, such street or
alley line shall be construed to be the district boundary line.
   (B)   Where the district boundaries are not otherwise indicated and where
the property has been or may hereafter be divided into blocks and lots, the
district boundaries shall be construed to be lot lines, and where the
designations on the map are approximately bounded by lot lines, said lot line
shall be construed to be the boundary of the district.
   (C)   In unsubdivided property, the district boundary shown on the map shall
be determined by use of the scale shown on such map.
(Prior Code, § 22.21(3)) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.053 ZONING OF RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   All streets, alleys, public ways, waterways and railroad rights-of-way, if
not otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zone
as the property immediately abutting them. Where the centerline serves as a
district boundary, the zoning of the right-of-way shall be deemed to be the
same as that of the abutting property up to such centerline, unless otherwise
specifically designated.
(Prior Code, § 22.21(4)) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.054 R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The R-1 Single-Family Residence District is intended to
provide a quiet, pleasant and low to moderate density living area protected
from excessive traffic and nuisances, such as noise, odors, vibration, and uses
which are incompatible with the provisions of this chapter for this district.
The R-1 Single-Family Residence District shall be municipally sewered, unless
extensions are not available. Nothing contained herein or any action whereby
land is included in the R-1 District will prevent the Village Board from
requiring sewer in the future.
   (B)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Single-family dwellings;
      (2)   Public parks and playgrounds;
      (3)   Community living arrangement which has a capacity for eight or
fewer persons being served by the program, subject to state licensing
requirements;
      (4)   Family day care homes, limited to not more than eight children.
Family day care homes shall be subject to state licensing requirements; and
      (5)   Accessory building or use, including a private detached garage or
carport, and paved parking areas customarily incidental to the above uses, but
not involving the conduct of a business.
   (C)   Conditional uses (see §
157.133).
      (1)   Elementary, junior and senior high schools;
      (2)   Fire stations;
      (3)   Churches and cemeteries;
      (4)   Museums, libraries and community centers not conducted for profit;
      (5)   Nursing homes, homes for the elderly and hospitals;
      (6)   Golf courses;
      (7)   Group day care homes licensed for nine or more children, subject to
all state licensing requirements;
      (8)   Community living arrangements which have a capacity for nine or
more persons being served by the program, subject to state licensing
requirements;
      (9)   Private lodges and clubs;
      (10)   Public and private facilities, such as water wells, water and
sewage pumping stations, water storage tanks, electrical power substations,
telephone exchanges and microwave radio towers; and
      (11)   Home occupations (see §
157.032). Use may require a conditional use permit.
   (D)   Dimensional requirements.
      (1)   Lot size (see §
157.026).
         (a)   Minimum lot area.
            1.   Existing platted or CSM lots: 13,068 square feet. A 99-foot by
132-foot lot is considered a standard minimum lot.
            2.   New platted or CSM lots: 17,424 square feet. A 132-foot by
132-foot lot is considered a standard minimum lot.
         (b)   Minimum lot width.
            1.   Existing platted or CSM lots: 99 feet.
            2.   New platted or CSM lots: 100 feet.
      (2)   Setbacks and required yards for principal building (see §
157.027).
         (a)   Minimum front yard: 30 feet to foundation.
         (b)   Minimum side yard: six feet, 18 aggregate; or, if garage is
attached, six feet on garage side, 12 feet on dwelling side.
      (3)   Setbacks and required yards for accessory building (see §
157.029). Side/rear yard setbacks are six feet for all accessory buildings,
including detached garages (except 20 feet for garages facing an alley).
   (E)   Off-street parking. Off-street parking as required by §
157.035.
(Prior Code, § 22.21(5)) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.055 R-2 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The R-2 Multiple-Family Residence District is intended to
provide a living environment similar in all respects to the R-1 District,
although with a higher population density and greater diversity of housing
types. The R-2 Multiple-Family Residence District shall be municipally sewered,
unless specifically exempted by the Village Board because sewer extensions are
not available. Nothing contained herein, or any action whereby land is included
in the R-2 District, will prevent the Village Board from requiring sewer in the
future.
   (B)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Single-family dwellings;
      (2)   Two-family dwellings;
      (3)   Multiple-family dwellings;
      (4)   Community living arrangement for 15 persons or less, subject to
state licensing requirements;
      (5)   Bed and breakfast establishments subject to the following
provisions:
         (a)   Bed and breakfast establishments shall require a permit in
accordance with Wis. Adm. Code Chapter DHS 197; and
         (b)   Off-street parking provisions shall be required.
      (6)   Public parks and playgrounds.
   (C)   Permitted accessory uses. Private garages and carports and accessory
buildings and structures incidental to residential uses.
   (D)   Conditional uses (see §
157.133).
      (1)   Community living arrangements which have a capacity for 16 persons
or more, subject to state licensing requirements;
      (2)   Elementary, junior and senior high schools;
      (3)   Fire stations;
      (4)   Churches;
      (5)   Museums, libraries and community centers not conducted for profit;
      (6)   Nursing homes, homes for the elderly and hospitals;
      (7)   Golf courses;
      (8)   Group day care homes licensed for nine or more children, subject to
all state licensing requirements;
      (9)   Private lodges and clubs;
      (10)   Boarding houses;
      (11)   Public and private facilities, such as water wells, water and
sewage pumping stations, water storage tanks, electrical power substations,
telephone exchanges, microwave radio towers, sewage disposal plants, municipal
incinerators, power plants, shops and storage yards; and
      (12)   Home occupations (see §
157.032).
   (E)   Dimensional requirements.
      (1)   Lot size (see §
157.026).
         (a)   Minimum lot area.
            1.   Single-family dwelling: 13,068 square feet.
            2.   Two-family dwelling: 17,424 square feet.
            3.   Multiple-family dwelling: Lots shall have the minimum of the
larger of 17,424 square feet or:
 
Dwelling Type              Minimum Lot Area
Multiple-family, 1 bedroom 2,178 SF per dwelling unit
Multiple-family, 2 bedroom 2,900 SF per dwelling unit
Multiple-family, 3 bedroom 4,000 SF per dwelling unit
 
         (b)   Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
      (2)   Setbacks and required yards for principal building (see §
157.027).
         (a)   Minimum front yard: 30 feet.
         (b)   Minimum side yard: §
157.054(D)(2) shall apply to all single- and two-family dwellings; ten feet for
multiple-family dwellings.
      (3)   Setbacks and required yards for accessory building (see §
157.029). Side/rear yard setbacks are six feet for all accessory buildings.
   (F)   Off-street parking. Off-street parking as required by §
157.035.
(Prior Code, § 22.21(6)) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.056 RD RURAL DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The RD Rural Development District is intended to allow for
agricultural uses within the village.
   (B)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Single-family dwellings;
      (2)   Two-family dwellings;
      (3)   Agricultural and general farming activities including dairying,
livestock and poultry raising (except farms feeding offal or garbage and mink
farms), crop production and forestry; and
      (4)   Sporting and pet animal kennels.
   (C)   Conditional uses (see §
157.133).
      (1)   Bed and breakfast establishments subject to the provisions of §
157.055(B)(5);
      (2)   Public parks and playgrounds; and
      (3)   Any other conditional use as stated in §
157.055(D).
   (D)   Dimensional requirements.
      (1)   Lot size.
         (a)   Minimum lot area: 17,424 square feet. A 132-foot by 132-foot lot
is considered a standard minimum lot.
         (b)   Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
      (2)   Setbacks and required yards for principal and accessory building.
Section
157.054(D)(3) shall apply to all accessory buildings.
   (E)   Off-street parking. Off-street parking as required by §
157.035.
(Prior Code, § 22.21(7)) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.057 C-1 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The C-1 Central Business District is intended to provide for
the orderly and appropriate regulations to ensure compatibility of the diverse
uses typical of the “downtown” area without inhibiting the potential for
maximum development of commercial, cultural, entertainment and other community
activities which contribute to its role as the “center” of the village.
   (B)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Retail sales establishments;
      (2)   Financial institutions;
      (3)   Personal and business service establishments;
      (4)   Commercial and professional offices;
      (5)   Hotels and motels;
      (6)   Restaurants, cafes, taverns and bars;
      (7)   Theaters and bowling alleys;
      (8)   Auditoriums and community centers;
      (9)   Government offices, post offices and libraries;
      (10)   Medical and dental clinics;
      (11)   Clubs and lodges;
      (12)   Newspaper and magazine publishers;
      (13)   Day care centers, provided all state requirements are met;
      (14)   Churches;
      (15)   Multiple-family dwellings;
      (16)   Replacement of single- and two-family dwellings which have been
damaged by fire, explosion, flood or other calamity;
      (17)   Gasoline service stations;
      (18)   Automobile and other vehicle sales; and
      (19)   Attached living quarters which is a rental residence, provided
there is off-street parking.
   (C)   Permitted accessory uses.
      (1)   Rental residences on other than the basement;
      (2)   Attached living quarters which is occupied by the household of the
owner of the establishment;
      (3)   Garages for storage and vehicles used in conjunction with the
operation of the business or for occupants of the premises; and
      (4)   Off-street parking lots.
   (D)   Conditional uses (see §
157.133).
      (1)   Rest homes and nursing homes;
      (2)   Warehouses for local wholesale and retail establishments or for
personal property;
      (3)   Public and private facilities, such as water wells, water and
sewage pumping stations, water storage tanks, electrical power substations,
telephone exchanges, sewage disposal plants, municipal incinerators, power
plants, shops and storage yards;
      (4)   Light assembly or light manufacturing, including incubator
facilities designed for start-up of business which may be limited in time of
the permitted use;
      (5)   Single-family dwelling; and
      (6)   Two-family dwelling.
   (E)   Dimensional requirements.
      (1)   Lot size (see §
157.026).
         (a)   Minimum lot area: 2,000 square feet.
         (b)   Minimum lot width: 25 feet.
      (2)   Setbacks and required yards for principal building (see §
157.027).
         (a)   Minimum front yard: none required.
         (b)   Minimum side yard: none required, except when adjacent to or
abutting a residential district, a side yard setback of ten feet shall be
required.
      (3)   Setbacks and required yards for accessory building (see §
157.029). Minimum side yard: none required; however, side yard setbacks shall
be six feet for all accessory buildings when adjacent or abutting a residential
district.
(Prior Code, § 22.21(8)) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.058 C-2 GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose.  The C-2 General Commercial District is intended to provide
for individual or small groups of retail and customer service establishments.
This type of district is generally located away from the traditional Central
Business District and provides such amenities as increased open space and off-
street parking and loading facilities, making such retail centers more
compatible with the character of adjacent residential districts or highway
access.
   (B)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Retail sales establishments;
      (2)   Financial institutions;
      (3)   Personal and business service establishments;
      (4)   Commercial and professional offices;
      (5)   Automotive sales and equipment service establishments, including
gasoline service stations;
      (6)   Hotels and motels;
      (7)   Restaurants, cafes, taverns and bars;
      (8)   Theaters and bowling alleys;
      (9)   Auditoriums and community centers;
      (10)   Government offices, post offices and libraries;
      (11)   Clubs and lodges;
      (12)   Veterinary hospitals and clinics, provided that no service,
including the boarding of animals, is offered outside of an enclosed building;
      (13)   Medical and dental clinics;
      (14)   Wholesale establishments;
      (15)   Day care centers, provided all state requirements are met;
      (16)   Rest homes and nursing homes;
      (17)   Boarding houses;
      (18)   Multiple-family dwellings, subject to §
157.055(E);
      (19)   Mini warehouses. Outdoor storage is limited to boats and
recreational vehicles defined in §
157.010. All such outdoor storage shall be screened. The screening required
shall consist of a fence or wall not less than five feet high. The fence or
wall shall be constructed in a manner and of such material to impair direct
vision of the outdoor storage area; and
      (20)   Lumber and building supply yards, providing that not more than 10%
of the lot or tract is used for the open storage of products, materials or
equipment.
   (C)   Permitted accessory uses.
      (1)   Parking (see §
157.035); and
      (2)   Accessory buildings and structures.
   (D)   Conditional uses (see §
157.133).
      (1)   Hospitals;
      (2)   Recreational establishments, including drive-in theaters, golf
courses, golf or baseball driving ranges, archery fields, miniature golf
courses or similar uses;
      (3)   Recreational vehicles camps, when such camps provide not less than
1,800 square feet of lot area for each cabin, recreational vehicle or tent, and
when such camp is clearly bounded by a fence or hedge. The requirements of Wis.
Adm. Code Chapter DHS 178 and all other applicable codes shall be minimum
standards and may be supplemented by the Planning Committee;
      (4)   Sporting and pet animal kennels;
      (5)   Animal hospitals, including the outside boarding of animals;
      (6)   Automobile body repair shops;
      (7)   Transmitting towers, receiving towers, relay and microwave towers,
including broadcast facilities and studios;
      (8)   Public and private facilities, such as water wells, water and
sewage pumping stations, water storage tanks, electrical power substations,
telephone exchanges, sewage disposal plants, municipal incinerators, power
plants, shops and storage yards;
      (9)   Light assembly or light manufacturing, including incubator
facilities designed for start-up of business which may be limited in time of
the permitted use;
      (10)   Single-family dwelling; and
      (11)   Two-family dwelling.
   (E)   Dimensional requirements.
      (1)   Lot size (see §
157.026).
         (a)   Minimum lot area: 15,000 square feet.
         (b)   Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
      (2)   Setbacks and required yards for principal building (see §
157.027).
         (a)   Minimum front yard: 20 feet.
         (b)   Minimum side yard: six feet.
         (c)   Minimum rear yard: 20 feet.
      (3)   Setbacks and required yards for accessory building (see §
157.029). Side and rear yard setbacks are six feet for all accessory buildings.
   (F)   Visual screening requirement. When adjoining or abutting a residential
district, a visual screening may be required. Such visual screening shall
consist of a single row hedge planting or solid wooden fence not less than six
feet in height.
(Prior Code, § 22.21(9)) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.059 ID INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. This district is intended to provide for manufacturing and
industrial development in those areas where the relationship to surrounding
land use would create fewer problems of compatibility and would not necessitate
as stringent regulatory controls. Such districts should not normally abut
directly upon residence districts.
   (B)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Manufacturing, assembly, fabrication and processing plants;
      (2)   Experimental, testing and research laboratories, not involving the
keeping of animals or use of animal products or any significant degree of
danger or undesirable operational characteristics;
      (3)   Printing and publishing houses and related activities;
      (4)   Tool making, cabinetry and repair shops;
      (5)   General warehousing;
      (6)   Lumber and building supply yards;
      (7)   Automobile body repair shop, not including the storage of junked or
wrecked automobiles and parts;
      (8)   Public utility distribution lines, including but not limited to
electric, gas, water, television cable and telephone distribution lines and
other related accessories subject to approval by the Village Public Works
Department;
      (9)   Transportation terminals, including trucking;
      (10)   Commercial service facilities intended primarily as a convenience
for the industrial area such as restaurants, motels, gasoline service stations
or similar uses; and
      (11)   Office buildings.
   (C)   Permitted accessory uses.
      (1)   Office, storage, power supply and other such uses normally
auxiliary to the principal use;
      (2)   Off-street parking and loading facilities as required in §
157.035; and
      (3)   Residential quarters for the resident operator, guard or caretaker.
   (D)   Conditional uses.
      (1)   Kennels and animal hospitals, laboratories using animal products;
      (2)   Manufacture of cement, lime, gypsum, plaster of paris, acid,
explosives, fertilizers or glue;
      (3)   Rendering plants, refineries or tanneries;
      (4)   Stockyards or slaughterhouses;
      (5)   Junk or salvage yards;
      (6)   Storage of explosives except as incidental or a permitted use and
storage of gasoline or petroleum in excess of 50,000 gallons;
      (7)   Automobile body repair shops, including the storage of junked or
wrecked automobiles and parts;
      (8)   Animal hospitals, kennels or laboratories using animal products;
      (9)   Any similar uses which in the opinion of the Planning Committee
would not be hazardous, noxious or offensive to the surrounding area;
      (10)   Commercial service facilities intended primarily as a convenience
for the industrial area such as restaurants, motels, gasoline service stations
or similar uses;
      (11)   Transmission lines, antennas and towers, including but not limited
to electric, gas, petroleum and telephone transmission lines, antennas and
towers, whether installation is above or below ground, and other related
accessories, substations, municipal water towers, pump houses, water and sewage
treatment plants;
      (12)   Single-family dwellings;
      (13)   Two-family dwellings; and
      (14)   Multi-family dwellings.
   (E)   Dimensional requirements; setbacks.
      (1)   (a)   Minimum front yard: 25 feet;
         (b)   Minimum side yard: 25 feet; 50 feet in aggregate; and
         (c)   Minimum rear yard: 25 feet.
      (2)   For all but division (E)(1)(a) above, when adjoining or abutting a
residence district, will maintain a minimum setback of 50 feet and with a
minimum 15-foot wide, six-foot high planting screen.
(Prior Code, § 22.21(10)) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.060 PI PUBLIC AND INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this district is to designate areas of public
use such as parks, playgrounds, schools, governmental uses or other public
areas; to delineate institutional uses, such as churches, hospitals and
community facilities; and to distinguish areas for public service uses, and
public and private utilities.
   (B)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Municipal uses, village-owned and operated;
      (2)   Public parks and playgrounds;
      (3)   Public utility and public services uses;
      (4)   Non-commercial parking;
      (5)   Signs for municipal and public utility use;
      (6)   Public and private schools, athletic fields and related educational
or recreational facilities;
      (7)   Government offices and facilities, and post offices;
      (8)   Churches and cemeteries;
      (9)   Public and private facilities, such as water wells, water and
sewage pumping stations, sewage disposal plants, water storage tanks,
electrical power substations, telephone exchanges, transmitting towers,
receiving towers, relay towers, microwave radio towers, municipal storage
yards;
      (10)   Public housing;
      (11)   Museums, libraries, auditoriums and community centers not
conducted for profit;
      (12)   Nursing homes and hospitals; and
      (13)   Off-street parking and loading facilities as required in §
157.035.
   (C)   Dimensional requirements. In the Public and Institutional District,
the requirements for lot area, lot width, setbacks and building height shall be
consistent with basic planning and zoning principles and designed to encourage
and promote improved aesthetic and environmental design. Such requirements as
are made part of an approved site plan in accordance with the standards
provided herein shall be construed to be enforced in accordance with this
section.
   (D)   Procedure. The procedure for zoning of a Public and Institutional
District shall be the same as required by §§
157.110 through
157.116. In addition thereto, a site plan shall be required for zoning of a
Public and Institutional District, prior to any physical change, as defined in
division (D)(3) below, or any physical change in use to a property in a Public
and Institutional District, and shall be subject to the following additional
requirements:
      (1)   Site plan. The applicant shall file with the Planning Committee
seven copies of a site plan which includes the following information:
         (a)   Name and address of the applicant. If the owner of the land is
other than the applicant, a duly verified statement by the owner that the
applicant is authorized by him or her to make the application;
         (b)   A statement describing the general character of the intended
development, physical change or change in use;
         (c)   An accurate map of the project area, to include: its location,
relationship to surrounding properties, including the zoning of adjacent
properties, existing topography and natural drainage, all building and
structure footprints, driveways, sidewalks, parking lots, utilities and
stormwater ,management structures;
         (d)   Landscaping plans for the entire site, including provisions for
visual screening; and
         (e)   Such other plans and specifications and information as may
reasonably be required by the Planning Committee or Village Board.
      (2)   Visual screening requirement. When adjoining or abutting a
residential district, a visual screening may be required. Such visual screening
shall consist of a single row hedge planting or solid wooden fence not less
than six feet in height.
      (3)   Any physical change defined. In this section, ANY PHYSICAL CHANGE
means any new construction of a building or structure, or modification of any
property located within a Public and Institutional District which significantly
affects the quality of the physical and human environment in the judgment of
the Planning Committee. Projects necessary to maintain or repair buildings and
grounds that will not require exterior physical design changes or use changes,
or accessory structures with all setbacks at a minimum of 25 feet and
considered incidental to a principal use on the property, will be permitted
without a site plan.
      (4)   Approval of the site plan. Within 30 days after completion of the
filing of the site plan, the Planning Committee shall forward to the Village
Board a recommendation that such site plan be approved as submitted, approved
with modifications, approved with conditions, or disapproved. The approval of
the site plan shall establish the basic right of use for the area in conformity
with such plan as approved, which shall be established as an integral component
of the Public and Institutional District regulations.
   (E)   Character and intensity of land use.  In review of site plans and all
other matters concerning the Public and Institutional District, the Planning
Committee and Village Board shall consider the uses proposed and their
intensity and arrangement on the site, which shall be of an aesthetic,
environmental and operational character which:
      (1)   Will be compatible with the physical nature of the site, with
particular concern for the preservation of natural features, tree growth and
open space;
      (2)   Will produce an attractive environment of sustained aesthetic and
environmental desirability; and
      (3)   Will not create a traffic or parking demand incompatible with the
existing or proposed facilities to serve it.
   (F)   Village exempted from site plan. The village in the development,
administration and management of its property is exempted only from division
(D) above, except that the village shall follow §§
157.110 through
157.116 for zoning to a Public and Institutional District. The Village Board
shall determine the information, plans and specifications necessary for
approvals of village uses, buildings or facilities within the Public and
Institutional District, and the Planning Committee or Village Board may require
visual screening for village properties pursuant to division (D)(2) above.
(Prior Code, § 22.21(11)) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.061 W CONSERVANCY DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this district is to discourage development in
natural areas with unique features or environmental hazards, provide areas to
ensure proper water conservation and flood control, and provide areas for
outdoor recreation and forestry pursuits.
   (B)   Permitted uses. Management of recreation, forestry, wildlife and fish.
   (C)   Conditional uses.
      (1)   Parks and bicycle/hiking trails;
      (2)   Power stations, transmission lines, water pumping and storage
facilities; and
      (3)   Golf courses.
(Prior Code, § 22.21(12)) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.062 GWP GROUNDWATER PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The residents of the village depend exclusively on
groundwater for a safe drinking water supply. Certain land use practices and
activities can seriously threaten or degrade groundwater quality. The purpose
of this section is to establish a groundwater protection overlay district to
institute land use regulations and restrictions within a defined area which
contributes water directly to the municipal water supply providing protection
for the aquifer and municipal water supply of the village and promoting the
public health, safety and general welfare of village residents.
   (B)   Authority. Statutory authority of the village to enact these
regulations was established by the Wisconsin Legislature in 1983, Wisconsin Act
410 (effective May 11,1984), which specifically added groundwater protection,
in Wis. Stats. §§ 59.97(1) (which has since been renumbered as § 59.69(1)) and
62.23(7)(c), to the statutory authorization for county and municipal planning
and zoning to protect the public health, safety and welfare. In addition, Wis.
Stats. § 61.35, the village has the authority to enact this section, effective
in the incorporated areas of the village, to encourage the protection of
groundwater resources.
   (C)   Application. The regulations specified in this Wellhead Protection
section shall apply within the area surrounding each municipal water supply
well that has been designated as a "wellhead protection area" by the village in
the most recent and up-to-date wellhead protection plan, and are in addition to
the requirements in the underlying zoning district, if any. If there is a
conflict between this chapter and the zoning ordinance, the more restrictive
provision shall apply.
   (D)   (1)   GWP Groundwater Protection Overlay District boundaries. The
location and boundaries of the zoning districts established by this chapter are
set forth in the village’s most recent and up-to-date wellhead protection plan
on the map titled "Wellhead Protection Area" (on file in the village office)
incorporated herein and hereby made a part of this section. Said figures,
together with everything shown thereon and all amendments thereto, shall be as
much a part of this chapter as though fully set forth and described herein.
This section thus promotes public health, safety, and welfare. The Groundwater
Protection Overlay District is intended to protect the groundwater recharge
area for the water supply from contamination.
      (2)   Note: Wellhead protection areas are derived from hydrologic studies
and are based on the area surrounding a well where groundwater takes five years
or less to travel from the land surface to the pumping well.
   (E)   Principal uses. The following uses are permitted in the Groundwater
Protection Overlay District subject to the separation distances in division
(H).
      (1)   Parks, playgrounds or wildlife areas, provided there is no on-site
waste disposal or fuel storage tank facilities associated with this use.
      (2)   Non-motorized trails, such as bike, skiing, nature and fitness
trails.
      (3)   Residential, commercial and industrial establishments that are
municipally sewered and whose use, aggregate of hazardous chemicals in use,
storage, handling and/or production may not exceed 20 gallons or 160 pounds at
any time, with the exception for those uses listed as "conditional" or
"prohibited" in divisions (F) or (G) (hazardous chemicals are identified by
OSHA under 29 CFR 1910.1200(c) and by OSHA under 40 CFR Part 370).
      (4)   Routine tillage, planting, and field management operations in
support of agricultural crop production, where nutrients from legume, manure,
and commercial sources are accounted for and credited toward crop nutrient
need. The combination of all nutrient sources applied or available on
individual fields may not exceed University of Wisconsin soil test
recommendations for that field.
   (F)   Conditional uses. In accordance with §
157.133, the following uses may be conditionally permitted in the Groundwater
Protection Overlay District subject to the separation distances in division
(H):
      (1)   Hydrocarbon, petroleum or hazardous chemical storage tanks;
      (2)   Motor vehicle services, including filling and service stations,
repair, renovation and body work;
      (3)   Residential, commercial, and industrial establishments that are
municipally sewered and whose use, aggregate of hazardous chemicals in use,
storage, handling and/or production exceeds 20 gallons or 160 pounds at any
time;
      (4)   Stormwater infiltration basins; and
      (5)   Geothermal wells, also known as ground source heat pump along with
any associated piping and/or ground loop component installations.
   (G)   Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited in the Groundwater
Protection Overlay District:
      (1)   Animal waste storage areas and facilities;
      (2)   Application of fertilizer to manicured lawns or grasses in excess
of the nutrient requirements of the grass;
      (3)   Asphalt product manufacturing plants;
      (4)   Dry cleaning establishments;
      (5)   Fertilizer manufacturing or storage facilities;
      (6)   Foundries and forge plants;
      (7)   Hazardous chemical processing or manufacturing facilities;
      (8)   Industrial liquid waste storage areas;
      (9)   Landfills or other areas for dumping, disposal or transferring of
garbage, refuse, recycling, trash, or demolition material, including auto
salvage operations;
      (10)   Metal reduction or refinement facilities;
      (11)   Mining operations, including metallic, gravel pits, industrial or
frac-sand mining;
      (12)   Motor freight terminals;
      (13)   Petroleum or hazardous chemical storage greater than 110 gallons
in any single wall petroleum storage tank (double wall storage tanks
installations shall meet the requirements of s. ATCP 93.260 and receive written
approval from the Department of Safety and Professional Services or its
designated local program operator under s. ATCP 93.110); and
      (14)   Road salt or de-icing materials storage areas.
   (H)   Separation distances. The following separation distances as specified
in s. NR 811.12(5), Wis. Adm. Code, shall be maintained within the Groundwater
Protection Overlay District.
      (1)   Ten feet between a well and an emergency or standby power system
that is operated by the same facility which operates the well and that has a
double wall above ground storage tank with continuous electronic interstitial
leakage monitoring. These facilities shall meet the installation requirements
of s. ATCP 93.260 and receive written approval from the Department of Safety
and Professional Services or its designated local program operator under s.
ATCP 93.110.
      (2)   Fifty feet between a well and a storm sewer main or a sanitary
sewer main where the sanitary sewer main is constructed of water main class
materials and joints. Gravity sanitary sewers shall be successfully air
pressure tested in place. The air pressure test shall meet or exceed the
requirements of the four psi low pressure air test for plastic gravity sewer
lines found in the latest edition of Standard Specifications for Sewer & Water
Construction in Wisconsin. Force mains shall be successfully pressure tested
with water to meet the AWWA C600 pressure and leakage testing requirements for
one hour at 125% of the pump shut-off head.
      (3)   Two hundred feet between a well field and any sanitary sewer main
not constructed of water main class materials, sanitary sewer manhole, lift
station, one or two family residential heating fuel oil underground storage
tank or above ground storage tank or private onsite wastewater treatment system
(POWTS) treatment tank or holding tank component and associated piping.
      (4)   Three hundred feet between a well field and any farm underground
storage tank system or other underground storage tank system with double wall
and with electronic interstitial monitoring for the system, which means the
tank and any piping connected to it. These installations shall meet the most
restrictive installation requirements of s. ATCP 93.260 and receive written
approval from the Department of Safety and Professional Services or its
designated local program operator under s. ATCP 93.110, Wis. Admin. Code. These
requirements apply to tanks containing gasoline, diesel, bio-diesel, ethanol,
other alternative fuel, fuel oil, petroleum product, motor fuel, burner fuel,
lubricant, waste oil, or hazardous substances.
      (5)   Three hundred feet between a well field and any farm above ground
storage tank with double wall, or single wall tank with other secondary
containment and under a canopy; other above ground storage tank system with
double wall, or single wall tank with secondary containment and under a canopy
and with electronic interstitial monitoring for a double wall tank or
electronic leakage monitoring for a single wall tank secondary containment
structure. These installations shall meet the most restrictive installation
requirements of s. ATCP 93.260, Wis. Admin. Code, and receive written approval
from the Department of Commerce or its designated local program operator under
s. ATCP 93.110, Wis. Admin. Code. These requirements apply to tanks containing
gasoline, diesel, bio-diesel, ethanol, other alternative fuel, fuel oil,
petroleum product, motor fuel, burner fuel, lubricant, waste oil, or hazardous
substances.
      (6)   Four hundred feet between a well field and a POWTS dispersal
component with a design capacity of less than 12,000 gallons per day, a
cemetery or a storm water retention or detention pond.
      (7)   Six hundred feet between a well field and any farm underground
storage tank system or other underground storage tank system with double wall
and with electronic interstitial monitoring for the system, which means the
tank and any piping connected to it; any farm above ground storage tank with
double wall, or single wall tank with other secondary containment and under a
canopy or other above ground storage tank system with double wall, or single
wall tank with secondary containment and under a canopy; and with electronic
interstitial monitoring for a double wall tank or electronic leakage monitoring
for a single wall tank secondary containment structure. These installations
shall meet the standard double wall tank or single wall tank secondary
containment installation requirements of s. ATCP 93.260 and receive written
approval from the Department of Safety and Professional Services or its
designated local program operator under s. ATCP 93.110. These requirements
apply to tanks containing gasoline, diesel, bio-diesel, ethanol, other
alternative fuel, fuel oil, petroleum product, motor fuel, burner fuel,
lubricant, waste oil, or hazardous substances.
      (8)   One thousand feet between a well field and land application of
municipal, commercial, or industrial waste; the boundaries of a land spreading
facility for spreading of petroleum-contaminated soil regulated under state
administrative regulations while that facility is in operation; agricultural,
industrial, commercial or municipal waste water treatment plant treatment
units, lagoons, or storage structures; manure stacks or storage structures; or
POWTS dispersal component with a design capacity of 12,000 gallons per day or
more.
      (9)   One thousand two hundred feet between a well field and any solid
waste storage, transportation, transfer, incineration, air curtain destructor,
processing, wood burning, one time disposal or small demolition facility;
sanitary landfill; any property with residual groundwater contamination that
exceeds Ch. NR 140 enforcement standards; coal storage area; salt or deicing
material storage area; any single wall farm underground storage tank or single
wall farm above ground storage tank or other single wall underground storage
tank or above ground storage tank that has or has not received written approval
from the Department of Safety and Professional Services or its designated local
program operator under s. ATCP 93.110, Wis. Admin. Code, for a single wall tank
installation. These requirements apply to tanks containing gasoline, diesel,
bio-diesel, ethanol, other alternative fuel, fuel oil, petroleum product, motor
fuel, burner fuel, lubricant, waste oil, or hazardous substances; and bulk
pesticide or fertilizer handling or storage facilities.
   (I)   Existing non-conforming uses. In accordance with §
157.030, the lawful nonconforming use of a structure or land existing at the
time of the adoption or amendment of this chapter may be continued although the
use does not conform with the provisions of this chapter. However, only that
portion of the land in actual use may be so continued and the structure may not
be extended, enlarged, reconstructed, substituted, moved, or structurally
altered except when required to do so by law or order or so as to comply with
the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2021, passed 8-8-2021)
SPECIAL REGULATIONS FOR MOBILE HOMES
§ 157.075 PURPOSE.
   It is the intent and purpose of this subchapter to regulate the placing of
mobile homes of all types and varieties in the village with regard to providing
adequate standards to protect the public health, safety, convenience and
general welfare.
(Prior Code, § 22.13(A)) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.076 OCCUPANCY.
   No mobile home as defined in this chapter shall be occupied or used for
living or sleeping purposes unless it is located in a mobile home park that has
been granted an appropriate permit by the Planning Committee in accordance with
the procedures set forth in this section and
Chapter 152. Temporary mobile homes or recreational vehicles used on
construction projects, as defined in these regulations, presently placed and
occupied outside of a mobile home park shall not be replaced.
(Prior Code, § 22.13(B)) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.077 SPECIAL REGULATIONS FOR MOBILE HOME PARKS.
   The following regulations shall apply to mobile home parks:
   (A)   Purpose. The mobile home park, as defined in §
157.010, is established:
      (1)   To provide regulations and standards for the development of a safe,
healthy and well- designed community for permanent mobile home living;
      (2)   To provide appropriately located sites for mobile home living,
developed at reasonable densities consistent with sound standards of public
health and safety;
      (3)   To comply as much as possible with the objectives and purposes of
each zoning district in which mobile home parks are located;
      (4)   To ensure adequate light, air, access and open space for each
mobile living unit; and
      (5)   To regulate the mobile home park such that it will complement the
land use policy of the zoning district.
   (B)   Placement.  
      (1)   No mobile home shall be located within the following delineated
area of the village: all of the village limits except within the boundaries of
two mobile home parks existing in the village on the date of adoption of this
chapter.
      (2)   Mobile homes located in all other areas of the village shall be in
accordance with the provisions of this section. Mobile homes presently placed
and occupied in the aforesaid described area shall not be replaced.
   (C)   Administration.
      (1)   Mobile home park applications. New mobile home parks, as herein
defined, shall require a conditional use permit, issued in accordance with the
provisions of this section. Applications for a conditional use permit shall
contain the following information:
         (a)   Name and address of the applicant. If the owner of the land is
other than the applicant, a duly verified statement by the owner that the
applicant is authorized by him or her to construct the proposed park and make
the application;
         (b)   Location and legal description of the proposed mobile home park;
         (c)   Existing easements and covenants affecting the property;
         (d)   Land characteristics, such as natural drainage, swamp areas and
wooded areas;
         (e)   Development characteristics, such as surrounding streets,
existing buildings, available community sewer, water and other utilities;
         (f)   Complete preliminary engineering plans and specifications of the
proposed park, showing but not limited to the following:
            1.   The area and dimensions of the tract of land;
            2.   The number, location and size of all mobile home lots and the
location of common and recreational areas;
            3.   The location and width of roadways and walkways;
            4.   The location of the mobile home stands within the mobile home
park, including a detailed sketch of at least one typical mobile home lot and
stand therein;
            5.   Plans and specifications of all utilities, including: sewage
collection and disposal, storm water drainage, water distribution and supply,
solid waste storage and collection, lighting, electrical, telephone and TV
antenna systems;
            6.   The number, location and size of all individual and common
parking areas;
            7.   Landscaping plans for the entire park, including a planting
plan for the buffer strip;
            8.   Plans and specifications of all buildings to be located within
the park;
            9.   Written statements describing proposed park operations,
management and maintenance, including proposed fees and charges and rules to be
established by the operator for conduct of persons within the park; and
            10.   Such other plans and specifications and information as may
reasonably be required by the Planning Committee or Village Board.
      (2)   Action by Planning Committee.
         (a)   Review; action.  
            1.   The Planning Committee shall review the conditional use permit
application to determine its conformity with land development trends in the
community and recognized principles of design, land use planning and landscape
architecture.
            2.   The Planning Committee shall forward the conditional use
permit application to the Village Board with a recommendation that it be:
               a.   Approved;
               b.   Approved with conditions;
               c.   Approved with modifications; or
               d.   Disapproved.
            3.   This communication must be made within 30 days of receipt of
the conditional use permit application.
         (b)   Determination of Village Board. After receipt of the
recommendations of the Planning Committee, the Village Board shall make its
determination regarding the conditional use permit.
         (c)   Findings of fact. Within 30 days after the close of the public
hearing in regards to the proposed conditional use permit, the Village Board
shall approve, approve with conditions, approve with modifications or
disapprove the conditional use permit. For the Village Board to make an
affirmative recommendation, it must find in each of the following instances
that:
            1.   The establishment of a proposed mobile home park will not be
detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort or general
welfare of the community;
            2.   The proposed mobile home park will not be injurious to the use
and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes
already permitted nor substantially diminish and impair property values within
the neighborhood;
            3.   The proposed mobile home park will not impede the normal or
orderly development and improvement of the surrounding property for uses
permitted in the district;
            4.   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and/or other
necessary facilities have been, are being or will be provided; and
            5.   Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide
ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public
streets.
      (3)   Mobile home park license. It shall be unlawful for a person to
establish or operate a mobile home park upon property owned or controlled by
him or her within the village without having first secured the conditional use
permit required by this chapter and the mobile home park license required by
Chapter 152. The application for a mobile home park license shall accompany the
conditional use permit request and shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount
which can be found at the office of the Village Clerk. The Village Clerk shall
issue the mobile home park license only upon Village Board approval of the
conditional use permit. The mobile home park license fee will be returned to
the applicant if the conditional use permit is denied.
   (D)   Mobile home park requirements.
      (1)   Park size. The minimum size of a mobile home park shall be five
acres.
      (2)   Density. The maximum density for mobile home parks shall be eight
mobile home units or lots per gross acre.
      (3)   Setbacks. No mobile home shall be located closer than 30 feet from
any park property boundary line.
      (4)   Drainage and landscaping. The ground surface in all parts of every
mobile home park shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a
safe, efficient manner away from the mobile home stand; all mobile home sites
shall be sodded or seeded and the park shall be attractively landscaped in
accordance with a plan submitted at the time of initial permit application.
      (5)   Recreation areas. Each park shall contain a recreation area. A
minimum of one-half acre of area for such use shall be provided for each 100
sites. The minimum area in a park shall be one-half acre.
      (6)   Screening. All mobile home parks shall be provided with a screening
of trees or shrubs along the property boundary line separating the park and
such adjacent properties, except where the adjoining property is also a mobile
home park. Within the six months after issuance of the appropriate licenses and
permits for the occupation of such mobile home park, the following plantings
shall be established: a permanent planting of trees and shrubs so arranged and
in sufficient numbers so as to form a solid wall of plant material. Such
planting shall be a minimum height of two feet at the original time of planting
and shall be grown or maintained at a height of not less than ten feet, except
where line of sight vision is necessary for pedestrian or vehicular traffic
safety.
      (7)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted within mobile home
parks:
         (a)   Mobile homes used for single-family residential uses;
         (b)   One single-family dwelling per park for the owner, operator or
caretaker thereof;
         (c)   Service buildings such as park offices, laundromats and
recreational buildings provided that such uses be subordinate to the
residential character of the park and are intended for use only by park
residents;
         (d)   Accessory structures such as storage sheds, porches and carports
as approved by the park management. Accessory structures shall meet the minimum
setback requirements prescribed for the basic mobile home unit; and
         (e)   Home occupations as permitted in §
157.032.
      (8)   Prohibited uses.
         (a)   Commercial sales of mobile homes except that existing mobile
homes on the site may be sold by the owner.
         (b)   Dependent mobile homes (those which do not have complete
bathroom facilities as defined in Wis. Stats. § 66.058(1)(a)), and recreational
vehicles shall be prohibited from placement or occupancy within mobile home
parks.
      (9)   Access, street and parking requirements.
         (a)   General requirements.  All mobile home stands shall be provided
with safe, convenient access to public streets and roads. Such access shall be
provided by private streets located within the park boundaries.
         (b)   Park entrances. Entrances to parks shall be designed to minimize
congestion and hazards and allow free movement of traffic on adjacent streets.
         (c)   Interior streets.
            1.   Paving requirements for interior streets shall adhere to
locally applicable codes and shall meet the following width standards:
 
Description                             Distance
2-way street with parking on both sides 32 feet
2-way street with parking on one side   25 feet
2-way street with parking prohibited    18 feet
1-way street with parking on one side   22 feet
1-way street with parking prohibited    14 feet
 
            2.   Right-of-way width shall be at least 66 feet, unless the
Village Board has specifically approved a lesser width, but shall in no case be
less than 50 feet.
         (d)   Parking requirements. A minimum of two improved parking spaces
shall be provided for each mobile home, one of which will be on the mobile home
site.
      (10)   Water and sanitary sewer requirements. Mobile home parks and each
mobile home therein shall be connected to public water and sanitary sewage
facilities.
      (11)   Plumbing requirements. All plumbing within the park and within the
mobile homes therein shall meet all applicable standards for the Wisconsin
Administrative Code and any additional requirements of the Village Board.
      (12)   Solid wastes. All solid wastes shall be stored, collected and
disposed.
   (E)   Mobile home site requirements.  Each site for the placement of mobile
homes shall be clearly staked or otherwise delineated and shall meet the
following standards.
      (1)   Minimum lot size.  Individual lots within the mobile home park
shall contain an area of not less than 5,000 square feet and shall have a
minimum width, at the narrowest point, of 50 feet.
      (2)   Mobile home stand. A mobile home stand with minimum dimensions of
17 feet by 70 feet intended for the actual placement of the mobile home shall
be provided on each mobile home site. The stand shall be surfaced with asphalt,
concrete, gravel or similar material and provide adequate drainage and support
against settling and frost heave. The mobile home stand shall be equipped with
tie-downs and anchors to secure the mobile home against winds.
      (3)   Required separation between mobile homes. Mobile homes shall be
separated from each other and from other buildings and structures by at least
20 feet. An accessory structure such as an awning, cabana, storage cabinet,
carport, windbreak or porch attached to the mobile home shall, for purposes of
the separation requirements, be considered a part of the mobile home. The basic
unit shall not occupy in excess of one-fourth of the area of the lot and the
complete unit, including all accessory structures, shall not occupy more than
one-half of the area of the lot.
      (4)   Setback and buffer strips. Each mobile home shall be located at
least five feet from any mobile home lot line. There shall be a minimum setback
of the mobile home of 20 feet from the front, or main street side of the lot
and of at least ten feet from the rear of the lot. All mobile homes shall be
located at least 30 feet from any park property boundary line.
(Prior Code, § 22.13(C)) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.078 MANUFACTURED HOMES EXEMPTED.
   (A)   Purpose. To allow specific manufactured housing that is compatible and
in character with conventional housing within the village.
   (B)   Exemptions. A “manufactured home” as defined in §
152.03 as exempted from the provisions of §§
157.075 through
157.078 is:
      (1)   Designed to be used as a dwelling; and
      (2)   When placed on-site:
         (a)   Is set upon an enclosed permanent foundation upon land which is
owned by the manufactured home owner;
         (b)   Is off its wheels;
         (c)   Is properly connected to utilities;
         (d)   Is installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions
of a plan certified by a registered architect or engineer so as to ensure
proper support for the home; and
         (e)   Has no tow bars, wheels or axles attached to it.
(Prior Code, § 22.13(D)) (Ord. passed - -2011)
BOARD OF APPEALS
§ 157.090 ESTABLISHMENT.
   Pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e), there is hereby
established a Board of Appeals for the village for the purpose of hearing
appeals and applications and granting variances and exception to the provisions
of this chapter in harmony with the purpose and intent of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 22.23(1)) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.091 MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   The Board of Appeals shall consist of five members appointed by the
Village President and approved by the Village Board.
   (B)   Terms shall be for staggered three-year periods, except that of those
first appointed, one shall serve for one year, two for two years, and two for
three years.
   (C)   Two alternate members may be appointed by the Village President for a
term of three years and shall act only when a regular member is absent or
refuses to vote because of conflict of interest. Annually, the Village
President shall designate one of the alternate members as first alternate and
the other as second alternate. The first alternate shall act with full power
only when a member of the Board of Appeals refuses to vote because of conflict
of interest or when a member is absent. The second alternate shall so act only
when the first alternate so refuses or is absent or when more than one member
of the Board of Appeals refuses or is absent.
(Prior Code, § 22.23(2)) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.092 GENERAL RULES.
   (A)   The members of the Board of Appeals shall serve at a rate equal to
Board compensation for special meetings.
   (B)   Members shall be removable by the Village President for cause upon
written charges and after public hearing.
   (C)   The Village President shall designate one of the members as
Chairperson and the Board of Appeals may designate such other officers and
employ such employees as it feels necessary with the approval of the Village
Board.
   (D)   The Board of Appeals shall adopt rules governing its procedure
consistent with the terms of this chapter.
   (E)   Meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the
Chairperson and at such other times as the Board may determine. Such
Chairperson, or in his or her absence the Acting Chairperson, may administer
oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board shall
be open to the public.
   (F)   The Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing
the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other
official action, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the
Village Clerk and shall be a public record.
(Prior Code, § 22.23(3)) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.093 POWERS.
   The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers:
   (A)   Errors. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error
in any order, requirements, decision or determination made by the Zoning
Administrator;
   (B)   Variances. To hear and authorize appeals for variances where, owing to
special conditions, a literal enforcement will result in practical difficulty
or unnecessary hardship. Such variance shall not be contrary to the public
interest and shall be so conditional that the spirit and purposes of this
chapter shall be observed and the public safety, welfare and justice secured;
   (C)   Interpretations. To hear and decide applications for interpretations
of the zoning regulations and the location of the boundaries of the zoning
districts;
   (D)   Permits. The Board may reverse, affirm wholly or partly, or modify the
order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and may make such
order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made;
   (E)   Assistance. The Board may request assistance from other village
officers, departments, committees and boards; and
   (F)   Oaths. The Chairperson may administer oaths and compel the attendance
of witnesses.
(Prior Code, § 22.23(4)) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.094 APPEALS AND APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Appeals to the Board of Appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved
or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the village affected by the
decision of the Zoning Administrator. Such appeals shall be filed in the office
of the Village Clerk within 60 days after the date of written notice of the
decision or order of the Zoning Administrator.
   (B)   Applications may be made by the owner or lessee of the structure or
land to be affected at any time and shall be filed in the office of the Village
Clerk. Such appeals and applications shall include the following:
      (1)   Name and address of the appellant or applicant and all abutting and
opposite property owners of record;
      (2)   Plat of survey prepared by a land surveyor registered in this state
or other map drawn to scale and approved by the Zoning Administrator showing
the location, boundaries, dimensions, uses and size of the following: subject
site; existing and proposed structures; existing and proposed easements,
streets and other public ways; off-street parking, loading areas and driveways;
existing highway access restrictions; floodplain boundaries; and existing and
proposed street, side and rear yards; and
      (3)   Additional information as may be required by the Village Planning
Committee or Zoning Administrator.
   (C)   All applications shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee to defray
the cost of giving notice, investigation and other administrative processing.
(Prior Code, § 22.23(5)) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.095 HEARINGS.
   The Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time and place for the hearing,
publish a Class 2 notice under Wis. Stats. Chapter 985 and shall give due
notice to the appellant or applicant, owners of record properties which are
located within 175 feet of the parcel involved, the Zoning Administrator, and
the Village Planning Committee. At the hearing the appellant or applicant may
appear in person, by agent or by attorney.
(Prior Code, § 22.23(6)) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.096 FINDINGS.
   No variance to the provisions of this chapter shall be granted by the Board
of Appeals unless it finds beyond a reasonable doubt that all the following
facts and conditions exist and so indicates in the minutes of its proceedings:
   (A)   Preservation of intent. No variance shall be granted that is not
consistent with the purpose and intent of the regulations for the district in
which the development is located. No variance shall have the effect of
permitting a use in any district that is not a stated permitted use, accessory
use or conditional use in that particular district;
   (B)   Exceptional circumstances. There must be exceptional, extraordinary or
unusual circumstances or conditions applying to the lot or parcel, structure,
use or intended use that do not apply generally to other properties or uses in
the same district and the granting of the variance would not be of so general
or recurrent nature as to suggest that this chapter should be changed;
   (C)   Economic hardship and self-imposed hardship not grounds for variance.
No variance shall be granted solely on the basis of economic gain or loss.
Self-imposed hardships shall not be considered as grounds for the granting of a
variance;
   (D)   Preservation of property rights. Such variance is necessary for the
preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights of subject property
which are the same or similar to property rights possessed by other properties
in the same district and same vicinity; and
   (E)   Absence of detriment. The variance will not create substantial
detriment to adjacent property and will not materially impair or be contrary to
the purpose and spirit of this chapter or the public interest.
(Prior Code, § 22.23(7)) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.097 DECISION.
   (A)   Action upon receipt of appeal. Upon receipt of an appeal, the Zoning
Administrator and Village Clerk shall transmit to the Board of Appeals all the
papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken
and the appeal application.
   (B)   Hearing within 30 days of filing.  Each appeal shall be heard within
30 days from the time of filing and public notice of such hearing shall be
given as provided by §
157.095.
   (C)   Decision within 30 days of hearing. The Board of Appeals shall decide
all appeals and applications within 30 days after the final hearing and shall
transmit a signed copy of the Board’s decision to the appellant or applicant,
the Zoning Administrator and the Planning Committee as provided for in division
(E) below.
   (D)   Decisions of the Board. The concurring vote of four members of the
Board of Appeals shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision
or determination of any such administrative official or to decide in favor of
the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this
chapter or to affect any variation therefrom.
   (E)   Form of decision. The final disposition of an appeal or requested
variance shall be in the form of a written decision or order stated in the
minutes. Such decision shall state the reasons for the Board’s determination
and its findings of fact and shall either affirm, reverse, vary or modify the
order, requirement, decision or determination appealed, in whole or in part,
dismiss the appeal or grant or deny the application for a variance.
   (F)   Conditions. The Board of Appeals may impose such requirements and
conditions with respect to location, construction, maintenance and operation,
in addition to any which may be stipulated in this chapter, as the Board may
deem necessary for the protection of adjacent properties and the public
interest and welfare.
(Prior Code, § 22.23(8)) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.098 REVIEW BY COURT OF RECORD.
   Any person or persons aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Appeals or
any taxpayers or any officer, department, board or bureau of the municipality,
may appeal a decision of the Board of Appeals within 30 days after the filing
of the decision in the office of the Board of Appeals in the manner provided in
Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7)(e).
(Prior Code, § 22.23(9)) (Ord. passed - -2011)
CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
§ 157.110 AUTHORITY.
   Pursuant to the provisions of Wis. Stats. § 62.23(7), whenever the public
necessity, convenience, general welfare or good zoning practice require, the
Village Board may, by ordinance, change the district boundaries or amend,
change or supplement the regulations established by this chapter or amendments
thereto.
(Prior Code, § 22.24(1)) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.111 INITIATION.
   A change or amendment may be initiated by the Village Board, Village
Planning Committee, or by a petition of one or more of the owners or lessees of
property within the area proposed to be changed.
(Prior Code, § 22.24(2)) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.112 PETITIONS.
   (A)   All petitions for a change, amendment or supplement of the established
zoning districts and regulations connected therewith shall be filed by the
person requesting such action on forms furnished by the Village Clerk.
      (1)   The person requesting such action shall provide all information
requested on the petition, including the following:
         (a)   Name and street address of the petitioner;
         (b)   The lot number of any real estate owned by the petitioner
adjacent to the area proposed to be changed;
         (c)   Legal description of the property to be altered;
         (d)   The existing use of all buildings on such land;
         (e)   The principal use of all properties within 300 feet of such
land;
         (f)   Purpose for which such property is to be used;
         (g)   Reciting of facts indicating that the proposed change will not
be detrimental to the general public interest and the purposes of this chapter;
         (h)   Names and addresses of all surrounding property owners within
175 feet of the property to be altered;
         (i)   Plat plan or survey plat, drawn to scale, showing the property
to be rezoned, location of structures and property lines within 250 feet of the
parcel; and
         (j)   Any further information requested on the petition or which may
be required by the Planning Committee to facilitate the making of a
comprehensive report to the Village Board.
      (2)   Failure to supply such information shall be grounds for dismissal
of the petition.
   (B)   A petition for change or amendment submitted by a private property
owner shall be filed with the Village Clerk and shall be accompanied by the
appropriate fee to defray the cost of giving notice, investigation and other
administrative processing.
(Prior Code, § 22.24(3)) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.113 PLANNING COMMITTEE REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATION.
   (A)   The Village Clerk shall transmit the petition to the Planning
Committee.
   (B)   The Village Planning Committee shall conduct a study and investigation
of all proposed changes and amendments within the corporate limits and shall
recommend that the petition be granted as requested, modified or denied. The
recommendation shall be made within 30 days from which the petition is first
received and shall be made in writing to the Village Board.
   (C)   The Village Clerk shall provide due notice of the Planning Committee
meeting to the applicant and owners of record of properties which are located
within 175 feet of the parcel involved in the application.
(Prior Code, § 22.24(4)) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.114 HEARING.
   The Village Board shall hold a public hearing upon each proposed change or
amendment recommended by the Village Planning Committee, giving notice of the
time, place and the change or amendment proposed by publication of a Class 2
notice under Wis. Stats. Chapter 985 to include a location sketch. The Village
Board shall also give at least ten days’ prior written notice to the Clerk of
any municipality within 1,000 feet of any land to be affected by the proposed
change or amendment.
(Prior Code, § 22.24(5)) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.115 VILLAGE BOARD ACTION.
   Following such hearing and after careful consideration of the Village
Planning Committee’s recommendations, the Village Board shall vote on the
passage of the proposed change or amendment.
(Prior Code, § 22.24(6)) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.116 PROTEST.
   In the event of a protest at the public hearing against such district change
or amendment to the regulations of this chapter, duly signed and acknowledged
by the owners of 20% or more of the surrounding land extending 1,000 feet from
the parcel to be altered, such changes or amendment shall not become effective
except by the favorable vote of three-fourths of the full Village Board
membership.
(Prior Code, § 22.24(7)) (Ord. passed - -2011)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 157.130 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR DESIGNATION.
   (A)   The Zoning Administrator is hereby designated as the enforcement
officer for the provisions of this chapter. The duty of the Zoning
Administrator shall be to interpret and administer this chapter and, after on-
site inspection, advise the Village Board on the issuance of all zoning permits
required by this chapter.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator shall further:
      (1)   Keep an accurate record of all permits, numbered in the order of
issuance, in a record book for this purpose;
      (2)   Initiate, direct and review, from time to time, a study of the
provisions of this chapter, and make reports of the recommendations to the
Planning Committee for investigation and appropriate action;
      (3)   Upon reasonable cause or question as to proper compliance, to
revoke any building or occupancy permit and issue cease and desist orders
requiring the cessation of any building, moving, alteration or use which is in
violation of the provisions of this chapter, such revocation to be in effect
until reinstated by the Zoning Administrator or the Board of Appeals, or take
any other action as directed by the Village Board to ensure compliance with or
to prevent violation of its provisions;
      (4)   Inspect all structures, lands and waters as often as necessary to
assure compliance with this chapter;
      (5)   Investigate all complaints made relating to the location of
structures and the use of structures, lands and waters, give notice of all
violations of this chapter to the owner, resident, agent or occupant of the
premises, and report uncorrected violations to the Village Board for referral
to the Village Attorney in a manner specified by him or her (see §
157.137);
      (6)   Assist the Village Attorney in the prosecution of ordinance
violations (see §
157.137);
      (7)   Be permitted access to premises and structures during reasonable
hours to make those inspections as deemed necessary by him or her to ensure
compliance with this chapter. If, however, he or she is refused entry after
presentation of his or her identification, he or she may procure a special
inspection warrant in accordance with Wis. Stats. § 66.122;
      (8)   Prohibit the use or erection of any structure, land or water until
he or she or his or her representative has inspected and approved such use or
erection; and
      (9)   Request assistance and cooperation from the Village Planning
Committee, Village Police Department and Village Attorney as deemed necessary.
(Prior Code, § 22.25(1)) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.131 BUILDING PERMIT.
   (A)   (1)   No building or structure above or below the ground, shall be
erected, structurally altered or relocated within the village until a building
permit has been issued by the Zoning Administrator certifying that such
building would be in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all
applicable building codes.
      (2)   Exceptions are as follows.
         (a)   No building permit shall be required for re-roofing a structure,
unless the design or form of the roof is changed, or for painting any
structure.
         (b)   No building permit shall be required for the following when the
cost does not exceed (total cost - all improvements) $2,000:
            1.   Additional plumbing fixtures;
            2.   New siding;
            3.   New windows;
            4.   Basement expansion;
            5.   New foundation or basement walls;
            6.   New floor (not including replacement);
            7.   Extra or additional heating plant or central air conditioning;
            8.   Addition or major remodeling of bathrooms;
            9.   New fireplaces;
            10.   Addition of garages, carports, breezeways and porches;
            11.   Basement finishing;
            12.   Attic finishing;
            13.   Concrete and blacktop driveways or parking lots; and
            14.   Sidewalks (see §§
90.02 and
90.03).
         (c)   Any of the above work must be done in conformance with this
chapter and all other ordinances in effect within the village.
   (B)   No person, whether as owner, contractor, builder and the like, shall
erect, construct or structurally alter any building or other structure without
obtaining a required zoning permit from the Zoning Administrator, and such
Zoning Administrator shall not issue any zoning permit unless the requirements
of this chapter are complied with.
   (C)   All applications for building permits shall be signed by the applicant
or his or her agent, and shall be made to the Village Clerk for submission to
the Zoning Administrator for approval or disapproval.
   (D)   (1)   The application is to be submitted on the form supplied by the
village which shall contain the following:
         (a)   A statement that the applicant will comply with all village
ordinances and all laws of this state applicable to the premises;
         (b)   A legal description of the property; and
         (c)   An estimated cost of the work to be done.
      (2)   The application shall also be accompanied by plans, drawn to scale,
showing the location, actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built on,
the exact size and location on the lot of the proposed or existing building and
accessory building, the required setbacks, the existing and intended use of
each building or part of a building, the number of families the building is
intended to accommodate and such other information as may be required by the
Village Board for the purpose of compliance with this chapter. All grades for
building shall be obtained from the village. Grades are to be checked by the
Village Director of Public Works before any new footings can be installed. An
application for a building permit shall be made in conformity with the
requirements of this chapter and all applicable building codes.
   (E)   A building permit shall be granted or denied in writing by the Zoning
Administrator within 30 days of application and the applicant shall post such
permit in a conspicuous and prominent place at the site of the permitted
building activity. The permit shall expire within six months unless substantial
work has commenced, or within 18 months after the issuance of the permit, if
the structure for which a permit is issued is not substantially completed, and
the property must be returned to its original condition at the time of original
issuance of said permit. The applicant shall reapply for a building permit
before commencing work on the property or structure subject to an expired
building permit. Substantial work or substantially completed as stated above
shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator and any dispute of such
determination shall be presented to the Village Board for final determination.
Any permit issued in conflict with the provisions of this chapter shall be null
and void.
(Prior Code, § 22.25(2)) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.132 PLANNING COMMITTEE.
   The Planning Committee shall have the duties and powers conferred upon it by
§
30.18(A)(4) of this code.
(Prior Code, § 22.25(3)) (Ord. passed - -2011; Ord. 2023-02, passed 7-12-2023)
§ 157.133 CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.
   (A)   Purpose. The formulation and enactment of a comprehensive zoning
ordinance is based on the division of the entire village into districts in each
of which are permitted specified uses that are mutually compatible.
      (1)   In addition to such permitted compatible uses, however, it is
recognized that there are other uses which may be necessary or desirable to
allow in a given district, but which because of their potential influence upon
neighboring uses or public facilities, need to be carefully regulated with
respect to location or operation for the protection of the community. Such uses
are classified in this chapter as conditional uses.
      (2)   In some cases, traditionally more restrictive uses such as single-
family dwellings are only allowed in less restrictive districts such as Light
Industrial. While there may be merit in segregating such uses because of
incompatibility with the less restrictive use, the size of the village and
necessity to preserve the tax basis may be considered in determining that such
more restrictive use shall be permitted as a conditional use.
      (3)   Conditional uses may but are not required to be permitted in the
district in which listed upon petition for such grant to the Village Board, and
subject to the recommendation of the Planning Committee, approval of the Board
and to such other conditions as hereinafter designated.
   (B)   Application for conditional use permit. A request for conditional use
grant shall be submitted in writing to the Village Clerk by the person
requesting such action on forms furnished by the Village Clerk.
      (1)   The persons requesting such action shall provide all information
requested on the application/petition, including:
         (a)   Names and address of the applicant, owner of the site,
architect, professional engineer, contractor, when engaged, and all opposite
and abutting property owners of record;
         (b)   Description of the subject site by lot, block and recorded
subdivision or by metes and bounds; address of the subject site; type of
structure; proposed operation or use of the structure or site; number of
employees; and the zoning district within which the subject site lies;
         (c)   A map drawn to scale showing the location, property boundaries,
dimensions, uses and size of the following: subject site; existing and proposed
structures; existing and proposed easements, streets and other public ways;
off-street parking, loading areas, and driveways; existing highway access
restrictions, existing and proposed street, side and rear yards; and areas
subject to inundation by flood waters;
         (d)   Purpose of which the conditional use permit is requested;
         (e)   Reciting of facts indicating that the proposed use will not be
detrimental to the general public interest, the purposes of this chapter and
the general area in which it is located;
         (f)   Drainage and sewage disposal plans;
         (g)   Architecture and landscape treatment;
         (h)   Planting screen and operational control devices plan, where
necessary, to eliminate noise, dust, odor, smoke or other objectionable
operating conditions; and
         (i)   Any further information requested on the application/petition
which may be required by the Planning Committee to render its decision.
      (2)   Failure to supply such information shall be grounds for dismissal
of the application/petition.
   (C)   Planning Committee review and recommendation.
      (1)   The Village Clerk shall transmit the petition to the Planning
Committee.
      (2)   The Village Planning Committee shall conduct a study and
investigation of all proposed changes and amendments within the corporate
limits and shall recommend that the petition be granted as requested, modified
or denied. The Planning Committee may consult with the Zoning Administrator
regarding the petition. The recommendation shall be made within 60 days from
which the petition is first received and shall be made in writing to the
Village Board.
   (D)   Hearings. The Village Board shall hold a public hearing upon each
proposed change or amendment recommended by the Village Planning Committee,
giving notice of the time, place and change or amendment proposed by
publication of a Class 2 notice under Wis. Stats. Chapter 985. In addition, the
Village Board may, at its option, require that notice be given to owners of
record of properties located within 175 feet of the parcel involved. See §
157.135(A).
   (E)   Review and decision. Within 30 days following the public hearing and
any necessary study and investigation, the Village Board shall so soon as
practical render its decision in writing and a copy shall be made a permanent
part of the Board’s records. Such decisions shall include an accurate
description of the conditional use permitted and any and all conditions made
applicable thereto, or if disapproved, shall indicate the reasons for
disapproval.
   (F)   Standards for conditional use permit approval. The Planning Committee
and Village Board shall apply the following general standards when reviewing,
recommending and approving or disapproving a conditional use permit.
      (1)   No grant of a conditional use shall violate the spirit or intent of
this chapter.
      (2)   No conditional use shall be allowed which could be contrary to the
public health, safety or general welfare, or which would be substantially
adverse to property value in the neighborhood affected.
      (3)   No use shall be permitted by conditional use permit that would
constitute a nuisance by reason of noise, dust, smoke, odor or other similar
factors.
      (4)   The conditional use will not be injurious to the use, value and
enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for purposes already
permitted.
      (5)   The conditional use will not, in any way, impede or diminish the
normal and orderly development and improvement of the surrounding property or
the district.
      (6)   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and other necessary
facilities have been or are being provided.
      (7)   Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide sufficient
off-street parking and loading space to serve the proposed use.
   (G)   Authority to impose conditions.  The Planning Committee and the
Village Board may make the granting of an application for a conditional use
permit contingent upon such express conditions as it considers necessary to
further the aims of this chapter and to achieve the standards of division (F)
above. The applicant must agree to the conditions prior to the approval of a
conditional use permit. These conditions may include but are not limited to
specifications of:
      (1)   The period of time in which all or part of the use may be
permitted;
      (2)   Setback and yard dimensions;
      (3)   Specified sewage disposal and water supply facilities;
      (4)   Landscaping and planting screens;
      (5)   Operational controls;
      (6)   Sureties;
      (7)   Deed restrictions;
      (8)   Location of structures, docks, piers or signs;
      (9)   Location and amount of parking facilities;
      (10)   Type of construction;
      (11)   Type of shore cover;
      (12)   Sign and lighting limitations; and
      (13)   Number of employees.
   (H)   Notation of approval.  When a conditional use permit is approved, the
building permit shall be appropriately noted and such permit shall be
applicable solely to the structures, use and property so described. Indication
of such permit shall also be made on the Zoning District Map by appropriate
symbol.
   (I)   Dimensions. Except as may be specifically otherwise provided, any use
shall conform to the building location, height, lot size and open space
regulations of the district in which it is located.
   (J)   Lapse of conditional use permit. A conditional use permit shall lapse
and become void one year after passage by the Village Board unless the
conditional use is fully established or a building permit has been issued and/
or construction has commenced and is being pursued diligently according to the
requirements of the permit. A conditional use permit may be renewed for an
additional period of one year by application to and approval of the Village
Board.
   (K)   Automatic termination of conditional use permit. In the event the use
for which the permit was granted shall cease or be abandoned for a period of
one continuous year, the conditional use permit granted herein shall
automatically cease.
   (L)   Revocation of conditional use permit. If, in the opinion of the
Village Board, the terms of a conditional use permit have been violated, or
that the use is substantially detrimental to persons of property in the
neighborhood, the Village Board shall, following notice to all parties, hold a
public hearing on the revocation of the permit. If, upon finding of act that
the terms of the permit have been violated, the Village Board may revoke,
modify or leave the permit unchanged. The Village Board may thereafter direct
the Village Attorney to secure such additional court orders as are necessary to
implement its action.
   (M)   Fees.  All conditional use petitions shall be accompanied by the
appropriate fee to defray the cost of giving notice, investigation and other
administrative processing, as provided for in §
157.134.
(Prior Code, § 22.25(4)) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.134 FEES FOR PERMITS, VARIANCES, REZONINGS, CONDITIONAL USES AND SIGNS.
   All persons, firms or corporations performing work which by this chapter
requires an action of the Zoning Administrator, the Planning Committee, or the
Village Board shall pay a fee for consideration to the Village Clerk to help
defray the cost of administration, investigation, advertising and processing of
such actions. The fees for consideration shall be in accordance with the fee
schedule established by the Village Board and presented as a separate
attachment in support of these regulations.
(Prior Code, § 22.25(5)) (Ord. passed - -2011)
Cross-reference:
   Fee schedule, see §
34.02
§ 157.135 PUBLIC HEARINGS.
   In order that the owners of property involved and other legitimately
interested partied may have fair opportunity to be heard, adequate notice shall
be given of any public hearing required by the provisions of this chapter in
the manner hereinafter defined or as may be otherwise specifically designated
elsewhere in this chapter.
   (A)   The notice to be given concerning any appeals or variances,
conditional use permits, or changes and amendments of this chapter shall be
given by publishing a Class 2 notice under Wis. Stats. Chapter 985, and by
giving due notice of the hearing to all parties in interest.
   (B)   Due notice to parties in interest shall mean that the Village Clerk
will mail, by ordinary postage, reasonable advance notice of all hearings and
meetings on any pending matter to the applicant and to owners of record of
properties which are located within 175 feet of the parcel involved in the
application (250 feet in the case of changes and amendments to the zoning
districts and regulations). In addition, at least ten days’ prior written
notice of any such hearings shall be given to the Clerk of any municipality
whose boundaries are within 1,000 feet of any lands included in the
application. Failure of the office to accomplish such provision of notice shall
not invalidate or prejudice the proceedings, provided that reasonable efforts
were made to so notify the parties in interest.
(Prior Code, § 22.25(6)) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.136 ANNEXATIONS.
   Any area annexed to the village after the effective date of this chapter
shall automatically be placed in the R-1 Single-Family Residence District, and
shall remain in such district until the appropriate zoning district(s), zoning
district boundaries and regulations are studied and recommended by the Planning
Committee and adopted by the Village Board in accordance with the requirements
of §§
157.110 through
157.116; except that such adoption be completed within 60 days of the
annexation.
(Prior Code, § 22.25(7)) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.137 MUNICIPALITIES AND STATE AGENCIES REGULATED.
   Unless specifically exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns and
counties are required to comply with this chapter and obtain all required
permits. State agencies are required to comply if Wis. Stats. § 13.48(13)
applies. The construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state
highways and bridges by the State Department of Transportation are exempt from
compliance when Wis. Stats. § 30.12(4)(a) applies.
(Prior Code, § 22.25(8)) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.138 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to use or improve any structure or land, or to
use water or air in violation of any of the Zoning Administrator, Village
Board, Village Planning Committee or any property owner who would be
specifically damaged by such violation, may institute appropriate action or
proceeding to enjoin a violation of this chapter or cause a structure to be
vacated or removed.
   (B)   Whenever an order of the Zoning Administrator, Planning Committee,
Board of Appeals or Village Board has not been complied with within 30 days
after written notice has been mailed to the owner, resident, agent or occupant
of the premises, the Zoning Administrator, Planning Committee, Board of
Appeals, Village Board or the Village Attorney may institute appropriate legal
action or proceedings to prohibit such owner, agent or occupant from using such
structure, land or water.
(Prior Code, § 22.25(9)) (Ord. passed - -2011) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.139 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter has been revised and is effective the date of passage and
publication as required by law.
(Prior Code, § 22.26) (Ord. passed - -2011)
§ 157.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with or resists the enforcement of any of the
provisions of this chapter or any order of the Zoning Administrator, Village
Board, Board of Appeals or Planning Committee issued in accordance with this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit to the village a penalty of not
less than $50 together with the taxable cost in such action and not more than
$500, and in default of payment thereof shall be imprisoned for a term of not
more than 30 days or until such penalty and costs are paid. Each and every day
of violation shall constitute a separate offense in addition to any penalties.
All footings, construction, buildings and structures installed in violation of
this chapter shall, at the request of the village immediately be removed by the
violator at the violator’s expense. Compliance with this chapter is mandatory,
and no building or structure shall be allowed without full compliance.
Compliance therewith may also be enforced by an injunctional order at the suit
of the village or the owner or owners of real estate within the district
affected by the regulations of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 22.25(9)) (Ord. passed - -2011)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   FRANCHISES
TABLE I: FRANCHISES
 
Prior Code Section Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                                        Granting a franchise for electric
15.11              -        3-11-2009   distribution system to Northern States
                                        Power Company for an unspecified period
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Wisconsin Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Resolutions
References to Documents
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO WISCONSIN STATUTES
Wis. Stats. Section Code Section
Wis. Stats. Section      Code Section
7.30(4)(b)               30.15
8.05(1)(c)               30.15
                         153.021,
13.48(13)                154.16,
                         157.137
17.16                    30.16
19.015                   30.15
19.35(1)                 32.03
19.84                    30.02
19.84(3)                 30.02
19.85(1)                 30.02
                         73.52,
23.23                    73.46-
                         73.48,
                         73.51
23.33(3)(i)              73.49
23.33(13)                73.99
23.53                    73.99
23.54                    73.99
24.67                    30.15
                         50.03,
                         Ch. 153,
Ch. 30                   153.042,
                         153.060,
                         154.37
30.11                    153.083
30.12                    154.16,
                         157.137
30.121                   154.20,
                         154.39
30.123(6)(d)             153.021
30.2022                  153.021
30.50(4s)                130.077
                         50.03,
                         Ch. 153,
Ch. 31                   153.042,
                         153.060,
                         154.37
Ch. 43                   92.01,
                         92.02
43.54(1)(a)              30.15
43.60(3)                 30.15
46.03(22)                157.010
48.02(6)(7)              157.010
48.34(9)                 130.079
48.60                    157.010
48.62                    157.010
49.50(7)(h)              130.079
Ch. 50                   157.010
50.01                    157.010
51.45                    130.015
51.45(11)                130.015
51.45(12)                130.015
59.69                    153.075
59.69(1)                 157.062
                         153.075,
59.692                   154.01,
                         154.20,
                         154.58
60.22                    150.02
60.62(4)                 150.02
60.80                    150.08
Ch. 61                   50.04
61.19                    30.01
61.195                   30.01
61.20                    30.01
61.23                    30.01
61.24                    30.01,
                         30.15
61.25                    30.01
61.26                    30.01
61.27                    30.01
61.31                    30.01
61.32                    30.01,
                         30.02
61.34                    30.15
                         30.01,
                         30.18,
                         153.001,
61.35                    153.022,
                         154.01,
                         154.17,
                         157.010,
                         157.062
                         154.01,
61.351                   154.20,
                         154.39
61.351(6)                154.58
61.50                    10.20
61.73                    30.16
62.18                    52.01
62.185                   52.01
                         30.18,
                         153.001,
62.23                    153.082,
                         154.01,
                         154.17,
                         155.02
62.23(1)                 150.02,
                         154.20
62.23(2)                 30.18
62.23(3)                 30.18
62.23(4)                 30.18
62.23(5)                 30.18
62.23(7)                 153.075,
                         157.110
62.23(7)(c)              157.062
62.23(7)(d)              157.010
62.23(7)(d)2             154.58
                         30.01,
                         153.078,
62.23(7)(e)              154.57,
                         157.090,
                         157.098
63.23(7)(e)3             154.57
62.23(7)(h)              154.39
62.23(7)(i)              157.010
62.231                   154.01,
                         154.39
62.231(6)                154.58
62.33(1)                 30.01
65.90                    32.25,
                         32.26
65.90(5)(A)              32.32
Ch. 66                   50.04
66.0101                  30.01
66.0103                  10.20
66.0407                  30.15
66.0435                  152.02
66.0435(3)(c)1           152.05
66.0435(3)(c)2           152.05
66.049                   110.18
66.0517                  30.15
66.058(1)(a)             157.077
66.0701(13)              32.01
66.0703                  Ch. 51, App. B
                         30.15,
66.0809                  51.030,
                         51.049,
                         Ch. 51, App B
66.0821                  52.01
66.0821(4)(b)            52.35
66.0907                  90.03
66.1001(2)               150.06
66.1001(4)               150.02,
                         150.03
66.1001(4)(a)            150.04
66.1001(4)(b)            150.08
                         150.01,
66.1001(4)(c)            150.02,
                         150.07
66.1001(4)(d)            150.05
66.117                   110.02
66.122                   157.130
66.193                   30.20
66.40                    30.16
66.40 to 66.404          30.16
66.40(5)                 30.16
66.40(8)                 30.16
66.99                    30.15
70.47(7)(af)             32.03
70.67                    30.01
70.67(2)                 30.01
84.31                    110.18
                         153.001,
                         153.022,
87.30                    153.044,   
                         153.999,
                         154.01,
                         154.17
87.30(1)(e)              153.019
87.30(2)                 154.99
98.26                    Ch. 51, App. B
Ch. 101                  151.20
101.65                   151.01,
                         151.26
101.66(2)                151.05
103.70                   130.079
103.72                   130.079
106.50                   93.01
111.335                  110.02
114.002(18m)             157.010
114.14(2)                30.15
118.15                   130.079
118.15(4)                130.079
118.16(1)(c)             130.079
118.16(5)                130.079
118.163                  130.079
118.257(1)(d)            110.15
120.12(20)               130.078
                         110.02,
Ch. 125                  130.016,
                         156.01
125.07(4)                130.016
125.09                   130.016
125.12                   110.02,
                         130.079
125.12(2)(b)             110.02
125.12(3)                110.02
125.12(3m)               110.02
134.65(1)                130.077
134.66                   110.15
134.66(1)(f)             130.077,
                         130.078
139.30 to 139.41         110.15
139.30(1)                130.077
139.65(1)                130.077
139.75(12)               130.077
139.79                   110.15
Ch. 146                  50.04
159.09(3)(b)             50.15
Ch. 160                  50.04
167.10                   30.15,
                         110.17
167.10(3)(c)             110.17
167.10(3)(g)             110.17
167.10(3)(8)             30.15
167.25                   130.032
Ch. 170                  30.15
Ch. 174                  110.16
175.25                   110.18
175.25(4)                110.18
182.0175                 Ch. 51, App. B
196-03(3)(b)             Ch. 51, App. B
196.171                  Ch. 51, App. B
                         90.01,
                         155.02,
Ch. 236                  155.03,
                         157.010,
                         153.075,
                         155.08
236.02(8)                90.01
236.02(12)               153.083
236.12                   155.03
236.13(2)(a)             90.01
236.13(2)(b)             90.01
236.15                   155.05
236.20(2)(a) through (l) 155.07
236.31(3)                155.99
236.34                   155.07
Ch. 281                  50.03,
                         50.04
                         154.01,
281.191                  154.20,
                         154.58
Ch. 283                  50.03,
                         50.04
Ch. 287                  50.04
287.01(5m)               50.22
287.01(7)                50.22
287.11                   50.15
287.11(2m)               50.24
289.01(33)               50.22
289.01(35)               50.22
289.41                   50.04
Ch. 323                  30.15
Ch. 340 to 349           70.01
340.01(4)                130.079
346.04                   73.48
346.06                   73.48
346.11                   73.48
346.14(1)                73.48
346.18                   73.48
346.19                   73.48
346.40                   73.48
346.44                   73.48
346.46                   73.48
346.47                   73.48
346.48                   73.48
346.48(2)(b)2            70.03
346.50(1)(b)             73.48
346.51                   73.48
346.52                   73.48
346.53                   73.48
346.54                   73.48
346.55                   73.48
346.87                   73.48
346.88                   73.48
346.89                   73.48
346.90                   73.48
346.91                   73.48
346.92(1)                73.48
346.94(1)                73.48
346.94(9)                73.48
350.02(2)(a)5            Ch. 74 Sched. V
779.14(1m)               30.15
Ch. 823                  50.04,
                         94.06
938.34(2)                130.079
938.34(5g)               130.079
938.37                   130.079
938.342(1g)(f)           130.079
Ch. 942                  130.001
Ch. 943                  130.001
943.20                   Ch. 51, App. B
Ch. 944                  130.001
Ch. 945                  130.001
Ch. 946                  130.001
Ch. 947                  130.001
Ch. 948                  130.001
Ch. 961                  130.001
                         153.077,
                         153.083,
                         154.20,
Ch. 985                  154.57,
                         157.095,
                         157.114,
                         157.133,
                         157.135
                         
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code 2014 Code
Prior Code       2014 Code
1.01             10.13
1.02             10.17
1.03             10.05,
                 10.15
1.04             10.07
1.05             10.99
1.07             10.20
2.01             30.01
2.02             30.02
2.03             30.15
2.08             30.16
2.09             30.17
2.11             30.18
2.14             30.19
2.15             30.20
3.02(2)          31.01
4.02             30.60
5.01(2)          32.25
5.01(3)          32.26
5.01(4)          32.27
5.01(5)          32.28
5.01(6)          32.29
5.01(7)          32.30
5.01(8)          32.31
5.01(9)          32.32
5.01(10)         32.33
5.01(21)         32.01
5.01(22)         32.02
7.01(1)          50.01
7.01(2)          50.02
7.01(3)          50.03
7.01(4)          50.04
7.02(1)          50.15
7.02(2)          50.16
7.02(3)          50.17
7.02(4)          50.18
7.02(5)          50.19
7.02(6)          50.20
7.02(7)          50.21
7.02(8)          50.22
7.02(9)          50.23
7.02(10)         50.24
7.02(11)         50.25
7.02(12)         50.26
7.03(1)          50.40
7.03(2)          50.41
7.03(3)          50.42
7.03(4)          50.43
7.03(5)          50.44
7.03(6)          50.45
7.03(7)          50.46
7.03(8)          50.47
7.03(9)          50.48
7.03(10)         50.49
7.03(11)         50.50
7.03(12)         50.51
7.03(13)         50.52
7.03(14)         50.53
7.03(17)         50.54,
                 50.99
9.01(1)          70.01
9.01(4)(B)       Ch. 74 Sched. I
9.01(4)(D)       Ch. 74 Sched. II
9.01(5)(C)(5)    Ch. 74 Sched. IV
9.01(6)          Ch. 74 Sched. III
9.01(8)(A)       72.06,
                 Ch. 75 Sched. I
9.01(8)(B)       Ch. 75 Sched. II
9.01(8)(E)       Ch. 75 Sched. II
9.01(17)         70.03
9.01(22)         71.01
10.01(1)         110.01
10.01(2)         110.02
10.02            110.15
10.03            110.16
10.05(1)         111.01
10.05(2)         111.02
10.06            110.17
10.08            110.18
11.01(1)         73.30
11.01(3)         Ch. 74 Sched. V
12.01(1)         94.01
12.01(2)         94.02
12.01(3)         94.03
12.01(4)         94.04
12.01(5)         94.05
12.01(6)         94.06
12.01(7)         94.07
12.01(8)         94.99
13.01(1)         130.001
13.01(3)         130.015
13.01(4)         130.030
13.01(6)         95.01
13.01(7)         95.02
13.01(8)         130.031
13.01(9)         130.032
13.01(12)        130.033
13.01(13)        130.002
13.01(14)        130.016
13.01(16)        130.003
13.01(17)        130.076
13.01(18)        130.045
13.01(19)        130.046
13.01(20)        130.075
13.01(21)        130.062
13.01(23)        130.060
13.01(25)        130.061
14.01(1)         90.01
14.01(2)         90.02
14.01(3)         90.03
14.01(4)         90.04
14.01(5)         90.05
14.01(6)         90.06
14.01(7)         90.07
14.01(8)         Ch. 91, App. A
14.01(8)(1)      91.01
14.01(8)(2)      91.02
14.01(8)(3)      91.03
14.01(8)(4)      91.04
14.01(8)(5)      91.05
14.01(8)(6)      91.06
14.01(8)(7)      91.07
14.01(8)(8)      91.08
14.01(8)(9)      91.09
14.01(8)(10)     91.10
14.01(8)(11)     91.11
14.01(8)(12)     91.12
14.01(8)(13)     91.13,
                 91.99
14.01(8)(14)     91.14,
                 91.99
14.01(8)(15)     91.99
14.01(8)(16)     91.15
14.01(8)(17)     91.16
14.01(8)9:       91.17
14.01(9)(A)      92.01
14.01(9)(B)      92.02
14.01(10)(A)     92.15
14.01(10)(B)     92.16
14.01(10)(C)     92.17
14.01(10)(D)     92.18
14.01(10)(E)     92.19
14.01(10)(F)     92.20
15.01            51.001
15.02            51.002
15.03(1)         51.015
15.03(2)         51.016
15.03(3)         51.017
15.03(4)         51.018
15.03(5)         51.019
15.03(6)         51.020
15.03(7)         51.021
15.03(8)         51.022
15.03(9)         51.023
15.03(10)        51.024
15.03(11)        51.025
15.03(12)        51.026
15.03(13)        51.027
15.03(14)        51.028,
                 51.999
15.03(15)        51.029
15.03(16)        51.999
15.03(17)        51.030
15.03(18)        51.031
15.04(1)         51.045
15.04(2)         51.046
15.04(3)         51.047
15.04(4)         51.999
15.04(5)         51.048
15.04(6)         51.049
15.04(7)         51.050
15.04(8)         51.051
15.05            51.080
15.06            51.081
15.07            51.095
15.08            51.096
15.09            51.097
15.10            51.065
15.11            TSO I
15.13            51.999
16.0             151.20
16.02            151.21
16.03            151.22
16.04            151.23
16.05            151.24
16.06            151.25
16.07            151.26
16.08            151.27
16.09            151.28
16.10            151.29
16.11            34.02,
                 151.30
16.12            151.31
16.13            151.32
16.14            151.33
16.15            151.34
16.16            151.35
16.17            151.36
16.18            151.37
16.19            151.99
17.01            155.01
17.02            155.02
17.03            155.03
17.04            155.04
17.05            155.05
17.06            155.06
17.07            155.07
17.08            155.08
17.09            155.09
17.10            155.10
17.12            155.99
Ch. 18           152.01
Ch. 18 § 1      152.02
Ch. 18 § 2      152.03
Ch. 18 § 3      152.04
Ch. 18 § 4      152.05
Ch. 18 § 5      152.06
Ch. 18 § 6      152.07
Ch. 18 § 7      152.08
Ch. 18 § 8      152.99
Ch. 18 § 9      152.09
Ch. 19 § 1.1    153.001
Ch. 19 § 1.2    153.002
Ch. 19 § 1.3    153.003
Ch. 19 § 1.4    153.004
Ch. 19 § 1.5(1) 153.015
Ch. 19 § 1.5(2) 153.016
Ch. 19 § 1.5(3) 153.017
Ch. 19 § 1.5(4) 153.018
Ch. 19 § 1.5(5) 153.019
Ch. 19 § 1.5(6) 153.020
Ch. 19 § 1.5(7) 153.021
Ch. 19 § 1.5(8) 153.022
Ch. 19 § 1.5(9) 153.023
Ch. 19 § 1.5(10)153.024
Ch. 19 § 1.5(12)153.025
Ch. 19 § 1.5(13)153.026
Ch. 19 § 2.1    153.040
Ch. 19 § 2.2    153.041
Ch. 19 § 2.3    153.042
Ch. 19 § 2.4    153.043
Ch. 19 § 3.1    153.060
Ch. 19 § 3.2    153.060
Ch. 19 § 3.3    153.060
Ch. 19 § 3.4    153.060
Ch. 19 § 4.1    153.061
Ch. 19 § 4.2    153.061
Ch. 19 § 4.3    153.061
Ch. 19 § 5.1    153.062
Ch. 19 § 5.3    153.062
Ch. 19 § 5.4    153.062
Ch. 19 § 6.1    153.044
Ch. 19 § 6.2    153.045
Ch. 19 § 6.3    153.046
Ch. 19 § 7.0    153.075
Ch. 19 § 7.1    153.076
Ch. 19 § 7.2    153.077
Ch. 19 § 7.3    153.078
Ch. 19 § 7.4    153.079
Ch. 19 § 7.5    153.080
Ch. 19 § 7.6    153.081
Ch. 19 § 8.2    153.082
Ch. 19 § 9.0    153.999
Ch. 19 § 10.0   153.083
Ch. 20 § 1.1    154.01
Ch. 20 § 1.2    154.02
Ch. 20 § 2.1    154.15
Ch. 20 § 2.2    154.16
Ch. 20 § 2.3    154.17
Ch. 20 § 2.4    154.18
Ch. 20 § 2.6    154.19
Ch. 20 § 3.1    154.35
Ch. 20 § 3.2    154.36
Ch. 20 § 3.3    154.37
Ch. 20 § 3.4    154.38
Ch. 20 § 4.0    154.39
Ch. 20 § 5.1    154.50
Ch. 20 § 5.2    154.51
Ch. 20 § 5.3    154.52
Ch. 20 § 5.4    154.53
Ch. 20 § 5.5    154.54
Ch. 20 § 5.6    154.55
Ch. 20 § 5.7    154.56
Ch. 20 § 5.8    154.57
Ch. 20 § 6.0    154.58
Ch. 20 § 7.0    154.59,
                 154.99
Ch. 20 § 8.0    154.20
21.01            73.45
21.02            73.46
21.03            73.47
21.04            73.48
21.05            73.49
21.06            73.50
21.07            73.51
21.08            73.99
21.09            73.52
22.01            157.001
22.02            157.002
22.03            157.003
22.04            157.004
22.05            157.005
22.06            157.006
22.07            157.007
22.08            157.008
22.09            157.009
22.10            157.010
22.11            157.025
22.12            157.026
22.13            157.027
22.14            157.028
22.15            157.029
22.16            157.030
22.17            157.031
22.18            157.032
22.19            157.033
22.20            157.034
22.21(1)         157.050
22.21(2)         157.051
22.21(3)         157.052
22.21(4)         157.053
22.21(5)         157.054
22.21(6)         157.055
22.21(7)         157.056
22.21(8)         157.057
22.21(9)         157.058
22.21(10)        157.059
22.21(11)        157.060
22.21(12)        157.061
22.21(13)(A)     157.075
22.21(13)(B)     157.076
22.21(13)(C)     157.077
22.21(13)(D)     157.078
22.22            157.035
22.23(1)         157.090
22.23(2)         157.091
22.23(3)         157.092
22.23(4)         157.093
22.23(5)         157.094
22.23(6)         157.095
22.23(7)         157.096
22.23(8)         157.097
22.23(9)         157.098
22.24(1)         157.110
22.24(2)         157.111
22.24(3)         157.112
22.24(4)         157.113
22.24(5)         157.114
22.24(6)         157.115
22.24(7)         157.116
22.25(1)         157.130
22.25(2)         157.131
22.25(3)         157.132
22.25(4)         157.133
22.25(5)         157.134
22.25(6)         157.135
22.25(7)         157.136
22.25(8)         157.137
22.25(9)         157.138,
                 157.999
22.26            157.139
24(A)(1)         95.15
24(A)(2)         95.16
24(A)(3)         95.17
24(A)(4)         95.18
24(A)(5)         95.19
24(A)(6)         95.20
24(A)(7)         95.21
24(A)(8)         95.99
24(A)(9)         95.22
Ch. 25, § 1     150.02
Ch. 25, § 2     150.04
Ch. 25, § 3     150.05
Ch. 25, § 4     150.06
Ch. 25, § 5     150.07
Ch. 25, § 6     150.08
Ch. 26 § 1.1    151.01
Ch. 26 § 1.2    151.02
Ch. 26 § 1.3    151.03
Ch. 26 § 1.4    151.04
Ch. 26 § 1.5    151.05
Ch. 26 § 1.6    151.06
Ch. 26 § 1.7    151.99
Ch. 26 § 1.8    151.07
Ch. 26 § 1.9    151.08
                 
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed/Effective Code Section
-        eff. 10-1-2001        34.02,
                               52.36
-        12-14-2011            34.02
2018-04  5-9-2018              93.01
                              
 
REFERENCES TO DOCUMENTS
 
Doc. No. Date Passed/Effective Code Section
-        - -                   51.027
PSC Doc. eff. 3-15-2002        34.02,
                               Ch. 51, App. B
PSC Doc. eff. 6-22-2012        34.02,
                               Ch. 51, App. B
-        eff. - -2013          34.02
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.   Date Passed Code Section
-          - -         33.01 –
                       33.08
                       95.15 –
-          - -         95.22,
                       95.99
                       151.01 –
26         - -         151.08,
                       151.99
                       154.01,
                       154.02,
                       154.15-
                       154.20,
84         9-9-1987    154.35-
                       154.39,
                       154.50-
                       154.59,
                       154.99
                       154.01,
                       154.02,
                       154.15-
                       154.20,
-          3-11-1992   154.35-
                       154.39,
                       154.50-
                       154.59,
                       154.99
                       51.028,
-          1-9-2002    51.999,
                       Ch. 51, App. A
25         - -2008     150.04 –
                       150.08
                       10.05,
                       10.07,
                       10.13,
                       10.15,
                       10.17,
-          3-12-2008   10.20,
                       30.01,
                       30.02,
                       30.15-
                       30.20,
                       30.60,
                       31.01,
                       32.01,
                       32.02,
                       32.25-
                       32.33,
                       50.01-
                       50.04,
                       50.15-
                       50.26,
                       50.40-
                       50.54,
                       50.99,
                       51.001,
                       51.002,
                       51.015-
                       51.026,
                       51.045-
                       51.051,
                       51.065,
                       51.080,
                       51.081,
                       51.095-
                       51.097,
                       51.999,
                       70.01,
                       71.01,
                       72.06,
                       73.30,
                       73.45-
                       73.52,
                       73.99,
                       Ch. 74 Scheds. I –
                       V,
                       Ch. 75 Scheds. I,
                       II;
                       90.01 –
-          3-11-2009   90.07,
                       91.01-
                       91.17,
                       91.99,
                       Ch. 91, App. A;
                       92.01,
                       92.02,
                       92.15-
                       92.20,
                       94.01-
                       94.07,
                       94.99,
                       95.01,
                       95.02,
                       110.01,
                       110.02,
                       110.15-
                       110.18,
                       111.01,
                       111.02,
                       130.001-
                       130.003,
                       130.015,
                       130.016,
                       130.030-
                       130.033,
                       130.045,
                       130.046,
                       130.060-
                       130.062,
                       130.075,
                       130.076,
                       151.20-
                       151.37,
                       151.99,
                       TSO I
                       153.001 –
                       153.004,
                       153.015-
                       153.026,
                       153.040-
-          7-8-2009    153.046,
                       153.060-
                       153.062,
                       153.075-
                       153.083,
                       153.999
                       157.001 –
                       157.010,
                       157.025-
                       157.035,
                       157.050-
                       157.061,
                       157.075-
-          - -2011     157.078,
                       157.090-
                       157.098,
                       157.110-
                       157.116,
                       157.130-
                       157.139,
                       157.999
                       34.02,
                       52.01-
-          9- -2011    52.21,
                       52.35,
                       52.99
                       152.01 –
-          5-9-2012    152.09,
                       152.99
27         10-9-2012   130.079
                       152.01 –
-          10-9-2013   152.09,
                       152.99
-          6-14-2017   51.027
-          6-14-2017   51.028
-          4-11-2018   32.03
130.17     8-12-2020   130.017
2021-06-09 6-9-2021    31.02
2021       8-8-2021    157.062
-          12-8-2021   130.077,
                       130.078
2023-01    4-12-2023   92.30
                       30.01,
2023-02    7-12-2023   30.18,
                       157.010,
                       157.132
                       151.03,
                       151.05,
                       151.06,
                       151.20,
                       151.21,
2023-03    8-9-2023    151.24 -
                       151.26,
                       151.28,
                       151.29,
                       151.31,
                       151.33
                       153.001 -
                       153.004,
                       153.015 -
                       153.026,
-          1-10-2024   153.040 -
                       153.046,
                       153.060 -
                       153.062,
                       153.075 - 150.083,
                       153.999
150-2025   5-14-2025   150.01 -
                       150.08
157-2025   5-14-2025   157.029
151-2025   7-9-2025    151.38
                      
 
