VILLAGE CODE
OF
REEDSVILLE, WISCONSIN
Code current through:
Ord. 2025-04, passed October 13, 2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
   This code of the Village of Reedsville, as supplemented, contains ordinances
up to and including ordinance 2025-04, passed October 13, 2025. Ordinances of
the Village adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code
to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the
Village office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the
code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
American Legal Publishing
Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not affect the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 1-1-1
   The village board of the village of Reedsville does ordain as follows:
   Section 1: From and after the date of passage of this ordinance, the village
code of the village of Reedsville, Wisconsin, prepared by Sterling Codifiers,
Inc., under the direction of the governing body of the village, containing all
ordinances of a general nature in effect at the time of such codification,
shall be accepted in all courts without question as the official code and law
of the village as enacted by the president and board of trustees.
   Section 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification,
the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions
of the official village code is identified by the proper catchline and is
inserted in the proper place in each of the official copies. Each such new
provision shall become effective upon the passage of the ordinance and the
insertion of the proper replacement pages in the copies of the code, three (3)
copies of which shall be maintained in the office of the village clerk,
certified as to correctness and available for inspection at any and all times
that said office is regularly open.
   Section 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this official
village code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision
and the fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the
governing body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous
effectiveness of ordinances included in said official village code. All
ordinances of a special nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances,
franchises, vacating ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in
full force and effect unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of
the village code. Such ordinances are not intended to be included in the
official village code.
   Section 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such code, or
to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the village to be
misrepresented thereby.
   Section 5: This ordinance and code adopted by the same shall be in force and
effect from and after its passage and approval in accordance with law, as
printed and published in book form by order of the president and board of
trustees.
         /s/   
         Edward C. Reinemann, President
         /s/   
         Betty J. Dolezal, Clerk-Treasurer
            For:  7   
            Against:  0   
Introduced by: /s/   
Moved by: /s/   
Seconded by: /s/   
Published: March 18, 1982
Date Of Effect: This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after
its passage, approval, recording and publication, as provided by law.
Date Of Enactment: Passed and adopted by the village board of the village of
Reedsville, Manitowoc County, state of Wisconsin, on the 15th day of March,
1982.
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATIVE
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL VILLAGE CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alterations
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the board of trustees, this code is hereby declared to be and
shall hereafter constitute the official village code of Reedsville. This code
of ordinances shall be known and cited as the REEDSVILLE VILLAGE CODE, and it
is hereby published by authority of the board of trustees and shall be kept up
to date as provided in section
1-1-3 of this chapter under the direction of the village attorney, acting for
said village board of trustees. Any reference to the number of any section
contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same
number, its appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty
clause relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is
made to this code by title in any legal document. (1981 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the village of general and permanent effect, except
the excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (1981 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section
number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute a
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the
amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be
properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of this code.
(1981 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
village board. The clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly
inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the clerk. Any
person having in his custody an official copy of this code shall make every
effort to maintain this code in an up to date and efficient manner. He shall
see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are
delivered to him or made available to him through the office of the village
clerk. Said code books, while in actual possession of officials and other
interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the village and shall
be returned to the office of the clerk when directed so to do by order of the
village board. (1981 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the village passed prior to the adoption of this code
are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this code or are by
necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation
ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise
ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
village; and all special ordinances. (1981 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other
public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public
utilities shall be replaced by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue
of the preceding section, excepting as this code may contain provisions for
such matters, in which case this code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1981 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance,
whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense
or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes
effect, save only that proceedings thereafter shall conform to the ordinance in
force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new ordinance, such
provision may be, by the consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment
announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action now
pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the village herein
repealed and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this code
shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the same
provision; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
village under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this code. (1981 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional
or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of
this code, or any part thereof. The village board of trustees hereby declares
that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph,
sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or
more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or
phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (1981 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: Definitions
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any section of this code importing the plural number is
used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any single
matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although distributive
words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party or person is
referred to in this code by words importing the singular number only, or the
masculine gender, several matters, parties or persons and females as well as
males and bodies corporate shall be applied to any section of this code which
contains any express provision excluding such construction or where the subject
matter or content may be repugnant thereto.
The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the village has been
changed in the content of this code to "title", "chapter", "section" and/or
"subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification
purposes only. Such change to the village's ordinances is not meant to amend
the passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1981 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have
the meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
BOARD: Unless otherwise indicated, the board of trustees of the village.
CODE: The municipal code of Reedsville, and amendments thereto.
COUNTY: The county of Manitowoc, state of Wisconsin.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a village employee by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words, "of the
village of Reedsville".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the village for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
MAYOR: See definition of Village President.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense for which a sentence to a term of imprisonment in
other than a penitentiary may be imposed.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the
inhabitants of the village; or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a
hazard to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or
to the community.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, this term shall include any person
who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or
with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this code to a village officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the village
of Reedsville".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, this term shall include any part
owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of
a part of such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Every description of money, goods, chattels, effects,
evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any pecuniary
obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred,
increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or interest
therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, this term shall be understood
to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small
quantities direct to the consumer.
STATE: The state of Wisconsin.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public squares, public
places and sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, this term shall include any person
who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or
with others.
VILLAGE: The village of Reedsville, county of Manitowoc, state of Wisconsin.
VILLAGE PRESIDENT: The president of the village may be referred to as "mayor"
or "president" of the village.
WHOLESALER AND WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, such
terms shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles
or things in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: These terms may include printing and any other mode of
representing words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is
required by law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it
shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to
write, by his proper mark. (1981 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted. (1981 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Application Of Provisions
1-4-3: Liability Of Officers
1-4-4: Deposit Schedule Adopted By Reference
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of a provision of this code shall forfeit a
sum not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), but not to exceed any
limitations provided by Wisconsin statutes 1 . (1981 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. WSA 66.115.
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every
section of this code the same as though it were a part of each and every
separate section unless otherwise indicated. Any person convicted of a
violation of any section of this code where a duty is prescribed or obligation
imposed, or where any action which is of a continuing nature is forbidden or is
declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of an offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such duty or obligation remains
unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise specifically provided in
this code.
   B.   In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this code, the prosecuting officer may elect
under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the
same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or
permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other
penalty being enforced.
   C.   Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes
a breach of any section or provision of this code and there shall be no penalty
specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter shall
apply. (1981 Code)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intent of
the board of trustees to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or
employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the
duty. (1981 Code)
1-4-4: DEPOSIT SCHEDULE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
Where applicable, the deposit schedule for Manitowoc County ordinance
violations, currently effective, is adopted by reference and shall be the
deposit schedule and penalty schedule for those violations. (Ord., 12-2-1996)
CHAPTER 5
VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES
SECTION:
1-5-1: Form Of Government
1-5-2: Meetings Of The Board
1-5-3: Special Committees
1-5-4: Rules Of Procedure
1-5-5: Board Of Review
1-5-6: Village Trustees
1-5-1: FORM OF GOVERNMENT:
The village operates as a village under a village board with president type
form of government. (Ord. 2014-1, 5-1-2014)
1-5-2: MEETINGS OF THE BOARD:
   A.   Regular Meetings: The regular meetings of the village board shall be
held in the village hall on the second Monday of each month at six o’clock (6:
00) P.M. except when that day for holding any regular meeting shall be a legal
holiday, the regular meeting shall be moved to the following Monday.
   B.   Special Meetings: Special meetings of the village board may be called
by the president or by any two (2) board members filing with the village clerk,
in writing, a request therefor, stating the purpose of the meeting, whereupon
the village clerk shall notify all members of the village board of such special
meeting and the reason therefor. No other business shall be considered or
transacted at any special meeting other than that for which the special meeting
was called.
   C.   Adjournments: Any regular or special meeting may be adjourned by a
majority of the members present, but no adjournment shall be made to a time
later than the next regular meeting.
   D.   Order Of Business: The business of the village board shall be conducted
in the following order, unless temporarily suspended by unanimous vote:
      1.   Call to order by the village president.
      2.   Pledge Of Allegiance.
      3.   Roll call.
      4.   Receiving visitors, reports of maintenance and police personnel.
      5.   Reading, correction and approval of minutes of the previous meeting.
      6.   Consideration of bills, treasurer report.
      7.   President’s report.
      8.   Departments’ report.
      9.   Unfinished business from previous meetings.
      10.   Adjournment. (Ord. 2014-1, 5-1-2014; amd. Ord. 2024-1, 4-8- 2024)
1-5-3: SPECIAL COMMITTEES:
   A.   Special Committees: Select or special committees may be provided for on
motion or by resolution, designating the number and object, and unless
otherwise ordered, shall be appointed by the president.
   B.   General Committee Rules: The chairman of each committee shall be
responsible for the functioning of the committee. No committee shall have the
authority to bind the board without express authority in each instance. All
committees shall report and make recommendations to the board for final
approval. On formal assignments to committees, the report shall be in writing
with a definite recommendation. Any committee may require the cooperation of
any village official in relation to matters pending before it. (Ord. 2014-1, 5-
1-2014)
1-5-4: RULES OF PROCEDURE:
   A.   Introduction Of Ordinances, Resolutions: All ordinances, resolutions or
communications shall be in writing and have endorsed thereon the name of the
person presenting the same, and shall be delivered to the village clerk to be
read by him to the village board.
The style of all ordinances shall be:
The Village Board of the Village of Reedsville do ordain as follows:
   B.   Reports Of Special Committees:
      1.   The committee to which any matter shall be referred shall report
thereon, at the first regular meeting after such reference, unless there is no
objection by the board to further time being taken. Action on the report of a
committee shall be deferred until the next regular meeting by the request of
two (2) board members present. Committee reports shall be oral, except when
ordered by the president that they be in writing. (Ord. 2014-1, 5-1-2014)
   C.   Roll Call Vote:
      1.   On all ordinances and resolutions, on any confirmation, and on the
adoption of any measure assessing or levying taxes, appropriating or disbursing
money, or creating any liability or charge against the village of any fund
thereof, the vote shall be by ayes and noes.
      2.   On all other questions, it shall be in order for the president to
call for the ayes and noes.
      3.   All roll call votes shall be duly recorded in the minutes of the
meeting.
   D.   Members To Vote: Every member, when a question is put, shall vote
unless the president shall, for special cause, excuse him; but it shall not be
in order for a member to be excused after the board has commenced voting.
   E.   Publication Of Proceedings:
      1.   The proceedings of the board shall be published in the official
village newspaper in such manner as the board may direct.
      2.   All ordinances shall be published in the official village newspaper
within fifteen (15) days of passage, and shall take effect on the day after
publication or at any other date if expressly prescribed.
      3.   All ordinances and resolutions adopted shall be signed by the
president and countersigned by the clerk.
      4.   This code shall be kept current to date; and upon passage of any
ordinances, the clerk shall provide for insertion of the same into this code.
   F.   Recognition For Debate: Whenever a member is to speak in debate, or
deliver any matter to the board, he shall respectfully address himself to the
president, and confine his remarks to the question under debate, and avoid
personalities.
When two (2) or more members address the president at the same time, the
president shall name the member who is first to speak.
   G.   Motions:
      1.   Discussion: No motion shall be discussed or acted upon until it has
been seconded; nor shall any motion be withdrawn or amended without the consent
of the person making the same and the person seconding it.
      2.   Precedence Of Motions: When a question is under consideration, no
motion shall be entertained except:
         a.   To adjourn.
         b.   To lay on the table.
         c.   For the previous question.
         d.   To postpone to a certain day or time.
         e.   To commit to a standing or special committee.
         f.   To amend or to substitute.
These several motions shall take precedence in their order as they stand in
this rule.
      3.   Motions Decided Without Debate: A motion to adjourn, to lay on the
table and for the previous question shall be decided without debate.
      4.   Moving The Previous Question: Any member desirous of terminating the
debate may call the previous question, when the question to be announced by the
president shall be: "Shall the main question now be put?". Such motion shall be
decided without debate. If a majority of the members present vote in the
affirmative, the main question shall be taken without further debate, and its
effect shall be to put an end to all debate, and bring the board to a direct
vote, first upon the pending amendment, if any, and then upon the main
question.
      5.   Division Of Question: Any member may call for a division of the
question when the same can be separated into two (2) or more distinct
propositions.
      6.   Motion For Reconsideration: It shall be in order for any member who
voted in the affirmative on any question which was adopted, or for any member
who voted in the negative when the number of affirmative votes was insufficient
for adoption to move a reconsideration to such vote at the same or next
succeeding regular meeting of the board. A motion to reconsider having been
lost shall not be again in order.
   H.   Suspension Of Rules: Any of these rules may be suspended upon pending
measure by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the board members present.
These rules and all amendments or additions thereto which may hereafter be made
shall govern the board until altered or repealed as herein provided.
   I.   Amendment Of Rules: These rules or any part thereof may be temporarily
suspended in connection with any matter under consideration by a recorded vote
of two-thirds (2/3) of the members present.
   J.   Robert's Rules Of Order: The deliberations of the board shall be
conducted in accordance with the parliamentary rules contained in "Robert's
Rules Of Order, Revised", which is incorporated in this section by reference.
(1968 Code § 1.02)
1-5-5: BOARD OF REVIEW:
The board of review shall consist of the village board or such members as
designated by said board and shall meet as required by Wisconsin statutes and
at such time and place as determined and fixed by the village board and by
Wisconsin statutes 1 . (1968 Code § 1.06)
 
Notes
1 1. WSA 70.46, 70.47.
1-5-6: VILLAGE TRUSTEES:
The village board shall consist of six (6) trustees plus the village president.
Three (3) trustees shall be elected each year for a term of two (2) years and
shall first apply to trustees elected in April, 2014. (Ord. 2013-2, 2-7-2013,
eff. 2-7-2013; amd. Ord. 2023-03, 6-8-2023)
CHAPTER 6
VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-6-1: Elected Officials
1-6-2: Appointed Officials
1-6-3: Salaries, Compensation
1-6-4: Municipal Judge (Rep. by Ord., 6-7-1982, eff. 5-1-1983)
1-6-5: Election Board
1-6-1: ELECTED OFFICIALS:
Elected officials shall be elected in accordance with the Wisconsin statutes,
commencing on the third Tuesday of April 1 . (1968 Code § 1.03)
 
Notes
1 1. WSA 61.19.
1-6-2: APPOINTED OFFICIALS:
The following officials shall be appointed by the village president, subject to
approval of the village board, and such appointment shall be effective until
repealed by the village board:
   Assessor
   Building inspector
   Clerk-treasurer
   Electrical inspector
   Energy inspector
   Fire chief
   Plumbing inspector
   Police Chief
   President of First Responder
   Village attorney
(Ord. 2012-2, 4-16-2012; amd. Ord. 2023-03, 6-8-2023)
1-6-3: SALARIES, COMPENSATION:
   A.   Salaries: The salaries of all officers and employees shall be as
determined by the village board from time to time.
   B.   Retirement Fund: The village elects to include all eligible village
personnel under the village retirement fund. (1968 Code § 1.08)
1-6-4: MUNICIPAL JUDGE:
(Rep. by Ord., 6-7-1982, eff. 5-1-1983)
1-6-5: ELECTION BOARD:
The election board shall be in accordance with the requirements of applicable
state 1  and federal laws. (1968 Code § 1.07)
 
Notes
1 1. WSA 7.22.
CHAPTER 7
FINANCIAL PROCEDURES
SECTION:
1-7-1: Preparation Of Tax Roll And Tax Receipts
1-7-2: Fiscal Year
1-7-3: Budget Preparation
1-7-4: Transfer Of Appropriations
1-7-5: Village Expenditures In Accordance With Appropriation
1-7-6: Destruction Of Public Records
1-7-7: Refunds Of Tax Payments
1-7-8: Confidentiality Of Assessment Records
1-7-1: PREPARATION OF TAX ROLL AND TAX RECEIPTS:
   A.   Aggregate Tax Stated On Roll: Pursuant to section 70.65(2), Wisconsin
statutes, the village clerk shall, in computing the tax roll, insert only the
aggregate amount of state, county, school and local taxes in a single column in
the roll opposite the parcel or tract of land against which the tax is levied,
or, in the case of personal property, in a single column opposite the name of
the person against whom the tax is levied.
   B.   Rates Stamped On Receipts: Pursuant to section 74.08(1), Wisconsin
statutes, in lieu of entering on each tax receipt the several amounts paid
respectively for state, county, school, local and other taxes, the aggregate
amount of such taxes shall be combined in a single column on the tax receipt
issued by the village treasurer. The treasurer shall cause to be printed or
stamped on the tax receipt the separate proportion or rate of taxes levied for
state, county, school, local or other purpose. (1968 Code § 2.01)
1-7-2: FISCAL YEAR:
The calendar year shall be the fiscal year 1 . (1968 Code § 2.02)
 
Notes
1 1. WSA 62.12(1).
1-7-3: BUDGET PREPARATION:
On or before the first Monday in November of each year the village board shall
prepare and submit a proposed budget presenting a financial plan for conducting
the affairs of the village for the ensuing calendar year. The budget shall
include the following information:
   A.   An itemization of all anticipated income of the village from sources
other than general property taxes and bonds issued, with a comparative
statement of the amounts received by the village from each of the same or
similar sources for the last preceding and current fiscal year.
   B.   An estimate of the amount of money to be raised from general property
taxes which, with income from other sources, will be necessary to meet the
proposed expenditures.
   C.   Such other information as may be required by the board and by state
law.
The village shall provide a copy of the budget thus prepared. (1968 Code §
2.03; amd. 1981 Code)
1-7-4: TRANSFER OF APPROPRIATIONS:
Upon written recommendation of the village board, it may at any time, by a two-
thirds (2/3) vote of the entire membership, transfer any portion of an
unencumbered balance of an appropriation to any other purpose or object. Notice
of such transfer shall be given by publication within two (2) weeks thereafter
in the official village newspaper. (1968 Code § 2.04)
1-7-5: VILLAGE EXPENDITURES IN ACCORDANCE WITH APPROPRIATION:
No money shall be drawn from the village treasury, nor shall any obligation for
the expenditure of money be incurred, except in pursuance of the annual
appropriation in the adopted budget or when changed as authorized by section
1-7-4 of this chapter. At the close of each fiscal year any unencumbered
balance of any appropriation shall revert to the general fund and shall be
subject to reappropriation; but appropriations may be made by the board, to be
paid out of the income of the current year, in furtherance of improvements or
other objects of work which will not be completed within such year, and any
such appropriation shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was
made shall have been accomplished or abandoned. (1968 Code § 2.05)
1-7-6: DESTRUCTION OF PUBLIC RECORDS:
   A.   Financial Records: Officers are empowered to destroy the following
nonutility records under their jurisdiction after the completion of an audit by
the department of state audit or an auditor licensed under chapter 442,
Wisconsin statutes, but not less than seven (7) years after payment or receipt
of the sum involved in the applicable transaction:
      1.   Bank statements, deposit books, slips and stubs.
      2.   Bonds and coupons after maturity.
      3.   Canceled checks, duplicates and check stubs.
      4.   License and permit applications, stubs and duplicates.
      5.   Payrolls and other time and employment records of personnel included
under the Wisconsin retirement fund.
      6.   Receipt funds.
      7.   Special assessment records.
      8.   Vouchers, requisitions, purchase orders and all other supporting
documents pertaining thereto.
   B.   Utility Records: Officers are empowered to destroy the following
records of municipal utilities, subject to regulation by the state public
service commission and after an audit as provided above, but not less than two
(2) years after payment or receipt of the sum involved in the applicable
transaction:
      1.   Water, sewer, electrical stubs and receipts of current billings.
      2.   Customers' ledgers.
      3.   Vouchers and supporting documents pertaining to charges not included
in plant accounts.
      4.   Other utility records after seven (7) years with the written
approval of the state public service commission.
   C.   Other Records: Officers are empowered to destroy the following records,
but not less than seven (7) years after the record was effective:
      1.   Assessment rolls and related records, including board of review 1
minutes.
      2.   Contracts and papers relating thereto.
      3.   Correspondence and communications.
      4.   Financial reports other than annual financial reports.
      5.   Insurance policies.
      6.   Justice dockets.
      7.   Oaths of office.
      8.   Reports of boards, commissions, committees and officials duplicated
in the official minutes.
      9.   Resolutions and petitions.
      10.   Voter record cards.
   D.   Notice Required: Prior to the destruction of any public record
described above, at least sixty (60) days' notice shall be given the state
historical society. (1968 Code § 2.06)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  1-5-5 of this title.
1-7-7: REFUNDS OF TAX PAYMENTS:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: It is the declared intent of this section that tax
payments made in excess of the tax bill amounts shall be refunded pursuant to
the procedures established under this section within fifteen (15) business days
of payment. Further, it is the declared intent that this policy shall be in
full force and effect upon adoption by the village board, with the purpose of
complying with section 74.03(2) of Wisconsin statutes.
   B.   Authority: This section is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to
village boards under section 60.044 of Wisconsin statutes to enact an
alternative system of approving financial claims against the village other than
claims under section 893.80 of Wisconsin statutes.
   C.   Required Procedures Of Treasurer: Pursuant to section 61.26 of
Wisconsin statutes upon receipt of tax payments in excess of the tax bill, the
village treasurer shall deposit as soon as practicable all payments in the name
of the village in public depositories designated by the village board. Upon
verification by the village treasurer that the payment as deposited has cleared
and not been returned as insufficient funds, but no later than ten (10) days
after depositing, the treasurer shall notify the village clerk in writing: the
name and mailing address of the taxpayer for whom a refund in excess of the tax
bill amount is due, the amount of the refund in excess of the tax bill, the
date payment was received, and a statement that the payment as made has cleared
and not been returned as insufficient funds.
   D.   Required Procedures Of Clerk: Upon written notification from the
village treasurer that a taxpayer has made a tax payment in excess of the tax
bill amount, the village clerk shall approve a claim as a proper charge against
the village treasury, and endorse his/her approval on the claim after having
determined that the following conditions have been complied with:
      1.   The funds are available to pay the claim, assuming the tax payment
has cleared and has not been returned as is evidenced by the treasurer's
notice.
      2.   The village board has authorized the refund of excess tax payment as
established by the adoption of this section.
      3.   The refund is due in the amount noticed by the village treasurer as
a tax payment in excess of the amount of the tax bill.
      4.   The refund is a valid claim against the village, being a payment in
excess of the tax bill amount.
Further, the village clerk, shall prepare monthly and file with the village
board a list of claims paid under this procedure, listing the amount of the
claims, the date paid, the name of the taxpayer/claimant, and that the payment
was a payment of a refund for excess tax payment.
   E.   Issuance Of Disbursement: Upon approval of the claim by the village
clerk under the procedures listed in subsection D of this section, a refund
check payable to the taxpayer/claimant named in the claim or authorization and
in the amount approved, shall be written by the village treasurer countersigned
as required by section 66.042 of Wisconsin statutes by the village clerk and
village treasurer, shall be issued no later than fifteen (15) business days
from the date the tax payment was received by the village treasurer as noticed
by the village treasurer in subsection C of this section.
   F.   Mailing Or Delivery Of Refund: Upon issuance of the proper
countersigned refund check, pursuant to the procedures in this section, the
refund check shall be delivered to the taxpayer/claimant or mailed to the last
known mailing address of the taxpayer/claimant by the village treasurer.
   G.   Annual Detailed Audit: Pursuant to section 66.044(3) of Wisconsin
statutes the village board is hereby required to contract for an annual
detailed audit of its financial transactions and accounts by a public
accountant licensed under chapter 442 of Wisconsin statutes and designated by
the village board.
   H.   Fidelity Bond: Pursuant to section 66.044(4) of Wisconsin statutes the
village clerk must be covered by a fidelity bond of not less than five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00). (Ord., 11-16-1998)
   I.   The Village shall not refund overpayment of real estate taxes if such
overpayment is in the amount of five dollars ($5.00) or less. The Village
decrees that the administrative costs exceed the amount of overpayment and that
a refund is not justified. (Ord., 11-16-1998; amd. Ord. 2023-04, 8-10-2023)
1-7-8: CONFIDENTIALITY OF ASSESSMENT RECORDS:
   A.   Adoption: This section adopts by reference Wisconsin statutes section
70.47(7)(af). Income and expense information provided by property owner to the
assessor for the purposes of establishing the valuation for assessment purposes
by the income method of valuation shall be confidential and not a public record
open to inspection or copying under section 19.35(1) of Wisconsin statutes.
   B.   Exceptions: An officer may make disclosure of such information under
the following circumstances:
      1.   The assessor has access to such information in the performance of
his/her duties;
      2.   The board of review may review such information when needed, in its
opinion, to decide upon a contested assessment;
      3.   Another person or body has the right to review such information due
to the intimate relationship to the duties of an office or as set by law;
      4.   The officer is complying with a court order;
      5.   The person providing the income and expense information has
contested the assessment level at either the board of review or by filing a
claim for excessive assessment under Wisconsin statutes section 74.37, in which
case the base records are open and public. (Ord. 1-00, 5-1-2000)
CHAPTER 8
PUBLIC RECORDS
SECTION:
1-8-1: Definitions
1-8-2: Maintenance Of Records
1-8-3: Designated Legal Custodians
1-8-4: Public Access To Records
1-8-5: Procedure For Access To Records
1-8-6: Limitations On Right To Access
1-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
AUTHORITY: Any of the following village of Reedsville entities having custody
of a village record: an office, elected official, agency, board, commission,
committee, council, department or public body corporate and politic created by
constitution, law, ordinance, rule or order; or a formally constituted subunit
of the foregoing.
CUSTODIAN: That officer, department head, division head, or employee of the
village designated under section
1-8-3 of this chapter or otherwise responsible by law to keep and preserve any
village records or file, deposit or keep such records in his or her office, or
lawfully in possession or entitled to possession of such public records and who
is required by this chapter to respond to requests for access to such records.
EMPLOYEE: Any individual who is employed by the village, other than an
individual holding local public office, or any individual who is employed by an
employer other than the village.
LOCAL PUBLIC OFFICE: Any of the following offices: any elective office of the
village; a village manager; an appointive office or a position in the village
in which the individual serves for a limited term. Local public office also
includes any appointed office or position of the village in which an individual
serves as the head of a department, but does not include a position filled by a
municipal employee. The following positions are positions of local public
office: village clerk-treasurer, village chief of police, fire chief, first
responder's president, manager of the Reedsville association of growth and
development, board of appeals, planning commission, board of review, emergency
management, building inspector, and assessor.
RECORD: Any material on which written, drawn, printed, spoken, visual or
electromagnetic information is recorded or preserved, regardless of physical
form or characteristics, which has been created or is being kept by an
authority. "Record" includes, but is not limited to, handwritten, typed or
printed pages, maps, charts, photographs, films, recordings, tapes (including
computer tapes), computer printouts, and optical disks. "Record" does not
include drafts, notes, preliminary computations and like materials prepared for
the originator's personal use or prepared by the originator in the name of a
person for whom the originator is working; materials which are purely the
personal property of the custodian and have no relation to his or her office;
materials to which access is limited by copyright, patent or bequest; and
published materials in the possession of an authority other than a public
library which are available for sale, or which are available for inspection at
a public library. (Ord. 2005-1, 2-21-2005; amd. Ord. 2011-5, 11-7-2011)
1-8-2: MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS:
   A.   Duty To Maintain: Except as otherwise provided herein, each officer and
employee of the village shall safely keep and preserve all records received
from his or her predecessor or other persons and required by law to be filed,
deposited or kept in his or her office, or which are in the lawful possession
or control of the officer or employee or his or her deputies, or to the
possession or control of which he or she or they may be lawfully entitled as
such officers or employees.
   B.   Successor Officer: Upon the expiration of an officer's term of office
or an employee's term of employment, or whenever the office or position of
employment becomes vacant, each such officer or employee shall deliver to his
or her successor all records then in his or her custody and the successor shall
receipt therefor to the officer or employee, who shall file said receipt with
the village clerk-treasurer. If a vacancy occurs before a successor is selected
or qualifies, such records shall be delivered to and receipted for by the
village clerk-treasurer, on behalf of the successor, to be delivered to such
successor upon the latter's receipt. (Ord. 2005-1, 2-21-2005)
1-8-3: DESIGNATED LEGAL CUSTODIANS:
   A.   Elected Official: Each elected official is the legal custodian of his
or her records and the records of his or her office. However, the official may
designate in writing the village clerk- treasurer to act as the legal
custodian.
   B.   Village Board; Other Authorities: Unless provided in subsection C of
this section or otherwise prohibited by law, the village clerk-treasurer or the
village clerk-treasurer's designee shall act as legal custodian for the village
and for any committees, commissions, boards, or other authorities created by
ordinance or resolution of the village board. The following offices or
authorities shall have as a legal custodian of records the individual so named:
Village board/general village records   Village clerk-treasurer
Financial records                       Village clerk-treasurer
Police department records               Police chief
Fire department records                 Fire chief and/or secretary of fire
                                         department
First responders records                Fire chief and/or secretary of first
                                         responders
Association for growth and development  Manager of growth and development
                                         association
Assessment roll                         Village assessor
Board of review records                 Village clerk-treasurer
Board of appeals records                Village clerk-treasurer
Planning commission records             Village clerk-treasurer
 
   C.   Undesignated: For every authority not specified in subsections A and B
of this section, the authority's chief administrative officer holding local
public office is the legal custodian for the authority, but the officer may
designate an employee of his or her staff to act as the legal custodian. Such
designation shall be in writing. (Ord. 2011-5, 11-7-2011)
1-8-4: PUBLIC ACCESS TO RECORDS:
   A.   Right To Inspect: Except as provided in section
1-8-6 of this chapter, any person has a right to inspect a record and to make
or receive a copy of any record as provided in section 19.35(1), Wisconsin
statutes.
   B.   Availability: Records will be available for inspection and copying
during all regular office hours.
   C.   Place To Inspect: A requester shall be permitted to use facilities
comparable to those available to village employees to inspect, copy or abstract
a record.
   D.   Supervision: The legal custodian may require supervision during
inspection or may impose other reasonable restrictions on the manner of access
to an original record if the record is irreplaceable or easily damaged.
   E.   Fee Schedule: A requester shall be charged a fee to defray the cost of
locating and copying records as follows:
      1.   The cost of photocopying shall be twenty five cents ($0.25) per
page. This cost has been calculated not to exceed the actual, necessary and
direct cost of reproduction.
      2.   If the form of a written record does not permit photocopying, the
actual and necessary cost of photographing and photographic processing shall be
charged.
      3.   The actual full cost of providing a copy of other records not in
printed form on paper, such as films, computer printouts and audio and video
tapes, shall be charged.
      4.   If mailing or shipping is necessary, the actual cost thereof shall
be charged.
      5.   There shall be no charge for locating a record unless the actual
cost therefor exceeds fifty dollars ($50.00), in which case the actual cost
shall be determined by the legal custodian and charged to the requester.
      6.   The legal custodian shall estimate the cost of all applicable fees
and shall require a cash deposit adequate to assure payment, if such estimate
exceeds five dollars ($5.00).
      7.   Elected and appointed officials of the village shall not be required
to pay for public records they may reasonably require for the proper
performance of their official duties.
      8.   The legal custodian may provide copies of a record without charge or
at a reduced charge where the legal custodian determines that waiver or
reduction of the fee is in the public interest.
      9.   The cost to fax shall be one dollar ($1.00) per page.
   F.   Public Records Notice: Pursuant to section 19.34, Wisconsin statutes,
and the guidelines therein listed, each authority shall adopt, prominently
display and make available for inspection and copying at its offices, for the
guidance of the public, a notice containing a description of its organization
and the established times and places at which, the legal custodian from whom,
and the methods whereby, the public may obtain information and access to
records in its custody, make requests for records, or obtain copies of records,
and the costs thereof. The notice shall also separately identify each position
of the authority that constitutes a local public office. This subsection does
not apply to members of the village board. (Ord. 2005-1, 2-21-2005; amd. Ord.
2023-03, 6-8-2023)
1-8-5: PROCEDURE FOR ACCESS TO RECORDS:
   A.   Request To Inspect Or Copy; In General: A request to inspect or copy a
record shall be made to the legal custodian or to the village clerk-treasurer,
who shall forward it to the legal custodian as soon as practicable. A request
shall be deemed sufficient if it reasonably describes the requested record or
the information requested. However, a request for a record without a reasonable
limitation as to subject matter or length of time represented by the record
does not constitute a sufficient request. A request may be made orally, but a
request must be in writing before an action to enforce the request is commenced
under section 19.37, Wisconsin statutes. Except as provided below, no request
may be refused because the request is received by mail, unless prepayment of a
fee is required under subsection 1-8-4E of this chapter.
   B.   Custodian Response: Each custodian, upon request for any record, shall,
as soon as practicable and without delay, either fill the request or notify the
requester of the authority's determination to deny the request in whole or in
part and the reasons therefor. If the legal custodian, after conferring with
the village attorney, determines that a written request is so general as to be
unduly time consuming, the party making the request may first be required to
itemize his or her request in a manner which would permit reasonable
compliance.
   C.   Denial Of Request: A request for a record may be denied as provided in
section
1-8-6 of this chapter. If a request is made orally, the request may be denied
orally unless a demand for a written statement of the reasons denying the
request is made by the requester within five (5) business days of the oral
denial. If a written request is denied in whole or in part, the requester shall
receive a written statement of the reasons for denying the request. Every
written denial of a request shall inform the requester that, if the request for
the record was made in writing, then the determination is subject to review
upon petition for a writ of mandamus under section 19.37(1), Wisconsin
statutes, or upon application to the attorney general or a district attorney.
   D.   Request To Inspect And Copy; Records Regarding Employment Or Search
Warrant: The procedure set forth in this subsection will apply to the following
records: 1) a record containing information relating to an employee that is
created or kept by the authority as the result of an investigation into a
disciplinary matter involving the employee or possible employment related
violation by the employee of a statute, ordinance, rule, regulation, or policy
of the employee's employer; 2) a record obtained by the authority through a
subpoena or search warrant; or 3) a record prepared by an employer other than
an authority if that record contains information relating to an employee of
that employer unless the employee authorizes the authority to provide access to
that information.
      1.   Notice To Record Subject: If the authority decides to permit access
to a record described in this subsection, the authority shall, before
permitting access and within three (3) days after making the decision to permit
access, serve written notice of that decision on any record subject to whom the
record pertains, either by certified mail or personal service. The notice shall
briefly describe the requested record and include a description of the rights
of the record subject set forth in the following subsections.
      2.   Record Subject Response: Within five (5) days after receipt of a
notice, a record subject may provide written notification to the authority of
his/her intent to seek a court order restraining the authority from providing
access to the requested record.
      3.   Action By Record Subject: Within ten (10) days after receipt of a
notice, a record subject may commence an action seeking a court order to
restrain the authority from providing access to the requested record. If such
an action is commenced, the authority shall be named as a defendant. The record
requester may intervene in the action as a matter of right. If the record
requester does not intervene, the authority shall notify the requester of the
results of the proceeding.
      4.   Time For Authority To Act: The authority shall not provide access to
a requested record within twelve (12) days of sending a notice pertaining to
that record under this section. If the record subject commences an action under
this section, the authority shall not provide access to the requested record
during the pendency of the action and until any appeal is decided, until the
period for appealing or petitioning for review expires, until a petition for
review is denied, or the authority receives written notice from the record
subject that an appeal or petition will not be filed, whichever first occurs.
      5.   Exceptions: This subsection does not apply: a) to access to a record
pertaining to an employee provided to the employee who is the subject of the
record or to his or her representative to the extent required under section
103.13, Wisconsin statutes, or to a recognized or certified collective
bargaining representative to the extent required to fulfill a duty to bargain
or pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement under chapter 111, Wisconsin
statutes; and b) to access to a record produced in relation to a function
produced for equal rights, discrimination, or fair employment law compliance
purposes under sections 106.54, 230.45, or chapter 111 of the Wisconsin
statutes.
      6.   Officer Or Employee Right To Augment Record: If an authority decides
to permit access to a record containing information relating to a record
subject who is an officer or employee of the authority holding a local public
office, the authority shall serve written notice of that decision on the record
subject by certified mail or personal service before permitting access and
within three (3) days after making the decision to permit access. The notice
shall describe the requested record and include a description of the rights of
the record subject as follows: Within five (5) days after receipt of the
notice, a record subject may augment the record to be released with written
comments and documentation selected by the record subject. In that event, the
authority shall release the record as augmented by the record subject. (Ord.
2005-1, 2-21-2005)
1-8-6: LIMITATIONS ON RIGHT TO ACCESS:
   A.   Records Exempt From Inspection: Although not intended to be exhaustive,
the following list of records is exempt from inspection under this chapter
pursuant to section 19.36, Wisconsin statutes and other applicable law:
      1.   Records specifically exempted from disclosure by state or federal
law or authorized to be exempted from disclosure by state law.
      2.   Any record relating to investigative information obtained for law
enforcement purposes if federal law or regulations require exemption from
disclosure or if exemption from disclosure is a condition to receipt of aids by
the state.
      3.   Computer programs and files, although the material used as input for
a computer program/file or the material produced as a product of the computer
program is subject to inspection.
      4.   A record or any portion of a record containing information
qualifying as a common law trade secret.
      5.   Information maintained, prepared, or provided by the village
concerning the home address, home electronic mail address, home telephone
number, or social security number of an employee or an individual holding local
public office, unless the employee or individual holding local public office
authorizes the village to provide access to such information. This exception
does not apply to the home address of an individual who holds an elective
public office or to the home address of an individual who, as a condition of
employment, is required to reside in a specified location.
      6.   Information relating to the current investigation of a possible
criminal offense or possible misconduct connected with employment by an
employee prior to the disposition of the investigation.
      7.   Information pursuant to the employee's employment examination,
except an examination score if access to the score is not otherwise prohibited.
      8.   Information pertaining to one or more specific employees that is
used by the village for staff management planning, including performance
evaluations, judgments, or recommendations concerning future salary adjustments
or other wage treatments, management bonus plans, promotions, job assignments,
letters of reference or other comments or ratings relating to employees.
      9.   A record prepared or provided by an employer, performing under a
contract requiring the payment of prevailing wages, containing an employee's
personally identifiable information.
   B.   Public Library Circulation Records: As provided by section 43.30,
Wisconsin statutes, public library circulation records are exempt from
inspection under this section.
   C.   Records Which May Be Exempt Under Balancing Test: In responding to a
request for inspection or copying of a record which is not specifically exempt
from disclosure, the legal custodian, after conferring with the village
attorney, may deny the request, in whole or in part, only if he or she
determines that the harm to the public interest resulting from disclosure would
outweigh the public interest in full access to the requested record. Examples
of matters for which disclosure may be refused include, but are not limited to,
the following:
      1.   Records obtained under official pledges of confidentiality which
were necessary and given in order to obtain the information contained in them.
      2.   Pursuant to section 19.85(1)(a), Wisconsin statutes, records of
current deliberations after a quasi-judicial hearing.
      3.   Pursuant to sections 19.85(1)(b) and (c), Wisconsin statutes,
records of current deliberations concerning employment, dismissal, promotion,
demotion, compensation, performance, or discipline of any village officer or
employee, or the investigation of charges against a village officer or
employee, unless such officer or employee consents to such disclosure.
      4.   Pursuant to section 19.85(1)(d), Wisconsin statutes, records
concerning current strategy for crime detection or prevention.
      5.   Pursuant to section 19.85(1)(e), Wisconsin statutes, records of
current deliberations or negotiations on the purchase of village property,
investing of village funds, or other village business whenever competitive or
bargaining reasons require nondisclosure.
      6.   Pursuant to section 19.85(1)(f), Wisconsin statutes, financial,
medical, social or personal histories or disciplinary data of specific persons
which, if disclosed, would be likely to have a substantial adverse effect upon
the reputation of any person referred to in such history or data.
      7.   Pursuant to section 19.85(1)(g), Wisconsin statutes, communications
between legal counsel for the village and any officer, agent or employee of the
village, when advice is being rendered concerning strategy with respect to
current litigation in which the village or any of its officers, agents or
employees is or is likely to become involved, or communications which are
privileged under section 905.03, Wisconsin statutes.
      8.   Pursuant to section 19.85(1)(h), Wisconsin statutes, requests for
confidential written advice from an ethics board, and records of advice given
by such ethics board on such requests.
   D.   Modifying Records To Separate Exempt From Nonexempt Information: If a
record contains information that may be made public and information that may
not be made public, the custodian of the record shall provide the information
that may be made public and delete the information that may not be made public
from the record before release. The custodian shall confer with the village
attorney prior to releasing any such record and shall follow the guidance of
the village attorney when separating out the exempt material. If, in the
judgment of the custodian and the village attorney, there is no feasible way to
separate the exempt material from the nonexempt material without unreasonably
jeopardizing nondisclosure of the exempt material, the entire record shall be
withheld from disclosure. (Ord. 2005-1, 2-21-2005)
CHAPTER 9
CODE OF ETHICS
SECTION:
1-9-1: Declaration Of Policy
1-9-2: Standards Of Conduct
1-9-3: Responsibility Of Public Office
1-9-4: Dedicated Service
1-9-5: Fair And Equal Treatment
1-9-6: Conflict Of Interest
1-9-7: Advisory Opinion
1-9-8: Jurisdiction And Application
1-9-9: Sanctions
1-9-10: Distribution Of Code Of Ethics
1-9-1: DECLARATION OF POLICY:
   A.   The proper operation of democratic government requires that public
officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the
people; that government decisions and policy be made in proper channels of the
governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and
that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In
recognition of these goals, there is hereby established a code of ethics for
all village of Reedsville officials and employees, whether elected or
appointed, paid or unpaid, including members of boards, committees and
commissions of the village as well as any individuals who are candidates for
elective office as soon as such individuals file nomination papers with the
village.
   B.   The purpose of this chapter is to establish guidelines for ethical
standards of conduct for all such officials and employees by setting forth
those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interests of the
village of Reedsville and by directing disclosure by such officials and
employees of private financial or other interests in matters affecting the
village. The provisions and purpose of this chapter and such rules and
regulations as may be established are hereby declared to be in the best
interests of the village of Reedsville. (Ord. 2006-3, 8-21-2006)
1-9-2: STANDARDS OF CONDUCT:
There are certain provisions of the Wisconsin statutes which should, while not
set forth herein, be considered an integral part of any code of ethics.
Accordingly, the provisions of the following sections of the Wisconsin statutes
are made a part of this code of ethics and incorporated herein by reference and
shall apply to public officials and employees whenever applicable:
Section 946.10 Bribery of public officers and employees
Section 946.11 Special privileges from public utilities
Section 946.12 Misconduct in public office
Section 946.13 Private interest in public contract prohibited
(Ord. 2006-3, 8-21-2006)
1-9-3: RESPONSIBILITY OF PUBLIC OFFICE:
Public officials and employees are agents of public purpose and hold office for
the benefit of the public. They are bound to uphold the constitution of the
United States and the constitution of this state and carry out impartially the
laws of the nation, state and municipality and to observe in their official
acts the highest standards of morality and to discharge faithfully the duties
of their office regardless of personal considerations, recognizing that the
public interest must be their prime concern. (Ord. 2006-3, 8-21-2006)
1-9-4: DEDICATED SERVICE:
All officials and employees of the village of Reedsville should be loyal to the
objectives expressed by the electorate and the programs developed to attain
these objectives. Appointive officials and employees should adhere to the rules
of work and performance established as the standard for their positions by the
appropriate authority.
Officials and employees should not exceed their authority or breach the law or
ask others to do so, and they should work in full cooperation with other public
officials and employees unless prohibited from so doing by law or by officially
recognized confidentiality of their work. (Ord. 2006-3, 8-21-2006)
1-9-5: FAIR AND EQUAL TREATMENT:
   A.   Use Of Public Property: No official or employee shall request or permit
the unauthorized use of village owned vehicles, equipment, materials or
property for personal convenience or profit.
   B.   Obligations To Citizens: No official or employee shall grant any
special consideration, treatment or advantage to any citizen beyond that which
is available to every other citizen. (Ord. 2006-3, 8-21-2006)
1-9-6: CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
   A.   Financial And Personal Interest Prohibited: No official or employee,
whether paid or unpaid, shall engage in any business or transaction or shall
act in regard to financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect,
which is incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties in the
public interest contrary to the provisions of this chapter or which would tend
to impair independence of judgment or action in the performance of official
duties.
   B.   Definitions:
    ANYTHING OF VALUE: Any gift, favor, loan, service or promise of future
employment, but does not include reasonable fees and honorariums, or the
exchange of seasonal, anniversary or customary gifts among relatives and
friends.
   BUSINESS: Any corporation, partnership, association, organization, self-
employed individual or any other legal entity which engages in profit making
activities.
   FINANCIAL INTEREST: Any interest which shall yield, directly or indirectly,
a monetary or other material benefit to the officer or employee or to any
person employing or retaining the services of the officer or employee.
   PERSON: Any person, corporation, partnership or joint venture, limited
liability company, limited liability partnership, or other entity.
   PERSONAL INTEREST: The following specific blood or marriage relationships:
      1.   A person's spouse, mother, father, child, brother or sister; or
      2.   A person's relative by blood or marriage who receives, directly or
indirectly, more than one- half (1/2) support from such person or from whom
such person receives, directly or indirectly, more than one-half (1/2) of his
or her support.
   PUBLIC EMPLOYEE: Any person excluded from the definition of "public
official" who is employed by the village.
   PUBLIC OFFICIAL: Those persons serving in statutory elected or appointed
offices provided for in chapter 61 of the Wisconsin statutes and all members
appointed to boards, committees and commissions established or appointed by the
village president or village board pursuant to this city code, whether paid or
unpaid.
   SIGNIFICANT INTEREST: Owning or controlling, directly or indirectly, at
least ten percent (10%) or five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) of the outstanding
stock of any business.
   C.   Specific Conflicts Enumerated:
      1.   Incompatible Employment: No official or employee shall engage in or
accept private employment or render service, for private interest, when such
employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of official
duties or would tend to impair independence of judgment or action in the
performance of official duties, unless otherwise permitted by law and unless
disclosure is made as hereinafter provided.
      2.   Disclosure Of Confidential Information: No official or employee
shall, without proper legal authorization, disclose confidential information
concerning the property, government, or affairs of the village, nor shall such
information be used to advance the financial or other private interest of the
official or employee or others.
      3.   Gifts And Favors: No official or employee shall accept any gift,
whether in the form of service, loan, thing or promise, from any person which
may tend to impair his or her independence of judgment or action in the
performance of his or her duties. No official or employee shall grant in the
discharge of his or her duties any improper favor, service or thing of value.
Any official who receives, directly or indirectly, any gift or gifts within any
calendar year from any person who is known by said official or employee to be
interested directly or indirectly in any manner whatsoever in business dealings
with the village upon which the official or employee has any influence or input
or over which the official or employee has any jurisdiction, discretion or
control, shall disclose the nature and value of such gifts to the village board
by January 20 next following the year in which the gift or gifts are received.
No official or employee may solicit or accept, either directly or indirectly,
from any person or organization, money or anything of value if it could
reasonably be expected to influence the employee's official actions or
judgments or be considered a reward for any action or inaction on the part of
the official or employee.
An official or employee is not to accept hospitality if after consideration of
the surrounding circumstances it could reasonably be concluded that such
hospitality would not be extended were it not for the fact that the guest or a
member of the guest's immediate family was a village official or employee.
Participation in celebrations, grand openings, open houses, informational
meetings, and similar events is excluded from this prohibition. This paragraph
further shall not be construed to prevent candidates for elective office from
accepting hospitality from citizens for the purpose of supporting the
candidate's campaign.
Gifts received by an official or employee under unusual circumstances should be
referred to the village board or designee within ten (10) days of receipt for
recommended disposition.
      4.   Representing Private Interests Before Village Agencies Or Courts: No
officer or employee shall appear on behalf of any private person (other than
himself or herself, his or her spouse or minor children) before any village
agency or municipal court. However, members of the village board may appear
before village agencies on behalf of constituents in the course of their duties
as representatives of the electorate or in the performance of public or civic
obligations.
   D.   Contract With The Village: No village officer or employee who in his/
her capacity as such officer or employee participates in the making of a
contract in which he/she has a private pecuniary interest, direct or indirect,
or is authorized or required by law to participate, or performs in regard to
that contract some function requiring the exercise of discretion on his part,
shall enter into any contract with the village unless within the exceptions of
section 946.13, Wisconsin statutes.
   E.   Disclosure Of Interest In Legislation: Any member of the village board
who has a financial interest or personal interest in any proposed legislation
before the village board shall disclose on the records of the village board the
nature and extent of such interest.
Any other official or employee who has a financial interest or personal
interest in any proposed legislative action of the village board or any board,
commission or committee upon which the official or employee has any influence
or input or of which the official or employee is a member that is to make a
recommendation or decision upon any item which is the subject of the proposed
legislative action, shall disclose on the records of the village board or the
appropriate board, commission or committee the nature and extent of such
interest. (Ord. 2006-3, 8-21-2006)
1-9-7: ADVISORY OPINION:
Any questions as to the interpretation of any provisions of this code of ethics
shall be referred to the village board, which, if it deems it necessary or
appropriate, may request an advisory opinion from the village attorney. (Ord.
2006-3, 8-21-2006)
1-9-8: JURISDICTION AND APPLICATION:
The village board shall have administrative jurisdiction over this code of
ethics. (Ord. 2006-3, 8-21-2006)
1-9-9: SANCTIONS:
A determination that an official's or employee's actions constitute improper
conduct under the provisions of this chapter may constitute a cause for
suspension, removal from office or employment, or other disciplinary action.
Any sanction shall be consistent with the terms of any applicable labor
agreement. (Ord. 2006-3, 8-21-2006)
1-9-10: DISTRIBUTION OF CODE OF ETHICS:
The village clerk shall cause a copy of this code of ethics to be distributed
to each public official and employee elected, entering upon his or her duties
and to every public official and employee of the village of Reedsville on an
annual basis thereafter. (Ord. 2011-5, 11-7-2011)
CHAPTER 10
PLAN COMMISSION
SECTION:
1-10-1: Title
1-10-2: Purpose
1-10-3: Authority; Establishment
1-10-4: Membership
1-10-5: Appointments
1-10-6: Terms Of Office
1-10-7: Vacancies
1-10-8: Compensation; Expenses
1-10-9: Experts And Staff
1-10-10: Rules; Records
1-10-11: President And Officers
1-10-12: Commission Members As Local Public Officials
1-10-13: General And Miscellaneous Powers
1-10-14: Village Comprehensive Planning; General Authority And Requirements
1-10-15: Procedure For Adoption And Recommendation Of Comprehensive Plan Or
Amendment
1-10-16: Plan Implementation And Administration
1-10-17: Referrals To The Plan Commission
1-10-1: TITLE:
This chapter is entitled the VILLAGE OF REEDSVILLE PLAN COMMISSION ORDINANCE.
(Ord. 2007-3, 6-18-2007)
1-10-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a village of Reedsville plan
commission and set forth its organization, powers and duties, to further the
health, safety, welfare and wise use of resources for the benefit of current
and future residents of the village and affected neighboring jurisdictions,
through the adoption and implementation of comprehensive planning with
significant citizen involvement. (Ord. 2007-3, 6-18-2007)
1-10-3: AUTHORITY; ESTABLISHMENT:
The village board of the village of Reedsville establishes a seven (7) member
plan commission under section 61.35, Wisconsin statutes. The plan commission
shall be considered the village planning agency under sections 236.02(13) and
236.45, Wisconsin statutes, which authorize, but do not require, village
adoption of a subdivision or other land division ordinance. (Ord. 2007-3, 6-18-
2007)
1-10-4: MEMBERSHIP:
The plan commission consists of one member of the village board, who may be the
village board president, and six (6) citizen members, who are not otherwise
village officials, and who shall be persons of recognized experience and
qualifications. (Ord. 2007-3, 6-18-2007)
1-10-5: APPOINTMENTS:
The village board president shall appoint the members of the plan commission
and designate a plan commission president during the month of April to fill any
expiring term. The village board president may appoint himself, herself, or
another village board member to the plan commission and may designate himself
or herself, the other village board member, or a citizen member as president of
the plan commission. All appointments are subject to the advisory approval of
the village board. In a year in which any village board member was elected at
the spring election, any appointment or designation by the village board
president shall be made after the election and qualification of the village
board members elected. Any citizen appointed to the plan commission shall take
and file the oath of office within five (5) days of notice of appointment, as
provided under sections 19.01 and 61.21, Wisconsin statutes. (Ord. 2007-3, 6-
18-2007)
1-10-6: TERMS OF OFFICE:
The term of office for the plan commission president and each commission member
shall be for a period of three (3) years, ending on April 30, or until a
successor is appointed and qualified, except:
   A.   Initial Terms: If the initial appointments to the plan commission are
made during April, the citizen members shall be appointed for staggered terms
as follows: two (2) persons for a term that expires in one year; two (2)
persons for a term that expires in two (2) years; and two (2) persons for a
term that expires in three (3) years. If the initial appointments are made
after April, the first citizens appointed to the plan commission shall be
appointed for staggered terms as follows: two (2) persons for a term that
expires one year from the previous April 30; two (2) persons for a term that
expires two (2) years from the previous April 30; and two (2) persons for a
term that expires three (3) years from the previous April 30. (Ord. 2007-3, 6-
18-2007)
1-10-7: VACANCIES:
A person who is appointed to fill a vacancy on the plan commission shall serve
for the remainder of the term. (Ord. 2007-3, 6-18-2007)
1-10-8: COMPENSATION; EXPENSES:
The village board of the village of Reedsville hereby sets a per diem allowance
per meeting for citizen and village board members of the plan commission, as
allowed under section 66.0501(2), Wisconsin statutes. In addition, the village
board may reimburse reasonable costs and expenses, as allowed under section
61.32, Wisconsin statutes. (Ord. 2007-3, 6-18-2007)
1-10-9: EXPERTS AND STAFF:
The plan commission may, under section 62.23(1), Wisconsin statutes, recommend
to the village board the employment of experts and staff, and may review and
recommend to the approval authority proposed payments under any contract with
an expert. (Ord. 2007-3, 6-18-2007)
1-10-10: RULES; RECORDS:
The plan commission, under section 62.23(2), Wisconsin statutes, may adopt
rules for the transaction of its business, subject to village ordinances, and
shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and
determinations, which shall be a public record under sections 19.21 - 19.39,
Wisconsin statutes. (Ord. 2007-3, 6-18-2007)
1-10-11: PRESIDENT AND OFFICERS:
   A.   President: The plan commission president shall be appointed and serve a
term as provided in sections
1-10-5 and
1-10-6 of this chapter. The president shall, subject to village ordinances and
commission rules:
      1.   Provide leadership to the commission;
      2.   Set commission meeting and hearing dates;
      3.   Provide notice of commission meetings and hearings and set their
agendas, personally or by his or her designee;
      4.   Preside at commission meetings and hearings; and
      5.   Ensure that the laws are followed.
   B.   Vice President: The plan commission may elect, by open vote under
section 19.88(1), Wisconsin statutes, a vice president to act in the place of
the president when the president is absent or incapacitated for any cause.
   C.   Secretary: The plan commission shall elect, by open vote under section
19.88(1), Wisconsin statutes, one of its members to serve as secretary, or,
with the approval of the village board, designate the village clerk or other
village officer or employee as secretary. (Ord. 2007-3, 6-18-2007)
1-10-12: COMMISSION MEMBERS AS LOCAL PUBLIC OFFICIALS:
All members of the plan commission shall faithfully discharge their official
duties to the best of their abilities, as provided in the oath of office,
section 19.01, Wisconsin statutes, in accordance with, but not limited to, the
provisions of the Wisconsin statutes on: public records, sections 19.21 -
19.39; code of ethics for local government officials, sections 19.42, 19.58 and
19.59; open meetings, sections 19.81 - 19.89; misconduct in office, section
946.12; and private interests in public contracts, section 946.13. Commission
members shall further perform their duties in a fair and rational manner and
avoid arbitrary actions. (Ord. 2007-3, 6-18-2007)
1-10-13: GENERAL AND MISCELLANEOUS POWERS:
The plan commission, under section 62.23(4), Wisconsin statutes, shall have the
power:
   A.   Necessary to enable it to perform its functions and promote village
planning.
   B.   To make reports and recommendations relating to the plan and
development of the village to the village board, other public bodies, citizens,
public utilities and organizations.
   C.   To recommend to the village board programs for public improvements and
the financing of such improvements.
   D.   To receive from public officials, within a reasonable time, requested
available information required for the commission to do its work.
   E.   For itself, its members and employees, in the performance of their
duties, to enter upon land, make examinations and surveys, and place and
maintain necessary monuments and marks thereon. However, entry shall not be
made upon private land, except to the extent that the private land is held open
to the general public, without the permission of the landowner or tenant. If
such permission has been refused, entry shall be made under the authority of an
inspection warrant issued for cause under section 66.0119, Wisconsin statutes,
or other court issued warrant. (Ord. 2007-3, 6-18-2007)
1-10-14: VILLAGE COMPREHENSIVE PLANNING; GENERAL AUTHORITY AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The plan commission shall recommend for adoption by the village board a
comprehensive plan under sections 62.23 and 66.1001, Wisconsin statutes, which
contains the elements specified in section 66.1001(2), Wisconsin statutes, and
follows the procedures in section 66.1001(4), Wisconsin statutes.
   B.   The plan commission shall make and recommend adoption of the
comprehensive plan within the time period directed by the village board, but
not later than a time sufficient to allow the village board to review the plan
and pass an ordinance adopting it to take effect on or before January 1, 2010,
so that the village comprehensive plan is in effect by the date on which any
village program or action affecting land use must be consistent with the
village comprehensive plan under section 66.1001(3), Wisconsin statutes.
   C.   In this section the requirement to make the plan means that the plan
commission shall ensure that the plan is prepared, and oversee and coordinate
the preparation of the plan, whether the work is performed for the village by
the plan commission, village staff, another unit of government, the regional
planning commission, a consultant, citizens, an advisory committee, or any
other person, group or organization. (Ord. 2007-3, 6-18-2007)
1-10-15: PROCEDURE FOR ADOPTION AND RECOMMENDATION OF COMPREHENSIVE PLAN OR
AMENDMENT:
The plan commission, in order to ensure that the requirements of section
66.1001(4), Wisconsin statutes, are met, shall proceed as follows:
   A.   Public Participation Verification: Prior to beginning work on a
comprehensive plan, the plan commission shall verify that the village board has
adopted written procedures designated to foster public participation in every
stage of preparation of the comprehensive plan. These written procedures shall
include open discussion, communication programs, and information services and
noticed public meetings. These written procedures shall further provide for
wide distribution of proposed, alternative or amended elements of a
comprehensive plan and shall provide an opportunity for written comments to be
submitted by members of the public to the village board and for the village
board to respond to such written comments.
   B.   Resolution: The plan commission, under section 66.1001(4)(b), Wisconsin
statutes, shall recommend its proposed comprehensive plan or amendment to the
village board by adopting a resolution by a majority vote of the entire plan
commission. The vote shall be recorded in the minutes of the plan commission.
The resolution shall refer to maps and other descriptive materials that relate
to one or more elements of the comprehensive plan. The resolution adopting a
comprehensive plan shall further recite that the requirements of the
comprehensive planning law have been met, under section 66.1001, Wisconsin
statutes, namely that:
      1.   The village board adopted written procedures to foster public
participation and that such procedures allowed public participation at each
stage of preparing the comprehensive plan;
      2.   The plan contains the nine (9) specified elements and meets the
requirements of those elements;
      3.   The (specified) maps and (specified) other descriptive materials
relate to the plan;
      4.   The plan has been adopted by a majority vote of the entire plan
commission, which the clerk or secretary is directed to record in the minutes;
and
      5.   The plan commission clerk or secretary is directed to send a copy of
the comprehensive plan adopted by the commission to the governmental units
specified in section 66.1001(4), Wisconsin statutes.
   C.   Transmittal: One copy of the comprehensive plan or amendment adopted by
the plan commission for recommendation to the village board shall be sent to:
      1.   Every governmental body that is located in whole or in part within
the boundaries of the village, including any school district, village sanitary
district, public inland lake protection and rehabilitation district or other
special district.
      2.   The clerk of every city, village, county and regional planning
commission that is adjacent to the village.
      3.   The Wisconsin land council.
      4.   After September 1, 2005, the department of administration.
      5.   The regional planning commission in which the village is located.
      6.   The public library that serves the area in which the village is
located. (Ord. 2007-3, 6-18-2007)
1-10-16: PLAN IMPLEMENTATION AND ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Ordinance Development: If directed by resolution or motion of the
village board, the plan commission shall prepare the following:
      1.   Zoning: A proposed village zoning ordinance, sections 61.35 and
62.23(7), Wisconsin statutes, a village construction site erosion control and
storm water management zoning ordinance under section 61.354, Wisconsin
statutes, a village exclusive agricultural zoning ordinance under subchapter V
of chapter 91, Wisconsin statutes, and any other zoning ordinance within the
village authority.
      2.   Official Map: A proposed official map ordinance under section 62.23
(6), Wisconsin statutes.
      3.   Subdivisions: A proposed village subdivision or other land division
ordinance under section 236.45, Wisconsin statutes.
      4.   Other: Any other ordinance specified by the village board.
   B.   Ordinance Amendment: The plan commission, on its own motion, or at the
direction of the village board by its resolution or motion, may prepare
proposed amendments to the village ordinances relating to comprehensive
planning and land use.
   C.   Nonregulatory Programs: The plan commission, on its own motion, or at
the direction of the village board by resolution or motion, may propose
nonregulatory programs to implement the comprehensive plan, including programs
relating to topics such as education, economic development and tourism
promotion, preservation of natural resources through the acquisition of land or
conservation easements, and capital improvement planning.
   D.   Program Administration: The plan commission shall, pursuant to village
ordinances, have the following powers:
      1.   Review Manitowoc County Zoning Conditional Use Permits: Review
proposed conditional use permits submitted for review by Manitowoc County and
make recommendations to the village board.
      2.   Subdivision Review: Proposed plats or other land divisions under
chapter 236, Wisconsin statutes, shall be referred to the plan commission for
review and recommendation to the village board.
      3.   Rezoning Review: Review proposed Manitowoc County rezoning requests.
   E.   Consistency: Any ordinance, amendment or program proposed by the plan
commission, and any plan commission approval, recommendation for approval or
other action under village ordinances or programs that implement the village
comprehensive plan under sections 62.23 and 66.1001, Wisconsin statutes, shall
be consistent with that plan as of January 1, 2010. If any such plan commission
action would not be consistent with the comprehensive plan, the plan commission
shall use this as information to consider in updating the comprehensive plan.
(Ord. 2007-3, 6-18-2007)
1-10-17: REFERRALS TO THE PLAN COMMISSION:
   A.   Required Referrals Under Section 62.23(5), Wisconsin Statutes: The
following shall be referred to the plan commission for report:
      1.   The location and architectural design of any public building.
      2.   The location of any statue or other memorial.
      3.   The location, acceptance, extension, alteration, vacation,
abandonment, change of use, sale, acquisition of land for or lease of land for
any:
         a.   Street, alley or other public way;
         b.   Park or playground;
         c.   Airport;
         d.   Area for parking vehicles; or
         e.   Other memorial or public grounds.
      4.   The location, extension, abandonment or authorization for any
publicly or privately owned public utility.
      5.   All plats under the village's jurisdiction under chapter 236,
Wisconsin statutes, including division under a village subdivision or other
land division ordinance adopted under section 236.45, Wisconsin statutes.
      6.   The location, character and extent or acquisition, leasing or sale
of lands for:
         a.   Public or semipublic housing;
         b.   Slum clearance;
         c.   Relief of congestion; or
         d.   Vacation camps for children.
      7.   The amendment or repeal of any ordinance adopted under section
62.23, Wisconsin statutes, including ordinances relating to: the village plan
commission; the village master plan or the village comprehensive plan under
section 66.1001, Wisconsin statutes; a village official map; and village zoning
under village powers.
   B.   Required Referrals Under Wisconsin Statutes Other Than Section 62.23
(5): The following shall be referred to the plan commission for report:
      1.   An application for initial licensure of a child welfare agency or
group home under section 48.68(3), Wisconsin statutes.
      2.   An application for initial licensure of a community based
residential facility under section 50.03(4), Wisconsin statutes.
      3.   Proposed designation of a street, road or public way, or any part
thereof, wholly within the jurisdiction of the village, as a pedestrian mall
under section 66.0905, Wisconsin statutes.
      4.   Matters relating to the establishment or termination of an
architectural conservancy district under section 66.1007, Wisconsin statutes.
      5.   Matters relating to the establishment of a reinvestment neighborhood
required to be referred under section 66.1107, Wisconsin statutes.
      6.   Matters relating to the establishment or termination of a business
improvement district required to be referred under section 66.1109, Wisconsin
statutes.
      7.   A proposed housing project under section 66.1211(3), Wisconsin
statutes.
      8.   Matters relating to urban redevelopment and renewal in the village
required to be referred under subchapter XIII of chapter 66, Wisconsin
statutes.
      9.   The adoption or amendment of a village subdivision or other land
division ordinance under section 236.45(4), Wisconsin statutes.
      10.   Any other matter required by Wisconsin statutes to be referred to
the plan commission.
   C.   Required Referrals Under This Chapter: In addition to referrals
required by Wisconsin statutes, the following matters shall be referred to the
plan commission for report:
      1.   Proposed regulations or amendments relating to historic
preservation.
      2.   A proposed driveway access ordinance or amendment.
      3.   A proposed village official map ordinance under section 62.23(6),
Wisconsin statutes, or any other proposed village ordinance under section
62.23, Wisconsin statutes, not specifically required by Wisconsin statutes to
be referred to the commission.
      4.   A proposed village zoning ordinance or amendment adopted under
authority separate from or supplemental to section 62.23, Wisconsin statutes,
including a village construction site erosion control and storm water
management zoning ordinance under section 61.354, Wisconsin statutes, and a
village exclusive agricultural zoning ordinance under subchapter V of chapter
91, Wisconsin statutes.
      5.   An application for a special exception permit under the village
zoning ordinance.
      6.   A proposed site plan.
      7.   A proposed extraterritorial zoning ordinance or a proposed amendment
to an existing ordinance under section 62.23(7a), Wisconsin statutes.
      8.   A proposed boundary change pursuant to an approved cooperative plan
agreement under section 66.0307, Wisconsin statutes, or a proposed boundary
agreement under section 66.0225, Wisconsin statutes, or other authority.
      9.   A proposed zoning ordinance or amendment pursuant to an agreement in
an approved cooperative plan under section 66.0307(7m), Wisconsin statutes.
      10.   Any proposed plan, element of a plan or amendment to such plan or
element developed by the regional planning commission and sent to the village
for review or adoption.
      11.   Any proposed contract, for the provision of information, or the
preparation of a comprehensive plan, and element of the plan or an
implementation measure, between the village and the regional planning
commission, under section 66.0309, Wisconsin statutes, another unit of
government, a consultant or any other person or organization.
      12.   A proposed ordinance, regulation or plan, or amendment to the
foregoing, relating to a mobile home park under section 66.0435, Wisconsin
statutes.
      13.   A proposed agreement, or proposed modification to such agreement,
to establish an airport affected area, under section 66.1009, Wisconsin
statutes.
      14.   A proposed village airport zoning ordinance under section 114.136
(2), Wisconsin statutes.
      15.   A proposal to create environmental remediation tax incremental
financing in the village under section 66.1106, Wisconsin statutes.
      16.   A proposed county agricultural preservation plan or amendment,
under subchapter IV of chapter 91, Wisconsin statutes, referred by the county
to the village or proposed village agricultural preservation plan or amendment.
      17.   Any other matter required by any village ordinance or village board
resolution or motion to be referred to the plan commission.
   D.   Discretionary Referrals: The village board, or other village officer or
body with final approval authority or referral authorization under the village
ordinances, may refer any of the following to the plan commission for report:
      1.   A proposed county development plan or comprehensive plan, proposed
element of such a plan, or proposed amendment to such plan.
      2.   A proposed county zoning ordinance or amendment.
      3.   A proposed county subdivision or other related land division
ordinance under section 236.45, Wisconsin statutes, or amendment.
      4.   An appeal or permit application under the county zoning ordinance to
the county zoning board of adjustment, county planning body or other county
body.
      5.   A proposed intergovernmental cooperation agreement, under section
66.0301, Wisconsin statutes, or other statute, affecting land use, or a
municipal revenue sharing agreement under section 66.0305, Wisconsin statutes.
      6.   A proposed plat or other land division under the county subdivision
or other land division ordinance under section 236.45, Wisconsin statutes.
      7.   A proposed county plan, under section 236.46, Wisconsin statutes, or
the proposed amendment or repeal of the ordinance adopting such plan, for a
system of village arterial thoroughfares and minor streets, and the platting of
lots surrounded by them.
      8.   Any other matter deemed advisable for referral to the plan
commission for report.
   E.   Referral Period: No final action may be taken by the village board or
any other officer or body with final authority on a matter referred to the plan
commission until the commission has made its report, or thirty (30) days, or
such longer period as stipulated by the village board, has passed since
referral. The thirty (30) day period for referrals required by Wisconsin
statutes may be shortened only if so authorized by statute. The thirty (30) day
referral period, for matters subject to required or discretionary referral
under the village ordinances, but not required to be referred under Wisconsin
statutes, may be made subject by the village board to a referral period shorter
or longer than the thirty (30) day referral period if deemed advisable. (Ord.
2007-3, 6-18-2007)
TITLE 2
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
2-1-1: Official Map
2-1-2: Street And Sidewalk Grades
2-1-3: Construction And Repair Of Streets, Sidewalks, Curb And Gutter, And
Driveways
2-1-4: Street Excavations
2-1-5: Building Materials In Streets
2-1-6: Moving Buildings
2-1-7: Littering Streets Prohibited
2-1-8: Snow And Ice Removal
2-1-9: Signs And Awnings
2-1-10: Vehicle Restrictions In Park Or Cemetery, On Public Ways
2-1-11: Parking Restrictions
2-1-12: Use Of Village Property To Conduct Business
2-1-13: Presence On Public Grounds
2-1-14: Loitering In Cemeteries
2-1-15: Trees And Shrubs
2-1-1: OFFICIAL MAP:
   A.   Purpose: These "official map" provisions are established in the village
for the purpose of servicing and promoting the public health, safety,
convenience, economy, orderliness and general welfare of the community; to
further the orderly layout and use of land; to stabilize the location or real
property boundary lines; to facilitate adequate provision for transportation,
parks, playgrounds and stormwater drainage; and to facilitate the further
subdivision of larger tracts into smaller parcels of land.
   B.   Authority: The provisions of this section are enacted under the
authority granted by section 62.23(6) of the Wisconsin statutes.
   C.   Official Map Adopted: There is hereby adopted an "official map" which
is on file in the village clerk-treasurer's office bearing the date of April
20, 1981. This map is designated as the "official map of the village of
Reedsville" along with all changes or additions adopted pursuant to this
section or to section 62.23(6), Wisconsin statutes. All notations, references
and other information shown on the official map shall be as much a part of this
section as though the matters and information thereon were fully described
herein.
   D.   Building Permit: No building or structure shall hereafter be located,
erected, moved, reconstructed, converted or structurally altered within the
village unless a building permit has been applied for and issued. Application
for a building permit shall be made to the village clerk-treasurer on forms
prescribed by her. The village clerk-treasurer may require an applicant for a
building permit to submit a plot plan which must show accurately the location
of any proposed building or structure with reference to any street, highway,
parkway, school site or park as shown on the official map.
No permit shall hereafter be issued for any building in the bed of an existing
or proposed street, highway, parkway, school site or park shown on the official
map. No permit shall be issued unless a street, highway or parkway provides
access to the proposed structure.
   E.   Administration And Enforcement:
      1.   Administration: It shall be the duty of the village board, through
its agent, the village clerk-treasurer, to administer the provisions of this
section in accordance with the requirements, procedures and provisions of
section 62.23(6), Wisconsin statutes.
      2.   Appeals: The village board shall have the power to review any
administrative decision of the village clerk-treasurer under this section and
to grant relief from the requirements of this section under the provisions of
sections 62.23(6)(d), (e), (f) and (g) of the Wisconsin statutes.
      3.   Changes And Additions: The village board may change or add to the
official map; provided however, that no such changes or additions shall become
effective until a public hearing and all procedures contained in sections 61.35
and 62.23(6)(B), Wisconsin statutes, are adhered to. Changes and/or additions
made by duly approved subdivision plats of certified surveys shall not require
a public hearing if the change or additions do not affect any land outside the
area being platted.
   F.   Effect Of Map: The placing of any street, highway, parkway, park or
school site line or lines upon the official map shall not in and of itself
constitute or be deemed to constitute, the opening or establishment of any land
for such purposes.
   G.   Recording: The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall file a certificate with
the Register of Deeds of Manitowoc County showing that the Village has
established, changed or added to the official map immediately after adoption by
the Village Board.
   H.   Penalty: Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not more than two hundred
dollars ($200.00) and not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and the costs of
prosecution for each violation or in default of payment of such forfeiture and
costs shall be imprisoned in the County Jail until payment thereof, but not
exceeding thirty (30) days.
No damages shall be allowed for the taking by any governmental agency for
street, highway and parkway purposes, any building or structure erected in
violation of this section. (Ord., 4-20-1981)
2-1-2: STREET AND SIDEWALK GRADES:
   A.   Establishment: The grade of all streets, alleys and sidewalks shall be
established and described by the Village Board and shall be recorded by the
Village Clerk-Treasurer in his office. No street, alley or sidewalk shall be
worked until the grade is established.
   B.   Altering Grade Prohibited: No person shall alter the grade of any
street, alley, sidewalk or public ground or any part thereof unless authorized
or instructed to do so by the Village Board. (Ord., 5-17-1999)
2-1-3: CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR OF STREETS, SIDEWALKS, CURB AND GUTTER, AND
DRIVEWAYS:
   A.   When Sidewalks Are To Be Constructed:
      1.   Sidewalk Placement: The Village Board may, from time to time by
resolution, determine where sidewalks shall be constructed and order the same
be laid according to the specifications and grade provided in this chapter.
Criteria to be considered for installation include: location of sidewalk,
expected amount of vehicle and pedestrian traffic, safety, and budget.
      2.   New Developments: Owners of lots in newly developed areas shall have
no obligation to construct sidewalks until one hundred percent (100%) of the
number of lots in such block have been built upon.
      3.   Curb And Gutter: When a street is to be constructed or reconstructed
with new curb and gutter, sidewalks shall be constructed along each side of the
street in said blocks.
      4.   Existing Sidewalks: Sidewalks shall be reconstructed in front of any
parcel, at no cost to property owner, where fifty percent (50%) or more of
existing sidewalks is built to acceptable grade, and in serviceable condition.
      5.   Fifty Percent Or More Of Block Having Sidewalks: Sidewalks shall be
constructed along the side of the street in any Village block where fifty
percent (50%) or more of the property in the block have sidewalks.
      6.   Sidewalk Removal Prohibited: No person shall remove any sidewalk
without the permission of the Village Board.
      7.   Installation Of Access Ramps: When work is done on public sidewalks
within the street right-of-way, handicapped access ramps shall be installed
where required.
      8.   Tree Removal And Maintenance: Trees affecting sidewalk, or curb and
gutters, intersections, streets and street crosswalks shall be removed or
pruned. Trees on private land shall be removed by the property owner at the
property owner’s cost, after notification.
   B.   When Sidewalks Are To Be Replaced/Repaired:
      1.   Board Decisions: The Village Board may at any time, by resolution,
order property owners to repair or replace any sidewalk which is unsafe,
defective or insufficient to be removed and replaced with a sidewalk in
accordance with the standard specifications provided in this chapter.
      2.   Replacement Criteria: Criteria is based on evidence of deterioration
and potential hazards due to concrete sections being broken, tilted, raised,
chipped or displaced through overall use, grade change, and freeze and thaw
action.
      3.   Seventy Five Percent Requirement: If seventy five percent (75%) of
the sidewalk in front of any parcel is required to be replaced or repaired, the
entire sidewalk in front of parcel shall be replaced.
      4.   Scheduling: Permanent repairs or replacements may be scheduled with
current construction projects.
      5.   Construction Specifications:
         a.   All sidewalks, curbs, gutters, alley approaches and drive
approaches shall be Grade A concrete; air-entrained within the limits of four
percent (4%) to seven percent (7%) by unit volume, using a minimum of six (6)
bags of cement per yard and developing a twenty eight (28) day compression
strength of three thousand five hundred (3,500) pounds per square inch. Fine
aggregates shall meet the requirements of the State standard specifications,
subsections 501.3.6.3.1 through 501.3.6.3.6. Coarse aggregates shall meet the
requirements of the State standard specifications, subsections 501.3.6.4.1
through 501.3.6.4.5, except the maximum amount of chert allowed under
subsection 501.3.6.4.3 is changed from five percent (5%) to chert-free
aggregate. Maximum stone size is to be three-fourths inch (3/4").
         b.   Driveways, driveway approaches and sidewalks crossing the
driveway shall be reinforced with 6 x 6 10-10 WWF and shall be constructed to
the following minimum thickness: residential - six inches (6") thick;
commercial - seven inches (7") thick. Standard sidewalks will be four inches
(4") thick, non-reinforced concrete, five feet (5') in width.
         c.   A six inch (6") PVC protective sleeve shall be placed around any
water curb stop that remains within the proposed sidewalks.
         d.   A four inch (4") PVC protective sleeve shall be placed around any
sump pump discharge line that remains within the proposed sidewalks.
         e.   The Reedsville Utility Department is to be contacted, when the
curb box is to be located under the driveway, sidewalk or driveway approach.
         f.   Sidewalks, steps and driveways shall be constructed on a minimum
of six inch (6") thick compacted sand base. The sand base shall be granular
material having at least ninety percent (90%) passing the no. four (#4) sieve.
         g.   Expansion joint of one-half inch (1/2") shall be required where
sidewalks or driveways intersect the back of curbs.
         h.   Construction of sidewalk of driveway grade shall be one-fourth
inch (1/4") higher than the back of curb elevation where they meet.
         i.   All concrete sidewalks, curbs, gutters, alley approaches, and
driveway approaches shall be cured by the impervious coating method and shall
receive a brush finish.
      6.   Setbacks: All sidewalks hereafter built or rebuilt within the
Village shall be laid parallel to and according to the specifications provided
in this chapter.
      7.   Location: Sidewalks, curbs, and gutters shall be placed at locations
as directed by the Village Board and under supervision of the Village Engineer.
      8.   Sidewalk And Landscaping: The areas in the right-of-way shall be
maintained by the adjacent property owner in a neat, clean, orderly, and
healthful condition. Maintenance shall include pruning of trees, shrubs, mowing
of lawn, weeding, and removal of litter, fertilizing, and watering of all
plantings.
      9.   Default Of Property Owner: When any such property owner shall
neglect for a period of thirty (30) days after such service to lay, remove,
replace or repair any such sidewalks, the Village may cause such work to be
done at the expense of such property owner.
      10.   Cost: It is determined that the cost to the property shall be one-
third (1/3) of the cost of the curb and gutter, which shall be borne by the
Village. The cost to the property shall be two- thirds (2/3) of the cost of
curb and gutter, which shall be borne by property owner. Cost to each property
shall be one hundred percent (100%) of the cost of the sidewalk, which shall be
borne by the property owner.
      11.   Notice: A copy of the resolution directing such laying, removal,
replacement, or repair shall be served upon the property owner of each parcel
of land in front of which such work is ordered. Each property owner shall be
notified at least thirty (30) days before construction begins. A public hearing
shall be held not less than ten (10) days and not more than forty (40) days
after notice, pursuant of section 66.60(8), Wisconsin State Statutes.
      12.   Appeal To Board: Any property owner who is served with a notice and
believes himself aggrieved thereby, may petition the Village Board for a
variance requiring that a sidewalk not be constructed or repaired providing
such request be filed with the Village Clerk within twenty (20) days of receipt
of such notice. Such petition shall be accepted or rejected within twenty one
(21) days after it has been filed with the Village Clerk. If petition request
is accepted, the Village Board reserves the right to require construction of a
sidewalk at a future time.
      13.   Service Laterals Installed Before Paving: Whenever the Village
Board shall determine to lay a permanent pavement, or pave macadamize, repair,
or remacadamize any street or portion thereof in which water or sewer mains
have been laid, the Village Board shall proceed to lay the necessary water
service pipes and sewer laterals before the improvement of such street. The
expense of laying such water service pipes and sewer laterals from main to
curb, and of connecting such water pipes and sewer laterals with the street
mains shall be charged to the Village until used by the property owner if said
owner makes use of the property.
      14.   Payment Of Charges: All billed charges for the payment of sidewalk,
driveway approaches, curb, and gutter construction or water and sewer main
extension are due ninety (90) days from the date of billing, interest free.
After that time, interest of one and one-half percent (11/2%) per month will be
charged. In the event the amount is unpaid at the time of compiling the tax
roll, said charges will be entered into the current tax roll as a lien against
the property of the respective property owners.
   C.   Driveways:
      1.   Width: The minimum width of a driveway approach shall be twelve feet
(12') measured at right angles to the centerline of the driveway.
      2.   Access: Access shall not be more than one driveway approach for each
sixty five feet (65') of frontage on any street.
      3.   Approaches: Any two (2) approaches shall be at least twenty feet
(20') apart. Wherever possible, adjacent sites should share driveway
approaches.
      4.   Street Intersections: Driveway shall not be closer than seventy five
feet (75') from the right-of-way of the adjacent street at an intersection. At
street intersections, a driveway shall not provide direct ingress or egress to
or from the street intersection area and shall not occupy areas of the street
deemed necessary for effective traffic control or for signs or signals.
      5.   Aprons: No driveway aprons shall extend out into the street farther
than the face of the curb and under no circumstances shall such driveway’s
apron extend into the gutter area.
      6.   Construction: All driveway entrances and approaches shall be so
constructed that they shall not interfere with the drainage of the streets,
sidewalks or with any existing structures of the right-of-way.
      7.   Workmanship And Materials: All driveway entrances and approaches
which are constructed across sidewalks shall be paved in accordance with the
requirements for sidewalk construction in so far as such requirements are
applicable, including thickness requirements. Driveway surfaces shall connect
with the street pavement and sidewalk in a neat and workmanlike manner. (Ord.
2013-6, 9-19-2013; amd. Ord. 2018-2, 3-8-2018; Ord. 2023-03, 6-8-2023)
2-1-4: STREET EXCAVATIONS:
   A.   Permit Required, Fee: No person shall make or cause to be made any
excavation or opening in any street, alley, highway, sidewalk or other public
way within the Village without first obtaining a permit therefor from the
Village Clerk- Treasurer. The fee for such permit shall be one hundred dollars
($100.00).
   B.   Safety Requirements: Any person holding a permit under this section
shall guard any hole, trench or ditch dug or excavation made by erecting a
sufficient fence, railing, lights or otherwise, for the period of time the same
shall be or continue to be unsafe or dangerous to the public.
   C.   Restoration:
      1.   Required: Street excavations shall not be larger and shall not be
left open longer than the necessity of the work demands. The backfilling below
the top surface of the street shall be done with sand and gravel, firmly tamped
in the presence of or under the supervision of the Director of Public Works
Department. All earth, stone or other material shall be hauled away by the
person authorized to make the excavation, and the pavement or top surface of
the street shall be replaced as it was prior to the excavation.
      2.   Village May Restore: If the person holding a permit hereunder shall
neglect to repair or restore to its former condition any street, alley or
sidewalk excavated, altered or taken up, within the time and in the manner
directed by the Director of Public Works Department, said Director shall cause
the same to be done at the expense of such person. The expense thereof, when
chargeable to a lot owner, shall be certified to the village clerk-treasurer by
the said Director and if not paid shall be carried into the tax roll as a
special tax against the lot. (1968 Code § 6.05; amd. 1981 Code; Ord. 2023-03,
6-8-2023; Ord. 2023-04, 8-10-2023)
2-1-5: BUILDING MATERIALS IN STREETS:
   A.   Permit Required, Fee: No person shall place any building materials in
or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public grounds within the Village
without a written permit from the Reedsville Public Works Department. The fee
for such permit shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) and is payable at
the Clerk-Treasurer Office.
   B.   Indemnity Agreement: No person shall be granted a permit unless the
applicant shall file with the village clerk-treasurer an agreement that he will
hold the village free from any and all damages, liability, costs or expenses
that may result in consequence of the granting of said permit for the occupancy
of said street, alley, sidewalk or public grounds; that he shall erect and
maintain such barriers and lights as will effectually prevent the occurrence of
accidents in consequence of such occupancy or use; that he will obey all
ordinances of the village and all rules which may be made in that behalf; and
at the expiration of said permit he shall leave the street, alley, sidewalk or
public grounds in as good and clean a condition as same was prior to the
issuance of said permit.
   C.   Obstruction Limited: Such permit shall not authorize the obstruction of
more than one-third (1/3) of the roadway proper, or one-third (1/3) of the
sidewalk proper, nor for a longer period than one month, nor shall such
material be so placed as to obstruct the flow of water in the gutters; and
during the period of time such material shall remain upon such public street,
alley, sidewalk or public way, public travel shall be protected by proper
lights during the nighttime. (1968 Code § 6.06; amd. Ord. 2023-03, 6-8-2023)
2-1-6: MOVING BUILDINGS:
See section
7-1-9 of this code. (Ord. 4-00, 8-22-2000)
2-1-7: LITTERING STREETS PROHIBITED:
   A.   Duty Of Abutting Property Owner: No person shall place, throw, deposit,
dump, scatter, leave or permit to remain any rubbish, paper, stone, wire,
manure, snow, ice, dirt, grass, leaves, construction or yard waste, dirt or
filthy substance upon the street, gutter, sidewalk, alley or public ground in
the village. Each owner or occupant of any building, dwelling house, store,
shop, tenement or structure of any kind and description fronting or abutting on
any street, sidewalk, gutter, alley or public ground shall clean the same by
sweeping, scraping or shoveling such rubbish, dirt or filth from the sidewalk
by or before twelve o'clock (12:00) noon of each day, and shall cooperate with
the street commissioner in keeping the streets, alleys, gutters and public
grounds in a clean, tidy and orderly manner. (Ord. 2016-9, 12-8-2016)
   B.   Littering From Vehicles: No person shall operate a vehicle on any
street or alley so as to let fall or scatter upon the roadway any material with
which the vehicle may be loaded. No person shall place or drop glass, stone,
metal, tacks or like substances on any street or alley. (1968 Code § 6.07)
2-1-8: SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL:
The owner or occupant of any lot abutting on a public sidewalk shall clear the
sidewalk of snow within twenty four (24) hours after a snowfall and keep the
same free of ice. If such snow or ice is not removed as required herein, the
street commissioner shall cause the same to be done and the cost thereof
assessed against the abutting property pursuant to section 66.60(16), Wisconsin
statutes. (1968 Code § 6.08)
2-1-9: SIGNS AND AWNINGS:
   A.   Awnings: All awnings heretofore erected, or to be erected in place of
those now existing and attached to buildings, shall be at least seven and one-
half feet (71/2') at the lowest part thereof above the top of the sidewalk and
shall be supported without posts, but by iron brackets or by an iron framework
attached firmly to the building so as to leave the sidewalk wholly unobstructed
and all awnings heretofore erected or constructed in a different manner and in
any way obstructive to the public use of travel on the sidewalks, shall be
removed within ten (10) days after notice in writing given by the authority of
the village board and personally served on the owner or occupant of the
building to which such awning is attached.
   B.   Signs: No person shall place or hang any sign or cause the same to be
hung over any sidewalk without the written permit of the village board. No
permit shall be granted for the placing or hanging of any sign where the
distance from the bottom of the sign to the sidewalk shall be less than nine
feet (9').
No permit shall be granted for the placing or hanging of any sign which
protrudes fifteen inches (15") or less from the building to which it is
fastened, where the distance from the bottom of the sign to the sidewalk shall
be less than nine feet (9').
   C.   Permit Required: No porch, gallery, store, platform, entrance to
basement, fire escapes, downspout, railing or grating shall be allowed to
extend into, upon or over any sidewalk without the written permit of the
village board. (1981 Code)
   D.   Regulating Outdoor Advertising: No person shall erect or display any
outdoor advertising or sign, except in conformance with the provisions of this
subsection.
      1.   Definitions:
          ADVERTISING: Shall include, but not be limited by this enumeration,
any outdoor sign, billboard, poster panel, or structure of any kind, including
the signs of buildings, upon which is displayed, or painted, or otherwise
depicted in any way, information, announcements, notices or other art which
calls, or is intended hereby to give the word "advertisement" its broadest
general meaning.
         SIGN: Any outdoor advertising sign, display, device, notice, figure,
painting, drawing, message, placard, poster and billboard, or other structure
on which an advertisement is placed which is designed, intended or used to
advertise or inform, so long as any part of the advertising or informative
contents are visible from any place on any village street.
      2.   Zoning Use Classifications: When used herein, the terms "residence
districts", "business districts" and "industrial districts" shall mean the
designations given to such terms in the zoning regulations of the village, that
are contained in the village zoning ordinance 1 .
      3.   Permits Required: No sign shall be placed within the village until
the owner of the property upon which it is to be erected shall have first
obtained a village permit therefor from the village clerk, upon payment of a
fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
      4.   Sign Prohibited: No sign shall be erected or maintained within any
residence districts, except for the following:
         a.   Directional or other official signs, including, but not limited
to, signs pertaining to natural wonders, scenic and historical attractions, not
exceeding ten feet (10') in square foot area.
         b.   On premises signs advertising home activities conducted on the
property on which they are located, so long as they do not exceed one square
foot.
         c.   Signs advertising the sale or lease of the property upon which
they are located.
         d.   The signs permitted in subsections D4a, D4b and D4c of this
section shall be constructed in such fashion and maintained in such manner as
to be aesthetically pleasing and in keeping with the general construction
within the area in which they are placed. The interpretation and the
appropriateness of such signs shall be left to the Director of the Public
Works, and any person aggrieved by the determinations of such official may
appeal such determination direction to the village board, and the findings of
the village board shall be final. The size, coloring and lighting of such signs
shall be within the regulations.
      5.   Signs Permitted: Any sign or advertisement may be erected within the
business and industrial districts of the village, but only upon petition to the
village board for a permit to erect such sign or advertisement. The
determination of the village board upon such petition shall be based upon the
following criteria:
         a.   Size Of Signs:
            Maximum area shall not exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200)
square feet.
            Maximum area shall not exceed thirty feet (30').
            Maximum length shall not exceed fifty feet (50').
            The size limitations shall apply to each side of a sign structure.
         b.   Spacing Of Signs:
            (1)   No more than two (2) signs shall be permitted on any lot nor
closer than one hundred feet (100') apart, whichever is less.
            (2)   Signs larger than ten (10) square feet shall not be
constructed one above the other.
         c.   Illumination Of Signs:
            (1)   All signs shall be effectively shielded so as to prevent rays
of light from being directed at any portion of the village streets, and which
are of such intensity of brilliance as to cause glare or otherwise impair the
vision of the driver of any motor vehicle upon the village streets.
            (2)   No signs shall be so illuminated so as to interfere with the
effectiveness or obscure any official traffic sign, device or signal.
            (3)   No flashing, intermittent or moving light or lights shall be
permitted unless the same are of the nature which gives public service
information, time, date, temperature, weather or similar information.
         d.   Setbacks: All signs shall conform with the setback requirements
of the zoning ordinance 2  of the village. No sign shall be allowed on or to
overhang highway right of way.
         e.   Official Sign Resemblance: No sign shall be erected or maintained
which imitates or resembles an official traffic sign, signal or device.
         f.   Architectural Conformity: The sign shall be so constructed so as
to be in keeping with the architectural design of the other structures within
the area in which it is to be placed.
      6.   Federal, State And County Highways: Signs on federal, state and
county highways within the village shall conform with federal, state and county
laws affecting the same as well as local ordinances.
      7.   Natural Objects As Signs: No sign shall be erected or maintained
upon trees, or painted or drawn upon other natural features within the village.
      8.   Sign Maintenance: Signs shall not be erected nor maintained which
are structurally unsafe or in substantial disrepair.
      9.   Nuisances: Any sign or advertising erected without the permit herein
required or which do not conform to this subsection are declared to be a
nuisance.
      10.   Exemptions: Exempted from this subsection are all "on premises"
signs. Such are defined to be those located on the premises of the advertised
activity and within fifty feet (50') of such activity.
      11.   Nonconforming Signs: Any sign not now in conformance with the
herein regulations shall be permitted to be maintained for a period of two (2)
years (until January 1992), within which time said sign shall be brought within
compliance and failing to do so upon the termination of said two (2) year
period, the village board shall exercise its police powers to obtain such
conformity or removal of such nonconforming sign.
      12.   Other Advertising Material: No signs, posters or other advertising
material shall be placed in or on any village owned property without permission
from the department of public works director. (Ord., 11-20-1989; amd. Ord.
2016-9, 12-8-2016; Ord. 2023-03, 6-8-2023; Ord. 2023-04, 8-10-2023)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 8 of this code.
2 1. See title 8 of this code.
2-1-10: VEHICLE RESTRICTIONS IN PARK OR CEMETERY, ON PUBLIC WAYS:
   A.   Park And Cemetery Restrictions:
      1.   No person may operate an automobile, motorbike, motor truck, motor
delivery wagon, bus, motorcycle, minibus, minibike, snowmobile or other similar
motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer used in connection therewith in any
village park or cemetery unless an area in such park or cemetery has been
specifically designated by the village board for usage of a vehicle. The
village board may limit the type of vehicle which may be operated in any park
or cemetery area.
      2.   This subsection shall not apply to:
         a.   Any vehicle owned by the state, the United States or a local unit
of government or any vehicle operated by employees, agents or officers of the
state, the United States or of a local unit of government while in the
performance of their official duties.
         b.   Any vehicle, when furnishing services or supplies.
         c.   Any vehicle traveling on the designated vehicular roads in the
parks or cemeteries of the village.
      3.   Any person violating subsection A1 of this section shall forfeit not
more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. (Ord., 6-19-1978)
   B.   Snowmobile Requirements: Except as otherwise specifically provided in
this subsection, the statutory provisions describing and defining regulations
with respect to snowmobiles in the following enumerated sections of the
Wisconsin statutes, are hereby adopted by reference and made part of this
subsection as if fully set forth herein. Acts required to be performed or
prohibited by such statutes are required or prohibited by this subsection. Any
future amendments, revisions or modifications of the statutes incorporated
herein by reference are intended to be made part of this code. For purposes of
this subsection, "village" is the village of Reedsville, Manitowoc County,
Wisconsin.
350.01   Definitions.
350.02   Operation of snowmobiles on or in the vicinity of highways.
350.03   Right of way.
350.04   Snowmobile races, derbies and routes.
350.045  Public utility exemption.
350.047  Local ordinance to be filed.
350.05   Operation by youthful operators restricted.
350.055  Safety certification program established.
350.07   Driving animals.
350.08   Owner permitting operation.
350.09   Headlamps, taillamps and brakes, etc.
350.10   Miscellaneous provisions for snowmobile operation.
350.101  Intoxicated snowmobiling.
350.102  Preliminary breath screening test.
350.1025 Application of intoxicated snowmobile law.
350.103  Implied consent.
350.104  Chemical tests.
350.106  Report arrest to department.
350.107  Officer's action after arrest for operating a snowmobile while under
         influence of intoxicant.
350.108  Public education program.
350.11   Penalties.
350.115  Snowmobile registration restitution surcharge.
350.12   Registration of snowmobiles; trail use stickers.
350.125  Completion of application for registration by snowmobile dealers.
350.13   Uniform trail signs and standards.
350.135  Interferences with uniform trail signs and standards prohibited.
350.137  Uniform snowmobile rail crossing standards.
350.138  Snowmobile rail crossings requiring permits.
350.139  Established snowmobile rail crossings.
350.1395 Snowmobile rail crossings; closing and removal; review of rail
         authorities; insurance rules.
350.14   Duties of snowmobile recreational council.
350.145  Recommendations of the snowmobile recreational council.
350.15   Accidents and accident reports.
350.155  Coroners and medical examiners to report; require blood specimen.
350.17   Enforcement.
350.18   Local ordinances.
350.19   Liability of landowners.
350.99   Parties to a violation.
 
      1.   Speed And Equipment:
         a.   Speed: Except as provided by Wisconsin statutes incorporated
herein by reference, no person shall operate a snowmobile within the village of
Reedsville or on any trail or street or other public way designated in this
subsection at a speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour.
         b.   Restriction On Equipment: No snowmobile shall be allowed to
operate within the village snowmobile route equipped with an expansion chamber
or any muffler other than a properly functioning muffler of the type and size
provided by the manufacturer, unless it conforms to the noise level regulated
by section 350.095, Wisconsin statutes.
         c.   Headlamp: Every snowmobile operating within the village shall
display a lighted headlamp and taillamp at all times. Said lamps shall conform
to the requirements of section 350.09, Wisconsin statutes.
      2.   Unattended Vehicles: No person shall leave or allow a snowmobile
owned or operated by such person to remain unattended on any public highway or
public property within the village while the motor is running or with the
starting key left in the ignition.
      3.   Operation On Sidewalks Prohibited: No person shall operate a
snowmobile upon any sidewalk, pedestrianway or upon the area between the
sidewalk and the curb line of any street in the village, except as specifically
authorized for the purpose of legally crossing the street, to obtain immediate
access to an authorized area of operation.
      4.   Restrictions On Operators Of Snowmobiles: Operation by youthful
operators shall be pursuant to chapter 350.05, Wisconsin statutes.
      5.   Snowmobile Routes And Trails Designated:
         a.   Operation Prohibited In Certain Areas:
            (1)   No person may operate a snowmobile for any reason on the
following streets:
               (A)   That portion of State Highway 10 within the village
limits.
               (B)   That portion of County Road W within the village limits.
               (C)   Any street within the village limits where operation is
prohibited by a posted sign.
            (2)   No person may operate a snowmobile in the following areas
within the village, unless authorization is obtained from the village board:
               (A)   Any village parks.
               (B)   Any village cemeteries.
               (C)   Any property owned or leased by the village.
         b.   Snowmobile Routes Are Designated As Follows:
            (1)   Trail Markers: The street superintendent of the village of
Reedsville is directed and authorized to procure, erect and maintain
appropriate snowmobile route, trail and limit signs and markers as approved by
the state department of natural resources and department of transportation
under section 350.13, Wisconsin statutes.
            (2)   Trail Status: The local snowmobile club shall have the power
to declare the stated snowmobile routes and trails either open or closed.
            (3)   Markers To Be Obeyed: No person shall fail to obey any route
or trail sign, marker or limit erected in accordance with this subsection or
traffic sign or signal under authority of Wisconsin statutes.
      6.   Snowmobile Travel Within The Village Limits:
         a.   Statutory Authority: Section 350.18, Wisconsin statutes, allows
the village to enact local regulations allowing snowmobilers to travel for
purposes of residential access and access from a place of lodging.
         b.   Travel By Shortest Route: Operation of snowmobiles within the
village limits shall be strictly limited to traveling along the extreme right
side of village streets, to gain access to and from the nearest access to a
snowmobile route or trail. The authority to enact local snowmobile residential
access regulations is found in the Wisconsin statutes. By authority of section
350.18, Wisconsin statutes the village of Reedsville does hereby provide for
snowmobile access into residential areas, and to lodging establishments within
the village limits according to the guidelines set herein.
         c.   Operation Authorized: This subsection allows the operation of a
snowmobile on a roadway and/or shoulder of a street or highway by persons
residing in or staying at a residence or lodging establishment within the
limits of the village of Reedsville, Manitowoc County, Wisconsin, for the sole
purpose of traveling into or from the village by the shortest distance that is
necessary to reach the snowmobile trail or route that is closest to that
residence or business establishment.
         d.   Conditions: This subsection designates the roadways and/or
shoulders of specific streets and highways for snowmobile travel by persons
residing in the village, for access to residences or lodging within the limits
of the village of Reedsville, Manitowoc County, Wisconsin, to travel for the
shortest distance that is necessary to reach the snowmobile trail or route that
is closest to that residence or lodging establishment subject to the following
conditions:
            (1)   Roadway Travel: Snowmobiles shall be operated on the extreme
right side of the roadway and travel with the flow of traffic.
            (2)   Lamps: Snowmobiles shall be operated in single file with
headlamps and taillamps in operation at all times, day or night.
            (3)   Yield Right Of Way: Snowmobile operators shall yield the
right of way to all other vehicular traffic and pedestrians.
            (4)   Penalty: Snowmobiles violating any of the above conditions
will be subject to the penalties outlined in Wisconsin statutes and village
ordinance.
            (5)   Speed: A snowmobile operated on any portion of the roadway or
shoulder of a highway pursuant to this subsection shall observe the fifteen
(15) mile per hour speed limit unless a lower speed is required by Wisconsin
statutes.
      7.   Penalty: The penalties under 350.11, Wisconsin statutes are adopted
and incorporated herein by reference.
      8.   Enforcement:
         a.   Enforced By: This subsection shall be enforced by any law
enforcement officer of the village of Reedsville, Manitowoc County, Wisconsin,
or such other local, county or state law enforcement officers as authorized by
the village board or by Wisconsin statutes.
         b.   Uniform Traffic Citation: The uniform traffic citation
promulgated under the Wisconsin state statutes, shall be used for violations of
this subsection relating to highway use except as herein provided.
         c.   Parking Violations: The special standardized village parking
ticket, if any, shall be used for enforcement of violations of rules of the
road relating to parking of vehicles.
         d.   Other Violations: All violations of this subsection not described
in subsection B8b or B8c of this section shall be enforced in accordance with
Wisconsin statutes. Stipulations of guilt or no contest may be made as provided
in Wisconsin statutes in substantially the form provided in the uniform traffic
citation within five (5) days of the date of the citation for such violation.
         e.   Forfeited Penalties And Deposits: Except as otherwise provided in
Wisconsin statutes and the deposit schedule adopted by the state board of
circuit court judges hereunder, required penalties and deposits not including
costs or fees for violation of this subsection shall be as established by the
schedule adopted by the village of Reedsville village board. (Ord. 2010-1, 3-1-
2010)
2-1-11: PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
Semitractors and/or trailers and all buses are prohibited from parking on
village streets from six o'clock (6:00) P.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of any
day. This restriction shall remain in effect for the entire year.
Parking shall be permitted twenty four (24) hours a day at approved locations
and times. All winter parking restrictions will apply. (Ord. 2011-5, 11-7-2011)
2-1-12: USE OF VILLAGE PROPERTY TO CONDUCT BUSINESS:
No person shall use any village facilities or any village property for the
purpose of conducting a business of any type without express permission by the
village board or its designee. It is the intent of this section to make all
facilities of the village available to all persons on an equal basis unless the
board or its authorized designee has determined otherwise.
No person shall, on any village property including the village street or
sidewalk, establish a "stand" or sell merchandise from a motor vehicle, cart,
trailer or other similar vehicle without first obtaining authorization from the
village board or an authorized designee.
Any person violating provisions of this section shall be required to forfeit
not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. Each sale and
each date that the activity occurs shall each be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord., 8-16-1982)
2-1-13: PRESENCE ON PUBLIC GROUNDS:
No person shall be present in or about any park, parkway or other public ground
in the village between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. in the evening
and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. the next morning unless that person has obtained
permission from the village board or its designee. This section does not apply
to such times when a special function or activity (with permission of the
village board) takes place in said areas, at which time no person shall be
present between the hours of eleven thirty o'clock (11:30) P.M. and six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. the next morning unless that person has obtained permission from
the village board or its designee. Any person violating this section shall be
required to forfeit not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord., 8-16-
1982)
2-1-14: LOITERING IN CEMETERIES:
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to loiter or to be found in any
cemetery in the village between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and five
o'clock (5:00) A.M. Any person found loitering in any cemetery in the village
between the hours described herein shall be fined not less than ten dollars
($10.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and in default thereof
shall be imprisoned in the county jail for not less than ten (10) days. (Ord.,
8-16-1982)
2-1-15: TREES AND SHRUBS:
   A.   Purpose: This section establishes policies, regulations and standards
necessary to ensure that the village and its residents will continue to benefit
from healthy, well managed trees or shrubs.
   B.   Definitions:
    PERSON: An individual, corporation, partnership, limited liability company,
or other entity.
   PUBLIC: Land owned, controlled or leased by the village of Reedsville,
including, but not limited to, rights of way, terraces and park lands.
   SHRUB: Any woody vegetation or woody plant having multiple stems and bearing
foliage from the ground up.
   TERRACES: The area between the sidewalk and street or where there is no
sidewalk, the area between the right of way line and street.
   TREE: Any woody plant, normally having one stem or trunk bearing its foliage
or crown well above ground level.
   C.   Pruning: Trees or shrubs shall be properly pruned for the purpose of
preventing the following potentially hazardous situations:
Obstruction of traffic signs;
Obstruction of a clear view of street and alley intersections;
Obstruction of the proper lighting of public streets;
Obstruction of public walks or streets; and
Obstruction of water meters.
Any owner of a tree or shrub growing on private property overhanging any
street, highway or public sidewalk within the village shall trim the branches
or plants considered a menace, nuisance or hazard to the safety of the public
in the use or operation of motor vehicles or pedestrians in the access of
public sidewalks.
   D.   Clearance:
      1.   The minimum vertical clearance of trees shall be fourteen feet (14')
between the surface of a street and the lowest branch.
      2.   Branches shall have a minimum of eight feet (8') between surface of
sidewalk or pedestrianway and the lowest branch.
   E.   Removal Of Public Trees Or Shrubs: The village shall coordinate
treatment or removal of any public tree or shrub which is hazardous, diseased
or insect ridden as to be deemed a nuisance to public safety or constitutes a
hazard to other trees or shrubs.
   F.   Planting: Persons planting a tree or shrub shall follow the following
procedures:
No tree or shrub shall be planted in a terrace.
No tree or shrub shall be planted within three feet (3') of any property lines.
No tree or shrub shall be planted closer than fifteen feet (15') from the
adjacent property's driveway approach.
No tree or shrub shall be planted within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
No tree or shrub shall be planted within fifteen feet (15') of a utility pole.
No tree or shrub shall be planted within five feet (5') of underground
utilities, including water, sewer, electrical, cable or telephone.
No person may install new or replace trees or shrubs on any public right of way
or public property without obtaining written permission from the village. The
village has the authority to refuse the granting of such permission, when such
planting is likely to create a public danger or nuisance or be detrimental to
the growth of adjacent trees or shrubs. Any violation of this section will
result in the removal of all unauthorized plantings at the violator's expense.
   G.   Notice: The village shall serve or cause to be served a notice upon any
owner of any private property upon which trees or shrubs are permitted to grow
in violation of the provisions of this section and demand abatement of the
nuisance within ten (10) days of the service of such notice. (Ord. 2004-2, 8-2-
2004)
CHAPTER 2
WATER AND SEWER SERVICE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
2-2-1: Compulsory Connection To Sewer And Water Systems
2-2-2: Sewer Service Regulations
2-2-2-1: Definitions
2-2-2-2: Use Of Public Sewers
2-2-2-3: Control Of Industrial Wastes Directed To Public Sewers
2-2-2-4: Sewer Service Charges
2-2-2-5: Sewer Construction And Connections
2-2-2-6: Violations And Penalties
2-2-2-7: Appeals
2-2-2-8: Audit, Notification, And Records
2-2-2-9: Private Sewer Laterals
2-2-3: Water Service Regulations
2-2-3-1: Water Rates And Charges
2-2-3-2: Public Water Systems, Contamination Prevention
2-2-3-3: Thawing Frozen Laterals, Permission Required
2-2-3-4: Sump Pump Installation
2-2-3-5: Water Softener Requirements
2-2-4: Right Of Entry, Safety, And Identification
2-2-5: Validity
2-2-6: Effective Date
2-2-1: COMPULSORY CONNECTION TO SEWER AND WATER SYSTEMS:
   A.   To assure preservation of public health, comfort and safety, it shall
be the duty of the owner or the agent of the owner of any building used for
human habitation and located adjacent to a sewer or water main, or in a block
through which one or both of the water and sewer systems extend to connect
therewith after notice as provided herein.
   B.   When a sewer or water main becomes available to any building used for
habitation, the Village Board shall notify the owner or his agent, in writing,
to connect herewith and to install a water closet and such other facilities as
may be reasonably necessary to protect the public health, welfare and safety.
The manner of connecting shall be prescribed by the Village Board.
   C.   The notice required by this section shall be given in the manner
prescribed by section 801.11(1), Wisconsin Statutes, or by registered mail
addressed to the last known address of the owner or his agent.
   D.   If the owner or his agent fails to comply after ten (10) days' notice
as herein provided, the notifying officer may cause connection and
installations to be made and the expense thereof assessed as a Special
Assessment Tax against the property.
   E.   The owner, or his agent may, within thirty (30) days after the
completion of the work, file a written option with the Village Clerk stating
that he cannot pay the cost of connection in one sum and electing that such sum
be levied in three (3) equal annual installments, with interest on the unpaid
balance at one percent (1%) per month. (Ord., 3-18-1996, eff. 4-1-1996)
2-2-2: SEWER SERVICE REGULATIONS:
2-2-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   The following definitions shall be applicable to this section
2-2-2 in its entirety.
    ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE(S): A discharge which was not intentional and may
include a discharge caused by gross negligence or wanton or reckless conduct.
   APPROVING AUTHORITY: The Superintendent of the wastewater treatment plant
(or other designated official) of the Village of Reedsville, or his duly
authorized deputy, agent, or representative.
   BOD (Denoting BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND): The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter in five (5) days at twenty degrees
Celsius (20°C), expressed as milligrams per liter. Quantitative determination
of BOD shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in "Standard
Methods".
   BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet (5') (1.5 m) outside the inner face of the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal, also called house connection.
   CATEGORY A: Those sanitary sewer users who discharge normal domestic
strength wastewater with concentration of BOD no greater than two hundred
twenty five milligrams per liter (225 mg/l), suspended solids no greater than
two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l), phosphorus no greater than ten
milligrams per liter (10 mg/l), and ammonia nitrogen no greater than thirty
milligrams per liter (30 mg/l).
   CATEGORY B: Those sanitary sewer users who discharge wastewater with
concentrations in excess of two hundred twenty five milligrams per liter (225
mg/l) of BOD, two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l) suspended solids, ten
milligrams per liter (10 mg/l) phosphorus, and thirty milligrams per liter (30
mg/l) ammonia nitrogen. Users whose wastewater exceeds the concentration from
any one of these parameters shall be in category B.
   COMBINED SEWER: A sewer intended to receive both wastewater and storm or
surface water.
   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS: Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids,
phosphorus, pH, or fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants
identified in the WPDES permit for the village of Reedsville wastewater
treatment works provided that said works were designed to treat such pollutants
and in fact does remove such pollutants to a substantial degree.
   CONTROL MANHOLE: A manhole located on the private sanitary sewer line coming
from any dwelling that is serviced by the wastewater treatment plant. The
manhole will be used for sampling and flow determinations. The design and
location of the control manhole shall be approved by the approving authority.
   DOMESTIC WASTEWATER: Wastewater discharged from sanitary conveniences which
contain no incompatible pollutants.
   FLOATABLE OIL: Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil if it is
properly pretreated and does not interfere with the collection system.
   GARBAGE: The residue from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food,
and from the handling, storage, and sale of food products and produce.
   GROUND GARBAGE: The residue from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of
food that has been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried
freely in suspension under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewer with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") in any dimension.
   HOLDING TANK WASTE: Any untreated wastewater from holding tanks such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and vacuum pump tank trucks.
   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS: Wastewater with pollutants that will adversely
affect or disrupt the quality of wastewater treatment if discharged to a
wastewater treatment facility.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE: The wastewater from industrial processes, trades, or
businesses as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes.
   MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY: An industry that has a discharge flow which:
      1.   Is fifty thousand (50,000) gallons or more per average workday; or
      2.   Is greater than five percent (5%) of the total flow rate or design
compatible pollutant loading received at the municipal wastewater treatment
plant; or
      3.   Contains a material in its discharge included on a list of toxic
pollutants in toxic amounts as defined in standards issued under section 307(a)
of the federal water pollution control act amendments of 1972; or
      4.   Contains a waste which has significant impact, either singularly or
in combination with other contributing industries, on the treatment works or
the quality of its effluent.
   MAY: Permissive.
   NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet, including storm sewer and combined sewer
overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water
or groundwaters.
   NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTEWATER: Wastewater with average daily
concentrations of BOD5 no greater than two hundred twenty five milligrams per
liter (225 mg/l), average daily total suspended solids concentration no greater
than two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l), average daily phosphorus no
greater than ten milligrams per liter (10 mg/l), and average daily ammonia
nitrogen no greater than thirty milligrams per liter (30 mg/l).
   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS: The total costs of labor and materials
required to operate and maintain the wastewater treatment works including
expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories, or
appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the treatment
works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were
designed and constructed.
   PARTS PER MILLION: A weight to weight ratio, the parts per million value
multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons
of water.
   PERSON: Any and all persons including all individual, firm, company,
municipal or private corporation, association, society, institution,
enterprise, governmental agency, or other entity.
   pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration. The
concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams, per liter of solution.
Neutral water, for example has a pH value of 7 and a hydrogen ion concentration
of 10-7.
   PUBLIC SEWER: Any sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the
village of Reedsville. It shall also include sewers within or outside the
village boundaries that serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into
the village sanitary or combined sewer system, even though those sewers may not
have been constructed with village funds.
   RECEIVING WATERS: Any public water into which the effluent from any
wastewater treatment plant or any public or private sewer is discharged.
   REPLACEMENT COSTS: Any expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of
the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such
works were designed and constructed. The term "operation and maintenance"
includes replacement.
   SANITARY SEWAGE: A combination of water carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions, and industrial plants (other than industrial
wastes from such plants); together with such ground, surface, and storm waters
as may be present.
   SANITARY SEWER: A sewer that carried sanitary and industrial water carried
wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and
institutions; together with minor quantities of ground, storm, and surface
waters that are not admitted intentionally.
   SEPTIC TANK WASTEWATER: Wastewater including sludge from septic tanks.
   SEWAGE: The spent water of a community. The preferred term is "wastewater".
   SEWER: A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
   SEWER SERVICE CHARGE: A charge levied on users of the wastewater treatment
facilities for payment of operation and maintenance expenses, debt service
costs, and other expenses or obligations of said facilities.
   SHALL: Mandatory.
   SHREDDED GARBAGE: Garbage which has been shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing
in public sewers with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") in any
dimension.
   SLUG: Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any
given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration
longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty
four (24) hour concentration or flows during normal operation and shall
adversely affect the system and/or performance of the wastewater treatment
works.
   STANDARD METHODS: The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the
most recent edition of "Standard Methods For The Examination Of Water, Sewage,
And Industrial Wastes" published jointly by the American Public Health
Association and the Federation Of Sewage and Industrial Wastes Associations.
   STORM DRAIN (Sometimes Termed STORM SEWER): A drain or sewer for conveying
water, groundwater, subsurface water, or unpolluted water from any source.
   STORMWATER RUNOFF: That portion of the rainfall that is drained into the
sewers.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and that are removable by
laboratory filtering as prescribed in "Standard Methods For Examination Of
Water And Wastewater" and are referred to as a nonfilterable residue.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER: Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   USER CHARGE SYSTEM: A system or methodology by which charges are levied on
users of treatment works for cost of operation and maintenance of such works.
The village of Reedsville established classes for users having similar flows
and wastewater characteristics; i.e., levels of biochemical oxygen demand,
suspended solids, et cetera. Each class is then assigned its share of the waste
treatment works operation and maintenance costs based on the proportional
contribution of the class to the total treatment works loading.
   USER, INDUSTRIAL: Any nongovernmental user of the wastewater system and the
treatment plant identified in the "Standard Industrial Classification Manual",
1972, office of management and budget as amended and supplemented, under the
following divisions:
      1.   Division A: Agricultural, forestry, and fishing.
      2.   Division B: Mining.
      3.   Division D: Manufacturing.
      4.   Division E: Transportation, communications, electric, gas, and
sanitary services.
      5.   Division I: Services.
   VILLAGE: The village of Reedsville, Manitowoc County, Wisconsin.
   VILLAGE BOARD: The trustees of the Village of Reedsville, Manitowoc County,
Wisconsin.
   WASTEWATER: The spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source,
it may be a combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any
groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present.
   WASTEWATER COLLECTION FACILITIES OR WASTEWATER COLLECTION SYSTEM: The
structures and equipment required to collect and carry wastewater.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITY: An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater and sludge. Also referred to as wastewater treatment plant.
   WASTEWATER WORKS: All facilities for collecting, pumping, transporting,
treating, and drying of sewage.
   WATERCOURSE: A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either
continuously or intermittently.
   WISCONSIN POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (WPDES) PERMIT: A permit
issued to the village of Reedsville by the Wisconsin department of natural
resources for the discharge of wastewater to the Root River. This permit, which
is on file in the office of the village of Reedsville wastewater utility,
specifies effluent limitations for compatible pollutants and specifies certain
conditions that have to be met by the village of Reedsville. This permit is
issued in compliance with the environmental protection agency as part of the
national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit program. (Ord.,
3-18-1996, eff. 4-1-1996; amd. Ord. 2020-1, 9-10-2020; Ord. 2020-2, 9-10-2020)
2-2-2-2: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS:
   A.   Private Septic Tanks Prohibited:
      1.   Construction Prohibited: No septic tank, outhouse, privy or vault
shall be built, constructed or maintained upon any premises within the village
located adjacent to a sewer main or in any block through which such sewer
system extends. This provision shall prohibit the construction of any such
septic tank or structure at any time after sewer facilities are available and
shall prohibit the maintenance of any such septic tank or structure at any time
after one year from the date such sewer facilities become available.
      2.   Discontinue Use Of Septic Tanks: Within one year after sewer
facilities become available, all septic tanks located in the village shall be
disconnected or: a) removed, or b) emptied and disinfected, or c) emptied of
all sewage and filled with sand, or d) disinfected and completely sealed at all
outlets.
   B.   Sanitary Sewers: No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged
any unpolluted water such as stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage, or cooling water to any sanitary sewer, except stormwater runoff from
limited areas, which stormwater may be polluted at times, may be discharged to
the sanitary sewer by permission of the approving authority.
   C.   Storm Sewers: All stormwater and other unpolluted drainage shall be
discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to
a natural outlet approved by the approving authority and other regulatory
agencies. Unpolluted industrial cooling water or process water may be
discharged, on approval of the approving authority, to a storm sewer, combined
sewer, or natural outlet and other regulatory agencies.
   D.   Prohibitions And Limitations: No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following, measured at the point of discharge, into the
wastewater collection facilities unless and until specifically authorized to do
so under the terms of a wastewater discharge permit, and then subject to any
limitation imposed by such permit thereon:
      1.   Any gasoline, benzine, naphtha, fuel oil, other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid, or gas; which by reason of their nature or quantity
are, or may be, sufficient whether alone or by interaction with other
substances to create a fire or explosion hazard or be injurious in any other
way to the system or its operation. Substances exhibiting ignitability are
prohibited.
      2.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids,
or gases, vapors, or fumes in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any waste treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create a public nuisance
in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant.
      3.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment, and personnel of the wastewater works.
      4.   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.
      5.   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to,
ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails, and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either
whole or ground by garbage grinders.
      6.   Wastewater having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty
degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65°C).
      7.   Wastewater containing more than fifty milligrams per liter (50 mg/l)
of petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or product of mineral oil
origin.
      8.   Wastewater containing more than three hundred milligrams per liter
(300 mg/l) of oil or grease of animal or vegetable origin.
      9.   Wax, grease, oil, plastic, or any substance that solidifies or
becomes discernibly viscous.
      10.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders
may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions,
restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or similar places where
garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of
consumption on the premises or when served by caterers.
      11.   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and
similar objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any such material
received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works exceeds
the limits established by the approving authority for such materials.
      12.   Any waters or wastes containing odor producing substances exceeding
limits which may be established by the approving authority.
      13.   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the approving authority in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
      14.   Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a
"slug" as defined herein.
      15.   Incompatible pollutants containing substances which are not
amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater
treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
      16.   Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or
wastes in the public sewer system, release noxious gases, form suspended solids
which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition deleterious
to structures and treatment processes.
      17.   Materials which exert or cause:
         a.   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the wastewater treatment
plant.
         b.   Unusual volume of flow of concentration of wastes constituting
"slugs" as defined herein.
         c.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium sulfate).
         d.   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions).
      18.   Any RCRA (resource conservation and recovery act) classified
hazardous waste.
      19.   Any petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of
mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference.
      20.   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the wastewater collection and treatment facilities in a quantity
that may cause acute worker health and safety problems.
      21.   No person discharging into the wastewater collection facilities
shall increase the use of potable or process water or mix separate wastewaters
for the purpose of diluting prohibited wastewater as a partial or complete
substitute for pretreatment or to otherwise avoid compliance with or circumvent
this rule.
      22.   The village shall comply with all of the requirements of WPDES
permit no. WI0028291-4 and all modifications thereof. No discharge shall be
allowed into the sanitary sewerage system that will alone or in combination
with other discharges cause a violation of the requirements of the WPDES permit
and any modifications thereto.
   E.   New Connections: New connections to the village's sanitary sewer system
will be allowed only if there is available capacity in all of the downstream
wastewater collection and treatment facilities.
   F.   Holding Tank Disposal: No person in the business of gathering and
disposing of holding tank sewage shall transfer such material into any disposal
area or sewer manhole located within the Village boundaries unless a permit for
disposal has been first obtained from the Village Board or its designee.
Written application for this permit shall be made to the Board and shall state
the name and address of the applicant; the name of its disposal unit; and the
size, make, model, and license number of each unit. Permits shall be non-
transferrable except in the case of replacement of the disposal unit for which
a permit shall have been originally issued. The permit may be obtained upon
payment of a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per calendar year. The Board
may impose such conditions as it deems necessary on any permit granted.
   Charges for a disposal shall be twelve dollars ($12.00) per one thousand
(1000) gallons plus six dollars ($6.00) per load for holding tank sewage. Bills
shall be mailed on a monthly basis and if payments are not received within
thirty (30) days thereof, disposal privileges shall be suspended.
   Any person disposing of holding tank sewage agrees to provide public
liability insurance in an amount not less than one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000) to protect any and all persons or property from injury and/or damage
arising out of and caused by any act or failure to act by the person disposing
of the septic tank sewage, his/her employees and agents. The person disposing
of the septic tank sewage shall furnish a certificate certifying such insurance
coverage to be in full force and effect prior to issuance of the permit
referred to in this section.
   G.   Special Arrangements: No statement contained in this chapter shall be
construed as prohibiting any special agreement between the approving authority
and any person whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may
be admitted to the sewage disposal works, either before or after pretreatment,
provided that there is no impairment of the functioning of the sewage disposal
works by reason of the admission of such wastes, and no extra costs are
incurred by the village without recompense by the person provided that all
rates and provisions set forth in this chapter are recognized and adhered to.
(Ord., 3-18-1996, eff. 4-1-1996; amd. Ord. 2020-1, 9-10-2020; Ord. 2023-03, 6-
8-2023; Ord. 2023-5, 12-11-2023)
2-2-2-3: CONTROL OF INDUSTRIAL WASTES DIRECTED TO PUBLIC SEWERS:
   A.   Submission Of Basic Data: Within three (3) months after passage of the
ordinance codified herein, firms that discharge industrial wastes to a public
sewer shall prepare and file with the approving authority a report that shall
include pertinent data relating to the quantity and characteristics of the
wastes discharged to the wastewater works. Similarly, each person desiring to
make a new connection to the public sewer for the purpose of discharging
industrial wastes shall prepare and file with the approving authority a report
that shall include actual or predicted data relating to the quantity and
characteristics of the waste to be discharged.
   B.   Extension Of Time: When it can be demonstrated that circumstances exist
which would create an unreasonable burden on the person to comply with the time
schedule imposed by subsection A of this section, a request for extension of
time may be presented for consideration of the approving authority.
   C.   Industrial Discharge: If any waters or wastes are discharged, or
proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters or wastes contain
substances or possess the characteristics described in subsection 2-2-2-2D of
this chapter and which in the judgment of the approving authority may have
deleterious effects upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving
waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life, health, or constitute a
public nuisance, the approving authority may:
      1.   Reject the wastes.
      2.   Require pretreatment to normal domestic strength wastewater for
discharge to the public sewers.
      3.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
      4.   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the
wastes not covered by existing sewer use charges under the provisions of
section
2-2-2-4 of this chapter.
   D.   Control Manholes: Each person discharging industrial wastewater into a
public sewer shall construct and maintain one or more control manholes or
access points to facilitate observation, measurement, and sampling of the
industrial wastewater, including domestic sewage.
Control manholes or access facilities shall be located and built in a manner
acceptable to the approving authority. If measuring devices are to be
permanently installed, they shall be of a type acceptable to the approving
authority.
Control manholes, access facilities, and related equipment shall be installed
by the person discharging the waste, at his expense, and shall be maintained by
him so as to be in safe condition, accessible, and in proper operation
condition at all times. Plans for installation of the control manholes or
access facilities and related equipment shall be approved by the approving
authority prior to the beginning of construction. Where the user fails to
comply with installation requirements by a specified date, the approving
authority shall have the structures installed and the cost billed to the user.
   E.   Measurement Of Flow: The volume of flow used for computing the sewer
use charges shall be the metered water consumption of the person as shown in
the records of meter readings maintained by the village water department except
as noted in subsections F and G of this section.
   F.   Provisions For Deductions: In the event that a person discharging
industrial wastewater into the public sewers produces evidence satisfactory to
the approving authority that some of the total annual volume of water used for
all purposes does not reach the public sewer, then the determination of the
water consumption to be used in computing the wastewater volume discharged into
the public sewer may be made a matter of agreement between the approving
authority and the person.
   G.   Metering Of Wastewater: Devices for measuring the volume of wastewater
discharged may be required by the approving authority if this volume cannot
otherwise be determined from the metered water consumption records. Metering
devices for determining the volume of wastewater shall be installed, owned, and
maintained by the person. Following approval and installation, such meters may
not be removed without the consent of the approving authority.
   H.   Wastewater Sampling: Industrial wastewater discharged into the public
sewers shall be subject to periodic inspection and a determination of a
character and concentration of said wastes. The determinations shall be made by
the industry as often as may be deemed necessary by the approving authority.
The approving authority shall also maintain the prerogative to sample the
industrial wastewater discharge.
Samples shall be collected in such a manner as to be representative of the
composition of the wastewater. The sampling may be accomplished either manually
or by the use of mechanical equipment acceptable to the approving authority.
Installation, operation, and maintenance of the sampling facilities shall be
the responsibility of the person discharging the wastewater and shall be
subject to the approval of the approving authority. Access to sampling
locations shall be granted to the approving authority or its duly authorized
representatives at all times. Every care shall be exercised in the collection
of samples to ensure their preservation in a state comparable to that at the
time the sample was taken.
   I.   Analysis: All measurements, tests, and analysis of the characteristics
of water and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods For The
Examination Of Water And Wastewater", published by the American Public Health
Association and with the federal regulations 40 CFR 136, "EPA regulations on
test procedures for the analysis of pollutants". Sampling methods, location
times, durations, and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis
subject to approval by the approving authority.
Determination of the character and concentration of the industrial wastes shall
be made by the person discharging them, or his agent, as designated and
required by the approving authority. The village may also make its own analysis
on the wastes.
   J.   Pretreatment: Where required, in the opinion of the approving
authority, to modify or eliminate incompatible wastes that are harmful to the
structures, processes, or operation of the wastewater treatment works, the
person shall provide at his expense such preliminary treatment or processing
facilities as may be determined required to render his wastes acceptable for
admission to the public sewers.
   K.   Grease And/Or Sand Interceptors: Grease, oil, and sand interceptors
shall be provided when, in the opinion of the approving authority, they are
necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease
or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
approving authority and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible
for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these interceptors, the
owner(s) shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by
appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain records of the
dates and means of disposal which are subject to review by the approving
authority. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials performed by
owner(s) personnel or by currently licensed waste disposal firms must be in
accordance with acceptable requirements of the department of natural resources
rules and regulations.
   L.   Accidental Discharges: Each industrial discharger shall provide
protection from accidental discharge of prohibited or regulated materials or
substances established by this chapter. Where necessary, facilities to prevent
accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained
at the discharger's cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and
operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the
approving authority for review and shall be approved by the approving authority
before construction of the facility. Review and approval of such plans and
operating procedures by the approving authority shall not relieve the
discharger from the responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to meet
the requirements of this chapter.
Dischargers shall notify the approving authority immediately upon the
occurrence of a "slug load", or accidental discharge of substances prohibited
by this chapter. The notification shall include location of discharge, date and
time thereof, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions.
Initial notification shall be followed within five (5) days by a written report
to the approving authority. Any discharger who discharges a slug load of
prohibited materials shall be liable for any expense, loss or damage to the
wastewater facilities or wastewater treatment works, in addition to the amount
of any fines imposed on the authority on account thereof under state or federal
law.
Signs shall be permanently posted in conspicuous places on the discharger's
premises, advising employees whom to call in the event of a slug or accidental
discharge. Employers shall instruct all employees who may cause or discover
such a discharge with respect to emergency notification procedure.
   M.   Submission Of Information: Plans, specifications, and other pertinent
information relating to proposed flow equalizations, pretreatment, or
processing facilities shall be submitted for review of the approving authority
prior to the start of their construction if the effluent from such facilities
is to be discharged into the public sewers. No construction of such facilities
shall commence until said approval has been granted. (Ord., 3-18-1996, eff. 4-
1-1996)
2-2-2-4: SEWER SERVICE CHARGES:
   A.   Determination Of Necessity: It is hereby determined and declared to be
necessary and conducive to the protection of the public health, safety,
welfare, and convenience of the village to levy and collect charges, rentals,
or rates of service upon all the lands, lots, and premises served by and having
connections with the sewerage system of the village.
   B.   Policy: It shall be the policy of the village to obtain sufficient
revenues to pay the costs of the operation and maintenance of the sewerage
facilities, including a replacement fund through a system of "sewer service
charges" as defined in this section. A portion of the debit service cost may be
obtained by the levy of a mil rate tax, with the remaining portion obtained
through sewer service charges. The system shall assure that each user of the
sewerage system pay their proportionate share of the cost of the cost of such
facilities.
   C.   Category B Users: Category B users shall be charged a surcharge, in
addition to the volume charge, based on the prevailing category B service
charges for BOD, suspended solids, phosphorus, and ammonia nitrogen.
   D.   Category C Users: Category C users (septic tank and holding tank
wastes) shall be charged an administrative charge per load in addition to the
computed charges for volume, BOD, suspended solids, and ammonia nitrogen.
   E.   Sewer Users Served By Private Wells: If any person discharging
wastewater into the public sanitary sewer system procures any part or all of
his water sources other than the water department, all or part of which is
discharged into the public sanitary sewer system, the person shall be required
to have water meters installed for purposes of determining the volume of water
obtained from these other sources. Where sewage meters are already installed,
the water meters will not be required. The water meters shall be furnished by
the water department and installed under its supervision, all costs being at
the expense of the person requiring the meter.
The water department will charge for each meter a rental charge set by the
water department to compensate for the cost of furnishing and servicing the
meter. The rental charge shall be billed at the time the sewer user charge is
billed.
   F.   Credits For Water Not Reaching Sewage System: If a portion of the water
furnished to any premises is not discharged into the sewage system, the amount
of such water will be deducted in computing the sewerage service charge,
provided a separate meter is installed. The property owner desiring to install
such separate meter shall make application and payment for the meter to the
waterworks superintendent and engage a plumber to make the necessary piping
changes and install the couplings so that the meter can be set.
   G.   Discount For Filling Swimming Pools: An allowance shall be made for
water used to fill swimming pools, providing that such water is not discharged
into the sanitary sewer system when said swimming pool is emptied. Customers
shall request a credit by completing an application available from the village
clerk. The volume to be deducted from the sewer bill shall be determined by use
of a portable deduct meter supplied by the utility, by recording meter readings
immediately prior to and following filling of the pool, or by using a
volumetric calculation. The method used shall be approved by the utility
superintendent prior to filling the pool.
   H.   Amount Of Sewer Service Charges:
      1.   Sewer Service Charge: The sewer rates shall be reviewed and
determined by the Village Board on an annual basis.
   The village shall, at its discretion, test any or all of the individual
loads of holding tank and septic tank waste discharge to the system. In the
event that the average concentrations of holding tank or septic tank waste, as
tested by the village, exceeds the minimum assumed concentration by twenty five
percent (25%) for any or all parameters, the village may utilize the prescribed
formulas to determine the proper charge.
   Any load containing a mixture of septic tank and holding tank waste shall be
charged at the septic tank waste rate.
   I.   Reassignment Of Sewer Users: The approving authority will reassign
sewer users into appropriate sewer service charge categories if wastewater
sampling programs or other related information indicate a change of categories
is necessary.
   J.   Operation, Maintenance, And Replacement Fund Accounts: All sewer
service charge revenues collected for replacement costs shall be deposited in a
separate and distinct fund to be used solely for “replacement costs” as defined
in section
2-2-2-1 of this chapter. All sewer service charge revenues collected for other
operation and maintenance expenses shall also be deposited in a separate and
distinct fund.
   All revenues for the replacement fund and for operation and maintenance of
the wastewater treatment facilities shall be used solely for the replacement
fund and operation and maintenance of the wastewater treatment facilities.
   K.   Charge For Toxic Pollutants: Any person discharging toxic pollutants
which cause an increase in the cost of managing the effluent or sludge from the
village’s wastewater treatment facility shall pay for such increased costs, as
may be determined by the approving authority.
   L.   Billing Practice: All charges for sewerage service shall be made
monthly and shall be payable on the first day of each month. A three percent
(3%) penalty shall be added to those bills not paid on or before the 20th day
after the due date of the bill with a thirty cent ($0.30) minimum penalty
charge. The failure to receive a bill shall not excuse non-payment. Sewerage
service charges shall be a lien on the property serviced according to Section
66.0809 and 74.01, Wis. Stats. (Ord., 3-18-1996, eff. 4-1-1996; amd. Ord. 6-00,
10-2-2000, eff. 12-20-2000; amd. Ord. 2000-9, 11-20-2000, eff. 1-1-2001; Ord.
2003-9, 12-15-2003; Ord. 2011-5, 11-7-2011; Ord. 2015-2, 6-4-2015; Ord. 2020-1,
9-10-2020; Ord. 2023-03, 6-8-2023; Ord. 2023-04, 8-10-2023; Ord. 2023-5, 12-11-
2023)
2-2-2-5: SEWER CONSTRUCTION AND CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Work Authorized: No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any
connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or
appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the
approving authority, and pay all the required fees. (Ord., 3-18-1996, eff. 4-1-
1996)
   B.   Cost Of Sewer Connection: All costs incident to the installation and
connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the property owner. The
village board hereby determines the basic cost thereof is eight hundred dollars
($800.00). The property owner shall indemnify the village from any loss or
damages that may be occasioned directly or indirectly by the installation of
the building sewer.
   C.   Use Of Old Building Sewers: Old building sewers may be used in
connections with new buildings only when they are found on examination and test
by the approving authority to meet all requirements for this chapter.
   D.   Materials And Methods Of Construction: The size, slope, alignment,
material of construction of building sewer, and the methods to be used in
excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench,
shall all conform to the requirements of state of Wisconsin administrative code
chapter ILHR 82 "design, construction, installation, supervision, and
inspections of plumbing", especially, section ILHR 82.04, "building sewers" or
other applicable rules and regulations of the village.
   E.   Building Sewer Grade: Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be
brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all
buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the
public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by
an approved means and discharged to the building sewer.
   F.   Storm And Ground Water Drains: No person shall make connection of roof
downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of
surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   G.   Inspection Of Connection: The applicant for the building sewer permit
shall notify the approving authority when the building sewer is ready for
inspection and connection to public sewer. The connection shall be made under
the supervision of the approving authority.
   H.   Barricades; Restoration: All excavations for the building sewer
installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to
protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public
property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the village.
   I.   Damage Or Tampering With Sewage Facilities; Wilful, Negligent, Or
Malicious Damage: No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully, or
negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any
structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage facilities.
Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under
a charge of disorderly conduct. (Ord., 3-18-1996, eff. 4-1-1996; amd. Ord.
2003-3, 7-7-2003; Ord. 2023-03, 6-8-2023)
2-2-2-6: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Written Notice Of Violation: Any person found to be violating any
provision of these rules shall be served by the village with a written notice
stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time
stated in such notice, permanently cease all violation.
   B.   Abatement Of Nuisance Without Notice: If the approving authority
determines that a public nuisance exists within the village and that there is
great and immediate danger to the wastewater collection and treatment
facilities or the public health, safety, peace, morals, or decency, the
approving authority may cause the same to be abated and charge the cost thereof
to the owner, occupant, or person causing, permitting, or maintaining the
nuisance, as the case may be.
   C.   Accidental Discharge: Any person found to be responsible for
accidentally allowing a deleterious discharge into the sewer system which
causes damage to the treatment facility and/or receiving body of water shall,
in addition to be a fine, pay the amount to cover damage, both values to be
established by the approving authority.
   D.   Continued Violations: Any person, partnership, or corporation, or any
officer, agent, or employee thereof, who shall continue any violation beyond
the aforesaid notice time limit provided shall, upon conviction thereof,
forfeit not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than five dollars
($5.00) plus the cost of prosecution. In default of payment of such forfeiture
and costs, said violator shall be imprisoned in the Manitowoc County Jail for a
period not to exceed sixty (60) days. Each day in which any violation is
continued beyond the aforesaid notice time limit shall be deemed a separate
offense.
   E.   Liability To Village Losses: Any person violating any provision of this
chapter shall become liable to the Village for any expense, loss, or damage
occasioned by reason of such violation which the Village may suffer as a result
thereof. (Ord., 3-18-1996, eff. 4-1-1996; amd. Ord. 2020-1, 9-10-2020)
2-2-2-7: APPEALS:
   A.   Procedures: Any user, permit applicant, or permit holder affected by
any decision, action, or determination, including cease and desist orders, made
by the approving authority interpreting or implementing the provisions of this
chapter or in any permit issued herein, may file with the approving authority a
written request for reconsideration within ten (10) days of the date of such
decision, action, or determination, setting forth in detail the facts
supporting the user's request for reconsideration. The approving authority
shall render a decision on the request for reconsideration to the user, permit
applicant, or permit holder in writing within thirty (30) days of receipt of
request. If the ruling on the request for reconsideration made by the approving
authority is unsatisfactory, the person requesting reconsideration may, within
ten (10) days after notification of the action, file a written appeal with the
Village Board.
A nonrefundable fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall accompany any appeal to the
Village Board within sixty (60) days from the date of filing. The Village Board
shall make a final ruling on the appeal within sixty (60) days from the date of
filing. (Ord., 3-18-1996, eff. 4-1-1996)
2-2-2-8: AUDIT, NOTIFICATION, AND RECORDS:
   A.   Biennial Audit: The Village shall review at least every two (2) years
the wastewater contribution of its sewer users, the operation and maintenance
expenses of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities and the sewer
service charge system, if necessary, to accomplish the following:
      1.   Maintain a proportionate distribution of operation and maintenance
expenses among sewer users based on the wastewater volume and pollutant
loadings discharged by the users.
      2.   Generate sufficient revenues to pay the operation and maintenance
expenses of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities.
      3.   Apply excess revenues collected from a class of users to the
operation and maintenance expenses attributable to the class of users for the
next year and adjust the sewer service charge rates accordingly.
   B.   Annual Notifications: The Village shall notify its sewer users annually
as to the sewer service charge rates. The notification shall show what portion
of the rates are attributable to the operation and maintenance expenses, any
debt service costs of the wastewater collection system and wastewater
treatment. The notification shall occur in conjunction with the adoption of a
budget for the ensuing year in accordance with section 65.90, Wisconsin
Statutes.
   C.   Records: The Village shall maintain records regarding wastewater flows,
costs of the wastewater collection and treatment facilities, sampling programs,
and other information which is necessary to document compliance with 40 CFR 35,
subpart E of the Clean Water Act. (Ord., 3-18-1996, eff. 4-1-1996)
2-2-2-9: PRIVATE SEWER LATERALS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to prevent significant water
inflow and infiltration into the Village's sanitary sewer system and to protect
public health, safety and welfare by assuring that private laterals are tested,
inspected, maintained and repaired or replaced.
   B.   Owner Maintenance Required: The owner of property containing a private
lateral shall maintain their private lateral. Maintenance under this section
includes:
      1.   Clearing obstructions from the private lateral;
      2.   Repairing a defect in the private lateral that allows the
introduction of extraneous flow or debris into the sanitary sewer system;
      3.   Repairing a defect in the private lateral that allows the discharge
of sewage on the property;
      4.   Keeping a manhole cover in place or a clean out cap tight and in
place; and
      5.   Providing a solid manhole cover.
   C.   Testing And Notice Of Defective Private Laterals: Utility staff may
periodically perform special tests to confirm the integrity of the sanitary
sewer system, including smoke testing, dyed water testing, air testing,
hydraulic testing, closed circuit television inspection, and other testing and
inspection techniques approved by the Village Board.
The utility staff may enter private property to inspect and/or test a private
lateral as allowed by law.
The utility staff shall give the property owner no less than twenty four (24)
hours' written notice before personnel enter private property to conduct an
inspection or test unless:
      1.   Village personnel are conducting an investigation of a complaint or
responding to a customer request to test or inspect a private lateral; or
      2.   Sewage is exposed on the property in a manner that creates a
potential public health hazard.
Utility staff may identify defects in a private lateral that allows extraneous
flow or debris to enter the private lateral or the discharge of sewage on the
property, or a condition that may interfere with the proper operation of the
private lateral.
A defect under this section may include:
      1.   Any visible leak;
      2.   Evidence of pipe or joint deterioration;
      3.   Root intrusion into a pipe that separates a pipe joint or enlarges
an existing crack;
      4.   A misaligned pipe segment, sag, or lack of proper gradient;
      5.   A lack of necessary clean-out cap or manhole cover;
      6.   All failing materials;
      7.   A downspout, drain, or other connection that allows stormwater or
other extraneous water to enter the sanitary sewer system; or
      8.   A flaw that allows the discharge of sewage on the property or the
introduction of extraneous water into the sanitary sewer system.
If the utility staff identifies a defective private lateral or condition that
interferes with the proper operation of the private lateral, staff shall send
the property owner written notice of the defect or condition, including a
statement that the private lateral must be replaced or repaired, or the
condition corrected, no later than ninety (90) days after the date of the
notice, or within such no longer time deemed reasonable by the utility.
   D.   Repair Or Replacement Required: A property owner shall repair or
replace a defective private lateral from the main sewer line to the building.
The property owner shall pay the appropriate fee and obtain a permit from the
Village before performing the repair or replacement of a defective private
lateral. Correction of a defect may include the installation of a sump pit,
sump pump and drainage tile.
If sewage is exposed on the property in a manner that makes it a potential
public health hazard, a property owner must:
      1.   Stop the discharge of sewage immediately;
      2.   Remediate the site not later than twenty four (24) hours after the
owner has notice of the exposed sewage; and
      3.   Complete all necessary repairs or replacement of a private lateral
immediately, but not later than thirty (30) days after the owner has notice of
the exposed sewage.
A person who repairs an existing private lateral or installs a new or
rehabilitated private lateral shall perform the repair or installation as
prescribed by the sewer utility's sanitary sewer connection standards and the
State Plumbing Code.
The repair or replacement of the private lateral and the connection of the
private lateral to the sanitary sewer shall conform to the requirements of the
Building and Plumbing Codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the
Village. All connections to the sanitary sewer shall be made gastight and
watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be
approved by the utility personnel before installation.
The property owner is responsible for all costs of private lateral repair,
replacement and maintenance from the sewer line into the building. The Village
has the authority to contract for repair/replacements of laterals in the right-
of-way and special assess the cost to the property owner.
Generally, the sanitary sewer lateral will be remediated from the main sewer
line to the building foundation or the floor drain in the basement. The
sanitary sewer lateral between the terrace and the main line sewer that is not
remediated at the time of the sanitary sewer lateral repair will be replaced as
a part of a future street or sanitary sewer construction project. The property
owner will be responsible for the cost of replacement of the lateral from the
property line to the building foundation or the floor drain in the basement in
the future when that project is undertaken.
   E.   Repair And Replacement Inspection And Testing Requirements: During the
replacement of the private lateral the utility staff shall:
      1.   Inspect the private lateral to determine that it complies with the
sewer utility's sanitary sewer connection standards and the State Plumbing
Code; and
      2.   Observe the testing of the private lateral per current State Code.
If a private lateral fails the post-repair or post- replacement inspection or
test, the property owners shall perform additional repairs as required by
utility staff to correct the defect.
   F.   Sanitary Sewer Lateral Remediation Projects: The Village recognizes
that its public sewer system has a finite life and, in many cases, has exceeded
the useful life of the system. The Village also recognizes that private
building sewers possess many of the same characteristics as the public sewer
system. The Village will undertake the systematic reconstruction of the public
sewer system lying within the corporate limits. As a part of this
reconstruction, the Village will conduct sanitary sewer lateral remediation
projects.
During a sanitary sewer remediation project, the Village shall require that the
property owner replace and/or remediate their private lateral if the lateral is
found to be defective. The property owner shall, at the owner's expense, make
the necessary repairs to correct the deficiency(ies). The property owner may
elect to:
      1.   Contract with a properly licensed contractor to complete the repair.
All work needed to accomplish the repair shall be done at the expense of the
property owner.
      2.   Have the Village contractors complete the repair.
The Village will publicly bid all sanitary sewer lateral remediation projects
and the property owners, if they elect to have the Village contractors complete
the work, will be special assessed for the project costs per the Village's
special assessment policy. The sanitary sewer lateral remediation projects may
include:
      1.   Replacement or remediation of defective private laterals;
      2.   Installation of sump pump/pit and drainage tile where required;
      3.   Construction of mini-storm sewers in the terrace;
      4.   Construction of storm sewer laterals.
The property owner will be given the option of selecting the sewer lateral
remediation option. Options include but not limited to, open cut construction,
slip lining (6 inch laterals only) or pipe bursting or any other method allowed
by State Code.
On-site inspector will be provided for the replacement/remediation of the
sanitary sewer lateral by the Village.
The sanitary sewer lateral remediation project will include patching of
basement floors if needed. Any other restoration needed in the building and
basement shall be the responsibility of the property owners and will not be
done as a part of the sanitary sewer lateral remediation project.
Any, and all, fences, trees, shrubs, swimming pools, decks, sheds, porches or
other landscaping, paving or structures that will need to be removed in order
to facilitate remediation of the private lateral shall be removed and replaced
by the property owner at their expense.
Final restoration of the yard will be the responsibility of the property owner.
The Village contractor will backfill the trench or holes that are dug and rough
grade the top soil. The contractor will not be responsible for final
landscaping. It will be the responsibility of the property owner to restore the
lawn, pavement or garden areas that are disturbed as a part of the sanitary
sewer lateral remediation project.
   G.   Sanitary Sewer Lateral Fees:
      1.   Televising Refusal Fee: A one hundred dollar ($100.00) monthly fee
is hereby imposed for connection of sewer laterals against every property
connected to the Village sanitary sewerage system in the utility which owner
refuses to consent to televising of the sewer lateral by the Village. This fee
will be imposed beginning thirty (30) days after request has been made by the
Village for permission to televise the owner’s sewer lateral. This fee will
continue until the property owner consents to televising by the Village.
      2.   Failure To Correct Fee: A one hundred dollar ($100.00) monthly fee
is also hereby imposed for connection of sewer laterals against every property
connected to the sanitary sewerage system in the utility which owner fails to
take corrective action upon request by the Village to repair sewer laterals
leaking freshwater into the sewerage system. This fee will be imposed beginning
thirty (30) days following notice by the Village to the owner that corrective
action is required and has not been completed on schedule and will continue
until corrective action by the owner has been taken.
      3.   Fee Exemptions: The following are the exemptions and procedures from
lateral fees:
         a.   Televising Exemption: Upon request by the Village utility to
televise a sewer lateral connected to the sewer main in the utility, the
property owner may grant consent to televise the lateral by signing a consent
form approved by the Village. Upon receipt of such signed consent form, the
Village is authorized to access the private sewer lateral and adjacent property
for purposes of televising the lateral. Owners complying with this section are
exempt from the televising refusal fee.
         b.   Corrective Fee Exemption: Each owner that repairs all laterals
determined by the Village to be leaking freshwater into the sewerage system
shall be exempt from the failure to correct fee beginning at such time that
verification of corrective action has been provided by the owner to the
Village. (Ord. 2018-4, 4-12-2018; Ord. 2023-03, 6-8-2023)
2-2-3: WATER SERVICE REGULATIONS:
2-2-3-1: WATER RATES AND CHARGES:
   A.   Failure To Pay Water Charges: It shall be the policy of the Village
that where the service charge for water consumption furnished to any property
shall not have been paid for the period as specified on the back of the utility
bill, the water facilities to said property shall be shut down so as to furnish
not more than a trickle of water to said premises. In addition, there shall be
a charge for reconnection after shutdown in the amount of thirty five dollars
($35.00) during regular working hours, and if after regular working hours, one
hundred dollars ($100.00)
   A penalty of three percent (3%) of the bill, with a thirty cent ($0.30)
minimum, will positively be charged on all payments not received before three
o’clock (3:00) P.M., the twentieth day of the month that is the month following
the close of each quarter.
   B.   Connection Cost: The utility or utility approved contractor will
provide and install the initial water service lateral, from the main through
the curb stop and box. The property owner shall be responsible for all costs of
installation and connection. The village board hereby determines the basic cost
thereof is eight hundred dollars ($800.00). The property owner shall indemnify
the village from any loss or damages that may be occasioned directly or
indirectly by the installation of the building sewer. (Ord., 3-18-1996, eff. 4-
1-1996; amd. Ord. 2003-4, 7-7-2003; Ord. 2023-03, 6-8-2023)
2-2-3-2: PUBLIC WATER SYSTEMS, CONTAMINATION PREVENTION:
   A.   A "cross connection" shall be defined as any physical connection or
arrangement between two (2) otherwise separate systems, one of which contains
potable water from the village water system, and the other, water from a
private source, water of unknown or questionable safety, or steam, gases or
chemicals, whereby there may be a flow from one system to the other, the
direction of flow depending on the pressure differential between the two (2)
systems.
   B.   No person shall establish or permit to be established, or maintain or
permit to be maintained any cross connection. No interconnection shall be
established whereby potable water from a private, auxiliary or emergency water
supply, other than the regular public water supply of the village, may enter
the supply or distribution system of the village unless such private, auxiliary
or emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of such supply
shall have been approved by the Director of the Public Works Department and by
the Wisconsin department of natural resources in accordance with section NR
111.25(3), Wisconsin administrative code.
   C.   It shall be the duty of the village board to cause inspections to be
made of all properties served by the public water system where cross connection
with the public water system is deemed possible. The frequency of inspections
and reinspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as
established and approved by the inspector and the village board, and as
approved by the Wisconsin department of natural resources.
   D.   Upon presentation of credentials, the representative of the village
board shall have the right to request entry at any reasonable time to examine
any property served by a connection to the public water system of the village
for cross connections. If entry is refused, such representative shall obtain a
special inspection warrant under section 66.122, Wisconsin statutes. On
request, the owner, lessee or occupant of any property so served shall furnish
to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system
or systems of such property.
   E.   The village sewer and water utility is hereby authorized and directed
to discontinue water services to any property wherein any connection in
violation of this section exists, and to take such other precautionary measures
deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water
system. Water service shall be discontinued only after reasonable notice and
opportunity for hearing under chapter 68, Wisconsin statutes, except as
provided in subsection F of this section. Water service to such property shall
not be restored until the cross connection(s) has been eliminated in compliance
with the provision of this section.
   F.   If it is determined by the village sewer and water utility that a cross
connection or any emergency endangers public health, safety or welfare and
requires immediate action, and a written finding to that effect is filed with
the village clerk and delivered to the customer's premises, services may be
immediately discontinued. The customer shall have an opportunity for hearing
under chapter 68, Wisconsin statutes, within ten (10) days of such emergency
discontinuance.
   G.   The village hereby adopts by reference the state plumbing code of
Wisconsin, being chapter H62, Wisconsin administrative code.
   H.   This section does not supersede the state plumbing code and village
plumbing code, but is supplementary to them. (Ord., 3-18-1996, eff. 4-1-1996;
amd. Ord. 2023-04, 8-10-2023)
2-2-3-3: THAWING FROZEN LATERALS, PERMISSION REQUIRED:
Any person intending to use an electric welder to thaw out frozen water
laterals shall receive permission for said use from the Director of the Public
Works Department. (Ord., 3-18-1996, eff. 4-1-1996; amd. Ord. 2023-04, 8-10-
2023)
2-2-3-4: SUMP PUMP INSTALLATION:
Sump pump installations shall be accomplished in such manner so as to prevent
the discharge or overflow of stormwater onto adjoining property. Further, no
discharge or overflow of stormwater shall be permitted upon any street or
public way from November 1 to April 1 of each year. No sump pump shall be
installed and connected to a sanitary sewer. Building construction on parcels
that are proximate to a storm sewer shall cause footing drains from such
structure to be connected to the storm sewer system. Where footing tile expels
into a sump, the sump shall be equipped with a pump that shall be so installed
and connected so as to discharge into a storm sewer. (Ord. 2015-4, 10-8-2015)
2-2-3-5: WATER SOFTENER REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Any water softener installed within the village of Reedsville after
March 15, 2010, must be rated to have a salt efficiency of at least four
thousand (4,000) grains of hardness removed per pound of salt used.
   B.   Any water softener installed after March 15, 2010, must regenerate on
demand only. Water softeners which estimate water usage based on time are
prohibited. (Ord. 2010-3, 3-15-2010; amd. Ord. 2023-03, 6-8-2023)
2-2-4: RIGHT OF ENTRY, SAFETY, AND IDENTIFICATION:
   A.   Right Of Entry: The superintendent of the wastewater treatment plant,
plumbing inspector, or other duly authorized employee of the village bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, and testing, all in
accordance with provisions of this chapter and section 196.171, Wisconsin
statutes.
   B.   Safety: While performing the necessary work, referred to in subsection
A of this section, on private premises, the duly authorized village employees
shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the
person, and the village shall indemnify the person against loss or damage to
their property by village employees; except as such may be caused by negligence
or failure of the person to maintain safe conditions.
   C.   Identification And Right To Enter Easements: The superintendent of the
wastewater treatment plant, plumbing inspector, and other duly authorized
employees of the village bearing proper credentials and identification shall be
permitted to enter all private properties through which the village holds a
duly negotiated easement for the purpose of, but not limited to, inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of
the sewage works lying within said easement, all subject to the terms, if any,
of the agreement. (Ord., 3-18-1996, eff. 4-1-1996)
2-2-5: VALIDITY:
   A.   Superseding Previous Ordinances: The ordinance codified herein
governing sewer use, industrial wastewater discharges, sewer service charges,
and sewer connections and construction shall supersede sections
2-2-1 through 2-2-7 of previous ordinances of the village.
   B.   Invalidation Clause: Invalidity of any section, clause, sentence, or
provision in this chapter shall not affect the validity of any other section,
clause, sentence, or provision of this chapter which can be given effect
without such invalid part or parts.
   C.   Amendment: The village, through its duly authorized officers, reserves
the right to amend this chapter in part, or in whole, whenever it may deem
necessary. (Ord., 3-18-1996, eff. 4-1-1996)
2-2-6: EFFECTIVE DATE:
   A.   Date Of Effect: This chapter shall take effect and be in force from and
after April 1, 1996.
   B.   Date Of Enactment (Approval): Passed and adopted by the village of
Reedsville in the county of Manitowoc in the state of Wisconsin on March 18,
1996. (Ord., 3-18-1996, eff. 4-1-1996)
CHAPTER 3
CROSS CONNECTIONS
SECTION:
2-3-1: Purpose
2-3-2: Applicability
2-3-3: Definitions
2-3-4: Abandonment Required
2-3-5: Well Operation Permit (Rep. by Ord. 2011-5, 11-7-2011)
2-3-6: Abandonment Procedures (Rep. by Ord. 2011-5, 11-7-2011)
2-3-7: Penalties
2-3-8: Unprotected Cross Connections Prohibited
2-3-9: Inspections
2-3-10: Right To Entry
2-3-11: Provision Of Requested Information
2-3-12: Discontinuation Of Water For Violation
2-3-13: Emergency Discontinuance
2-3-1: PURPOSE:
To prevent contamination of groundwater and to protect public health, safety
and welfare by assuring that unused, unsafe or noncomplying wells, or wells
which may serve as conduits for contamination, or wells which may be illegally
cross connected to the municipal water system are properly abandoned. (Ord., 2-
4-1991)
2-3-2: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter applies to all wells located on premises served by the Reedsville
municipal water system. (Ord., 2-4-1991)
2-3-3: DEFINITIONS:
CROSS CONNECTION: A connection or potential connection between any part of the
village of Reedsville water supply system and another environment containing
substances in a manner that, under any circumstances, would allow the
substances to enter the village of Reedsville water supply system by means of
back siphonage or back pressure.
MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM: A system for the provision to the public of piped water
for human consumption when such system has at least fifteen (15) service
connections, or regularly serves at least twenty five (25) year round residents
owned or operated by the village as defined in section 49.10(12)(F)1, Wisconsin
statutes, or a privately owned water utility serving any of the above.
NONCOMPLYING: A well or pump installation which does not comply with the
provisions of chapter NR 112, Wisconsin administrative code, in effect at the
time the well was constructed, a contamination source was installed, the pump
was installed or work was done on either the well or pump installation.
PUMP INSTALLATION: The pump and related equipment used for withdrawing water
from a well; including, the discharge piping, the underground connections,
pitless adapters, pressure tanks, pits, sampling faucets and well seals or
caps.
UNSAFE: A well or pump installation which produces water which is
bacteriologically contaminated, or contaminated with substance in excess of the
standards of chapter NR 109 or 140, Wisconsin administration code, or for which
a health advisory has been issued by the department of natural resources.
UNUSED: A well or pump installation which is not in use or does not have a
functional pumping system.
WATER UTILITY: The village of Reedsville public water utility.
WELL: An excavation or opening into the ground made by digging, boring,
drilling, driving, or other methods for the purpose of obtaining groundwater
for consumption or other use.
WELL ABANDONMENT: The filling and sealing of a well according to the provisions
of chapter NR 112, Wisconsin administrative code. (Ord., 2-4-1991; amd. Ord.
2013-5, 8-15-2013)
2-3-4: ABANDONMENT REQUIRED:
All wells located on premises served by the municipal water system shall be
abandoned in accordance with the terms of this chapter and chapter NR 112,
Wisconsin administrative code, by August 31, 1991, or no later than one year
from the date of connection to the municipal water system, whichever occurs
last, unless a well operation permit has been obtained by the well owner from
the village clerk. (Ord., 2-4-1991)
2-3-5: WELL OPERATION PERMIT:
(Rep. by Ord. 2011-5, 11-7-2011)
2-3-6: ABANDONMENT PROCEDURES:
(Rep. by Ord. 2011-5, 11-7-2011)
2-3-7: PENALTIES:
Any well owner violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be punished by forfeiture of fifty dollars ($50.00) and the cost of
prosecution. Each day of violation is a separate offense. If any person fails
to comply with this chapter for more than ten (10) days after receiving written
notice of the violation, the municipality may impose a penalty and cause the
well abandonment to be performed, and the expense to be assessed as a special
tax against the property. (Ord., 2-4-1991)
2-3-8: UNPROTECTED CROSS CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED:
No person, firm, or corporation may establish or maintain, or permit to be
established or maintained, any unprotected cross connection. Cross connections
shall be protected as required in SPS 382.41, Wisconsin administrative code.
(Ord. 2013-5, 8-15-2013)
2-3-9: INSPECTIONS:
The water utility may inspect, or arrange for an inspection of, property served
by the public water system for cross connections. As an alternative, the water
utility may require a person, firm, or corporation who owns, leases, or
occupies property to have their plumbing inspected, at their own expense by a
state of Wisconsin certified cross connection inspector/surveyor. The frequency
of inspections shall be established by the water utility in accordance with
Wisconsin administrative code. Any unprotected cross connections identified by
the inspection shall be promptly corrected. Failure to promptly correct an
unprotected cross connection shall be sufficient cause for the water utility to
discontinue water service to the property, as provided under section
2-3-12 of this chapter. (Ord. 2013-5, 8-15-2013)
2-3-10: RIGHT TO ENTRY:
Upon presentation of credentials, a representative of the water utility shall
have the right to request entry, at any reasonable time, to a property served
by a connection to the public water system for the purpose of inspecting the
property for cross connections. Refusing entry to such utility representative
shall be sufficient cause for the water utility to discontinue water service to
the property, as provided under section
2-3-12 of this chapter. If entry is refused, a special inspection warrant under
section 66.0119 of the Wisconsin statutes may be obtained. (Ord. 2013-5, 8-15-
2013)
2-3-11: PROVISION OF REQUESTED INFORMATION:
The water utility may request an owner, lessee, or occupant of property served
by a connection to the public water system to furnish the water utility with
pertinent information regarding the piping systems on the property. Refusing to
provide requested information shall be sufficient cause for the water utility
to discontinue water service to the property, as provided under section
2-3-12 of this chapter. (Ord. 2013-5, 8-15-2013)
2-3-12: DISCONTINUATION OF WATER FOR VIOLATION:
The water utility may discontinue water service to any property wherein any
unprotected connection in violation of this chapter exists, and take other
precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of
contamination of the public water system. Water service may be discontinued,
however, only after reasonable notice and opportunity for hearing under chapter
68, Wisconsin statutes, except as provided under section
2-3-13 of this chapter. Water service to such property shall not be restored
until the unprotected cross connection has been eliminated. (Ord. 2013-5, 8-15-
2013)
2-3-13: EMERGENCY DISCONTINUANCE:
If it is determined by the water utility that an unprotected cross connection
or emergency endangers public health, safety, or welfare, and requires
immediate action, and if a written finding to that effect is filed with the
village clerk-treasurer and delivered to the customer's premises, water service
may be immediately discontinued, subject to the provisions of Wisconsin
administrative code section PSC 185.37. The customer shall have an opportunity
for hearing under chapter 68, Wisconsin statutes, within ten (10) days of such
emergency discontinuation. Water service to such property shall not be restored
until the unprotected cross connection has been eliminated. (Ord. 2013-5, 8-15-
2013)
CHAPTER 4
GROUNDWATER PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT
SECTION:
2-4-1: Ground water Protection Overlay District
2-4-2: Principal Uses
2-4-3: Conditional Uses
2-4-4: Prohibited Uses
2-4-5: Separation Distances
2-4-6: Conditional Use Permits
2-4-7: Existing Non-Conforming Uses
2-4-8: Enforcement And Penalties
2-4-1: GROUNDWATER PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT:
   A.   Purpose. The residents of the Village of Reedsville depend exclusively
on groundwater for a safe drinking water supply. Certain land use practices and
activities can seriously threaten or degrade groundwater quality. The purpose
of this Ordinance is to establish a groundwater protection overlay district to
institute land use regulations and restrictions within a defined area which
contributes water directly to the municipal water supply providing protection
for the aquifer and municipal water supply of the Village of Reedsville and
promoting the public health, safety and general welfare of Village residents.
   B.   Authority. Statutory authority of the Village to enact these
regulations was established by the Wisconsin Legislature in 1983, Wisconsin Act
410 (effective May 11, 1984), which specifically added groundwater protection,
in § 59.97(1) {'{'}which has since been renumbered as § 59.69(1){'}'} and §
62.23(7)(c), Wis. Stats., to the statutory authorization for county and
municipal planning and zoning to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
In addition, § 61.35, Wis. Stats., the Village has the authority to enact this
ordinance, effective in the incorporated areas of the Village, to encourage the
protection of groundwater resources.
   C.   Application. The regulations specified in this Wellhead Protection
Ordinance shall apply within the area surrounding each municipal water supply
well that has been designated as a "wellhead protection area" by the Village in
the most recent and up to date wellhead protection plan, and are in addition to
the requirements in the underlying zoning district, if any. If there is a
conflict between this chapter and the zoning ordinance, the more restrictive
provision shall apply.
   D.   Groundwater protection overlay district. The location and boundaries of
the zoning districts established by this chapter are set forth in the Village
of Reedsville's most recent and up to date wellhead protection plan on the map
titled "Wellhead Protection Area" [on file in the Village of Reedsville office]
incorporated herein and hereby made a part of this ordinance. Said figures,
together with everything shown thereon and all amendments thereto, shall be as
much a part of this chapter as though fully set forth and described herein.
This chapter and thus promotes public health, safety, and welfare. The
groundwater protection overlay district is intended to protect the groundwater
recharge area for the water supply from contamination.
   Note: Wellhead protection areas are derived from hydrologic studies and are
based on the area surrounding a well where groundwater takes five (5)-years or
less to travel from the land surface to the pumping well. (Ord. 2021-1, 6-17-
2021)
2-4-2: PRINCIPAL USES:
The following uses are permitted in the Groundwater Protection Overlay District
subject to the separation distances in Section
2-4-5 Separation Distances.
   A.   Parks, playgrounds or wildlife areas, provided there is no on-site
waste disposal or fuel storage tank facilities associated with this use.
   B.   Non-motorized trails, such as bike, skiing, nature and fitness trails.
   C.   Residential, commercial and industrial establishments that are
municipally sewered and whose use, Aggregate of Hazardous Chemicals in use,
storage, handling and/or production may not exceed twenty (20) gallons or one
hundred and sixty (160) pounds at any time, with the exception for those uses
listed as "conditional" or "prohibited" in Sections 4 or 5 (Hazardous chemicals
are identified by OSHA under 29 CFR 1910.1200(c) and by OSHA under 40 CFR Part
370.).
   D.   Routine tillage, planting, and field management operations in support
of agricultural crop production, where nutrients from legume, manure, and
commercial sources are accounted for and credited toward crop nutrient need.
The combination of all nutrient sources applied or available on individual
fields may not exceed University of Wisconsin soil test recommendations for
that field. (Ord. 2021-1, 6-17-2021)
2-4-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses may be conditionally permitted under Sec. 13-1-44
Conditional Use Permits, in the Groundwater Protection Overlay District subject
to the separations distances found below in Section 2-4-5: Separation
Distances.
   A.   Hydrocarbon, petroleum or hazardous chemical storage tanks.
   B.   Motor vehicle services, including filling and service stations, repair,
renovation and body work.
   C.   Residential, commercial and industrial establishments that are
municipally sewered and whose use, Aggregate of Hazardous Chemicals in use,
storage, handling and/or production exceeds twenty (20) gallons or one hundred
and sixty (160) pounds at any time.
   D.   Stormwater infiltration basins
   E.   Geothermal wells, also known as ground source heat pump along with any
associated piping and/or ground loop component installations. (Ord. 2021-1, 6-
17-2021)
2-4-4: PROHIBITED USES:
The following uses are prohibited in the Groundwater Protection Overlay
District.
   A.   Animal waste storage areas and facilities.
   B.   Application of fertilizer to manicured lawns or grasses in excess of
the nutrient requirements of the grass.
   C.   Asphalt product manufacturing plants.
   D.   Dry cleaning establishments.
   E.   Fertilizer manufacturing or storage facilities.
   F.   Foundries and forge plants.
   G.   Hazardous chemical processing or manufacturing facilities.
   H.   Industrial liquid waste storage areas.
   I.   Landfills or other areas for dumping, disposal or transferring of
garbage, refuse, recycling, trash, or demolition material, including auto
salvage operations.
   J.   Metal reduction or refinement facilities.
   K.   Mining operations, including metallic, gravel pits, industrial or frac-
sand mining.
   L.   Motor freight terminals.
   M.   Petroleum or hazardous chemical storage greater than one hundred and
ten (110) gallons in any single wall petroleum storage tank (double wall
storage tanks installations shall meet the requirements of s. ATCP 93.260 and
receive written approval from the department of safety and professional
services or its designated Local Program Operator under s. ATCP 93.110).
   N.   Road salt or de-icing materials storage areas. (Ord. 2021-1, 6-17-2021)
2-4-5: SEPARATION DISTANCES:
The following separation distances as specified in s. NR 811.12(5), Wis. Adm.
Code, shall be maintained within the Groundwater Protection Overlay District.
   A.   Ten feet between a well and an emergency or standby power system that
is operated by the same facility which operates the well and that has a double
wall above ground storage tank with continuous electronic interstitial leakage
monitoring. These facilities shall meet the installation requirements of s.
ATCP 93.260 and receive written approval from the department of safety and
professional services or its designated Local Program Operator under s. ATCP
93.110.
   B.   Fifty feet between a well and a storm sewer main or a sanitary sewer
main where the sanitary sewer main is constructed of water main class materials
and joints. Gravity sanitary sewers shall be successfully air pressure tested
in place. The air pressure test shall meet or exceed the requirements of the
four (4) psi low pressure air test for plastic gravity sewer lines found in the
latest edition of Standard Specifications for Sewer and Water Construction in
Wisconsin. Force mains shall be successfully pressure tested with water to meet
the AWWA C600 pressure and leakage testing requirements for one hour at one
hundred and twenty-five percent (125%) of the pump shut-off head.
   C.   Two hundred feet between a well field and any sanitary sewer main not
constructed of water main class materials, sanitary sewer manhole, lift
station, one or two family residential heating fuel oil underground storage
tank or above ground storage tank or private onsite wastewater treatment system
(POWTS) treatment tank or holding tank component and associated piping.
   D.   Three hundred feet (300') between a well field and any farm underground
storage tank system or other underground storage tank system with double wall
and with electronic interstitial monitoring for the system, which means the
tank and any piping connected to it. These installations shall meet the most
restrictive installation requirements of s. ATCP 93.260 and receive written
approval from the department of safety and professional services or its
designated Local Program Operator under s. ATCP 93.110, Wis. Admin. Code. These
requirements apply to tanks containing gasoline, diesel, bio-diesel, ethanol,
other alternative fuel, fuel oil, petroleum product, motor fuel, burner fuel,
lubricant, waste oil, or hazardous substances.
   E.   Three hundred feet (300') between a well field and any farm above
ground storage tank with double wall, or single wall tank with other secondary
containment and under a canopy; other above ground storage tank system with
double wall, or single wall tank with secondary containment and under a canopy
and with electronic interstitial monitoring for a double wall tank or
electronic leakage monitoring for a single wall tank secondary containment
structure. These installations shall meet the most restrictive installation
requirements of s. ATCP 93.260, Wis. Admin. Code, and receive written approval
from the department of commerce or its designated Local Program Operator under
s. ATCP 93.110, Wis. Admin. Code. These requirements apply to tanks containing
gasoline, diesel, bio-diesel, ethanol, other alternative fuel, fuel oil,
petroleum product, motor fuel, burner fuel, lubricant, waste oil, or hazardous
substances.
   F.   Four hundred feet (400') between a well field and a POWTS dispersal
component with a design capacity of less than twelve thousand (12,000) gallons
per day, a cemetery or a storm water retention or detention pond.
   G.   Six hundred feet (600') between a well field and any farm underground
storage tank system or other underground storage tank system with double wall
and with electronic interstitial monitoring for the system, which means the
tank and any piping connected to it; any farm above ground storage tank with
double wall, or single wall tank with other secondary containment and under a
canopy or other above ground storage tank system with double wall, or single
wall tank with secondary containment and under a canopy; and with electronic
interstitial monitoring for a double wall tank or electronic leakage monitoring
for a single wall tank secondary containment structure. These installations
shall meet the standard double wall tank or single wall tank secondary
containment installation requirements of s. ATCP 93.260 and receive written
approval from the department of safety and professional services or its
designated Local Program Operator under s. ATCP 93.110. These requirements
apply to tanks containing gasoline, diesel, bio-diesel, ethanol, other
alternative fuel, fuel oil, petroleum product, motor fuel, burner fuel,
lubricant, waste oil, or hazardous substances.
   H.   One thousand feet (1000') between a well field and land application of
municipal, commercial, or industrial waste; the boundaries of a land spreading
facility for spreading of petroleum-contaminated soil regulated under state
administrative regulations while that facility is in operation; agricultural,
industrial, commercial or municipal waste water treatment plant treatment
units, lagoons, or storage structures; manure stacks or storage structures; or
POWTS dispersal component with a design capacity of twelve thousand (12,000)
gallons per day or more.
   I.   Twelve hundred feet (1,200') between a well field and any solid waste
storage, transportation, transfer, incineration, air curtain destructor,
processing, wood burning, one time disposal or small demolition facility;
sanitary landfill; any property with residual groundwater contamination that
exceeds ch. NR 140 enforcement standards; coal storage area; salt or deicing
material storage area; any single wall farm underground storage tank or single
wall farm above ground storage tank or other single wall underground storage
tank or above ground storage tank that has or has not received written approval
from the department of safety and professional services or its designated Local
Program Operator under s. ATCP 93.110, Wis. Admin. Code, for a single wall tank
installation. These requirements apply to tanks containing gasoline, diesel,
bio-diesel, ethanol, other alternative fuel, fuel oil, petroleum product, motor
fuel, burner fuel, lubricant, waste oil, or hazardous substances; and bulk
pesticide or fertilizer handling or storage facilities. (Ord. 2021-1, 6-17-
2021)
2-4-6: CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS:
Individuals and/or facilities may request the village in writing, to permit
additional land uses in the Groundwater Protection Overlay District.
   A.   Required application materials:
      1.   All requests shall be in writing, whether on or in substantial
compliance with forms to be provided by the village and may require an
environmental assessment report prepared by a licensed environmental engineer.
Said report shall be forwarded to the village and/or designee(s) for
recommendation and final decision by the Village Board.
      2.   All The individual/facility shall reimburse the village for all
consultant fees associated with this review at the invoiced amount plus
administrative costs.
      3.   Any exemptions granted shall be conditional and may include required
environmental and safety monitoring consistent with local, state and federal
requirements, and/or bonds and/or securities satisfactory to the village.
   B.   Referral to plan commission. A properly filed application shall be
referred to the Plan Commission for its review and recommendation. The Plan
Commission shall review the application and make its recommendation, if any.
The Plan Commission shall forward the recommendations to the Village Board.
Upon receipt of the recommendations of the Village Board shall hold a public
hearing.
   C.   Standards for conditional use. The Village Board shall apply the
following factors:
      1.   The village's responsibility, as a public water supplier, to protect
and preserve the health, safety and welfare of its citizens.
      2.   The degree to which the proposed land use practice, activity or
facility may threaten or degrade groundwater quality in the village or the
recharge area for the village municipal wells.
      3.   The economic hardship which may be faced by the landowner if the
application is denied.
      4.   The availability of alternative options to the applicant, and the
cost, effect and extent of availability of such alternative options.
      5.   The proximity of the applicant's property to other potential sources
of contamination.
      6.   The then existing condition of the village's groundwater public
water well(s) and well fields, and the vulnerability to further contamination.
      7.   The direction of flow of groundwater and other factors in the area
of the applicant's property which may affect the speed of the groundwater flow,
including topography, depth of soil, extent of aquifer, depth to water table
and location of private wells.
      8.   Any other hydrogeological data or information which is available
from any public or private agency or organization.
      9.   The potential benefit, both economic and social, from the approval
of the applicant's request for a permit.
   D.   Types of conditions which the village board may require. The Village
Board may stipulate conditions and restrictions including but not limited to
the following:
      1.   A requirement for periodic environmental and safety sampling,
testing, and reporting to establish the continued protection of the public
water supply. The village may require an application to install one or more
groundwater monitoring well(s), at the expense of the applicant;
      2.   The establishment of safety structures to prevent groundwater
contamination;
      3.   The establishment of an operational safety plan to define processes
and procedures for material containment, operations monitoring, best management
practices, and stormwater runoff management to prevent groundwater
contamination;
      4.   Written policies and procedures for reporting and cleaning up any
spill of a hazardous material;
      5.   The provision of copies of all federal, state and local facility
operation approval or certificates, and on-going environmental monitoring
results to the village.
      6.   A written agreement pursuant to which the applicant agrees to be
held financially responsible for all environmental cleanup costs in the event
of groundwater contamination;
      7.   Bonds and/or securities satisfactory to the village for future
monitoring and cleanup costs if groundwater contamination occurs in the future.
      8.   The foregoing conditions are listed for illustration purposes and
are not exclusive.
   E.   Transfers of interest in property. Conditional use permits issued under
this section are non-transferable to successor owners of the property subject
to the permit without the express written consent of the Village Board. The
Village Board may set conditions and restrictions on the transfer including but
not limited to a stipulation that the permit shall not be transferred unless
the new owner expressly and in writing assumes the same terms, if any, for
personal liability as were required of the former owner in the conditional use
permit to be transferred. Written permission shall be obtained prior to the
voluntary transfer of the subject property. When an involuntary transfer
occurs, the new owner, trustee, or other successor to an interest in the real
property shall apply to the village within sixty (60) days for permission to
continue the use granted by the conditional use permit.
   F.   Payment of costs. The applicant shall be solely and exclusively
responsible for any and all costs associated with the application. The
conditional use will become effective only after any costs incurred by the
village during the conditional use application review process and billed to the
applicant are paid by the applicant. Those costs may include:
      1.   The village's expenses, including consultant's and attorney's fees,
if any, associated with the review at the invoiced amount plus administrative
costs.
      2.   The cost of an environmental impact study if so required by the
village or its designee.
      3.   The cost of groundwater monitoring or groundwater wells if required
by the village or its designee.
      4.   The costs of an appraisal for the property or other property
evaluation expense if required by the village or its designee. (Ord. 2021-1, 6-
17-2021)
2-4-7: EXISTING NON-CONFORMING USES:
The lawful nonconforming use of a structure or land existing at the time of the
adoption or amendment of this ordinance may be continued although the use does
not conform with the provisions of this ordinance. However, only that portion
of the land in actual use may be so continued and the structure may not be
extended, enlarged, reconstructed, substituted, moved, or structurally altered
except when required to do so by law or order or so as to comply with the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2021-1, 6-17-2021)
2-4-8: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
In the event an individual and/or facility causes the release of any
contaminants which endanger the Groundwater Protection Overlay District, the
individual/facility causing said release shall immediately cease and desist,
and provide clean-up satisfactory to the village.
   A.   The individual/facility shall be responsible for all costs of cleanup
and the village consultant fees at the invoice amount plus administrative costs
for oversight, review and documentation, which includes all of the cost of
village employees' time associated in any way with the clean-up, the cost of
village equipment employed and the cost of mileage reimbursed to the village
employees attributed to the clean-up.
   B.   Following any such discharge, the village may require additional test
monitoring or other requirements as outlined in Section
2-4-6 herein.
   C.   Violations: It shall be unlawful to construct or use any structure,
land or water in violation of this ordinance. Any person who is specifically
damaged by such violations may institute appropriate action or proceeding to
enjoin a violation of this chapter.
   D.   Penalties: Any person, firm or corporation who fails to comply with the
provisions of this ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit not less
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more than five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) plus the costs of the prosecution for each violation. Each day of a
continuing violation shall be a separate violation. (Ord. 2021-1, 6-17-2021)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
LIQUOR AND BEVERAGE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
3-1-1: State Statutes Adopted
3-1-2: Licenses Required
3-1-3: Application For License
3-1-4: License Fees
3-1-5: Part Time Licenses
3-1-6: License Restrictions
3-1-7: Closing Hours
3-1-8: Search Of Licensed Premises
3-1-9: Posting License
3-1-10: Revocation And Suspension Of License
3-1-11: Soda Water Beverages (Rep. by Ord. 2023-03, 6-8-2023)
3-1-12: Penalty
3-1-13: Nude Dancing In Licensed Establishments Prohibited
3-1-1: STATE STATUTES ADOPTED:
The provisions of chapter 125, Wisconsin statutes, relating to the sale of
intoxicating liquors and fermented malt beverages, except sections 125.04(11),
125.66(3), 125.04(5), 125.09(6), 125.69, 125.56(2), 125.62, 125.61, 125.68(12)
and 125.14(2&3), exclusive of any provisions thereof relating to the penalty to
be imposed or the punishment for violation of said statutes, are hereby adopted
and made a part of this chapter by reference. (Ord., 10-2-1995)
3-1-2: LICENSES REQUIRED:
   A.   When Required: No person, except as provided by section
3-1-1 of this chapter, shall distribute, vend, sell, offer or keep for sale at
retail or wholesale, deal or traffic in, or, for the purpose of evading any law
or ordinance of the village, give away any intoxicating liquor and fermented
malt beverage or cause the same to be done, without having procured a license
or permit as provided in this chapter, nor without complying with all the
provisions of this chapter and all statutes, ordinances and regulations of the
state and village applicable thereto.
   B.   Separate License Required For Each Place: A separate license shall be
required for each premises where intoxicating liquor and fermented malt
beverages are kept, sold or offered for sale; and no license shall be issued to
any person for the purpose of possessing, selling or offering for sale any
intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverage in any dwelling house, flat or
residential apartment. (Ord., 11-7-1978; amd. 1981 Code)
3-1-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for a license issued under chapter 125, Wisconsin statutes, shall
be made as required in section 125.04(3), Wisconsin statutes. Each application
shall be accompanied by the cost of publication required under section 125.04
(3), Wisconsin statutes. Opportunity shall be given by the village board to any
person to be heard for or against the granting of any license. Upon the
approval of the application by the village board, the village clerk shall issue
the applicant a license. Each license shall be numbered in the order in which
issued and shall specifically state the premises for which issued, the date of
issuance, the fee paid, and the name of the licensee. Except as provided in
section
3-1-5 of this chapter, all licenses shall remain in force until July 1 next
after the granting thereof, unless sooner revoked in the manner provided
herein. No license shall be transferable, either as to license or location,
except as provided by section 125.04(3), Wisconsin statutes, and except that
the village board may authorize a transfer of location, if the licensed
premises shall become unsuitable for occupancy. (Ord., 10-2-1995)
3-1-4: LICENSE FEES:
There shall be the following classes and denominations of license, which, when
issued by the village clerk under the authority of the village board after
payment of the fee hereinafter specified, shall permit the holder to sell, deal
or traffic in intoxicating liquor and fermented malt beverages, as provided in
chapter 125, Wisconsin statutes: (Ord., 10-2-1995)
   A.   Class A Beer License: Twenty-Five dollars ($25.00) per year.
   B.   Class A Liquor License: Seventy-Five dollars ($75.00) per year.
   C.   Class B Beer License: One Hundred Fifty dollars ($150.00) per year.
   D.   Class B Liquor License: One Hundred Fifty dollars ($150.00) per year.
   E.   Class C Wine License: One Hundred dollars ($100.00) per year.
   F.   Temporary (Picnic) Class B License: Ten dollars ($10.00).
   G.   Operator’s License: Thirty-two dollars ($32.00) for two years. (Ord.
2023-03, 6-8-2023)
3-1-5: PART TIME LICENSES:
   A.   Prorated License Fees: Licenses may be granted which shall expire on
June 30 next following, upon payment of such proportion of the annual license
fee as the number of months or fraction of the month remaining bears to twelve
(12). Licenses may also be issued at any time for a period of six (6) months in
any calendar year for which one-half (1/2) of the annual license fee shall be
paid. Such six (6) month license shall not be renewable during the calendar
year in which issued. (1968 Code § 10.01)
   B.   Class B Intoxicating Liquor Licenses: Class B intoxicating liquor
licenses can be issued for a fractional part of each year, with the amount
charged being one-twelfth (1/12) of the fee for each month.
   C.   Class B Beer Licenses: Class B beer licenses can be issued for a
fractional part of the year, but must be charged for at the rate of three-
fourths (3/4) of the full year's fee, regardless of how many months.
   D.   Class A Beer Licenses: Class A beer license fees cannot be prorated.
The six (6) month restriction shall be applicable. (1981 Code)
   E.   Provisional Alcohol Beverage License: Provisional license may only be
issued to someone who has applied for a permanent retail alcohol beverage
license and is waiting for approval. Fee may not exceed fifteen dollars
($15.00). License expires after sixty (60) days or when the permanent license
is issued, whichever comes first. Provisional license may be revoked if false
statements are found on the application for the permanent license. Said license
may not be issued in excess of village's normal alcohol beverage (class B
liquor) quota. No person may hold more than one provisional license. (Ord., 10-
2-1995)
3-1-6: LICENSE RESTRICTIONS:
In addition to the requirements imposed by provisions of the Wisconsin statutes
adopted by reference in section
3-1-1 of this chapter, the following restrictions shall apply to the issuance
of licenses or permits pursuant to this chapter: (1968 Code § 10.01; amd. 1981
Code)
   A.   Requirements For Licenses: No license or permit shall be issued to any
person who is not twenty one (21) years of age or over, of good moral
character, a citizen of the United States and the state of Wisconsin and a
resident of the state continuously for one year prior to application. This
subsection shall not apply to Wisconsin corporations but shall apply to all
officers and directors of any such corporation. No more than two (2) class A or
B licenses shall be issued in the state to any one person, and in each
application the applicant shall state that he has not applied for another such
license within the state. (Ord., 10-2-1995)
   B.   Location: No retail class A or B intoxicating liquor license shall be
issued for premises less than three hundred feet (300') from an established
public school, parochial school, hospital or church, except those licensed on
June 30, 1947.
   C.   Effect Of Revocation Of License: No license shall be issued for any
premises if a license covering such premises has been revoked within six (6)
months prior to application. No license shall be issued to any person who has
had a license, issued pursuant to this chapter, revoked within twelve (12)
months prior to application. (1968 Code § 10.01; amd. 1981 Code)
   D.   Inspection Of Application And Premises: The village clerk shall notify
the fire chief and building inspector of all license and permit applications,
and these officials shall inspect or cause to be inspected such application and
premises to determine whether the applicant and the premises sought to be
licensed comply with the regulations, ordinances and laws applicable thereto
and the applicant's fitness for the trust to be imposed. These officials shall
furnish to the village board, in writing, the information derived from such
investigation. No license or permit provided for in this chapter shall be
issued without the approval of the village board. (Ord. 2012-2, 4-16-2012)
   E.   Health And Sanitation: No license shall be issued for any premises
which do not conform to the sanitary, safety and health requirements of the
state industrial commission and the state board of health and to all such
ordinances and regulations adopted by the village. Every premises for which a
license is issued, except a single day (picnic) license, must be connected to
the village's sewer and water systems 1 .
   F.   Tax Delinquencies: No license shall be granted for operation on any
premises upon which taxes or assessments or other financial claims of the
village are delinquent or unpaid.
   G.   Unobstructed View Required: All windows of any licensed premises shall
be of clear glass and the premises shall be so arranged as to furnish a clear
view of the entire premises from the sidewalk. There shall be no partition, box
stalls, screens, curtains, plants, advertising placard or other devices which
shall obstruct the view of said premises from the general observation of
persons passing, provided, booths not higher than forty eight inches (48") from
the floor shall not be construed as in conflict with the foregoing provisions;
and provided further, retail class B licenses shall permit the holder to serve
such beverages in a separate room at banquets and dinners. All blinds, curtains
or other obstructions to a clear view of the inside of all premises shall be
open and drawn aside during the hours the premises are required to be closed.
   H.   Street Level: Except in the sole discretion of the village board, class
B licenses will not be issued for premises above or below the street level, but
this shall not prohibit service by hotels or clubs to bona fide guests or
members.
   I.   Employee's Age Limit: No retail class B licensee shall employ any
person under eighteen (18) years of age, but this shall not apply to hotels,
restaurants or combination grocery stores and taverns where not to exceed
twenty percent (20%) of the gross revenue is derived from the sale of fermented
malt beverages or intoxicating liquors thereof to which women are customarily
admitted. This shall not apply to nightclubs.
   J.   Restrictions On Clubs: No club shall sell fermented malt beverages or
intoxicating liquors except to members and guests invited by members.
   K.   Sale On Credit Or Trade In Prohibited: No retail class A or B licensee
shall sell or offer to sell any fermented malt beverage or intoxicating liquor
to any person on credit, excepting credit extended by a hotel or club to a
resident guest or bona fide member, and by grocers and druggists who maintain a
credit system in connection with other purchases as well. No licensee shall
sell fermented malt beverages or intoxicating liquor to any person on a
passbook or store order or receive from any person any goods, wares,
merchandise or other articles in exchange for fermented malt beverages or
intoxicating liquor.
   L.   Disorder Or Indecency Prohibited: Each licensed premises shall be
conducted at all times in an orderly manner, and no disorderly, riotous or
indecent conduct shall be allowed at any time on any licensed premises.
   M.   Gambling Prohibited: No gambling or game of chance shall be permitted
upon the licensed premises. Slot machines or any device of chance are
prohibited and shall not be kept upon the premises. (1968 Code § 10.01; amd.
1981 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 2, chapter 2 of this code.
3-1-7: CLOSING HOURS:
Closing hours shall be as prescribed by chapter 125, Wisconsin statutes. (Ord.,
10-2-1995)
3-1-8: SEARCH OF LICENSED PREMISES:
It shall be a condition of any license issued hereunder that the licensed
premises may be entered and inspected at any reasonable hour by any police
officer of the village without any warrant, and the application for a license
hereunder shall be deemed a consent to this provision. Any refusal to permit
such inspection shall automatically operate as a revocation of any license
issued hereunder and shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. (1968 Code §
10.01; amd. 1981 Code)
3-1-9: POSTING LICENSE:
Licenses or permits issued under this chapter shall be posted and displayed as
provided in section 125.04(10), Wisconsin statutes, and any licensee or
permittee who shall fail to post his license or permit as herein required shall
be presumed to be operating without a license. (Ord., 10-2-1995)
3-1-10: REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Procedure: Except as hereinafter provided, the provisions of sections
125.12(2)(a) and 125.12(2)(b)(c), Wisconsin statutes, shall be applicable to
proceedings for the revocation or suspension of all licenses or permits granted
under this chapter. Revocation or suspension proceedings may be instituted by
the village board upon its own motion by adoption of a resolution. (Ord., 10-2-
1995)
   B.   Suspension Of License: The village president or his authorized
representative, upon obtaining reasonable information that any licensee has
violated any provision of this chapter or any state or federal liquor or
fermented malt beverage law or committed any felony, may suspend the license or
permit of such person for a period not to exceed ten (10) days, pending hearing
by the village board pursuant to subsection A of this section. (1968 Code §
10.01; amd. 1981 Code)
   C.   Automatic Revocation: Any license or permit issued under the provisions
of this chapter shall stand revoked without further proceedings upon the
conviction of a licensee or permittee or his employee, agent or representative
of a second offense under this chapter or chapter 125, Wisconsin statutes, or
any felony. (Ord., 10-2-1995)
   D.   Revocation For Nonuse: Any license or permit issued hereunder may be
revoked if not used within thirty (30) days after issuance or if its use is
discontinued for thirty (30) days or more.
   E.   Repossession Of License Or Permit: If any license or permit issued
under this chapter which shall be revoked or suspended by the village board,
president or action of any court, or pursuant to subsection C of this section,
it shall be the duty of the village clerk to notify the licensee or permittee
of such suspension or revocation and to notify the appropriate village official
who shall take physical possession of the license or permit wherever it may be
found and file such permit in the clerk's office. (1968 Code § 10.01; amd. 1981
Code)
3-1-11: SODA WATER BEVERAGES:
(Rep. by Ord. 2023-03, 6-8-2023)
3-1-12: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
a penalty as provided in this code. (1968 Code § 10.06)
3-1-13: NUDE DANCING IN LICENSED ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED:
   A.   Unlawful Acts: It is unlawful for any person to perform or engage in,
or for any licensee or manager or agent of the licensee to permit any person,
employee, entertainer or patron to perform or engage in any live act,
demonstration, dance or exhibition on the premises of a licensed establishment
which:
Shows his or her genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with
less than a fully opaque covering; or
Shows any portion of the female breast below a point immediately above the top
of the areola; or
Shows the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
   B.   Exemptions: The provisions of this section do not apply to the
following licensed establishments: theaters, performing arts centers, civic
centers, and dinner theaters where live dance, ballet, music and dramatic
performances of serious artistic merit are offered on a regular basis and in
which the predominant business or attraction is not the offering to customers
of entertainment which is intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual
gratification to such customers and where the establishment is not
distinguished by an emphasis on, or the advertising or promotion of, employees
engaging in nude erotic dancing.
   C.   Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following terms shall
mean:
    LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT: Any establishment licensed by the village board of
the village of Reedsville to sell alcohol beverages pursuant to chapter 125,
Wisconsin statutes.
   LICENSEE: The holder of a retail "class A", "class B", class "B", class "A",
or "class C" license granted by the village board of the village of Reedsville
pursuant to chapter 125, Wisconsin statutes.
   D.   Penalties: Any person, partnership, corporation, limited liability
company, limited liability partnership, or other entity which violates any of
the provisions of this section shall be subject to a forfeiture of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for the first offense, five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the
second offense, and one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the third offense,
together with all statutory costs and fees and costs of prosecution. A separate
offense and violation shall be deemed committed on each day on which a
violation occurs or continues. In addition, the third violation of this section
shall be deemed a basis for revocation, suspension, or nonrenewal of an alcohol
beverage license under section 125.12, Wisconsin statutes. (Ord. 2001-01, 1-2-
2001)
CHAPTER 2
CIGARETTE SALES
SECTION:
3-2-1: License Fee
3-2-2: State Statutes Adopted
3-2-3: Penalty
3-2-4: Restrictive Selling
3-2-5: Tobacco Products Restrictions
3-2-6: Tax Delinquencies
3-2-1: LICENSE FEE:
The annual fee for a license to sell or dispose of cigarettes, as provided in
section 134.65, Wisconsin statutes, shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord., 10-
19-1998; amd. Ord. 2023-03, 6-8-2023)
3-2-2: STATE STATUTES ADOPTED:
The provisions of chapter 134, Wisconsin statutes, specifically 134.66,
relating to the sale of tobacco products to persons under the age of eighteen
(18) and chapter 48, specifically 48.983(2) relating to possessing, buying,
attempting to buy or falsely representing age to receive any cigarette or
tobacco product, exclusive of any provisions thereof relating to the penalty to
be imposed or the punishment for violation of said statutes are hereby adopted
and made a part of this chapter by reference. (Ord., 12-2-1996)
3-2-3: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be fined not
more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor less than twenty five dollars
($25.00) for the first offense and not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00)
nor less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) for the second or subsequent
offense. If upon such second or subsequent violation, the person so violating
this chapter was personally guilty of a failure to exercise due care to prevent
violation thereof, he shall be fined not more than three hundred dollars
($300.00) nor less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) or imprisoned not
exceeding sixty (60) days or both. Conviction shall immediately terminate the
license of the person convicted of being personally guilty of such failure to
exercise due care and such person shall not be entitled to another license
hereunder for a period of five (5) years thereafter, nor shall he in that
period act as the servant or agent of a person licensed hereunder for the
performance of the acts authorized by such license 1 . (Ord., 12-2-1996)
 
Notes
1 1. WSA 134.65(5).
3-2-4: RESTRICTIVE SELLING:
No retailer may sell or give cigarettes or tobacco products to any person under
the age of eighteen (18). (Ord., 12-2-1996)
3-2-5: TOBACCO PRODUCTS RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   In this section, the following terms have the following definitions:
    CIGARETTE: Has the meaning given in section 139.30(1), Wisconsin statutes,
which is "any roll of tobacco wrapped in paper or any substance other than
tobacco".
   LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: Has the meaning given in section 30.50(4s),
Wisconsin statutes.
   TOBACCO PRODUCTS: Has the meaning given in section 139.75(12), Wisconsin
statutes, which is cigars; cheroots; stogies; periques; granulated, plug cut,
crimp cut, ready rubbed and other smoking tobacco; snuff; snuff flour;
cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine cut and other chewing tobaccos; shorts;
refuse scraps, clipping, cuttings, and sweepings of tobacco and other kinds and
forms of tobacco prepared in such manner as to be suitable for chewing or
smoking in a pipe or otherwise, or both for chewing and smoking; but "tobacco
products" does not include cigarettes, as defined under section 139.30(1),
Wisconsin statutes, and in this subsection.
   B.   Except as provided in subsection C of this section, no person under
eighteen (18) years of age may do any of the following:
      1.   Buy or attempt to buy any cigarette or tobacco product.
      2.   Falsely represent his or her age for the purpose of receiving any
cigarette or tobacco product.
      3.   Possess any cigarette or tobacco product.
   C.   A person under eighteen (18) years of age may purchase or possess
cigarettes or tobacco products for the sole purpose of resale in the course of
employment during his or her working hours if employed by a retailer licensed
under section 134.65(1), Wisconsin statutes.
   D.   A law enforcement officer shall seize any cigarette or tobacco product
involved in any violation of subsection B of this section committed in his or
her presence.
   E.   This section incorporates the terms of section 938.983, Wisconsin
statutes, and any amendments thereto are incorporated herein by reference. If
any provision of this section is in conflict with section 938.983, Wisconsin
statutes, the terms of section 938.983, Wisconsin statutes, will control and
that portion of this section will be deemed repealed.
   F.   Any violation of this section shall be subject to the general penalty
provisions of title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 2000-8, 11-20-2000, eff.
11-21-2000)
3-2-6: TAX DELINQUENCIES:
No license shall be granted for selling of cigarettes or tobacco products on
any premises upon which taxes or assessments or other financial claims of the
village are delinquent or unpaid. (Ord., 12-2-1996)
CHAPTER 3
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS; SOLICITORS
SECTION:
3-3-1: Definitions
3-3-2: Permit Required; Fee
3-3-3: Application For Permit; Investigation
3-3-4: Bond Required
3-3-5: Issuance Of Permit
3-3-6: Exemptions From Licensing Provisions
3-3-7: Prepayments
3-3-8: Health Officer's Certificate (Rep. by Ord. 2012-2, 4-16-2012)
3-3-9: Regulations For Permit Holders
3-3-10: Surrender Permit, Prohibited Acts
3-3-11: Revocation Of Permit
3-3-12: Violation, Fraudulent Sales
3-3-13: Failure To Pay Penalties
3-3-14: Penalty
3-3-15: Solicitors
3-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
SALE OF MERCHANDISE: Includes a sale in which the personal services rendered
upon or in connection with the merchandise constitutes the greatest part of
value for the price received, but does not include a farm auction sale
conducted by or for a resident farmer of personal property used on the farm or
the sale of produce or other perishable products at retail or wholesale by a
resident of the village of Reedsville.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT: A person who engages in the sale of merchandise at any
place in the village of Reedsville temporarily and who does not intend to
become and does not become a permanent merchant of that place. (Ord. 2002-4, 9-
3-2002)
3-3-2: PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE:
No transient merchant shall engage in the sale of merchandise within the
village of Reedsville without first obtaining a permit as set forth herein, and
paying the fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day. (Ord. 2002-4, 9-3-
2002)
3-3-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; INVESTIGATION:
   A.   File Application; Fee: Any person intending to engage in the "sale of
merchandise" as defined herein shall obtain a transient merchant permit
application form from the village clerk. The applicant shall complete all
information on the application form and shall attach a copy of all contracts,
order forms, or other documents to be used in the sale of merchandise covered
by this chapter. No permit shall be granted until the provisions of this
section shall have been complied with.
The applicant shall include a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) with the
application form to defray the costs of investigation of the facts stated in
the application. The application shall be sworn to by the applicant and filed
with the village clerk and shall contain such additional information as the
village board shall require for the effective enforcement of this chapter and
the safeguarding of the residents of the village from fraud, misconduct, or
abuse. (Ord. 2005-3, 12-19-2005, eff. 1-1-2006)
   B.   Investigation: Upon receipt of each such application, the village
officials shall institute such investigation of the applicant's business and
moral character as he deems necessary for the protection of public good, and
shall endorse his approval or disapproval upon said application within seventy
two (72) hours after it has been filed with him, and shall issue or deny the
permit in accordance with his findings after presentation by the applicant of a
receipt of the village clerk showing payment of the required fee. (1968 Code §
10.03)
3-3-4: BOND REQUIRED:
If the village officials determine, from investigation of said application,
that the interests of the village or of inhabitants of the village require
protection against possible misconduct of the licensee or that the applicant is
otherwise qualified, but due to causes beyond his control is unable to supply
all of the information required by subsection 3-3-3A of this chapter, he may
require the applicant to file with the village clerk a bond in the sum of two
thousand dollars ($2,000.00) with surety acceptable to the village clerk,
running to the village, conditioned that he will fully comply with the
ordinances of the village and laws of the state relating to peddlers,
canvassers or transient merchants, and guaranteeing to any citizen of the
village doing business with him that the property purchased will be delivered
according to the representations of the applicants; provided, that the action
to recover on any such bond shall be commenced within six (6) months after the
expiration of the license of the principal. (1968 Code § 10.03)
Ed Note:
   For further information about bond policies, please see Ord. 2022-01
3-3-5: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
All permits shall be numbered in the order in which they are issued and shall
state clearly the place where the business may be carried on, the kind of
goods, wares and merchandise to be sold, disposed of or contracted for, the
dates of issuance and expiration of permit, the fee paid and the name and
address of the licensee and all employees covered by said permit, and the date
of revocation of permit. Such permit shall automatically expire on January 1
following the date of issuance of such permit unless issued for a shorter
period of time. No permit shall be granted to a person under eighteen (18)
years of age and no applicant to whom a license has been refused or who has had
a permit which has been revoked shall make further application until a period
of at least six (6) months shall have elapsed since the last previous rejection
or revocation, unless he can show that the reason for such rejection or
revocation no longer exists. Every permit holder, while exercising his permit,
shall post his permit in a conspicuous place on the premises or his person and
shall exhibit the same upon demand of any officer, or a customer or prospective
vendee. A permit shall not be assignable and any holder of such permit who
allows it to be used by any other person shall be guilty of a violation of this
section. Whenever a permit shall be lost or destroyed, a duplicate in lieu
thereof under the original application may be issued by the village clerk upon
the filing with him by the permit holder of an affidavit setting forth the
circumstances of the loss and what, if any, search has been made for its
recovery, and upon the payment of a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). (1968
Code § 10.03; amd. Ord. 2023-03, 6-8-2023)
3-3-6: EXEMPTIONS FROM LICENSING PROVISIONS:
   A.   This chapter shall not include persons selling services, goods or
materials at wholesale to dealers in such articles, newsboys, vendors of dairy
products, fruit juices, bakery goods, groceries or ice products to any regular
customers on established routes, local area merchants or their employees in
delivering such goods in the regular course of business, any farmer or truck
gardener who shall vend, sell or dispose of, or offer to sell, vend or dispose
of the products of the farm or garden occupied and cultivated by him, except as
provided in section
3-3-9 of this chapter, nor governmental agents in the performance of their
official duties.
   B.   This chapter shall not prohibit any sale required by statute or by
order of any court, or to prevent any person conducting a bona fide auction
sale pursuant to law. (1968 Code § 10.03)
   C.   Any ex-soldier of the United States in any war who has a twenty five
percent (25%) disability or more or has a cardiac disability recognized by the
U.S. department of veterans' affairs, and any person disabled to the extent of
the loss of one arm or one leg or more or who has been declared blind as
defined under title XVI of the social security act, who has been a bona fide
resident of the state of Wisconsin for at least five (5) years and who has been
granted a special statewide peddler's license is exempt from the provisions of
this chapter. While engaged in the business specified in section
3-3-1 of this chapter, the person shall physically carry the license and proof
required for its issuance. A blind person shall also carry an identification
photograph which is not more than three (3) years old. This exemption is based
on section 440.51, Wisconsin statutes.
   D.   Religious, charitable, patriotic, educational, or philanthropic
agencies or their agents are exempt from the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 2002-4, 9-3-2002)
3-3-7: PREPAYMENTS:
All orders taken by a permit holder under this chapter who accepts or receives
payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery shall be in writing,
in duplicate, stating the terms thereof and the amount paid in advance, and one
copy shall be given to the purchaser at the time the deposit of money is paid.
(1968 Code § 10.03)
3-3-8: HEALTH OFFICER'S CERTIFICATE:
(Rep. by Ord. 2012-2, 4-16-2012)
3-3-9: REGULATIONS FOR PERMIT HOLDERS:
A transient merchant holding a permit shall:
   A.   Not falsely or fraudulently misrepresent the quantity, character or
quality of any article offered for sale, or offer for sale any unwholesome or
tainted food or foodstuffs, nor intentionally misrepresent to any prospective
customer the purpose of his visit or solicitation, nor the name of the business
of his principal, if any, nor the source of supply of the goods, wares or
merchandise which he sells or offers for sale, nor the disposition of the
proceeds or profits of his sales.
   B.   Not use the permit provided by the village after the expiration or
revocation of the permit.
   C.   Keep the premises in a clean and sanitary condition and the foodstuffs
offered for sale well covered and protected from dirt, dust and insects.
   D.   Not go in or upon private residences, businesses or offices without
having been requested or invited to do so by the owner, occupant or occupants
thereof. (1968 Code § 10.03)
3-3-10: SURRENDER PERMIT, PROHIBITED ACTS:
Upon expiration of the permit, the holder shall surrender the same to the
village clerk or his authorized representative. No person shall alter or change
in any manner any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter, and such
alteration or the failure of the holder of same to display the permit in a
conspicuous place on the premises or to exhibit the same upon demand of any
officer or customer or prospective vendee shall be cause for revocation of such
permit. (1968 Code § 10.03)
3-3-11: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
The village president or his authorized representative may, at any time, for a
violation of this chapter or any other village ordinance or any law, revoke any
permit issued under these provisions. When a permit shall be revoked, no refund
of any unearned portion of the permit fee shall be made. Notice of such
revocation and the reason or reasons therefor in writing shall be immediately
served personally upon the person named in the application or by mailing the
same to the permit holder at the named premises, and by filing a copy of such
notice with the village clerk. Appeal from revocation shall be made to the
village board within thirty (30) days of revocation. (1968 Code § 10.03)
3-3-12: VIOLATION, FRAUDULENT SALES:
Anyone who shall conduct any business in the village without first obtaining
the license or permit required under this chapter shall be deemed to have
engaged in a fraudulent sale and shall be subject to the penalty as set forth
in section
1-4-1 of this code for each such fraudulent sale, and in addition, shall be
subject to penalty for operating without a permit. Anyone who shall have
obtained the permit by supplying false information or by fraud shall be deemed
to have operated without a permit and the penalty therefor and for each
fraudulent sale shall apply.
All violations of this chapter shall be deemed to have been made with the
authority of the company said merchant, peddler, canvasser or solicitor
represents and shall subject the company as well as the individual to the
penalty set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1968 Code § 10.03)
3-3-13: FAILURE TO PAY PENALTIES:
In the event of the failure to pay the penalties imposed by section
1-4-1 of this code, all bonds executed under this chapter and any property
within the village shall be subject to all legal processes against said bond or
property authorized by law including attachment and/or execution to secure the
payment of such penalties. (1968 Code § 10.03)
3-3-14: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall be subject to
a penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1968 Code § 10.06)
3-3-15: SOLICITORS:
   A.   Application For Permission: Anyone desiring to solicit funds within the
village limits shall apply in writing to the village board, stating their names
and addresses, the organization they represent, the address of said
organization and the names and addresses of any other parties soliciting for
said organization within the village.
   B.   Investigation, Approval: The village shall then have the local law
enforcement officers investigate the information referred to in subsection A of
this section and issue a report to the village board. The report shall be made
to the board within seventy two (72) hours, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and
holidays and shall contain a recommendation of the law enforcement officers. If
the report shall be favorable, no further action need be taken. If the report
shall be unfavorable, the applicant shall be notified and shall have an
opportunity at the next board meeting to answer the report in person.
   C.   Hours: Hours of solicitation shall only be during the hours of
daylight, but in no case earlier than nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or later than
seven o'clock (7:00) P.M., nor shall any solicitation take place on Sundays.
   D.   False Claims Of Endorsement: No solicitor shall indicate that he/she or
the group they represent, or the cause they represent, has been endorsed by the
village board or such like statement.
   E.   Proof Of Registration: All solicitors and/or organizations shall show
proof that they or it are registered with the state of Wisconsin.
   F.   Exceptions: This section shall not apply to residents of the village as
solicitors.
   G.   Penalty: Permission granted under this section shall not be construed
as relieving any party of liability for any fraud or misrepresentation, nor for
violation of any other law or ordinance. Any person who shall violate the same
shall be subject to the penalties provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each solicitation shall be considered as a separate
violation. (Ord., 9-20-1982)
CHAPTER 4
MOBILE HOME PARKS
SECTION:
3-4-1: Application For License
3-4-2: Plans And Specifications Required
3-4-3: Renewal Of License
3-4-4: Fees
3-4-5: Hearing To Determine Fee, Appeal
3-4-6: Nonpark Mobile Homes
3-4-7: Nonpayment, Lien
3-4-8: Distribution Of Collections
3-4-9: Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code Adopted
3-4-10: Conditions
3-4-11: Revocation Of Permit
3-4-12: Penalties
3-4-13: Definition
3-4-1: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Original application for a mobile home park license shall be filed with the
village clerk, shall be in writing, signed by the applicant and shall contain
the following:
   A.   The name and address of the applicant.
   B.   The location and legal description of the mobile home park.
   C.   The complete plan of the park. (1968 Code § 2.09)
3-4-2: PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS REQUIRED:
Accompanying and to be filed with an original application for a mobile home
park shall be plans and specifications which shall be in compliance with all
applicable village ordinances and provisions of the state board of health. The
village clerk, after approval of the application by the village board and upon
completion of the work according to the plans, shall issue such license. A
mobile housing development harboring only nondependent mobile homes as defined
in section 66.058(1)(f), shall not be required to provide a service building.
(1968 Code § 2.09)
3-4-3: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
Upon application by any licensee and after approval of the village board, and
upon payment of the annual license fee, the clerk shall issue a certificate
renewing the license for another year, unless sooner revoked. The application
for renewal shall be in writing, signed by the applicant on forms furnished by
the village. (1968 Code § 2.09)
3-4-4: FEES:
   A.   License Fee: The licensing authority shall exact from the licensee an
annual fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00).
   B.   Transfer: The mobile home park permit is not transferable from person
to another or from place to another.
   C.   Personal Property Fee: In addition to the license fees provided in
subsection A of this section, each local taxing authority shall collect from
each occupied mobile home occupying space or lots in a mobile home park in the
village a monthly parking permit fee computed as follows: Beginning January 1,
1970, the local assessor shall determine the total fair market value of each
occupied mobile home in his district subject to the monthly parking permit fee.
The fair market value, minus the tax exempt household furnishing thus
established, shall be equalized to the general level of assessment on other
real and personal property in the district. The value of each occupied mobile
home thus determined shall be multiplied by the tax rate established on the
preceding January 1 assessment of general property. The parking permit fee
shall first be reduced by the credit allowed under section 79.10, Wisconsin
statutes. The total annual parking permit fee thus computed shall be divided by
twelve (12) and shall represent the monthly mobile home parking permit fee. The
fee shall be applicable to occupied mobile homes moving into the tax district
anytime during the year. The park operator shall furnish information to the
village clerk and the assessor on occupied mobile homes added to this park
within five (5) days after their arrival, on forms prescribed by the department
of revenue. As soon as the assessor receives the notice of an addition of an
occupied home to a park, he shall determine its fair market value and notify
the clerk of his determination. The clerk shall equalize the fair market value
established by the assessor and shall apply the tax rate for that year, divide
the annual parking permit fee thus determined by twelve (12) and notify the
mobile home owner of the monthly fee to be collected from said mobile home
owner. The mobile home park operator shall collect the monthly parking fee from
the mobile home owner. Liability for payment of the fee shall begin on the
first day of the next succeeding month and shall remain on the mobile home only
for such months as the occupied mobile home remains in the tax district. A new
fee rate and a new valuation shall be established each January and shall
continue for that calendar year. The valuation established shall be subject to
review as are other values established under chapter 70, Wisconsin statutes. If
the board of review reduces a valuation on which previous monthly payments have
been made, the tax district shall refund past excess fee payments. The monthly
parking permit fee shall be paid by the mobile home owner to the mobile park
owner, said payments to be made to the village treasurer by said mobile park
owner on or before the tenth of the month following the month for which such
parking permit fee is due. No such fee shall be imposed for any space occupied
by mobile home accompanied by an automobile if the mobile home and automobile
bear license plates issued by any other state, for an accumulating period not
to exceed sixty (60) days in any twelve (12) months or if the occupants of the
mobile home are nonresident tourists or vacationists. Exemption certificates in
duplicate shall be accepted by the village treasurer from qualified nonresident
tourists or vacationists in lieu of monthly mobile home permit fees. When one
or more persons occupying a mobile home are employed in this state, there shall
be no exemption from the monthly parking permit fee.
   The licensee of a park shall be liable for the monthly parking permit fee
for any mobile home occupying space therein as well as the owner and occupant
thereof. (1968 Code § 2.09; amd. Ord., 1-18-1999; Ord. 2010-8, 10-18-2010; Ord.
2023-03, 6-8-2023)
3-4-5: HEARING TO DETERMINE FEE, APPEAL:
   A.   Determination: The village shall make preliminary determination of the
amount of the per mobile home parking permit fee to be levied against a mobile
home park, and shall give notice of hearing on said proposed parking permit fee
to be held in the village hall where any interested person shall have an
opportunity to be heard.
   B.   Posting Notice: The village clerk shall post a notice of said hearing
in at least three (3) public places within the village, one posting of which
shall be in a conspicuous place on each mobile home park property. At least one
week shall intervene between the date of posting of such notice and the time of
the meeting. The village may, at such meeting, or at an adjourned meeting,
confirm or change the proposed parking permit fee and upon final determination
of the amount of the parking permit fee shall post notice on each mobile home
park property, stating the amount of the parking permit fee as finally
determined.
   C.   Appeal: If the owner of any parcel of land affected by such
determination feels himself aggrieved thereby, he may, within twenty (20) days
after the date of posting such determination, appeal to the circuit court of
the county, notice thereof to be served upon the village clerk, and by
executing a bond to the village in the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00)
with two (2) sureties or a bonding company to be approved by the clerk
conditioned for the faithful prosecution of such appeal and the payment of all
costs adjudged against him. The clerk, in case such an appeal is taken, shall
make a brief statement of the proceedings had before the board, with its
determination thereon and shall submit the same with all relevant papers to the
clerk of the circuit court. Such appeal shall be tried and determined in the
same manner as cases originally commenced in the court. An appeal brought under
this chapter shall not be construed to prevent, during the pendency of such
appeal, the collection of any such monthly assessment currently or subsequently
to become due.
   D.   Exclusion: This section shall not apply where a mobile home park is
owned and operated by any county under the provisions of section 59.07(13)(b),
Wisconsin statutes. (1968 Code § 2.09)
3-4-6: NONPARK MOBILE HOMES:
No mobile home is permitted by local ordinance to be located outside of a
licensed mobile home park. (Ord. 2010-8, 10-18-2010)
3-4-7: NONPAYMENT, LIEN:
Any mobile home park or trailer camp license fee and any mobile home parking
permit fee not paid when due creates a lien in favor of the village in the
delinquent amount upon the real estate parcel where such mobile home park,
trailer camp or mobile home is situated or was situated at the time when the
liability for such fee was incurred, effective as of the first day of the month
or year for which such fee is levied. The village shall provide that all such
license or permit fees not paid when due shall be extended upon the tax roll as
delinquent tax against the parcel where such park, camp or home is or was
situated at the time when liability for such fee was incurred, and such
proceedings in relation to the collection, return and sale of property for
delinquent real estate taxes shall apply to such delinquent license or permit
fee. (1968 Code § 2.09)
3-4-8: DISTRIBUTION OF COLLECTIONS:
The village may retain ten percent (10%) of the monthly parking permit fees
collected in each month to cover the cost of administration and shall pay to
the school district in which the park is located, within twenty (20) days after
the end of each month, such proportion of the remainder of the fees collected
in the preceding month and the credit allowed under section 79.10, Wisconsin
statutes, as the ratio of the most recent property tax levy for school purposes
bears to the total tax levy for all purposes in the village. If the mobile home
park is located in more than one school district, each district shall receive a
share in the proportion that its property tax levy for school purposes bears to
the total school tax levy. (1968 Code § 2.09)
3-4-9: WISCONSIN UNIFORM DWELLING CODE ADOPTED:
The Wisconsin uniform dwelling code, chapter comm. 26 of the Wisconsin
administrative code, as amended from time to time, and including all future
amendments, is adopted and incorporated by reference. (Ord. 2009-2, 5-18-2009)
3-4-10: CONDITIONS:
   A.   The mobile home park owner agrees to supply a copy of their rental
agreement application and the village building inspector's approved occupant
report before the mobile home can be moved into the park.
   B.   The mobile home applicant agrees to install, provide, and maintain
adequate, temporary sanitary facilities at the site during installation which
are sufficient to prevent a public health hazard.
   C.   The mobile home applicant's plan will prevent any public nuisance
associated with noise, dust, odors, fires, explosions, water pollution, and
erosion.
   D.   The mobile home applicant will install and maintain adequate physical
structures and/or operational controls to prevent trespassing, littering, and
discharge of waste and to prevent nuisances on private and public lands
adjacent to the mobile home site during installation.
   E.   A single-family mobile home can be no less than nine hundred eighty
(980) square feet in area excluding the hitch, built on a permanent chassis,
designed to be used as a dwelling, and includes the plumbing, heating, air
conditioning and electrical systems contained in it.
   F.   The mobile home will be permanently affixed to the real estate and all
electric, water, and septic connections will be made, so as to be an integral
part thereof within thirty (30) days from the date of installation.
   G.   The mobile home will be provided with compatible permanent skirting
properly installed and maintained. The skirting shall be installed within
ninety (90) days of installation of the mobile home. A permanent foundation,
wall, or basement may be erected to support any mobile home in lieu of the
above requirement for skirting.
   H.   The mobile home must meet all health regulations in respect to water,
septic disposal and sanitation.
   I.   If the physical condition of a mobile home presence is a threat to the
health and safety of its occupants or others, or by its physical appearance,
disrupts the right of enjoyment and use of the community by others, the tenancy
may be terminated 1 . (Ord. 2010-8, 10-18-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. WSA 710.15(5m)(h).
3-4-11: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
All mobile home park permits are issued conditionally. After notice and a
hearing, the village board may revoke a mobile home park permit previously
issued in the event the applicant fails to maintain compliance with the
conditions listed in section
3-4-10 of this chapter. (Ord. 2010-8, 10-18-2010)
3-4-12: PENALTIES:
Each day that a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate
offense. This chapter may be enforced by a civil action. A violation of this
chapter is deemed a public nuisance and may be enjoined. (Ord. 2010-8, 10-18-
2010)
3-4-13: DEFINITION:
MOBILE HOME PARK: Any plot or plots of ground upon which three (3) or more
mobile homes, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located. Once a
mobile home park has three (3) located mobile homes, no additional mobile homes
can be brought into the park 1 . (Ord. 2010-8, 10-18-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. WSA 66.0435(1)(cg).
CHAPTER 5
CATV FRANCHISE
SECTION:
3-5-1: Definitions
3-5-2: Grant Of Nonexclusive Franchise
3-5-3: Compliance With Applicable Laws And Ordinances
3-5-4: Effective Date And Period
3-5-5: Applicable Area
3-5-6: Liability And Indemnification
3-5-7: Operation And Maintenance Of The System
3-5-8: Rates And Charges To Be Filed With The Village Clerk And Published By
The Company At Company's Expense
3-5-9: Rights Reserved To The Village
3-5-10: Services
3-5-11: Safety Requirements
3-5-12: Construction And Maintenance
3-5-13: Removal Of Facilities
3-5-14: Transfer Or Assignment
3-5-15: Revocation
3-5-16: System Security; Tampering With Cable Television Equipment
3-5-17: Surrender Right
3-5-18: Payment To The Village
3-5-19: Severability
3-5-20: Force And Effect
3-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivation shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the
plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
BASIC SERVICE: Consists of those television broadcast station signals required
to be carried by the grantee's cable television system pursuant to rules and
regulations of the federal communications commission. Basic service generally
includes each of the three (3) major networks (ABC, CBS and NBC) and most
educational and independent stations that are receivable in the village off the
air directly from the television broadcast stations. Additional program
services may be included in the basic service at the option of the grantee.
BASIC SERVICE REVENUE: The revenue collected by the grantee from subscribers
for the provision of basic service and shall not include revenues collected
from premium services.
CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM: Hereinafter referred to also as "cable system" or
"system", means a system of coaxial cables or other electrical conductors and
transmission equipment used or to be used primarily to receive television or
radio signals directly or indirectly off the air and transmit them and other
related services to subscribers for various fees.
COMPANY OR GRANTEE: Shall be           , a            corporation, or anyone
who succeeds it in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
PREMIUM SERVICE: The term is comprised of any communications or program service
not included within the definition of "basic service", such as, but not limited
to, movie services, sporting events and other satellite delivered programming,
as well as advertising, leased channels, shopping services and the transmission
of other programming and electronic information for which a per program or per
channel charge is made.
VILLAGE: The village of Reedsville. (Ord., 12-19-1983)
3-5-2: GRANT OF NONEXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE:
The village hereby grants to the company a nonexclusive franchise for a period
of fifteen (15) years, unless sooner terminated pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter, to install, operate, and maintain, throughout the village, in,
upon, along, across, above, over and under the streets, alleys, easements
(including utility easements), public ways and public places as now laid out or
dedicated, and all extensions thereof, and additions thereto, a system of
wires, cables, underground conduits, ducts, trenches, conductors, amplifying
equipment, manholes, fittings, and any and all other fixtures, appliances and
appurtenances necessary for the installation, ownership, maintenance and
operation in the village of a cable television system for the purpose of
distribution of cable television and related services to inhabitants within the
limits of the village. (Ord., 12-19-1983)
3-5-3: COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAWS AND ORDINANCES:
The grantee shall, at all times during the life of this franchise, be subject
to the lawful exercise of the police power of the village and to such
reasonable regulations as the village shall hereafter adopt in the exercise of
its police power; provided, however, that such additional ordinances shall be
reasonable and lawful and shall not unreasonably conflict with or alter in any
manner the rights granted herein. (Ord., 12-19-1983)
3-5-4: EFFECTIVE DATE AND PERIOD:
Upon final passage and publication hereof as provided by law, and upon
acceptance by the company, this chapter shall take effect and shall then
continue in full force and effect for a period of fifteen (15) years upon the
terms and conditions set forth herein. (Ord., 12-19-1983)
3-5-5: APPLICABLE AREA:
This chapter shall apply to the present territorial limits of the village and
to any area henceforth added thereto during the period of this franchise.
Nothing herein contained is intended to preclude the company from extending its
cables and equipment to other portions of the village or outside the village
for the purpose of serving other areas, provided the company is legally
authorized to service the other areas. (Ord., 12-19-1983)
3-5-6: LIABILITY AND INDEMNIFICATION:
   A.   The company shall pay all damages and penalties which the village, its
officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees may legally be required to
pay as a result of the grant of authority to it under the terms of this
chapter. These damages or penalties shall be for all damages arising out of the
installation, operation and maintenance of the cable system authorized herein,
whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed, or
prohibited by this chapter.
   B.   The company shall pay all expenses incurred by the village, its
officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees in defending itself with
regard to all damages and penalties mentioned in subsection A of this section.
These expenses shall include all out of pocket expenses, such as attorney fees.
   C.   The company shall maintain throughout the period of this chapter
liability insurance insuring the village, its officers, boards, commissions,
agents and employees and the company in the minimum amounts of:
      1.   One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal injury or death
resulting from any one occurrence; and
      2.   Five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for property damage
resulting from any one occurrence.
The insurance policies mentioned above shall contain an endorsement stating
that the policies are extended to cover the liability assumed by the grantee
under the terms of this chapter and shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be cancelled nor
the amount of coverage thereof reduced until thirty (30) days after receipt by
the village clerk by registered mail of two (2) copies of a written notice of
such intent to cancel or reduce the coverage.
All policies of insurance or certified copies thereof and written evidence of
payment of required premiums, shall be filed and maintained with the village
clerk during the term of any franchise granted hereunder or any renewal hereof.
   D.   The company shall apply for the license and permits necessary for the
construction and operation of the cable television system herein described
within sixty (60) days of the filing of the company's unconditional acceptance
of this permit. (Ord., 12-19-1983)
3-5-7: OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF THE SYSTEM:
The grantee shall install such equipment and have the necessary equipment and
personnel to maintain its facilities so as to assure efficient service, and it
shall have the necessary equipment and personnel to make repairs promptly and
interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible.
   A.   The company shall be responsible for adopting procedures for the
investigation and resolution of complaints relating to the operation of the
company's cable television system, and the village shall have no responsibility
for the administration and implementation of such procedures. Notice of the
procedures for reporting and resolving complaints will be given to such
subscriber at the time of initial subscription to the cable system.
   B.   The community antenna, television and audio communication system will
be so designed, engineered and maintained by the company so as not to interfere
with the television reception of the residents of the village who do not
subscribe to its service. Neither the village nor the company shall require the
removal, or offer to remove, or provide any inducement for removal, of any
potential existing subscriber's antenna as a condition of provision of
services. (Ord., 12-19-1983)
3-5-8: RATES AND CHARGES TO BE FILED WITH THE VILLAGE CLERK AND PUBLISHED BY
THE COMPANY AT COMPANY'S EXPENSE:
   A.   Initial Rates And Charges Established: Company shall establish initial
rates and charges for basic service. With the granting of any franchise
hereunder, the company may fix all rates and charges for the "basic service"
herein defined, such as:
      1.   Charges for installation;
      2.   Subscriber rates; and
      3.   Service charges for separate classification of service.
   B.   Other Service Charges: Rates and charges for any service, other than
the basic service shall be filed with the village clerk at least thirty (30)
days prior to their effective date after company shall have had a public
hearing at its expense.
   C.   Preference And Prejudice Prohibited: Neither the board nor the company
shall, as to rates, charges, service, service facilities, rules, regulations or
in any other respect, make or grant any preference or advantage to any person,
or subject any person to prejudice or disadvantage. (Ord., 12-19-1983)
3-5-9: RIGHTS RESERVED TO THE VILLAGE:
   A.   The right is hereby reserved to the village to adopt, in addition to
the provisions contained herein and in existing applicable ordinances, such
additional regulations as it shall find necessary in the exercise of its police
power, provided that such regulation, by ordinance or otherwise, shall be
reasonable and not in conflict with the basic rights herein granted.
   B.   The board shall have the right to inspect and the grantee shall make
available its books, records, maps, plans, and/or other materials of the
grantee pertaining to the operation of said cable television system or any time
during normal business hours, provided that thirty (30) days' notice shall have
been given to the grantee as to what records are to be produced for such
inspection.
   C.   The board may hold hearings on any matter pertaining to this franchise,
and the grantee shall make available its representatives or agents for such
hearing. The grantee will be given at least thirty (30) days' written notice
of, and will have the right to attend, any village board meeting or public
hearing pertaining to this franchise chapter or to the grantee's cable
television operations. (Ord., 12-19-1983)
3-5-10: SERVICES:
   A.   The substance of the proposal of the grantee submitted in conjunction
with this chapter is incorporated herein by reference. Specific delivery of
services under this franchise are subject to good marketing practices and
conditions affecting the grantee.
   B.   The grantee will provide one outlet with the basic service to each of
the three (3) grade schools, the high school and the municipal building free of
charge. The distribution system within the schools and municipal building shall
be the responsibility of the respective school and village authorities. (Ord.,
12-19-1983)
3-5-11: SAFETY REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The company shall at all times employ reasonable care in conducting its
operations and shall install and use generally accepted methods and devices for
preventing failure and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries or
nuisances to the public.
   B.   The company shall install and maintain its wires, cables, fixtures and
other equipment in accordance with the applicable requirements of the national
safety code and local ordinances.
   C.   The company shall maintain at all times its structures, lines,
equipment and connections in, over, under or upon the streets, sidewalks,
alleys and public ways or places of the village, wherever situated or located,
on a safe, suitable, substantial condition, and in good order and repair.
(Ord., 12-19-1983)
3-5-12: CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   All structures, lines, and equipment erected by the grantee within the
village shall be so located as to cause minimum interference during
construction with the proper use of streets, alleys, public utility easements,
and other public ways and places and to cause minimum interference during
construction with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners, and
the grantee shall comply with all reasonable, proper and lawful ordinances of
the village now or hereafter in force. The grantee shall maintain the system so
as to cause no interference with the public ways or places during operation of
the system as described in state laws and regulations. Existing poles, posts,
conduits and other such structures of any electric power system, telephone
company or other public utility located in the village shall be made available
to the grantee for leasing or licensing upon reasonable terms and rates and
shall be used to the extent practicable in order to minimize interference with
travel and to avoid unnecessary duplication of facilities. The village shall
actively assist the grantee in obtaining reasonable joint pole or conduit use
agreements from the owners of existing poles or conduits provided that the
village incurs no cost or financial obligation in so doing. To the extent that
existing poles, posts, conduits and other such structures are not available, or
are not available under reasonable terms and conditions, including excessive
cost or unreasonable limitation upon the use by the grantee's cable television
system, grantee shall have the right to purchase, lease, or in any other manner
acquire land, rights of way, or public utility easements upon or under which to
erect and maintain its own poles, conduits and other such structures as may be
necessary for the construction and maintenance of its cable television system.
   B.   In case of any disturbance by the grantee of pavement, sidewalk,
driveway, or any other surfacing, the grantee shall, at its own cost and
expense, replace and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway, or surface so
disturbed in as good condition as before said work was begun.
   C.   In the event that at any time during the period of this franchise the
village shall lawfully elect to alter or change any street, alley, public
utility easement, or other public way, requiring the relocation of the
grantee's facilities, then, in such event, the grantee, upon reasonable notice
by the village, shall remove, relay and relocate the same at its own expense.
   D.   Grantee shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging all
streets, alleys, public utility easements, sidewalks, and public places of the
village so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming into contact
with the grantee's facilities.
   E.   All poles, lines, structures, and other facilities of the grantee in,
on, over and under the streets, sidewalks, alleys, public utility easements and
public grounds or places of the village shall be kept by the grantee at all
times in a safe and substantial condition and in good order and repair. (Ord.,
12-19-1983)
3-5-13: REMOVAL OF FACILITIES:
Upon termination of any subscriber to the grantee's service, the grantee may at
its own option, or shall upon subscriber's written request, remove all of its
facilities or equipment from the premises of the terminated subscriber. (Ord.,
12-19-1983)
3-5-14: TRANSFER OR ASSIGNMENT:
Any transfer or assignment of the company's rights and obligations under this
chapter to a subsidiary of the company shall be made only by an instrument in
writing, a duly executed copy of which shall be filed with the village within
thirty (30) days after any such transfer or assignment. Any other transfer or
assignment of the company's rights or obligations shall be made only upon
written approval of the village, which approval shall not be unreasonably
withheld. No consent shall be required for a transfer in trust, mortgage or
other hypothecation, in whole or in part, to secure an indebtedness. (Ord., 12-
19-1983)
3-5-15: REVOCATION:
This franchise, is revocable by the village for substantial breach by the
company of a material term of the franchise. The village shall provide written
notice to the company of any such breach. If the company fails within sixty
(60) days after receipt of such notice to correct said breach, then the village
shall have the right, after a full and complete public hearing, to revoke any
or all rights and privileges granted herein, provided however that said breach
did not result from factors beyond the reasonable control of the company.
(Ord., 12-19-1983)
3-5-16: SYSTEM SECURITY; TAMPERING WITH CABLE TELEVISION EQUIPMENT:
   A.   Unauthorized Connections Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any firm,
person, group, company, corporation or governmental body or agency, without the
expressed consent of the company, to make or possess any connection, extension,
or division, whether physically, acoustically, inductively, electronically or
otherwise, with or to any segment of a franchised community antenna television
and audio communications system for any purpose whatsoever.
   B.   Removal Or Destruction Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any firm,
person, group, company, corporation or government body or agency to wilfully
interfere, tamper, remove, obstruct or damage any part, segment or content of a
franchised community antenna television and audio communication system for any
purpose whatsoever.
   C.   Penalty: Any firm, person, group, company, corporation or governmental
body or agency convicted of a violation of this section shall, for each
offense, forfeit a sum of not less than one dollar ($1.00) nor more than two
hundred dollars ($200.00), together with costs of such prosecution.
   D.   Legal Action: The company shall have the right at all times to take
such legal action as it deems necessary to preserve the security thereof by its
subscribers or other persons. Any person who wilfully or maliciously damages or
causes to be damaged, any wire, cable, apparatus or equipment of the company
with intent to obtain a signal or impulse therefrom without authorization from
the company, shall be liable to the company in an amount of two hundred dollars
($200.00) per occurrence or actual damage to the equipment, whichever is
greater. (Ord., 12-19-1983)
3-5-17: SURRENDER RIGHT:
The grantee may surrender this franchise at any time upon filing with the
village clerk of this village a written notice of its intention to do so at
least three (3) months before the surrender date. On the surrender date
specified in that notice, all of the rights and privileges and all of the
obligations, duties, and liabilities of the grantee in connection with the
franchise shall terminate. Nothing herein absolves the grantee from actual
liabilities incurred prior to the date of termination. (Ord., 12-19-1983)
3-5-18: PAYMENT TO THE VILLAGE:
The grantee shall pay to the village a franchise fee of three percent (3%) of
the grantee's gross subscriber revenues from the operation of the cable
communications system within the village limits. Said annual sum shall be paid
within forty five (45) days of the end of the calendar quarter. Annually, an
independent auditor shall certify the amount of the grantee's revenue from all
cable services in order to verify the fee paid pursuant thereto. Said franchise
fee shall not be billed separately or added to any bills or statement sent by
the franchisee to the subscribers as a separately enumerated item. (Ord., 6-20-
1988)
3-5-19: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter
is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any federal or state
jurisdiction, specifically including the federal communications commission,
such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision,
and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions
thereof. (Ord., 12-19-1983)
3-5-20: FORCE AND EFFECT:
This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and
publication. The applicant's proposal for service shall be considered to be a
part of this chapter. (Ord., 12-19-1983)
CHAPTER 6
TOURIST LODGING
SECTION:
3-6-1: Purpose
3-6-2: Definitions
3-6-3: Tourist Lodging Permit Required
3-6-4: Standards For Tourist Lodging
3-6-5: Violations And Enforcement
3-6-6: Fee Schedule
3-6-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that the quality of tourist lodging
within the Village of Reedsville is adequate for protecting public health,
safety, and general welfare, including minimum standards of space for human
occupancy and for an adequate level of maintenance; determining the
responsibilities of owners, operators, and property managers offering these
properties for tourists, to protect character and stability of all areas within
the Village of Reedsville; to provide minimum standards necessary for the
health and safety of persons occupying or using buildings, structures, or
premises; and provisions for the administration and enforcement. (Ord. 2023-01,
3-9-2023)
3-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms shall be defined as follows:
BATHROOM:                          Full bath, including toilet, sink and shower
                                   or bathtub.
                                   An Owner or Property Manager who is
                                   responsible for the operation of the tourist
OPERATOR:                          lodging and for compliance with this
                                   Section, collection of rent, and payment of
                                   taxes.
OWNER:                             A person who holds legal title to a tourist
                                   lodging unit.
                                   Any person, other than Owner, appointed by
PROPERTY MANAGER:                  the Owner, operating a tourist lodging
                                   establishment or providing management
                                   services for tourist lodging.
                                   Any person appointed by the Owner to act as
RESIDENT AGENT:                    an agent on behalf of the Owner, as
                                   permitted in this Section.
                                   A resident tourist lodging unit that is
SHORT-TERM RENTAL:                 offered for rent for a fee and for fewer
                                   than 29 consecutive days.
                                   Any place offered for rent to tourists or
TOURIST LODGING OR TOURIST LODGING transients for sleeping accommodations
ESTABLISHMENT:                     including, but not limited to, hotels,
                                   motels, tourist rooming houses, cabins,
                                   cottages, or short-term rentals.
                                   A residential structure or part of a
                                   residential structure, including a room,
TOURIST LODGING UNIT:              that is used for sleeping and/ or living
                                   accommodations by one tourist or a group of
                                   tourists.
VILLAGE:                           Village means the Village of Reedsville, WI.
                                   (Ord. 2023-01, 3-9-2023)
 
3-6-3: TOURIST LODGING PERMIT REQUIRED:
No tourist lodging unit may be offered to the public for rent without the owner
or property manager first obtaining a tourist lodging permit issued by the
Village, and, submitting a current fire inspection report. (Ord. 2023-01, 3-9-
2023)
3-6-4: STANDARDS FOR TOURIST LODGING:
Each tourist lodging unit subject to this Section shall comply with all
applicable Village, county, state, and federal laws, and the following minimum
requirements:
   A.   Not less than one (1) bathroom for every six (6) occupants.
   B.   Not less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space for
the first occupant thereof and at least an additional one hundred (100) square
feet of floor space for every additional occupant thereof. The maximum
occupancy for any premises without a separate enclosed bedroom is two (2)
persons. The floor space shall be calculated on the basis of total habitable
room area. Floor space is determined using interior measurements of each room.
Floor space does not include kitchens, bathrooms, closets, garages, or rooms
not meeting Uniform Dwelling Code requirements for occupancy.
   C.   Each unit shall have a safe, unobstructed means of egress leading to a
safe, open space at ground level. The egress shall be continuously maintained
free of all obstructions or impediments to full and instant use in the case of
fire or other emergency. If a room does not meet this qualification, the unit
shall not be used for sleeping accommodations and a sign shall be posted
notifying occupants that the room shall not be used for sleeping due to lack of
safe egress. Escape routes shall be posted unless the room has a direct exit to
the outside.
   D.   At least one on-site off-street parking stall shall be provided for
each bedroom.
   E.   Traffic conditions in the neighborhood shall not be adversely impacted
by the tourist lodging establishment, including, but not limited to access to
the property, traffic generated by the use, or any other incidental use of the
property.
   F.   Functional smoke detectors and carbon monoxide detectors in accordance
with the requirements of Chapters SPS 321 and SPS 328 of the Wisconsin
Administrative Code, and all other safety devices and/or systems required by
law.
   G.   There shall be no accessible wood or solid fuel burning stove or
fireplace onsite unless the Owner provides a certificate from a properly
licensed commercial building inspector or fire inspector, not more than thirty
(30) days prior to submission, certifying that the fireplace and chimney have
been inspected and are in compliance with National Fire Prevention Associated
Fire Code Chapter 211 Standard for Chimneys, Fireplaces, Vents, and Solid Fuel-
Burning Appliances. Instructions for use of the stove or fireplace must be
prominently displayed.
   H.   A minimum of one (1) 2A 10:BC fire extinguishers shall be available and
maintained on an annual basis. If the extinguisher is not readily visible, one
or more signs shall be posted indicating the location of the extinguisher.
   I.   No hibachi, gas-fired grill, charcoal grill, or other similar device
used for cooking, heating, or any other purpose is allowed on any balcony,
deck, or under the overhang of a structure or within ten (10) feet of any
structure.
   J.   Obtain and maintain liability insurance against claims of personal
injury and property damage for tourist rooming house rentals.
   K.   The Owner and Manager shall be current in the payment of all taxes,
fees, penalties or forfeitures owed to the Village, owing to any local
governmental entity. All real estate taxes on the Tourist Lodging Property
shall be current.
   L.   The following licenses and permits are required:
      1.   Conditional Use Permit issued by the Village of Reedsville if
applicable;
      2.   State of Wisconsin Tourist Rooming House License;
      3.   Seller’s Permit;
      4.   Manitowoc County Health Department permit.
   M.   Any non-Wisconsin resident Owner shall appoint a Resident Agent to be
licensed under this Section.
   N.   LICENSE. No person shall operate a tourist rooming house without first
obtaining a non-prorated Tourist Rooming House license from the Village. Such
licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year following issuance. The
license shall only apply to the location licensed and is not transferable to a
different location. The license is not transferable from one operator to
another. The license shall be on display at all times onsite in a conspicuous
public place.
   O.   Certification of Compliance signed by the Property Manager certifying
that each managed property is in compliance with the terms and conditions of
the license and this Chapter. (Ord. 2023-01, 3-9-2023)
3-6-5: VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   This chapter shall be enforced by the Village Board, the Village
Building Inspector and upon referral, by the Village Attorney.
   B.   Any violation shall be subject to forfeiture per Village Ordinance
1-4-1. Each day of violation, following written notice to the Owner or Property
Manger is deemed a separate violation.
   C.   Convictions of the violation of operation of tourist lodging without
all required licenses shall result in the property being ineligible to operate
as tourist lodging for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of entry of
judgment. This is in addition to all other penalties.
   D.   The Village may seek all other remedies available at law and in equity
for violations of this Section. The Village shall also be entitled to all costs
of enforcement of the provisions of this Section as allowed by law. (Ord. 2023-
01, 3-9-2023)
3-6-6: FEE SCHEDULE:
The following fee schedule applies. The fee schedule may be revised in amount
or with additional fee categories by Resolution adopted by the Village Board.
   A.   Tourist rooming house license:
      1.   $100.00
   B.   Resident agent license:
      1.   $50.00
   C.   Late fees:
      1.   Late applications and renewals are subject to double the fee.
   D.   Inspection fees shall be as established from time to time by the
Village of Reedsville Building Inspector. (Ord. 2023-01, 3-9-2023)
TITLE 4
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BICYCLES
SECTION:
4-1-1: Registration Required
4-1-2: License Plates; Fees
4-1-3: Renewal Of Registration
4-1-4: Lost License Plates
4-1-5: Transfer And Cancellation
4-1-6: Operation Without Owner's Consent
4-1-7: Rules Of Operation
4-1-8: Penalties
4-1-1: REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
No person shall operate a bicycle or any similar wheeled vehicle upon any
street or public way within the village unless the bicycle shall first have
been registered by the owner and properly licensed or tagged as herein
provided. (1968 Code § 5.01)
4-1-2: LICENSE PLATES; FEES:
Registration shall be made by filing an application with village setting forth
the name and address of the owner, together with a complete description of the
bicycle, on forms provided for this purpose by the village, and paying a
registration fee of two dollars ($2.00). Each registration shall be serially
numbered and kept on file in the office of the village clerk as a public
record. Upon such registration, the proper village official shall cause an
identification tag or license plate to be affixed to the bicycle registered,
said identification tag or license plate to be serially numbered to correspond
with the registration number. Such tag or license plate shall remain fixed to
the bicycle unless removed by order of the authorized village official for
cause. The appropriate village official shall inspect each bicycle presented
for registration, and may refuse registration of any bicycle found to be in
unsafe mechanical condition.
All monies received from fees herein provided shall be placed in the general
fund of the village. (Ord., 12-2-1996)
4-1-3: RENEWAL OF REGISTRATION:
Registration is permanent and bicycles are registered on a need basis. (Ord.,
12-2-1996)
4-1-4: LOST LICENSE PLATES:
In case of theft, loss, mutilation or defacing of said tag or license plate, a
new tag or license plate shall be issued by the village for a fee of fifty
cents ($0.50). No person shall wilfully remove, deface or destroy any such
identification tag or license plate. (1968 Code § 5.01)
4-1-5: TRANSFER AND CANCELLATION:
   A.   Within ten (10) days after any bicycle registered hereunder shall
change ownership, the new owner shall apply for a license as provided herein.
The old license may be used by the previous owner for another bicycle without
additional charge upon registering such bicycle pursuant to section
4-1-2 of this chapter. If a bicycle is junked or taken out of operation or use,
the registration shall be canceled and the identification tag or license plate
returned to the village clerk.
   B.   The village officials may cancel the registration of and remove the
identification tag from any cycle being operated in the village in an unsafe
manner or in violation of any state law or local ordinance. Such cancellation
and removal shall be in addition to other penalties herein provided. (1968 Code
§ 5.01)
4-1-6: OPERATION WITHOUT OWNER'S CONSENT:
No person shall operate a bicycle in the village without the consent of the
registered owner. (1968 Code § 5.01)
4-1-7: RULES OF OPERATION:
Bicycles are hereby classified as vehicles, and their operation shall be
governed by all laws regulating traffic upon the streets of the village. In
addition to complying with the bicycle regulations imposed in this chapter, the
operator of a bicycle shall also comply with the following:
   A.   Persons operating bicycles shall signal for left hand turns and stops
with the left hand extended.
   B.   No person operating a bicycle shall do trick riding such as riding the
same without keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars, nor engage in
racing upon the village streets.
   C.   No operator of a bicycle shall ride on any public sidewalk. (1968 Code
§ 5.01)
4-1-8: PENALTIES:
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code and in addition, or in the alternative thereto, shall, upon
the first conviction, be subject to a forfeiture of his bicycle riding
privileges for a period of one to seven (7) days; upon a second conviction,
shall be subject to forfeiture of his bicycle riding privileges for a period of
one to thirty (30) days; and upon the third conviction, shall be subject to a
forfeiture of his bicycle riding privileges for an indefinite period. Any
person who shall operate a bicycle during the period of forfeiture above
mentioned shall be subject to having his bicycle impounded and sold at public
auction. (1968 Code § 5.02)
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL OFFENSES 1
SECTION:
4-2-1: Offenses Against Public Health And Safety
4-2-1-1: Firearms And Dangerous Weapons Regulations
4-2-1-2: Fireworks
4-2-1-3: Abandoned Or Unattended Refrigerators
4-2-1-4: Obstruction Of Aisles, Fire Escapes
4-2-2: Offenses Endangering Public Peace And Good Order
4-2-2-1: Disorderly Conduct
4-2-2-2: Drunkenness
4-2-2-3: Disturbance Of Public Meeting
4-2-2-4: Assault And Battery
4-2-2-5: Hunting Prohibited
4-2-2-6: Loud And Unnecessary Noise
4-2-2-7: Obedience To Officers
4-2-2-8: Assisting Escape Of Prisoner
4-2-2-9: Impersonating Police Officers
4-2-3: Offenses Endangering Public Morals And Decency
4-2-3-1: Gambling, Lotteries
4-2-3-2: Disorderly Houses
4-2-3-3: Vagrancy And Loitering
4-2-3-4: Indecent Conduct And Language
4-2-3-5: Obscene Literature
4-2-3-6: Reasonable And Prudent Limit (Nontraffic)
4-2-3-7: Possession Of Marijuana
4-2-3-8: Possession Of Drug Paraphernalia
4-2-3-9: Manufacture Or Delivery Of Drug Paraphernalia
4-2-3-10: Delivery Of Drug Paraphernalia To A Minor
4-2-4: Offenses Against Public And Private Property
4-2-4-1: Destruction Of Property
4-2-4-2: Littering
4-2-4-3: Trespassing
4-2-4-4: Theft
4-2-5: Penalty
4-2-6: Restrictions On Sales To Minors And Intoxicated Persons; Presence Of
Minors In Places Of Sale And Possession By Minors; Penalties
4-2-7: Possession Of Alcoholic Beverages On School Grounds Prohibited
4-2-8: Curfew
4-2-8-1: Minors Loitering After Certain Hours Prohibited
4-2-8-2: Exceptions
4-2-8-3: General Penalty
4-2-9: Harassment
4-2-10: Unlawful Use Of Telephone
4-2-11: Unlawful Use Of Computerized Communication Systems
4-2-12: Nicotine Products, Vapor Products And Electronic Smoking Devices
Products Regulated
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 6, chapter 2 of this Code relating to public nuisances.
4-2-1: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY:
4-2-1-1: FIREARMS AND DANGEROUS WEAPONS REGULATIONS:
   A.   Concealed Carry License/Permit Requirement: No person shall carry on
his or her person any concealed firearm or dangerous weapon unless a valid
license as designated under Wisconsin Statutes 175.60 has been duly issued.
   B.   Carrying Prohibited In Designated Municipal Buildings: In addition to
the provisions of Wisconsin Statutes section 175.60 enumerating places where
the carrying of a firearm or weapon is prohibited, including exceptions
thereto, it shall be unlawful for any person to enter and/or remain in the
following Municipal buildings while carrying a dangerous weapon or firearm:
      1.   Village Hall.
      2.   Police Department.
      3.   Fire station.
      4.   Department of Public Works.
      5.   Community Center, library, and all park buildings.
      6.   All Municipal water utility buildings, pumping stations and water
towers.
      7.   All Municipal sewer utility treatment plants and utility buildings.
      8.   All other Municipal buildings owned, leased or operated by the
Village whether they are now in existence or later constructed or leased.
      9.   Any other duly posted Village building.
Signs providing notice of the prohibitions in this subsection B shall be posted
in prominent places near all entrances of such buildings.
   C.   Exceptions: Subsection B of this section does not apply to:
      1.   A sworn law enforcement officer as defined in Wisconsin Statutes
section 175.60.
      2.   A qualified out-of-State law enforcement officer as defined in
Wisconsin Statutes section 941.23(1)(g) who meets the qualifications as stated
in Wisconsin Statutes section 941.23(2)(b).
      3.   Armed forces personnel acting in the line of duty.
   D.   Carrying Prohibited In Designated Public Buildings: It shall be
unlawful for any person other than a law enforcement officer as provided in
Wisconsin Statutes section 175.60(1) to enter any building, facility or
location open to the public that is posted as a no firearms or concealed
weapons location under Wisconsin Statutes section 943.13(1m)(c) while
possessing, carrying or concealing a firearm or weapon whether with or without
a State permit. (Ord. 2017-3, 10-12-2017)
   E.   Discharging Firearms And Other Weapons: No person except a peace
officer shall discharge any pistol, revolver, rifle, shotgun, compressed air
gun or other firearm within the Village, except where the use of such firearm
is required for the protection of person or property, or where used in hunting
areas designated by the Village Board, or where fired for test purposes in bona
fide repair shops.
   F.   Sale To Minors: No person shall sell, loan or give any pistol to any
person under eighteen (18) years of age.
   G.   Propelling Objects: No person, on foot, or from any vehicle, conveyance
or bicycle shall throw, shoot or propel any object, arrow, stone, snowball, or
other missile or projectile, by hand or by any other means, at any person or
at, on or into any building, structure, vehicle, street, sidewalk, alley,
highway, park, playground or other public place within the Village. (Ord. 2011-
5, 11-7-2011; amd. Ord. 2017-3, 10-12-2017)
4-2-1-2: FIREWORKS:
Section 167.10, Wisconsin Statutes, exclusive of penalty provisions, is adopted
by reference and made a part of this Code. (1968 Code § 7.01; amd. 1981 Code)
4-2-1-3: ABANDONED OR UNATTENDED REFRIGERATORS:
No person shall leave outside any building, dwelling or at a place accessible
to children, any unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other
container, having a capacity of one and one-half (11/2) cubic feet or more,
which has an airtight door which may not be opened from the inside. (1968 Code
§ 7.01; amd. 1981 Code)
4-2-1-4: OBSTRUCTION OF AISLES, FIRE ESCAPES:
No person shall obstruct an aisle, fire escape, entrance or exit of a public
building or building used for the assemblage of more than ten (10) persons.
(1968 Code § 7.01; amd. 1981 Code)
4-2-2: OFFENSES ENDANGERING PUBLIC PEACE AND GOOD ORDER:
4-2-2-1: DISORDERLY CONDUCT 1 :
No person shall:
   A.   In any public or private place, engage in violent, abusive, indecent,
profane, boisterous, unreasonably loud or otherwise disorderly conduct which
tends to cause or provoke an immediate disturbance of public order or tends to
disturb or annoy any other person.
   B.   Intentionally cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl, riot or
noisy altercation other than a bona fide athletic contest. (1968 Code § 7.02)
   C.   Operate a motor vehicle in a manner which tends to cause a disturbance
of traffic or persons. Such conduct includes, but is not limited to, causing
tires to squeal excessively and/or smoke, wheel stands, fishtailing, spinning
circles, sliding sideways, and other similar conduct. (Ord. 2003-6, 9-2-2003)
 
Notes
1 1. WSA 947.01.
4-2-2-2: DRUNKENNESS:
No person shall be habitually drunk or intoxicated so as to disturb good order
and quiet of the Village or be found in any place within the Village in such a
state of intoxication that he is unable to care for his own safety or for the
safety of others. (1968 Code § 7.02)
4-2-2-3: DISTURBANCE OF PUBLIC MEETING:
No person shall disturb a public meeting or loiter about a place of public
assemblage. (1968 Code § 7.02)
4-2-2-4: ASSAULT AND BATTERY 1 :
No person shall commit an assault and battery upon another. (1968 Code § 7.02)
 
Notes
1 2. WSA 940.19 et seq.
4-2-2-5: HUNTING PROHIBITED:
No person shall hunt, trap, shoot or kill any wild animal or bird within the
Village except as authorized by the Village Board, and except as follows:
   A.   Exceptions:
      1.   Bow and crossbow hunting are permitted, but not on any Municipally
owned land and not within one hundred (100) yards of any permanent building or
structure used for human occupancy on another person's land. This distance
restriction does not apply if the person who owns the land on which the
building or structure is located allows the hunter to hunt within one hundred
(100) yards of the building or structure. All bows and crossbows shall be
discharged toward the ground (e.g., from a tree stand). (Ord. 2015-4, 10-8-
2015)
4-2-2-6: LOUD AND UNNECESSARY NOISE:
No person shall make or cause to be made any loud, disturbing or unnecessary
sounds or noises such as may tend to annoy or disturb another in or about any
public street, alley or park of any private residence. (1968 Code § 7.02)
4-2-2-7: OBEDIENCE TO OFFICERS 1 :
No person shall, without reasonable excuse or justification, resist or in any
way interfere with any officer of the village while such officer is doing any
act in his official capacity and with lawful authority. (1968 Code § 7.02)
 
Notes
1 1. WSA 946.40 et seq.
4-2-2-8: ASSISTING ESCAPE OF PRISONER 1 :
No person shall intentionally aid any prisoner or person to escape from the
lawful custody of a policeman or peace officer of the village. (1968 Code §
7.02)
 
Notes
1 2. WSA 946.44.
4-2-2-9: IMPERSONATING POLICE OFFICERS 1 :
No person shall impersonate a policeman or peace officer within the village.
(1968 Code § 7.02)
 
Notes
1 3. WSA 946.69.
4-2-3: OFFENSES ENDANGERING PUBLIC MORALS AND DECENCY:
4-2-3-1: GAMBLING, LOTTERIES 1 :
All forms of gambling, lotteries and fraudulent devices and practices are
prohibited within the village. Any peace officer or policeman of the village is
hereby authorized to seize anything devised solely for gambling or found in
actual use for gambling within the village and to dispose thereof after a
judicial determination that said device was used solely for gambling or found
in actual use of gambling. (1968 Code § 7.03)
 
Notes
1 1. WSA 945.01.
4-2-3-2: DISORDERLY HOUSES 1 :
No person shall keep a disorderly house or house of prostitution within the
village. (1968 Code § 7.03)
 
Notes
1 2. WSA 280.09.
4-2-3-3: VAGRANCY AND LOITERING 1 :
No person shall loiter or loaf about any public building, place or premises or
wander about the streets, alleys, parks or other public places either by day or
night, whose actions give rise to a suspicion of wrongdoing and who is unable
to give a satisfactory account of himself; or who, having the physical ability
to work, is without any visible means of support and does not seek employment
or who derives part of his support from begging, prostitution, pandering,
fortune telling or a similar imposter. (1968 Code § 7.03)
 
Notes
1 3. WSA 947.02.
4-2-3-4: INDECENT CONDUCT AND LANGUAGE 1 :
No person shall use any indecent, vile, profane or obscene language or conduct
himself in any indecent, lewd, lascivious or obscene manner within the village.
It shall be a violation of this section for any person to sell, give away or
distribute within the village any obscene show or exhibition. (1968 Code §
7.03)
 
Notes
1 4. WSA 944.20.
4-2-3-5: OBSCENE LITERATURE 1 :
No person shall sell, offer for sale or give away or exhibit any obscene book,
pamphlet, paper, card, picture, toy or device. (1968 Code § 7.03)
 
Notes
1 5. WSA 944.21.
4-2-3-6: REASONABLE AND PRUDENT LIMIT (NONTRAFFIC):
No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under the conditions and having regard for the actual potential hazards
then existing. The speed and direction of a vehicle shall be so controlled as
may be necessary to avoid colliding with any object, person, vehicle or other
conveyance in compliance with legal requirements and using due care. (Ord., 11-
1-1982)
4-2-3-7: POSSESSION OF MARIJUANA:
   A.   No person shall possess any marijuana or other illegal drugs, as
defined in Wisconsin statutes 961.01, unless it was obtained directly from or
pursuant to, a valid prescription or order of a practitioner while acting in
the course of his or her professional practice, or except as otherwise
authorized by Wisconsin statutes chapter 961.
   B.   For purposes of this section, "practitioner" means:
      1.   A physician, dentist, veterinarian, podiatrist, scientific
investigator or other person licensed, registered or otherwise permitted to
distribute, dispense, conduct research with respect to, or administer a
controlled substance in the course of professional practice or research in the
state.
      2.   A pharmacy, hospital, or other institution licensed, registered or
otherwise permitted to distribute, dispense, conduct research with respect to
or administer a controlled substance in the course of professional practice or
research in the state.
   C.   This section does not apply to any person who is charged with
possession of more than twenty five grams (25 g) of marijuana, or who is
charged with possession of any amount of marijuana following a conviction for
possession of any amount of marijuana, in the state 1 . (Ord. 2011-5, 11-7-
2011)
 
Notes
1 1. WSA 961.
4-2-3-8: POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
   A.   Any person who violates Wisconsin statutes 961.573, which is adopted by
reference in this section as if fully set forth in this section, shall be
subject to disposition as provided in Wisconsin statutes 938.344. (Ord. 2011-5,
11-7-2011)
4-2-3-9: MANUFACTURE OR DELIVERY OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
   A.   Any person who violates Wisconsin statutes 961.574, which is adopted by
reference in this section as if fully set forth in this section, shall be
subject to disposition as provided in Wisconsin statutes 938.344. (Ord. 2011-5,
11-7-2011)
4-2-3-10: DELIVERY OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA TO A MINOR:
   A.   Any person who violates Wisconsin statutes 961.575, which is adopted by
reference in this section as if fully set forth in this section, shall be
subject to disposition as provided in Wisconsin statutes 938.344. (Ord. 2011-5,
11-7-2011)
4-2-4: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY:
4-2-4-1: DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY 1 :
No person shall wilfully injure or intentionally deface, destroy or unlawfully
remove, take or meddle with any property belonging to the village or its
departments or to any private person without the consent of the owner or proper
authority. (1968 Code § 7.04)
 
Notes
1 1. WSA 943.01.
4-2-4-2: LITTERING:
No person shall throw any glass, rubbish, waste or filth upon the streets,
alleys, highways, public parks or other property of the village 1  or upon any
private property not owned by him or upon the surface of any body of water
within the village. (1968 Code § 7.04)
 
Notes
1 2. See section
  2-1-7 of this code.
4-2-4-3: TRESPASSING:
Wisconsin statutes 943, specifically 943.13 and 943.14 exclusive of penalty
provisions, are adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. (Ord.,
12-2-1996)
4-2-4-4: THEFT:
No person shall intentionally take and carry away, use, transfer, conceal or
retain possession of movable property of another without the other's consent
and with intent to deprive the owner permanently of possession of such
property, if such property has a value of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
less. (Ord. 2011-3, 5-16-2011)
4-2-5: PENALTY:
   A.   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to a penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
   B.   In addition to any penalty imposed for violation of this chapter, any
person who shall cause physical damage to or destroy any public property shall
be liable for the costs of replacing or repairing such damaged or destroyed
property. The parent of any unemancipated minor child who violates section
4-2-4-1 of this chapter may also be held liable for the cost of replacing or
repairing such damaged or destroyed property in accordance with section
895.035, Wisconsin statutes. (1968 Code § 7.05)
4-2-6: RESTRICTIONS ON SALES TO MINORS AND INTOXICATED PERSONS; PRESENCE OF
MINORS IN PLACES OF SALE AND POSSESSION BY MINORS; PENALTIES:
   A.   Sales Of Alcoholic Beverages To Minors:
      1.   Restrictions:
         a.   No person may procure for, sell, dispense or give away any
fermented beverages to any underage person not accompanied by his or her
parent, guardian or spouse who has attained the legal drinking age.
         b.   No licensee or permittee may sell, vend, deal or traffic in
fermented malt beverages to or with any underage person not accompanied by his
or her parent, guardian or spouse who has attained the legal drinking age.
      2.   Penalties And License Suspension For Sale To Minor:
         a.   In this section "violation" means a violation of this subsection
or a local ordinance which strictly conforms to this subsection.
         b.   A person who commits a violation is subject to a forfeiture of:
            (1)   Not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) if the person
has not committed a previous violation within thirty (30) months of the
violation; or
            (2)   Not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) if the person has committed a previous violation
within thirty (30) months of the violation.
         c.   A court shall suspend any license or permit issued under this
chapter to a person for:
            (1)   Not more than three (3) days, if the court finds that the
person committed a violation within twelve (12) months after committing one
previous violation;
            (2)   Not less than three (3) days nor more than ten (10) days, if
the court finds that the person committed a violation within twelve (12) months
after committing two (2) other violations; or
            (3)   Not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty (30)
days, if the court finds that the person committed the violation within twelve
(12) months after committing three (3) other violations.
         d.   The court shall promptly mail notice of a suspension under this
subsection to the department and to the clerk of each municipality which has
issued a license or permit to the person.
      3.   Underage Persons; Penalties: An underage person who procures or
attempts to procure alcoholic beverages, possesses or consumes alcoholic
beverages, or falsely represents his or her age for the purpose of receiving
alcoholic beverages from a licensee or permittee is subject to:
         a.   A forfeiture of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
         b.   Participate in a supervised work program or other community
service work.
         c.   Operating privilege may be suspended.
         d.   Any combination of these penalties.
   B.   Sales Of Alcoholic Beverages To Intoxicated Persons:
      1.   Restrictions:
         a.   No person may procure for, sell, dispense or give away alcoholic
or malted beverages to a person who is intoxicated.
         b.   No licensee or permittee may sell, vend, deal or traffic in
alcoholic or malt beverages to or with a person who is intoxicated.
      2.   Penalties: Any person who violates subsection B1a of this section
shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days or
both.
   C.   Presence In Places Of Sale; Penalty:
      1.   Restrictions: An underage person not accompanied by his or her
parent, guardian or adult spouse who has attained the legal drinking age, may
not enter, knowingly attempt to enter or be on any premises for which a license
or permit for the retail sale of alcoholic and malt beverages has been issued,
for any purpose except the transaction of business pertaining to the licensed
premises with or for the licensee or his or her employee. The business may not
be amusement or the purchase, receiving or consumption of edibles or beverages
or similar activities which normally constitute activities of a customer of the
premises. This subsection does not apply to:
         a.   An underage person who is a resident, employee, lodger or boarder
on the premises controlled by the proprietor, licensee or permittee of which
the licensed premises consists or is a part.
         b.   An underage person who enters or is on a "class A" retail
intoxicated or malt beverage premises for the purpose of purchasing edibles or
beverages other than alcohol beverages. Any underage person so entering the
premises may not remain on the premises after the purchase.
         c.   Hotels, drugstores, grocery stores, bowling alleys, cars operated
by any railroad, regularly established athletic fields, stadiums or public
facilities as defined in section 125.51(5)(b)1.d, Wisconsin statutes, which are
owned by a county or municipality.
         d.   Premises in the village park, and concessions authorized on
village owned premises in the village parks as defined or designated in
chapters 27 and 28, Wisconsin statutes.
         e.   Premises operated under both a class "B" or "class B" license or
permit and a restaurant permit where the principal business conducted is that
of a restaurant. If the premises is operated under both a class "B" or "class
B" license or permit and a restaurant permit, the principal business conducted
is presumed to be the sale of alcoholic beverages, but the presumption may be
rebutted by competent evidence.
         f.   An underage person who enters or remains on a class "B" or "class
B" premises for the purpose of transacting business at an auction or market as
defined in section 125.06(11), Wisconsin statutes, if the person does not enter
or remain in a room where alcoholic beverages are sold or furnished.
         g.   An underage person who enters or remains in a room on class "B"
or "class B" licensed premises separate from any room where alcoholic beverages
are sold or served, for the purpose of engaging in marching or drilling with a
group of other persons if no alcoholic beverages are furnished or consumed by
any person in the room where the minor is present and the minor's presence is
authorized under this subsection. A minor may enter and remain on class "B" or
"class B" premises under this subsection only if the municipality which issued
the class "B" or "class B" license adopts an ordinance permitting minors to
enter and remain on the premises as provided in this subsection and the law
enforcement agency responsible for enforcing the ordinance issues to the class
"B" or "class B" licensee a written authorization permitting minors to be
present under this subsection on the date specified in the authorization.
Before issuing the authorization, the law enforcement agency shall make a
determination that the presence of minors on the licensed premises will not
endanger the health, welfare or safety of the minors or other members of the
community. The licensee shall obtain a separate authorization for each date on
which minors will be present on the premises.
      2.   Penalties:
         a.   A licensee or permittee who directly or indirectly permits any
underage person to enter or be on a licensed premises in violation is subject
to a forfeiture of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 2011-5,
11-7-2011)
4-2-7: POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ON SCHOOL GROUNDS PROHIBITED:
   A.   In this section:
    MOTOR VEHICLE: A motor vehicle owned, rented or consigned to a school.
   SCHOOL: A public, parochial or private school which provides an education
program for one or more grades between grades 1 and 12 and which is commonly
known as an elementary school, middle school, junior high school, senior high
school or high school.
   SCHOOL PREMISES: Premises owned, rented or under the control of a school.
   B.   No person may possess or consume alcoholic beverages:
      1.   On school premises;
      2.   In a motor vehicle; or
      3.   While participating in a school sponsored activity.
   C.   Repealed.
   D.   A person who violates this section is subject to a forfeiture of not
more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). (Ord. 2011-5, 11-7-2011)
4-2-8: CURFEW:
4-2-8-1: MINORS LOITERING AFTER CERTAIN HOURS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person under eighteen (18) years of age to be on
foot, bicycle or in or on any type of vehicle on any public street, highway,
road, alley, park, school grounds, cemetery, playground, public building or any
other public place in the village between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00)
P.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. Sunday through Thursday and twelve o'clock (12:
00) midnight to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. Friday and Saturday unless accompanied
by his or her parent or guardian, or person having lawful custody of his or her
person, or unless there exists a reasonable necessity therefor. The fact that
said child, unaccompanied by parent, guardian or other person having legal
custody, is found upon any such public place during the aforementioned hours
shall be prima facie evidence that said child is there unlawfully and that no
reasonable excuse exists therefor. (Ord., 12-22-1993)
4-2-8-2: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   This section shall not apply to a child:
      1.   Who is performing an errand as directed by his parent, guardian or
person having lawful custody.
      2.   Who is on his own premises or in the areas immediately adjacent
thereto.
      3.   Whose employment makes it necessary to be upon the streets, alleys
or public places or in any motor vehicle during such hours.
   B.   These exceptions shall not, however, permit a child to unnecessarily
loiter about the streets, alleys or public places or be in a parked motor
vehicle on the public streets.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having
the lawful care, custody and control of any person under the age of eighteen
(18) years to allow or permit such person to violate the provisions of
subsections A1 and A2 of this section. The fact that prior to the present
offense a parent, guardian or custodian was informed by any law enforcement
officer of a separate violation of this section
4-2-8 shall be prima facie evidence that such parent, guardian or custodian
allowed or permitted the present violation. Any parent, guardian or custodian
herein who shall have made a missing person notification to a police agency
shall not be considered to have allowed or permitted any person under the age
of eighteen (18) years to violate this section
4-2-8.
   D.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or organization operating or
in charge of any place of amusement, entertainment, refreshment or other place
of business to permit any minor under the age of eighteen (18) to loiter, or
idle in such place during the hours prohibited by this section
4-2-8. Whenever the owner or person in charge or in control of any place of
amusement, entertainment, refreshment or other place of business during the
hours prohibited by this section
4-2-8 shall find persons under the age of eighteen (18) years loitering,
loafing or idling in such places of business, he shall immediately order such
person to leave and if such person refuses to leave said place of business, the
operator shall immediately notify the police department and inform them of the
violation.
   E.   Every law enforcement officer is hereby authorized to detain any minor
violating the provisions of this section
4-2-8 until such time as the parent, guardian or person having legal custody of
the minor shall be notified and the person so notified shall as soon as
reasonably possible thereafter report to the law enforcement officer for the
purpose of taking custody of the minor and shall sign a release for him or her.
If no response is received, the law enforcement officer shall take whatever
action is deemed necessary, in the best interest of the minor.
   F.   The first time that a minor is detained by a law enforcement officer of
the village as provided in subsection E of this section, such parent, guardian
or person having such legal custody, shall be advised, personally, if known or
by registered mail, as to the provisions of this section, and further advised
that any violation of this section occurring thereafter by this minor or any
other minor under his or her care or custody shall result in a penalty imposed
as hereinafter provided. (Ord., 12-22-1993)
4-2-8-3: GENERAL PENALTY:
   A.   Any person, guardian or person having legal custody of a child
described in sections
4-2-8-1 and
4-2-8-2 of this chapter who has been warned in the manner provided in
subsection 4-2-8-2F of this chapter and who thereafter violates any of the
provisions of this section
4-2-8 shall be subject to a penalty of not more than twenty five dollars
($25.00) and costs. After a second violation within a six (6) month period, if
the defendant, in a prosecution under this section proves that he or she is
unable to comply with this section
4-2-8 because of the disobedience of the child, the action shall be dismissed
and the child referred to the court assigned to exercise jurisdiction under
chapter 48, Wisconsin statutes.
   B.   Any child who violates this section
4-2-8 after being detained and released under subsection 4-2-8-2E of this
chapter, shall be dealt with under chapter 48, Wisconsin statutes. (Ord., 12-
22-1993)
4-2-9: HARASSMENT:
Whoever, with intent to harass or intimidate another person, does any of the
following is subject to the penalty as provided in section
4-2-5 of this chapter:
   A.   Strikes, shoves, kicks or otherwise subjects the person to physical
contact or attempts or threatens to do the same.
   B.   Engages in a course of conduct or repeatedly commits acts which harass
or intimidate the person and which serve no legitimate purpose 1 . (Ord. 2010-
5, 5-3-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. WSA § 947.013(1m).
4-2-10: UNLAWFUL USE OF TELEPHONE:
Whoever commits any of the following acts is subject to the penalty as provided
in section
4-2-5 of this chapter:
   A.   With intent to frighten, intimidate, threaten, abuse or harass, makes a
telephone call and threatens to inflict injury or physical harm to any person
or the property of any person 1 .
   B.   With intent to frighten, intimidate, threaten or abuse, telephones
another and uses any obscene, lewd or profane language or suggests any lewd or
lascivious act 2 .
   C.   Makes a telephone call, whether or not conversation ensues, without
disclosing his or her identity and with intent to abuse or threaten any person
at the called number 3 .
   D.   Makes or causes the telephone of another repeatedly to ring, with
intent to harass any person at the called number.
   E.   Makes repeated telephone calls, whether or not conversation ensues,
with intent solely to harass any person at the called number.
   F.   Knowingly permits any telephone under his or her control to be used for
any purpose prohibited by this section.
   G.   In conspiracy or concerted action with other persons, makes repeated
calls or simultaneous calls solely to harass any person at the called number or
numbers 4 . (Ord. 2010-5, 5-3-2010)
 
Notes
1 2. WSA § 947.012(1)(a).
2 3. WSA § 947.012(1)(b).
3 4. WSA § 947.012(1)(c).
4 1. WSA § 947.012(2).
4-2-11: UNLAWFUL USE OF COMPUTERIZED COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS:
   A.   In this section, "message" means any transfer of signs, signals,
writing, images, sounds, data or intelligence of any nature, or any transfer of
a computer program, as defined in section 943.70(1)(c), Wisconsin statutes.
   B.   Whoever does any of the following is subject to the penalty as provided
in section
4-2-5 of this chapter:
      1.   With intent to frighten, intimidate, threaten, abuse or harass
another person, sends a message to the person on an electronic mail or other
computerized communication system and in that message threatens to inflict
injury or physical harm to any person or the property of any person.
      2.   With intent to frighten, intimidate, threaten, abuse or harass
another person, sends a message on an electronic mail or other computerized
communication system with the reasonable expectation that the person will
receive the message and in that message threatens to inflict injury or physical
harm to any person or the property of any person.
      3.   With intent to frighten, intimidate, threaten or abuse another
person, sends a message to the person on an electronic mail or other
computerized communication system and in that message uses any obscene, lewd or
profane language or suggests any lewd or lascivious act.
      4.   With intent to frighten, intimidate, threaten or abuse another
person, sends a message on an electronic mail or other computerized
communication system with the reasonable expectation that the person will
receive the message and in that message uses any obscene, lewd or profane
language or suggests any lewd or lascivious act.
      5.   With intent to frighten, intimidate, threaten or abuse another
person, sends a message to the person on an electronic mail or other
computerized communication system while intentionally preventing or attempting
to prevent the disclosure of his or her own identity.
      6.   While intentionally preventing or attempting to prevent the
disclosure of his or her identity and with intent to frighten, intimidate,
threaten or abuse another person, sends a message on an electronic mail or
other computerized communication system with the reasonable expectation that
the person will receive the message 1 .
   C.   Whoever does any of the following is subject to the penalty as provided
in section
4-2-5 of this chapter:
      1.   With intent to harass, annoy or offend another person, sends a
message to the person on an electronic mail or other computerized communication
system and in that message uses any obscene, lewd or profane language or
suggests any lewd or lascivious act.
      2.   With intent to harass, annoy or offend another person, sends a
message on an electronic mail or other computerized communication system with
the reasonable expectation that the person will receive the message and in that
message uses any obscene, lewd or profane language or suggests any lewd or
lascivious act.
      3.   With intent solely to harass another person, sends repeated messages
to the person on an electronic mail or other computerized communication system.
      4.   With intent solely to harass another person, sends repeated messages
on an electronic mail or other computerized communication system with the
reasonable expectation that the person will receive the messages.
      5.   With intent to harass or annoy another person, sends a message to
the person on an electronic mail or other computerized communication system
while intentionally preventing or attempting to prevent the disclosure of his
or her own identity.
      6.   While intentionally preventing or attempting to prevent the
disclosure of his or her identity and with intent to harass or annoy another
person, sends a message on an electronic mail or other computerized
communication system with the reasonable expectation that the person will
receive the message.
      7.   Knowingly permits or directs another person to send a message
prohibited by this section from any computer terminal or other device that is
used to send messages on an electronic mail or other computerized communication
system and that is under his or her control 2 . (Ord. 2010-5, 5-3-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. WSA § 947.0125(2).
2 2. WSA § 947.0125(3).
4-2-12: NICOTINE PRODUCTS, VAPOR PRODUCTS AND ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICES
PRODUCTS REGULATED:
   A.   Definitions: As used hereinbelow, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
    CIGARETTE: Has the meaning given in section 139.30(1m), Wisconsin Statutes.
   ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE: Means any product containing or delivering
nicotine or any other similar substance intended for human consumption that can
be used by a person to stimulate smoking through inhalation of vapor or aerosol
from the product. Electronic smoking device includes any components and parts
of such product, whether or not sold separately including, without limitation,
nicotine-containing e-liquids, a glass or plastic vial container or e-liquid,
cartridges, atomizers, batteries, cartomizers, clearomizers, digital display or
lights to adjust settings, tank systems, drip tips and flavorings.
   NICOTINE PRODUCT: As defined in section 134.66(1)(f), Wisconsin Statutes
means a product that contains nicotine and is not any of the following:
      1.   A tobacco product, as defined in section 139.75(12), Wisconsin
Statutes.
      2.   A cigarette.
      3.   A product that has been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration for sale as a smoking cessation product or for another medical
purpose and is being marketed and sold solely for such an approved purpose.
   SCHOOL: As defined in section 118.257(1)(d), Wisconsin Statutes means a
public, parochial, private, or tribal school which provides an educational
program for one or more grades between 1 and 12 and which is commonly known as
an elementary school, middle school, junior high school, senior high school or
high school.
   SMOKE OR SMOKING: Means the act of inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying
any lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, or pipe, or any other lighted or heated
tobacco or plant product intended for inhalation including, without limitation,
hookahs and marijuana, whether natural or synthetic, in any manner or form.
Smoking also includes the use of an electronic smoking device which creates an
aerosol or vapor, in any manner or form, or the use of any oral smoking device
for the purpose of circumventing the prohibition of smoking set forth in this
section.
   VAPOR PRODUCTS: Means noncombustible products, that may or may not contain
nicotine, that employ a mechanical heating element, battery, electronic
circuit, or other mechanism, regardless of shape or size, that can be used to
produce a vapor in a solution or other form. "Vapor products" includes, without
limitation, any vapor cartridge, solution, or other container or form, with or
without nicotine, that is intended to be used with an electronic cigarette,
electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or
device. "Vapor products" do not include any products regulated by the United
States Food and Drug Administration under chapter V of the Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act.
   VILLAGE: Means the Village of Reedsville, WI.
   B.   Restrictions On Sale Or Gift Of Nicotine Products To Persons Under
Eighteen Years Of Age: Except as modified by this section, section 134.66,
Wisconsin Statutes (as amended from time to time) relating to restrictions on
the sale or gift of nicotine products to persons under the age of eighteen
(18), is hereby adopted by reference as though set forth herein.
   C.   Purchase Or Possession Of Nicotine Products By Persons Under Eighteen
Years Of Age Prohibited: Except as modified by this section, section 254.92,
Wisconsin Statutes (as amended from time to time), prohibiting, with certain
exceptions, the purchase, attempted purchase, or possession of nicotine
products by persons under the age of eighteen (18), and prohibiting the
purchase of nicotine product by persons on behalf of or to provide to persons
under the age of eighteen (18), is hereby adopted by reference as though set
forth herein.
   D.   Possession Or Use Of Nicotine Products, Vapor Products Or Electronic
Smoking Devices By Persons Under Age Eighteen Prohibited Within Village; School
Buildings, Grounds And Activities: No person under the age of eighteen (18)
shall possess, smoke, or otherwise use any nicotine product, vapor product, or
electronic smoking device within the Village including, without limitation,
inside any building owned, leased or used by a school; on any school grounds;
while attending or participating in a school event or activity; or at an
educational facility as defined in section 101.123(1), Wisconsin Statutes.
   E.   Use Of Nicotine Products, Vapor Products Or Electronic Smoking Devices
In School Buildings, On School Grounds Or At School Activities Prohibited: No
person shall smoke or otherwise use any nicotine product, vapor product, or
electronic smoking device inside any building owned, leased or used by a
school; on any school grounds; while attending or participating in a school
event or activity; or at an educational facility as defined in section 101.123
(1), Wisconsin Statutes.
   F.   Possession Or Use Of Nicotine Products, Vapor Products Or Electronic
Smoking Devices In Or Upon Village Building Premises Prohibited: No person
shall possess, smoke, or otherwise use any nicotine product, vapor product or
electronic smoking device in or upon any building premises owned, leased or
used by the Village.
   G.   Sale Or Gift Of Vapor Products Or Electronic Smoking Device To Persons
Under Eighteen Years Of Age Prohibited: Consistent with sections 134.66 and
254.92, Wisconsin Statutes, no person shall sell, or provide for no or nominal
consideration, any vapor product or electronic smoking device to persons under
the age of eighteen (18).
   H.   Penalties: Any person who violates subsection D, E, F or G of this
section shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) or more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. (Ord.
2018-6, 10-11-2018)
CHAPTER 3
DOGS, CATS, ANIMALS
SECTION:
4-3-1: Definitions
4-3-2: Dog Or Cat License And Rabies Vaccination Required
4-3-3: License Fees; Penalties
4-3-4: Issuance Of License
4-3-5: State Regulations
4-3-6: Unlicensed Dogs Or Cats
4-3-7: Running At Large; Noise Prohibited
4-3-8: Impounding Dogs Or Cats
4-3-9: Impounding Costs
4-3-10: Report Of Impounded Dogs Or Cats
4-3-11: Dog Or Cat Infected With Hydrophobia
4-3-12: Quarantine For Rabies
4-3-13: Dog Or Cat Biting Persons
4-3-14: Cruelty To Animals
4-3-15: Defecation On Private Or Public Property
4-3-16: Area Of Keeping
4-3-17: Number Of Dogs And Cats Kept
4-3-18: Regulation Of Other Animals
4-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
ANIMAL: Any mammal, reptile or bird.
ANIMAL CONTROL AGENCY: The village may contract with or enter into an agreement
with such person, persons, organization or corporation to provide for the
operation of any animal shelter, impoundment of stray animals, confinement of
certain animals and disposition of impounding animals.
AT LARGE: Refers to any dog or cat running otherwise than upon the premises of
its owner when the dog or cat is not attached to a leash held by a competent
person, restrained within a motor vehicle or in an animal hospital or kennel.
CRUEL: Causing unnecessary and excessive pain or suffering or unjustifiable
injury or death.
DOG OR CAT: Includes both male and female whether altered or not.
FARM ANIMAL: Any warm blooded animal normally raised on farms in the United
States and used for food or fiber.
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: Meaning as appears in Wisconsin statutes 967.02(5) and
includes a humane or animal control officer under Wisconsin statutes 173.03,
but does not include a conservation warden appointed under Wisconsin statutes
23.10.
NEUTERED: Animal having nonfunctional reproductive organs.
OWNER: Any person owning, harboring or keeping an animal and the occupant of
any premises on which the animal remains or to which it customarily returns
daily for a period of ten (10) days; such person is presumed to be harboring,
or keeping the animal within the meaning of this section.
PET: An animal kept and treated as a pet.
RESIDENTIAL LOT: A parcel zoned as residential, occupied or to be occupied by a
dwelling, platted or unplatted, and under common ownership. For the purpose of
this section any vacant parcel or parcels adjoining a dwelling and under the
same ownership shall constitute one lot.
RESTRAIN: Notifying the animal's owner or any officer and requesting either the
owner or officer to capture and restrain the animal, or capturing and
restraining the animal and killing the animal if the circumstances require
immediate action.
UNTAGGED: Not having a valid license tag attached to a collar kept on the
animal whenever the animal is outdoors unless the animal is securely confined
in a fenced area. (Ord. 2011-5, 11-7-2011)
4-3-2: DOG OR CAT LICENSE AND RABIES VACCINATION REQUIRED:
Pursuant to section 174.052, Wisconsin statutes, all owners of dogs or cats in
the village are required to have their dog or cat vaccinated against rabies and
obtain licenses for such dog or cat.
Vaccination by a veterinarian against rabies is required for all dogs or cats
within thirty (30) days after the dog or cat reaches four (4) months of age.
There is no provision in the law for vaccination other than by a veterinarian.
Older vaccinated dogs or cats must be revaccinated when the certificate
expires. Certificates of current vaccination must be presented when obtaining
dog or cat licenses.
Owners of all dogs or cats five (5) months of age or older on January 1 of any
year or five (5) months of age, within the license year shall annually on or
before the date the dog or cat becomes five (5) months of age, pay the license
fee and obtain a license. (Ord., 8-2-1999)
4-3-3: LICENSE FEES; PENALTIES:
   A.   Minimum Fees: The owner of a dog or cat shall pay to the village
treasurer annually a minimum license fee for neutered males or spayed females
of ten dollars ($10.00) upon presentation of evidence attesting the same, and
fifteen dollars ($15.00) for an unneutered male or unspayed female.
   B.   Kennel Licenses: Dog or cat kennels will not be allowed within the
Village.
   C.   Penalties:
      1.   A late fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be assessed the owner of
each dog or cat five (5) months of age or over who fail to obtain a dog or cat
license by April 1 of each year.
      2.   Any person violating any provision of this section shall be subject
to a forfeiture of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and not more than
five hundred dollars, ($500.00). This section shall permit the Village Attorney
to apply to the court of competent jurisdiction for a temporary or permanent in
junction restraining any person from violating any aspect of this section.
(Ord., 8-2-1999; amd. Ord. 2011-5, 11-7-2011; Ord. 2022-4, 11-10-2022)
4-3-4: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
Upon payment to the village treasurer of the above named sum, the village
treasurer shall issue to such person a license to keep such dog or cat, which
license shall not be issued for a lesser period than one year, and such person
shall, upon presenting or procuring the license aforesaid, place upon the dog
or cat a collar with a tag, such tag to be furnished by the village treasurer.
(Ord., 8-2-1999)
4-3-5: STATE REGULATIONS:
The rules and regulations pertaining to licensing, specially Wisconsin statutes
174.05, 174.054, 174.055 and 174.07, together with any future additions,
deletions or supplements thereto, are incorporated as part of this chapter and
shall be enforced with the same force and effect as though set forth in full in
this section. Providing, however, that where such rules and regulations are
less stringent than other provisions found in this code, the provisions of this
code shall apply. The rules and regulations pertaining to licensing shall apply
also to cats. (Ord. 2011-5, 11-7-2011)
4-3-6: UNLICENSED DOGS OR CATS:
No unlicensed dog or cat shall run at large, and any person may seize or
impound any such unlicensed dog or cat found at large, and the fact that a dog
or cat is without a proper license tag attached to its collar shall be
presumptive evidence that it is unlicensed. Any authorized village official may
enter upon the premises of the owner or keeper of any unlicensed dog or cat for
the purpose of seizing such dog or cat, and if after request therefor, the
owner, keeper, or an immediate member of the owner's or keeper's family of
suitable age and discretion shall refuse to deliver the unlicensed dog or cat
to such official and the official cannot, without reasonable effort, catch the
unlicensed dog or cat, he may kill such dog or cat in a proper and humane
manner. (Ord., 8-2-1999)
4-3-7: RUNNING AT LARGE; NOISE PROHIBITED:
   A.   Dogs Or Cats: It shall be unlawful to own, harbor, shelter, or keep any
dog or cat which:
      1.   Habitually pursues any vehicle upon any public street, alley or
highway within the village.
      2.   Assaults or attacks any person.
      3.   Runs at large within the limits of the village. A dog or cat shall
be deemed to be running at large when it is on any public street, alley, parks,
or other grounds of the village or any other premises in the village other than
the premises of its owner, his servant, agent or a member of his family of
suitable age and discretion unless it is on a durable leash no longer than
eight feet (8') or the dog or cat must be under control and within eight feet
(8') of its owner, his servant, agent or a member of his family of suitable age
and discretion at all times when off the premises of its owner. Any dog or cat
running at large is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and any authorized
village official is hereby empowered to capture and restrain any dog or cat
deemed to be running at large within the village.
      4.   Habitually barks or howls to the annoyance of any two (2) or more
other persons.
   B.   Animals: No person owning, possessing, sheltering, or harboring any
animal shall allow such animal to run at large within the village. (Ord., 8-2-
1999)
4-3-8: IMPOUNDING DOGS OR CATS:
Any person may impound any such dog or cat running at large which habitually
pursues any vehicle upon any street, alley, or highway within the village, or
which assaults or attacks any person in the village. (Ord. 2011-5, 11-7-2011)
4-3-9: IMPOUNDING COSTS:
Upon possession of any dog or cat impounded, it shall be transported to the
animal control agency, and all costs relative to the housing and care of such
animal shall be the responsibility of such animal's owner. In addition, a
license shall be obtained for any unlicensed dog or cat. (Ord. 2011-5, 11-7-
2011)
4-3-10: REPORT OF IMPOUNDED DOGS OR CATS:
Any person or any authorized village official who impounds any dog or cat
shall, after delivery of said dog or cat to the appropriate village authority,
make a report to the village treasurer, stating when and under what conditions
he seized, or impounded such dog or cat, and the owner's name if known.
Whenever any unlicensed dog or cat is so impounded or delivered to the
appropriate village authority, the village treasurer or other authorized person
shall notify the owner personally or through the United States mail, if such
owner is known to the officer or can be ascertained by reasonable effort. If
such owner is unknown or cannot be ascertained, then the village treasurer or
authorized representative shall post a written notice in three (3) public
places in the village, giving a description of the dog or cat, stating where it
is impounded, and the conditions for its release within forty eight (48) hours,
Sundays excepted, after such village official has taken the dog or cat into his
possession. (Ord. 2011-5, 11-7-2011)
4-3-11: DOG OR CAT INFECTED WITH HYDROPHOBIA:
   A.   Any authorized village official may impound any dog or cat which he
believes from appearance or conduct to be infected with the disease known as
hydrophobia or rabies. Where it is impossible or dangerous to seize such dog or
cat and a reasonable effort has been made to seize the dog or cat, any village
official may kill such dog or cat in a proper and humane manner.
   B.   Any person who shall suspect that any dog or cat is infected with
hydrophobia or rabies shall report his suspicions to the proper village
officials, describing the dog or cat and giving the name of the owner if known.
Any such dog or cat shall, upon demand of any village official, be delivered to
such village official. If, upon examination by the village official, the dog or
cat shall prove in fact to be infected with said disease, the dog or cat may be
killed, in a proper and humane manner, by said official.
   C.   No person shall knowingly harbor or keep any dog or cat infected with
hydrophobia or rabies or any dog or cat known to have been bitten by a dog or
cat known to have been infected with hydrophobia or rabies, or shall fail to
report to the proper village officials the existence of a dog or cat which he
knows to be infected with hydrophobia or rabies. (Ord., 8-2-1999)
4-3-12: QUARANTINE FOR RABIES:
During the time that the village or any part thereof shall be quarantined for
rabies pursuant to the provisions of section 95.21, Wisconsin statutes, or any
other lawful provision, all dogs or cats within the district so quarantined
shall be kept securely confined, tied, leashed, or muzzled. Any dog or cat not
so kept securely confined, tied, leashed, or muzzled is declared to be a public
nuisance and shall be impounded by the village official or other person. Upon
the impounding of such dog or cat, notice thereof shall be given, the
possession of said dog or cat may be obtained and report thereof made in the
manner provided in section
4-3-10 of this chapter. Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of
this section requiring the confining, keeping, tying, holding in leash or
muzzling of any such dog or cat, shall be guilty of a violation of this
chapter. (Ord. 2012-2, 4-16-2012)
4-3-13: DOG OR CAT BITING PERSONS:
Every owner of a dog or cat and every other person who knows that a dog or cat
has bitten any person shall immediately report such fact, in writing, to the
appropriate village official, and such owner shall immediately confine said dog
or cat for at least fourteen (14) days thereafter and shall not release such
dog or cat except with the written approval of the village official. Any such
dog or cat shall be surrendered to the village official upon demand. (Ord., 8-
2-1999)
4-3-14: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
No person shall treat cruelly any animal by depriving it of necessary
sustenance or protection or by abandoning, beating, killing, tormenting,
maiming, disfiguring, or overworking it, or by committing any other act or
omission by which unjustifiable pain, dirtiness, suffering, or death caused or
knowingly permitted to any animal or animals, or by procurement of any of the
above acts or omissions, whether the acts or omissions are committed
maliciously, wilfully or negligently within the village. (Ord., 8-2-1999)
4-3-15: DEFECATION ON PRIVATE OR PUBLIC PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or in control of a dog or cat to
allow or permit such animal to defecate on any private or public property owned
by another unless such person shall remove all feces so deposited by such
animal. Violation of this section shall be punishable by a forfeiture of not
less than twenty dollars ($20.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00).
(Ord., 8-2-1999)
4-3-16: AREA OF KEEPING:
All pens, yards, runs, or other structures wherein any animal is kept shall be
maintained in good repair and in a reasonably sanitary condition so as to not
constitute a health hazard. (Ord., 8-2-1999)
4-3-17: NUMBER OF DOGS AND CATS KEPT:
It shall be unlawful to own, harbor, shelter or keep in its possession a
combination of more than four (4) dogs and/or cats on any one property, within
the village, with the exception of a litter of pups or kittens, which may be
kept for a period of four (4) months following birth. (Ord., 8-2-1999)
4-3-18: REGULATION OF OTHER ANIMALS:
   A.   Restricted Species:
      1.   No person, except for a duly authorized licensed breeder, pet shop
owner, commercial auction facility, farmer-owner of livestock permitted to be
located within the village limits, or as otherwise set forth in this section,
shall keep, sell, breed or offer for sale one or more horses, cows, pigs,
goats, sheep, chickens, geese, ducks, doves, pigeons, other fowl or bees
(collectively included as "creatures"), or construct or use shelters therefor
within the village of Reedsville without the written permission of the village
board or the chief of police or designee.
      2.   No person, except a pet shop owner, or as otherwise set forth in
this section, or as permitted by the village board, shall keep, sell, breed, or
offer for sale one or more large predators, endangered species or poisonous
snakes, rodents, reptiles, exotic species or wild animals (collectively
included as "creatures"), or construct or use shelters therefor within the
village of Reedsville without the written permission of the village board or
the chief of police or designee.
      3.   All stables, coops, yards, pens, kennels or other structures wherein
any animal or creature is kept shall be constructed so as to be cleanable and
kept in good repair. All such structures shall be kept clean and sanitary and
shall not cause any objectionable odor. Accumulations of cleansings or manure
of more than one day's operations in such structure shall be deemed a violation
of this section and subject to a forfeiture action.
   B.   Captive Wildlife; Dogs: All provision of Wisconsin statutes, chapter
169 relating to wild animals, and chapter 174 relating to dogs, as amended or
modified from time to time, are hereby incorporated by reference.
   C.   Creatures Not To Run At Large: No owner or keeper of any creature shall
permit a creature to run at large at any time in the village of Reedsville. A
creature is to be considered running at large if it is off the premises of the
owner or keeper and not under control of the owner or some other person. Any
police officer or humane officer may attempt to capture and restrain any such
creature running at large as permitted by the Wisconsin statutes.
   D.   Loud Or Barking Animals: No person shall keep, harbor or own any dog,
cat, or other animal that by loud or frequent or habitual barking, yelping, or
howling, or by constant threat of attacking or biting, shall cause annoyance to
the neighborhood or members of the public. No person shall refuse to deliver up
to any police officer any dog, cat, or other animal when properly requested to
do so under the provisions of this chapter.
   E.   Attacking Or Biting Creatures:
      1.   Keep, Harbor, Own: No person shall keep, harbor or own any creature
which shall attack, bite or cause damage to any member of the public, a
domestic animal or property of another whether the attack or damage is on
public or private property, including the private property of the person owning
the attacking or biting creature.
      2.   Removal Or Impoundment:
         a.   Removal: Any person ordered to remove any attacking or biting
creature from the village of Reedsville shall do so immediately.
         b.   Impoundment: Any creature ordered by the village to be impounded
shall be immediately surrendered to the village police to be detained until
such time as a court order is obtained for the disposition of the animal or
creature.
      3.   Costs Of Disposition: Any person keeping, harboring or owning an
attacking or biting creature shall pay all costs for the removal, impoundment,
destruction or other disposition of said animal.
      4.   Failing To Comply: Any person failing to comply with any written
terms, conditions or restrictions imposed by the village regarding an attacking
or biting creature shall be in violation of this section.
   F.   Furbearing Animal Farm Prohibited: No person, firm or corporation shall
keep, operate, maintain or have a mink farm or farms, fox farms or other
furbearing animal farm or farms within the corporate limits of the village of
Reedsville, and the keeping, operating or maintenance of such a farm within the
corporate limits of the village is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
   G.   Wild Animals:
      1.   Prohibition On Keeping: Except for state licensed game farms, or
otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to keep,
maintain or have in his possession or under his control within the village any
poisonous reptile or any other dangerous or carnivorous wild animal, insect or
reptile, any vicious or dangerous domesticated animal or any other animal or
reptile of wild, vicious or dangerous propensities. Specifically, it shall be
unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or have in his possession or under
his control within the village the following animals, reptiles or insects:
         a.   All poisonous animals and reptiles including rear fang snakes.
         b.   Chimpanzees (Pan); gibbons (Hylobates); gorillas (Gorilla);
orangutans (Pongo); and siamangs (Symphalangus).
         c.   Baboons (Papio, Mandrillus).
         d.   Bears (Ursidae).
         e.   Bison (Bison).
         f.   Cheetahs (Acinonyx jubatus).
         g.   Crocodilians (Crocodilia) and alligators.
         h.   Constrictor snakes, three feet (3') in length or more.
         i.   Coyotes (Canis latrans).
         j.   Game cocks and other fighting birds.
         k.   Hyenas (Hyaenidae).
         l.   Jaguars (Panthera onca).
         m.   Leopards (Panthera pardus).
         n.   Lions (Panthera leo).
         o.   Lynxes (Lynx).
         p.   Ostriches (Struthio).
         q.   Pumas (Felis concolor); also known as cougars, mountain lions and
panthers.
         r.   Sharks (class Chondrichthyes).
         s.   Snow leopards (Panthera uncia).
         t.   Tigers (Panthera tigris).
         u.   Wolves (Canis lupus).
         v.   Poisonous insects.
         w.   Except in properly zoned districts, horses, mules, ponies,
donkeys, cows, pigs, goats, sheep, chickens, poultry or any animal raised for
furbearing purposes unless otherwise permitted elsewhere in this code.
      2.   Exceptions; Pet Shops: The prohibitions of subsection G1 of this
section shall not apply where the animals, reptiles or insects are in the care,
custody or control of: a state licensed game farm; a veterinarian for
treatment; agricultural fairs; shows or projects of 4-H clubs; a display for
judging purposes; an itinerant or transient carnival, circus or other show; dog
or cat show or trials; public or private educational institutions; zoological
gardens, if:
         a.   Their location conforms to the provisions of the zoning ordinance
of the village.
         b.   All animals and animal quarters are kept in a clean and sanitary
condition and so maintained as to eliminate objectionable odors.
         c.   Animals are maintained in quarters so constructed as to prevent
their escape.
   H.   Farm Animals; Existing Premises: The keeping of cattle, horses, hogs,
poultry, alpaca, llamas, emus, and other farm animals is prohibited within the
village except as may be allowed in areas zoned agricultural or industrial. Any
such animals kept on premises other than those zoned agricultural or industrial
within the village as of the effective date hereof may continue to be kept on
such premises, provided that the owner of the premises registers the premises
with the village as required herein. Notwithstanding the registration, there is
not allowed any expansion of the area in which the animals are kept, or
increase in the number or type of the animals kept, or replacement of any
animals that die, are sold or otherwise transferred from the premises. The
owner of the premises shall register the premises with the police chief or the
village clerk by identifying the premises and the number and type of animals
existing on the premises, within thirty (30) days of the effective date hereof.
If the owner of the premises fails to register the animals within thirty (30)
days of the effective date hereof, such animals are deemed in violation of this
section.
   I.   Penalties: Violations of this section shall be punishable by a
forfeiture of not less than twenty dollars ($20.00) or more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 2016-5, 7-14-2016)
CHAPTER 4
SCHOOL TRUANCY
SECTION:
4-4-1: Definitions
4-4-2: Truant
4-4-3: Habitual Truant
4-4-4: Dropout
4-4-5: Contributing To Truancy
4-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
The terms "dropout", "habitual truant", "operating privilege", and "truant"
shall have the meanings provided in section 118.163(1), Wisconsin statutes, and
any amendment thereto, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference.
(Ord. 2000-7, 11-6-2000, eff. 11-7-2000)
4-4-2: TRUANT:
A person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age is prohibited from being a
truant. In the event that a person under the age of eighteen (18) years is
found to be a truant, the following dispositions shall be available to the
court:
   A.   An order for the person to attend school.
   B.   A forfeiture of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) plus costs for a
first violation, or a forfeiture of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00)
plus costs for any second or subsequent violation committed within twelve (12)
months of a previous violation, subject to Wisconsin statutes section 938.37
and subject to a maximum cumulative forfeiture amount of not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for all violations committed during a school
semester. All or part of the forfeiture plus costs may be assessed against the
person, the parents or guardian of the person, or both. (Ord. 2000-7, 11-6-
2000, eff. 11-7-2000)
4-4-3: HABITUAL TRUANT:
A person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age is prohibited from being a
habitual truant. In the event that a person under the age of eighteen (18)
years is found to be a habitual truant, the following dispositions shall be
available to the court:
   A.   Suspension of the person's operating privilege for not less than thirty
(30) days nor more than one year. The court shall immediately take possession
of any suspended license and forward it to the department of transportation
together with a notice stating the reason for and the duration of the
suspension.
   B.   An order for the person to participate in counseling or a supervised
work program or other community service work as described in section 938.34
(5g), Wisconsin statutes. The costs of any such counseling, supervised work
program, or other community service work may be assessed against the person,
the parents or guardian of the person, or both.
   C.   An order for the person to remain at home except during hours in which
the person is attending religious worship or a school program, including travel
time required to get to and from the school program or place of worship. The
order may permit a person to leave his or her home if the person is accompanied
by a parent or guardian.
   D.   An order for the person to attend an educational program as described
in section 938.34(7d), Wisconsin statutes.
   E.   An order for the Wisconsin department of workforce development to
revoke, under Wisconsin statutes section 103.72, a permit under Wisconsin
statutes section 103.70 authorizing the employment of the person.
   F.   An order for the person to be placed in a teen court program as
described in section 938.342(1g)(f), Wisconsin statutes.
   G.   An order for the person to attend school.
   H.   A forfeiture of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus
costs, subject to Wisconsin statutes section 938.37. All or part of the
forfeiture plus costs may be assessed against the person, the parents or
guardian of the person, or both.
   I.   Any other reasonable conditions consistent with this section, including
a curfew, restrictions as to going to or remaining on specified premises and
restrictions on associating with other children or adults.
   J.   An order placing the person under formal or informal supervision, as
described in section 938.34(2), Wisconsin statutes, for up to one year.
   K.   An order for the person's parent, guardian, or legal custodian to
participate in counseling at the parent's, guardian's, or legal custodian's own
expense or to attend school with the person, or both. (Ord. 2000-7, 11-6-2000,
eff. 11-7-2000)
4-4-4: DROPOUT:
A court may suspend the operating privilege of a person who is at least sixteen
(16) years of age but less than eighteen (18) years of age and who is a dropout
until the person reaches the age of eighteen (18). The court shall immediately
take possession of any suspended license and forward it to the Wisconsin
department of transportation together with a notice stating the reason for and
the duration of the suspension. (Ord. 2000-7, 11-6-2000, eff. 11-7-2000)
4-4-5: CONTRIBUTING TO TRUANCY:
   A.   Except as provided in subsection B of this section, any person
seventeen (17) years of age or older who, by any act or omission, knowingly
encourages or contributes to the truancy of a person seventeen (17) years of
age or under is in violation of this section and is subject to the forfeiture
as provided herein.
   B.   Subsection A of this section does not apply to a person who has under
his or her control a child who has been sanctioned by section 49.26(1)(h),
Wisconsin statutes, pertaining to the Learnfare program.
   C.   For purposes of this section "truancy" means any absence of part or all
of one or more days from school during which the school attendance officer,
principal or teacher has not been notified of the legal cause of such absence
by the parent or guardian of the absent pupil, and also means intermittent
attendance carried on for the purpose of defeating the intent of section
118.15, Wisconsin statutes, pertaining to compulsory school attendance.
   D.   An act or omission contributes to the truancy of a child, whether or
not the child is adjudged to be in need of protection or services, if the
natural and probable consequences of that act or omission would be to cause the
child to be truant.
   E.   A person who violates this section is subject to a forfeiture of not
more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus costs of prosecution. Each day of
violation constitutes a separate offense under this section. (Ord. 2016-1, 3-
10-2016)
CHAPTER 5
SOCIAL HOSTS
SECTION:
4-5-1: Purpose
4-5-2: Definitions
4-5-3: Prohibited Acts
4-5-4: Exceptions
4-5-5: Penalties
4-5-1: PURPOSE:
To discourage underage possession and consumption of alcohol, even if done
within the confines of a private residence, and intends to hold persons
criminally responsible who host events or gatherings where persons under twenty
one (21) years of age possess or consume alcohol regardless of whether the
person hosting the event or gathering supplied the alcohol. (Ord. 2010-7, 9-20-
2010)
4-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms have the following
meanings:
ALCOHOL: Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, whiskey,
rum, brandy, gin, or any other distilled spirits including dilutions and
mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process produced.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or
solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains one-half
of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage
purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other
substances.
ALLOW OR HOST: To aid, conduct, entertain, organize, supervise, control, or
permit an event or gathering.
CONTROL: Having the authority or power, or both, to direct, manage, oversee, or
restrict the affairs, assets, or business of a person or entity.
EVENT OR GATHERING: Any group of three (3) or more persons who have assembled
or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity.
PARENT: Any person having legal custody of a juvenile as natural, adoptive
parent, or stepparent; a legal guardian; or as a person to whom legal custody
has been given by order of the court.
PRESENT: Being at hand or in attendance.
PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY: Any home, yard, farm, field, land, apartment,
condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting
room, park, or any other place of assembly, whether occupied on a temporary or
permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or specifically for a party or
other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or
without permission or compensation.
UNDERAGE PERSON: Any individual under twenty one (21) years of age. (Ord. 2010-
7, 9-20-2010)
4-5-3: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person(s) to: host or allow an event or
gathering at or on any private or public property where alcohol or alcoholic
beverages are present when the person knows that an underage person will
possess or consume any alcohol or alcoholic beverage if the person fails to
take reasonable steps to prevent possession or consumption by the underage
person(s), even if the person who allows or hosts the event or gathering is not
present at the event or gathering.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to intentionally aid, advise, hire,
counsel, conspire with or otherwise procure another to commit the prohibited
act.
   C.   A person who hosts an event or gathering does not have to be present at
the event or gathering to be criminally responsible. (Ord. 2010-7, 9-20-2010)
4-5-4: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   This section does not apply to a person who procures for or dispenses,
gives, or sells alcohol or any alcoholic beverage to an underage person if the
underage person is in the direct company of the underage person's parent,
guardian, or spouse and the parent, guardian, or spouse has attained the legal
drinking age, has consented to the underage person possessing or consuming the
alcohol or alcoholic beverage, and is in a position to observe and control the
underage person.
   B.   This section does not apply to legally protected religious observances.
   C.   This section does not apply to an underage person who is lawfully in
possession of alcohol or alcoholic beverages during the course and scope of
employment. (Ord. 2010-7, 9-20-2010)
4-5-5: PENALTIES:
   A.   A person who violates any provision of this chapter is subject to a
forfeiture of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) nor more than five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for each offense, together with any applicable
assessment, cost surcharge and the costs of prosecution.
   B.   A person who has the ability to pay a forfeiture entered pursuant to
this chapter but who fails or refused to do so may be confined in the county
jail until the forfeiture and costs are paid. (Ord. 2010-7, 9-20-2010)
CHAPTER 6
SEXUAL OFFENDER RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS
SECTION:
4-6-1: Finding And Issue
4-6-2: Definitions
4-6-3: Sexual Offender And Sexual Predator Residence; Prohibition; Penalties;
Exceptions
4-6-4: Severability
4-6-5: Penalties
4-6-1: FINDING AND ISSUE:
   A.   Repeat sexual offenders, sexual offenders who use physical violence and
sexual offenders who prey on children are sexual predators who present an
extreme threat to public safety. Sexual offenders are extremely likely to use
physical violence and to repeat their offenses; and most sexual offenders
commit many offenses, have many more victims than are ever reported, and are
prosecuted for only a fraction of their crimes. This makes the cost of sexual
offender victimization to society at large, while incalculable, clearly
exorbitant.
   B.   It is the intent of this section not to impose a criminal penalty but
rather to serve the compelling interest of the village of Reedsville to
promote, protect, and improve the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens
of the village by creating areas around locations where children regularly
congregate in concentrated numbers wherein certain sexual offenders and sexual
predators are prohibited from establishing temporary or permanent residence.
(Ord. 2016-3, 4-14-2016)
4-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except when the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
ADULT CHILD: A person who is eighteen (18) years of age or older.
CHILD: A person under the age of eighteen (18) for the purpose of this chapter.
DESIGNATED OFFENDER: Any person who is required to register under Wisconsin
statutes section 301.45 for any sexual offense against a child or any person
who is required to register under Wisconsin statutes section 301.45 for whom a
bulletin to law enforcement agencies has been issued under Wisconsin statutes
section 301.46(2m).
LOITERING: Whether in a group, crowd, or as an individual, to stand idly about,
loaf, prowl, congregate, wander, stand, linger aimlessly, proceed slowly or
with many stops, to delay or dawdle.
PERMANENT RESIDENCE: A place where the person abides, lodges, or resides for
fourteen (14) or more consecutive days.
TEMPORARY RESIDENCE: A place where the person abides, lodges, or resides for a
period of fourteen (14) or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year
and which is not the person's permanent address or a place where the person
routinely abides, lodges, or resides for a period of four (4) or more
consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the person's
permanent residence. (Ord. 2016-3, 4-14-2016)
4-6-3: SEXUAL OFFENDER AND SEXUAL PREDATOR RESIDENCE; PROHIBITION; PENALTIES;
EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Prohibited Location Of Residence: It is unlawful for any designated
offender to establish a permanent residence or temporary residence within one
thousand feet (1,000') of any school, licensed daycare center, park,
recreational trail, playground, or place of worship.
   B.   Prohibited Loitering: It is unlawful for any designated offender to
loiter within five hundred feet (500') of any school, licensed daycare center,
park, trail, playground, place of worship, or any other place designated by the
Village as a place where children are known to congregate.
   C.   Prohibited Activity: It is unlawful for any designated offender to
participate in a holiday event involving children under eighteen (18) years of
age, such as distributing candy or other items to children. Holiday events in
which the offender is the parent or guardian of the children involved, and no
nonfamilial children are present, are exempt from this paragraph.
"Participation" is defined as actively taking part in the event.
   D.   Measurement Of Distance:
      1.   For the purposes of determining the minimum distance separation, the
requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer
property line of the permanent residence or temporary residence to nearest
outer property line of a school, licensed daycare center, park, recreational
trail, playground, place of worship or any other place designated by the
Village as a place where children are known to congregate.
      2.   The Reedsville Police Department shall prepare an official map
showing prohibited locations as defined by this section. The Reedsville Police
Department shall also maintain the map on file at the Reedsville Police
Department and update the map at least annually to reflect any changes in the
location of prohibited zones. These shall be designated on the map as child
safety zones.
   E.   Exceptions: A designated offender residing within a prohibited area as
described in this section does not commit a violation of this section if any of
the following apply:
      1.   The person established the permanent residence or temporary
residence and reported and registered the residence pursuant to Wisconsin
Statutes section 301.45 before the effective date hereof.
      2.   The person is a minor and is not required to register under
Wisconsin Statutes sections 301.45 or 301.46.
      3.   The school, licensed daycare center, park, recreational trail or
playground within one thousand feet (1,000') of the person's permanent
residence was opened after the person established the permanent residence or
temporary residence and reported and registered the residence pursuant to
Wisconsin Statutes section 301.45.
      4.   The residence is also the primary residence of the person's parents,
grandparents, siblings, spouse or adult children, provided that such parent,
grandparent, sibling, spouse or adult child established the residence at least
two (2) years before the designated offender established residence at the
location.
   F.   Property Owners Prohibited From Renting Real Property To Certain Sexual
Offenders And Sexual Predators:
      1.   It is unlawful to let or rent any place, structure, or part thereof,
trailer or other conveyance, with the knowledge that it will be used as a
permanent residence or temporary residence by any person prohibited from
establishing such permanent residence or temporary residence pursuant to this
chapter, if such place, structure, or part thereof, trailer or other
conveyance, is located within a prohibited location zone described in
subsection A of this section, and not subject to an exception set forth in
subsection E of this section.
      2.   A property owner's failure to comply with this section shall
constitute a violation of this section and shall subject the property owner to
the penalties set forth in section
4-6-5 of this chapter.
   G.   Appeal: The above one thousand foot (1,000') requirement may be waived
upon approval of the Reedsville Village Board through appeal by the affected
party. Such appeal shall be made in writing to the Village Clerk's Office, who
shall forward the request to the Reedsville Village Board, which shall receive
reports from the Village of Reedsville Police Department on such appeal. The
Reedsville Village Board shall convene and consider the public interest, as
well as the affected party's presentation and concerns. After deliberation, the
Reedsville Village Board shall forward its decision in writing via the minutes
or otherwise to the Village of Reedsville Police Department for their
information and action. A written copy of the decision shall be provided to the
affected party. (Ord. 2016-3, 4-14-2016)
   H.   Sexually Violent Person:
      1.   Sexually violent person is defined in section 980.01(7), Wisconsin
Statutes, the terms of which are incorporated herein by reference.
      2.   Pursuant to and consistent with section 980.135, Wisconsin Statutes,
the terms of this subsection H do not apply to a sexually violent person who is
released under section 980.08, Wisconsin Statutes, or against a person who
provides housing to the person, so long as the sexually violent person is
subject to supervised release under chapter 980, Wisconsin Statutes, is
residing where he or she is ordered to reside under section 980.08, Wisconsin
Statutes, and is in compliance with all court orders issued under chapter 980,
Wisconsin Statutes.
      3.   The provisions of section 980.08(4)(f), Wisconsin Statutes,
pertaining to the supervised release and the supervised release plan
requirements of a sexually violent person are incorporated herein by reference.
The purpose of this subsection is to incorporate the same terms, conditions and
plan for the placement of a sexually violent person for Municipal ordinance
enforcement authority. (Ord. 2017-1, 4-13-2017)
4-6-4: SEVERABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed severable and it is expressly
declared that the Village Board would have passed the other provisions of this
chapter irrespective of whether or not one (1) or more provisions may be
declared invalid. If any provisions of this chapter or the application to any
person or circumstance are held invalid, the remainder of this chapter or the
application of such other provisions to other persons or circumstances shall
not be affected. (Ord. 2016-3, 4-14-2016)
4-6-5: PENALTIES:
A person who violates any provision of this section shall be punished by a
forfeiture set forth in title 1, chapter 4 of this Code. Each day a person
maintains a residence in violation of this section constitutes a separate
violation. The Village of Reedsville may also seek equitable relief. (Ord.
2016-3, 4-14-2016)
TITLE 5
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
CHAPTER 1
FIRE DEPARTMENT; FIRE PREVENTION REGULATIONS
SECTION:
5-1-1: Fire Chief, Duties
5-1-2: Fire Inspector
5-1-3: Regulations At Fires
5-1-4: Penalty
5-1-1: FIRE CHIEF, DUTIES:
   A.   General Supervision: The chief of the fire department shall have
general supervision of the department, subject to this chapter and the bylaws
of the department and shall be responsible for the personnel and general
efficiency of the department.
   B.   Control And Care Of Apparatus:
      1.   The chief shall have control of all apparatus used by the department
and shall be responsible for its proper maintenance. Emergency repairs may be
authorized by the chief.
      2.   No apparatus shall be used for any purpose except for firefighting
within the village limits or surrounding townships under contract to the
village, or in training therefor, except pursuant to an agreement approved by
the board after the chief has given his recommendations on such use. With the
approval of the chief, such apparatus may be used for emergency purposes other
than firefighting. A written report of all such uses shall be made quarterly to
the board.
      3.   The chief shall keep an inventory of all apparatus and equipment and
an inventory of all hoses, showing dates and results of tests on each length,
which shall be individually identified.
   C.   Command At Fire: The chief shall be present at all fires, have complete
command of and entire responsibility for all firefighting operations, plan the
control of the same, direct the action of the companies when they arrive at a
fire, observe that every company does its duty, grant leaves of absence at a
fire when he may deem it proper and shall see that the fire apparatus is kept
in proper condition at all times.
   D.   Fire Record Book: The chief shall keep a fire record book of every fire
to which the department was called and shall enter in such book the locality of
such fire, time the alarm was received, cause of the fire, where the fire
started, cause of delay (if any) in responding, method of extinguishment and
equipment used, amount of insurance carried on the building and contents,
estimated fire loss, time fire was extinguished, names of men responding and
general remarks.
   E.   Enforcement Of Fire Prevention Rules: The chief shall enforce all fire
prevention regulations of the village and state laws and regulations pertaining
to fire prevention methods and on the activities of the department.
   F.   Reports To Board: The chief shall submit a written report to the board
not later than February 1 of each year, at such other times as he deems
desirable, relating to the conditions of the various pieces of apparatus and
appurtenances, the number of fires occurring since the previous report, the
date of same and loss occasioned thereby, the number of members of the
department, the number of active members in the department and resignations and
expulsions from the department. He shall also report upon the drill and
training program of the department, together with other pertinent information,
including recommendations of such improvements, as he deems proper and
necessary for the operation of the department.
   G.   Annual Budget Estimate: Not later than October 1 of each year, the
chief shall file with the village clerk a detailed estimate of the
appropriations needed for the conduct of the department during the ensuing
fiscal year 1 .
   H.   General Duties: He shall perform such other duties as are incumbent on
the commanding officer of the fire department. (1968 Code § 4.01)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  1-7-2 of this code.
5-1-2: FIRE INSPECTOR:
   A.   Fire Chief Appointed: The fire chief shall hold the office of fire
inspector, with power to appoint one or more deputy fire inspectors, who shall
perform the same duties and have the same powers as the fire inspector.
   B.   Inspections For Fire Hazards: The fire inspector shall inspect
quarterly all commercial, industrial and public buildings and premises within
the village for the purpose of noting and causing to be corrected any condition
liable to cause fire.
   C.   Permits For Inflammable Liquids Storage: The inspector shall
investigate and issue permits in accordance with the regulations of the state
industrial commission for the storage and handling of explosives and
inflammable liquids within the village. He shall perform such other duties as
required by the state industrial commission.
   D.   Fire Hazard As Nuisance; Removal: Whenever or wherever in the village
any inspection by the fire chief or his deputies reveals a fire hazard, the
chief or his deputies shall serve a notice in writing upon the owner of the
property giving said owner a reasonable time in which to remove the hazard. In
the event that the fire hazard is not removed within the time allowed, it shall
be deemed a nuisance. The fire chief or his deputy is authorized to have the
same removed by the village, and the cost of such removal shall be recovered in
an action by the village against the owner of the property.
   E.   Record Of Inspections: The chief shall keep a written record card of
each property inspected which shall conform to the requirements of the
industrial commission and shall make the quarterly report of inspections
required by the industrial commission.
   F.   Right Of Access And Interference: No person shall deny the chief or his
deputies free access to any property within the village at any reasonable time
for the purpose of making fire inspections. No person shall hinder or obstruct
the fire inspector in the performance of his duty or refuse to observe any
lawful direction given by him. (1968 Code § 4.03)
5-1-3: REGULATIONS AT FIRES:
   A.   Police Powers Of Department: The chief and assistants or officers in
command at any fire are hereby vested with full and complete police authority
at fires. Any officer of the department may cause the arrest of any person
failing to give the right of way to the fire department in responding to a
fire.
   B.   Access To Adjacent Property; Hindrance: Any fireman, while acting under
the direction of the fire chief or other officer in command, may enter upon the
premises adjacent to or in the vicinity of any building or other property then
on fire for the purpose of extinguishing such fire and if any person shall
hinder, resist or obstruct any fireman in the discharge of his duty, the person
so offending shall be deemed guilty of resisting firemen in the discharge of
their duties.
   C.   Removal Of Hazards At Fires: The fire chief may prescribe certain
limits in the vicinity of any fire within which no persons, excepting firemen
and policemen and those admitted by order of any officer of the department,
shall be permitted to enter. The chief may cause the removal of any property
whenever it shall become necessary for the preservation of such property from
fire or to prevent the spreading of fire or to protect the adjoining property,
and during the progress of any fire he may order the removal or destruction of
any property necessary to prevent the further spread of the fire. He may cause
the removal of all wires or other facilities and the turning off of all
electricity or other services where the same impedes the work of the department
during the progress of a fire.
   D.   Bystanders To Assist: Every person who shall be present at a fire shall
be subject to the orders of the fire chief or officer in command and may be
required to render assistance in fighting the fire or in removing or guarding
property. Such officer may cause the arrest of any person refusing to obey said
orders. (1968 Code § 4.02)
5-1-4: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
a penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1968 Code § 4.04)
CHAPTER 2
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
SECTION:
5-2-1: Adoption Of Fire Prevention Code
5-2-2: Definition
5-2-3: Enforcement, Modifications
5-2-4: Establishment Of District Limits, Storage Restrictions
5-2-5: Permits
5-2-6: Appeals
5-2-7: Penalties
5-2-1: ADOPTION OF FIRE PREVENTION CODE:
There is hereby adopted by the village board, for the purpose of prescribing
regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or
explosion, that certain code known as the fire prevention code, abbreviated
edition, recommended by the American Insurance Association, 1965 edition,
except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, of which
code not less than three (3) copies have been and now are filed in the office
of the village clerk, and the same are adopted and incorporated as fully as if
set out at length herein, and from the date on which this chapter shall take
effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the
village. (1981 Code)
5-2-2: DEFINITION:
Whenever the word "municipality" is used in the code hereby adopted, it shall
be held to mean the village of Reedsville. (1981 Code)
5-2-3: ENFORCEMENT, MODIFICATIONS:
The code adopted herein shall be enforced by the chief of the fire department
and the building inspector.
The chief of the fire department shall have power to modify any of the
provisions of the code adopted herein upon application in writing by the owner
or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties
in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code; provided, that the
spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial
justice done. The particulars of such modification, when granted or allowed and
the decision of the chief of the fire department thereon, shall be entered upon
the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished the
applicant. (1981 Code)
5-2-4: ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICT LIMITS, STORAGE RESTRICTIONS:
The limits referred to in section 53b of the code adopted herein, in which
storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, the limits referred to
in section 74a of the code adopted herein in which storage of class I liquids
in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited, and the limits referred to in
section 114 of the code adopted herein, in which bulk storage of liquefied
petroleum gas is restricted, are established as those set by the chief of the
fire department, which in his discretion carry out the general import and
intent of this chapter. (1981 Code)
5-2-5: PERMITS:
   A.   Permits will be issued by the chief of the fire department or the
building inspector for the city and shall be valid for a one year period
commencing on the date the permit is issued. (1981 Code; amd. Ord. 2023-03, 6-
8-2023)
5-2-6: APPEALS:
Whenever the chief of the fire department shall disapprove an application or
refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions
of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have
been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the
decision of the chief of the fire department to the village board of trustees
within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision appealed. (1981 Code)
5-2-7: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code adopted
herein or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with
any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed
statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any
certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been
taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified
by the village board of trustees, or by a court of competent jurisdiction,
within the time fixed therein, shall severally for each and every such
violation and noncompliance respectively, forfeit not less than ten dollars
($10.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). The imposition of one
penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to
continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such
violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise
specified, a separate offense shall be deemed to have occurred each ten (10)
days that prohibited conditions are maintained.
   B.   The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the
enforced removal of prohibited conditions. (1981 Code)
TITLE 6
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
HEALTH REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6-1-1: Board Of Health, Duties
6-1-2: Health Officer (Rep. by Ord. 2011-5, 11-7-2011)
6-1-3: Milk And Milk Products
6-1-4: Property Kept Sanitary
6-1-5: Abatement Of Health Nuisances
6-1-6: Penalty
6-1-1: BOARD OF HEALTH, DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the village board to assume the general administration
of health and sanitation laws and regulations in the village, to attend to the
administration and enforcement of the health laws of the state and to the rules
and regulations prescribed by the state board of health and the ordinances of
the village. (Ord. 2011-5, 11-7-2011)
The board shall take such measures and make such rules and regulations as shall
be necessary and effectual for the preservation and promotion of the public
health in the village. All orders and regulations shall be approved by the
village board and be published in the official newspaper, and after publication
shall have the force and effect of ordinances, including penalty for
violations. (1968 Code § 9.01)
6-1-2: HEALTH OFFICER:
(Rep. by Ord. 2011-5, 11-7-2011)
6-1-3: MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS:
No person shall sell, offer or expose for sale within the village any milk or
milk product other than grade A pasteurized milk or milk products as those
terms are defined in the Wisconsin administrative code. (1968 Code § 9.03)
6-1-4: PROPERTY KEPT SANITARY 1 :
The owners or occupants of any property within the village shall at all times
keep the same in a clean and sanitary condition and free from filth of all
descriptions whatever, and from foul odors which might generate or spread
disease, germs and contaminate the ground, air and water of the place under
control of said owner or occupant or of the premises joining the same. (1968
Code § 9.09)
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 2 of this title.
6-1-5: ABATEMENT OF HEALTH NUISANCES:
The village board shall have the power to abate health nuisances in accordance
with chapter 254, Wisconsin statutes, which is hereby adopted by reference and
made a part of this section as if fully set forth herein. (Ord. 2011-5, 11-7-
2011)
6-1-6: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
a penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1968 Code § 9.10)
CHAPTER 2
NUISANCES
SECTION:
6-2-1: Public Nuisances Prohibited
6-2-2: Acts Prohibited
6-2-3: Unnecessary Vehicle Smoke Prohibited
6-2-4: Abatement Of Nuisance
6-2-5: Cost Of Abatement
6-2-6: Penalty
6-2-7: Unlawful Assemblies And Their Suppression
6-2-1: PUBLIC NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
No person shall erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or permit to exist
any public nuisance within the village. (1968 Code § 8.01)
6-2-2: ACTS PROHIBITED:
   A.   Public Nuisance: A public nuisance is a thing, act, occupation,
condition or use of property which shall continue for such length of time as
to:
      1.   Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose
or safety of the public.
      2.   In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of
property.
      3.   Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or render
dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway, navigable body of water or
other public way or the use of public property.
   B.   Public Nuisances Affecting Health: The following acts, omissions,
places, conditions and things are hereby specifically declared to be public
health nuisances, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other
health nuisances 1  coming within the definition of subsection A of this
section:
      1.   All decayed, harmfully adulterated or unwholesome food or drink sold
or offered for sale to the public.
      2.   Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not intended for human
consumption or food which are not buried or otherwise disposed of in a sanitary
manner within twenty four (24) hours after death.
      3.   Accumulations of decayed animal or vegetable matter, trash, rubbish,
rotting lumber, bedding, packing material, scrap metal including inoperable or
junk automobiles, or any material whatsoever in which flies, mosquitoes,
disease carrying insects, rats or other vermin may breed.
      4.   All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other insects can
multiply.
      5.   Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not flytight.
      6.   All noxious weeds and other rank growth of vegetation 2 .
      7.   All animals running at large 3 .
      8.   The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes, gases, fly
ash, industrial dust or other atmospheric pollutants within the village limits
or within one mile therefrom in such quantities as to endanger the health of
persons of ordinary sensitiveness or to threaten or cause substantial injury to
property in the village.
      9.   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or
other body of water by sewage, creamery or industrial wastes or other
substances.
      10.   Any use of property, substances or things within the village
emitting or causing any foul, offensive, noisome, nauseous, noxious or
disagreeable odors, gases, effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive to the
physical senses of ordinary persons which annoy, discomfort, injure or
inconvenience the health of any appreciable number of persons within the
village.
      11.   Any use of property which shall cause any nauseous or unwholesome
liquid or substance to flow into or upon any street, gutter, alley, sidewalk or
public place within the village.
   C.   Public Nuisances Offending Morals And Decency: The following acts,
omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby specifically declared to be
public nuisances offending public morals and decency, but such enumeration
shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances offending public morals and
decency coming within the definition of subsection A of this section:
      1.   All disorderly houses, bawdy houses, houses of ill fame, gambling
houses and buildings or structures kept or resorted to for the purpose of
prostitution, promiscuous sexual intercourse or gambling 4 .
      2.   All places where intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages are
sold, possessed, stored, brewed, bottled, manufactured or rectified without a
permit or license as provided by for the ordinances of the village 5 .
      3.   Any place or premises within the village where village ordinances or
state laws relating to public health, safety, peace, morals or welfare are
openly, continuously, repeatedly and intentionally violated.
      4.   Any place or premises resorted to for the purpose of drinking
intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages in violation of the laws of the
state or ordinances of the village.
   D.   Public Nuisances Affecting Peace And Safety: The following acts,
omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby declared to be public
nuisances affecting peace and safety, but such enumeration shall not be
construed to exclude other nuisances affecting public peace or safety coming
within the provisions of subsection A of this section:
      1.   All signs and billboards, awnings and other similar structures over
or near streets, sidewalks, public grounds or places frequented by the public,
so situated or constructed as to endanger the public safety.
      2.   All buildings erected, repaired or altered in violation of the
provisions of the ordinances of the village relating to materials and the
manner of construction of buildings and structures within said district 6 .
      3.   All unauthorized signs, signals, markings or devices placed or
maintained upon or in view of any public highway or railroad crossing which
purport to be or may be mistaken as an official traffic control device,
railroad sign or signal or which because of its color, location, brilliance or
manner of operation interferes with the effectiveness of such device, sign or
signal.
      4.   All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent
persons driving vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways from obtaining a
clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk.
      5.   All use or display of fireworks except as provided by the laws of
the state and ordinances of the village 7 .
      6.   All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated or out of repair as
to be dangerous, unsafe, insanitary or otherwise unfit for human use.
      7.   All wires over streets, alleys or public grounds which are strung
less than eighteen feet (18') above the surface thereof.
      8.   All loud, discordant and unnecessary noises or vibrations of any
kind.
      9.   All obstructions of streets, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks and all
excavations in or under the same, except as permitted by the ordinances of the
village or which, although made in accordance with such ordinances, are kept or
maintained for an unreasonable or illegal length of time after the purpose
thereof has been accomplished 8 .
      10.   All open and unguarded pits, wells, excavations or unused basements
freely accessible from any public street, alley or sidewalk.
      11.   Any unauthorized or unlawful use of property abutting on a public
street, alley or sidewalk or of a public street, alley or sidewalk which causes
large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and free use of the
streets or sidewalks.
      12.   Repeated or continuous violations of the ordinances of the village
or laws of the state relating to the storage of flammable liquids 9 . (1968
Code § 8.02; amd. 1981 Code)
   E.   Additional Nuisances: Any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked,
junked, unregistered or discarded vehicle placed or stored on any public or
private property within the village limits for a period of longer than five (5)
days, unless said vehicles are stored within an enclosed building.
      1.   This section shall not apply to vehicles on the premises of a
business enterprise operating in a properly zoned area for the sale or repair
of said vehicles.
      2.   Repealed.
      3.   When any such vehicle shall be placed or stored upon public property
contrary to this subsection, a duly authorized village official, after notice
as specified in subsection 6-2-4B1 of this chapter shall cause such vehicle to
be removed by a junk or salvage yard and stored thereat for a period of thirty
(30) days. At the end of such storage period, the junk or storage yard may
dispose of such vehicle unless previously claimed by the owner. In order to
properly claim the vehicle, the owner must pay all reasonable removal and
storage costs. (Ord. 2011-5, 11-7-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 1 of this title.
2 1. See chapter 3 of this title.
3 2. See section
  4-3-7 of this code.
  1. See sections
4 4-2-3-1 and
  4-2-3-2 of this code.
5 2. See title 3, chapter 1 of this code.
6 3. See title 7, chapter 1 of this code.
7 1. WSA 167.10. See section
  4-2-1-2 of this code.
8 2. See title 2, chapter 1 of this code.
9 3. See subsection 5-1-2C of this code.
6-2-3: UNNECESSARY VEHICLE SMOKE PROHIBITED:
No person shall operate upon any street, alley or other public way in the
village any motor vehicle in such manner as to permit to escape therefrom any
unnecessary smoke, gas, steam or offensive odor, or in such manner as to
discharge any embers, oil or residue from the fuel used in the operation
thereof. (1968 Code § 6.09)
6-2-4: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE:
   A.   Enforcement: It shall be the duty of the fire chief, building
inspector, and officers of the village police department to enforce those
provisions of this chapter that come within the jurisdiction of their offices
and they shall make periodic inspections and inspections upon complaint to
ensure that such provisions are not violated. No action shall be taken under
this section to abate a public nuisance unless the officer shall have inspected
or caused to be inspected the premises where the nuisance is alleged to exist
and have satisfied himself that a nuisance does in fact exist. (Ord. 2012-2, 4-
16-2012)
   B.   Summary Abatement:
      1.   Notice To Owner: If the inspecting officer shall determine that a
public nuisance exists within the village, and that there is great and
immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the
village president may direct the appropriate village official to serve notice
on the person causing, permitting or maintaining such nuisance or upon the
owner or occupant of the premises where such nuisance is caused, permitted or
maintained and to post a copy of said notice on the premises. Such notice shall
direct the person causing, permitting or maintaining such a nuisance or the
owner or occupant of the premises to abate or remove such nuisance within
twenty four (24) hours and shall state that unless such nuisance is abated, the
village will cause the same to be abated and will charge the cost thereof to
the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance,
as the case may be.
      2.   Abatement By Village: If the nuisance is not abated within the time
provided or if the owner, occupant or person causing the nuisance cannot be
found, the officer having the duty of enforcement shall cause the abatement or
removal of such public nuisance.
   C.   Abatement By Court Action: If the inspecting officer shall determine
that a public nuisance exists on private premises but that the nature of such
nuisance is not such as to threaten great and immediate danger to the public
health, safety, peace, morals or decency, he shall file a written report of his
findings to the village president, who shall, upon direction of the village
board, cause an action to abate such nuisance to be commenced in the name of
the village in the circuit court of Manitowoc County, in accordance with the
provisions of chapter 823, Wisconsin statutes.
   D.   Other Methods Not Excluded: Nothing in this chapter shall be construed
as prohibiting the abatement of public nuisances by the village or its
officials in accordance with the laws of the state. (1968 Code § 8.03; amd.
1981 Code)
6-2-5: COST OF ABATEMENT:
In addition to any other penalty imposed by this chapter for the erection,
contrivance, creation, continuance or maintenance of a public nuisance, the
cost of abating a public nuisance by the village shall be collected as a debt
from the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the
nuisance, and if notice to abate the nuisance has been given to the owner, such
cost shall be assessed against the real estate as a special charge. (1968 Code
§ 8.04)
6-2-6: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
a penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1968 Code § 8.05)
6-2-7: UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLIES AND THEIR SUPPRESSION:
   A.   Peace officers of the village have a duty to suppress unlawful
assemblies within the village. For that reason any peace officer of the village
may order all persons who are part of an assembly to disperse.
   B.   An "unlawful assembly" is an assembly which consists of three (3) or
more persons and which causes such a disturbance of public order that it is
reasonable to believe that the assembly will cause injury to persons or damage
to property unless it is immediately dispersed. Any "unlawful assembly"
includes an assembly of persons who assemble for the purpose of blocking or
obstructing the lawful use by any other person or persons of any private or
public thoroughfares, property or of any positions of access or exits to or
from any private or public building, or dwelling place, or of any portion
thereof and which assembly does in fact so block or obstruct the lawful use by
any other person, or persons of any such private or public thoroughfares,
property or any position of access or exit to or from any private or public
building or dwelling place, or any portion thereof.
   C.   Whoever intentionally fails or refuses to withdraw from an unlawful
assembly from which he knows he has been ordered to disperse shall forfeit not
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
   D.   Whoever causes or attempts to cause, or participates in an unlawful
assembly upon any property of a public institution of higher education or upon
any highway abutting on such property is punishable under this section, if that
person fails to withdraw from the assembly promptly upon issuance of an order
to disperse, if such order is given in such manner that such person can
reasonably be expected to hear or read such order.
   E.   It shall be deemed unlawful assembly whenever three (3) or more persons
who are patrons of a tavern or other establishment to which a class B license
has been issued gather outside of said establishment and either intentionally
or unintentionally block the public thoroughfare when the said thoroughfare is
the public sidewalk or the public street. Should any passerby be required to
walk unto the public street or public highway around persons who have gathered
outside of said establishment, then it shall be prima facie evidence that the
persons who have gathered outside of said class B establishment have obstructed
the public thoroughfare. Any person convicted of so obstructing the public
thoroughfare shall be punished pursuant to subsection C of this section. (Ord.,
8-16-1982)
CHAPTER 3
WEEDS AND GRASS
SECTION:
6-3-1: Height Restriction; Mowing Required
6-3-2: Abatement By Village, Costs A Lien
6-3-1: HEIGHT RESTRICTION; MOWING REQUIRED:
No person owning property within the village shall permit to grow or pollinate
upon his premises any weeds or grasses which cause or produce hay fever in
human beings, exhale unpleasant or noxious odors or conceal filthy deposits. In
order to prevent such growth and pollination, it shall be the duty of every
property owner to mow or cause to be mowed, upon his premises all grasses or
weeds exceeding six inches (6") in height. (Ord. 2011-5, 11-7-2011)
6-3-2: ABATEMENT BY VILLAGE, COSTS A LIEN:
It shall be the duty of the village board to enforce this chapter and if any
person shall fail to comply herewith, the board shall, after five (5) days'
written notice by the owner, cause the premises to be mowed and report the cost
thereof in writing to the village clerk in the manner provided in section
66.98, Wisconsin statutes. Such charge shall be spread on the tax roll as a
special tax to be collected in the same manner as other taxes unless such lands
are exempt from taxation. (1968 Code § 9.05)
CHAPTER 4
GARBAGE AND RUBBISH
SECTION:
6-4-1: Definitions
6-4-2: Private Hauling And Collection Of Garbage Prohibited
6-4-3: Private Hauling Of Rubbish Regulated
6-4-4: Burning Of Rubbish And Garbage Restricted
6-4-5: Collection By Village
6-4-6: Recycling
6-4-7: Garbage, Rubbish And Recyclables From Outside Of Municipality
6-4-8: Improper Use Of Garbage, Rubbish Or Recycling Receptacles
6-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms "garbage" and "rubbish" are defined
as follows:
GARBAGE: All organic waste, refuse and residue of animals, fruit or vegetable
matter that attend the use of, preparation, cooking, dealing in or storage of
meat, fish, fowl, fruit, vegetables or grain.
RUBBISH: All worthless or discarded metal, glassware, ashes and other
noninflammable materials, tree limbs, cuttings, garden refuse, shrubbery,
cardboard paper cartons, newspapers, magazines and wastepaper, but excluding
"garbage" as defined herein. (1968 Code § 9.08)
6-4-2: PRIVATE HAULING AND COLLECTION OF GARBAGE PROHIBITED:
No person, other than the village and its agents or licensed contractors, shall
collect or transport any garbage over the village streets. (1968 Code § 9.08)
6-4-3: PRIVATE HAULING OF RUBBISH REGULATED:
Any person desiring to haul his own rubbish or to provide privately therefor
may do so with the permission and supervision of the village board. (1968 Code
§ 9.08)
6-4-4: BURNING OF RUBBISH AND GARBAGE RESTRICTED:
No person, other than the village and its agents or licensed contractors, shall
set fire to or burn any garbage or rubbish on any street or on any public or
private premises; provided, that private incinerators approved by the fire
department may be used for burning of rubbish. Burning permits must be obtained
from the fire chief. (1968 Code § 9.08; amd. 1981 Code)
6-4-5: COLLECTION BY VILLAGE:
   A.   Collection Time, Placement Of Containers:
      1.   The village, by its agents or licensed contractors, shall remove and
dispose of all garbage, rubbish, and recyclables.
         All garbage and rubbish to be removed shall be placed in approved
containers at the curb line on Fridays no later than seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
         All recyclables to be removed shall be placed in approved containers
at the curb line on the second and fourth Fridays of the month no later than
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
   B.   Care Of Garbage: Garbage shall be thoroughly drained and placed in
clear plastic bags which shall not weigh more than fifty (50) pounds or exceed
thirty (30) gallons in volume. Black bags are not acceptable.
   C.   Brush And Branches: Brush and branches will be chipped the first and
third Tuesday in the months of April and May. Clean woody vegetative material
no greater than six inches (6") in diameter, and not less than four feet (4')
in length can be chipped. Place near curb with cut ends facing street. (Ord.
2011-5, 11-7-2011; amd. Ord. 2023-03, 6-8-2023)
6-4-6: RECYCLING:
   A.   Title: This section shall be known as the RECYCLING ORDINANCE FOR THE
VILLAGE OF REEDSVILLE.
   B.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to promote recycling,
composting and resource recovery through the administration of an effective
recycling program, as provided in section 159.11, Wisconsin statutes and
chapter NR 544, Wisconsin administrative code.
   C.   Statutory Authority: This section is adopted as authorized under
section 159.09(3)(b), Wisconsin statutes.
   D.   Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: It is not intended by this section
to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or interfere with any existing rules,
regulations, ordinances or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to
law. However, whenever this section imposes greater restrictions, the
provisions of this section shall apply.
   E.   Interpretation: In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this section shall be held to be the minimum requirements and shall not be
deemed a limitation or repeal of any other power granted by the Wisconsin
statutes. Where any terms of requirements of this section may be inconsistent
or conflicting, the more restrictive requirements or interpretation shall
apply. Where a provision of this section is required by Wisconsin statutes, or
by a standard in chapter NR 544, Wisconsin administrative code, and where the
section provision is unclear, the provision shall be interpreted in light of
the Wisconsin statutes and chapter NR 544 standards in effect on the date of
adoption of this section, or in effect on the date of the most recent text
amendment of this section.
   F.   Severability: Should any portion of this section be declared
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder
of this section shall not be affected.
   G.   Applicability: The requirements of this section apply to all persons
and organizations within the village limits.
   H.   Administration: The provisions of this section shall be administered by
the village board.
   I.   Effective Date: The provisions of this section shall take effect on
January 1, 1995. (Ord., 3-21-1994, eff. 1-1-1995)
   J.   Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following terms and
phrases shall have the meanings given them:
    BIMETAL CONTAINER: A container for carbonated or malt beverages that is
made primarily of steel and aluminum.
   BRUSH AND BRANCHES: Clean woody vegetative material no greater than six
inches (6") in diameter. This term does not include stumps, roots or shrubs
with intact root balls.
   COMPUTERS: A residential or commercial computer, CPUs, monitors, printers,
keyboards, laptops, modems, mouse, storage drives, terminals and mainframes.
   CONTAINER BOARD: Corrugated paper board used in the manufacture of shipping
containers and related products.
   HDPE: High density polyethylene plastic containers marked by the SPI code
no. 2.
   LDPE: Low density polyethylene plastic containers marked by the SPI code no.
4.
   MAGAZINES: Magazines and other materials printed on similar paper.
   MAJOR APPLIANCES: Residential or commercial air conditioners, boilers,
clothes dryers, clothes washers, dehumidifiers, dishwashers, furnaces,
freezers, humidifiers, ovens, refrigerators, stoves, water heaters, and water
softeners.
   MIXED OR OTHER PLASTIC RESIN TYPES: Plastic containers marked by the SPI
code no. 7.
   MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING: A property containing five (5) or more residential
units, including those which are occupied seasonally.
   NEWSPAPER: A newspaper and other materials printed on newsprint.
   NONRESIDENTIAL FACILITIES AND PROPERTIES: Commercial, retail, industrial,
institutional and governmental facilities and properties. This term does not
include multiple-family dwellings.
   OFFICE PAPER: High grade, staple free, printing and writing papers from
offices in nonresidential facilities and properties. Printed white ledger and
computer printout are examples of office paper generally accepted as high
grade. This term does not include industrial process waste.
   PETE: Polyethylene terephthalate plastic containers marked by the SPI code
no. 1.
   PP: Polypropylene plastic containers marked by SPI code no. 5.
   PS: Polystyrene plastic containers marked by SPI code no. 6.
   PVC: Polyvinyl chloride plastic containers marked by SPI code no. 3.
   PERSON: Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, local
government unit, as defined in section 66.299(1)(a), Wisconsin statutes, state
agency or authority or federal agency.
   POSTCONSUMER WASTE: Solid waste other than solid waste generated in the
production of goods, hazardous waste, as defined in section 144.61(5),
Wisconsin statutes, waste from construction and demolition of structures, scrap
automobiles, or high volume industrial waste, as defined in section 144.44(7)
(a)1, Wisconsin statutes.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: Lead acid batteries; major appliances; waste oil; yard
waste; aluminum containers; corrugated paper or other container board; foam
polystyrene packaging; glass containers; magazines; newspapers; office paper;
plastic containers, including those made of PETE, HDPE, PVC, LDPE, PP, PS and
mixed or other plastic resin types; steel containers; waste tires; and bimetal
containers.
   SOLID WASTE: Has the meaning specified in section 144.01(5), Wisconsin
statutes.
   SOLID WASTE FACILITY: Has the meaning specified in section 144.43(5),
Wisconsin statutes.
   SOLID WASTE TREATMENT: Any method, technique or process which is designed to
change the physical, chemical or biological character or composition of solid
waste. "Treatment" includes incineration.
   WASTE TIRE: A tire that is no longer suitable for its original purpose
because of wear, damage or defect.
   YARD WASTE: Leaves, grass clippings and yard and garden debris. (Ord., 3-21-
1994, eff. 1-1-1995; amd. Ord., 9-7-1999)
   K.   Separation Of Recyclable Materials: Occupants of single- family and
two- to four-unit residences, multiple-family dwellings, nonresidential
facilities, places of business, industry or commerce, farms and governmental
facilities shall separate the following materials from postconsumer waste:
      1.   Lead acid batteries.
      2.   Major appliances.
      3.   Waste oil.
      4.   Yard waste.
      5.   Aluminum containers.
      6.   Bimetal containers.
      7.   Corrugated paper or other container board.
      8.   Foam polystyrene packaging.
      9.   Glass containers.
      10.   Magazines or other materials printed on similar paper.
      11.   Newspapers or other materials printed on newsprint.
      12.   Office paper.
      13.   Plastic containers made of PETE (#1), HDPE (#2), PVC (#3), LDPE
(#4), PP (#5), PS (#6), and mixed or other plastic resin types (#7).
      14.   Steel containers.
      15.   Waste tires.
   L.   Separation Requirements Exempted: The separation requirements of
subsection K of this section do not apply to the following: 1) occupants of
single-family and two- to four-unit residences, multiple-family dwellings and
nonresidential facilities and properties that send their postconsumer waste to
a processing facility licensed by the Wisconsin department of natural resources
that recovers the materials specified in subsection K of this section from
solid waste in as pure a form as technically possible; 2) solid waste which is
burned as a supplemental fuel at a facility if less than thirty percent (30%)
of the heat input to the facility is derived from the solid waste burned as
supplemental fuel; 3) a recyclable material specified in subsection K of this
section for which a variance or exemption has been granted by the department of
natural resources under section 159.07(7)(d) or 159.11(2m), Wisconsin statutes,
or section NR 544.14, Wisconsin administrative code.
   M.   Care Of Separated Recyclable Materials: To the greatest extent
practicable, the recyclable materials separated in accordance with subsection K
of this section shall be clean and kept free of contaminants such as food or
product residue, oil or grease, or other nonrecyclable materials, including,
but not limited to, household hazardous waste, medical waste and agricultural
chemical containers. Recyclable materials shall be stored in a manner which
protects them from wind, rain and other inclement weather conditions. (Ord., 3-
21-1994, eff. 1-1-1995)
   N.   Care Of Lead Acid Batteries, Computers, Waste Oil, Waste Tires, And
Yard Waste: Occupants of single- and two- to four- unit residences, multi-
family dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties shall manage lead
acid batteries, computers, waste oil, waste tires, and yard waste as follows:
      1.   Lead acid batteries, computers, waste tires, and waste oil shall be
disposed of by the owner of the item by contacting an accepting vendor and then
delivering the item as directed;
      2.   Yard waste shall be disposed of by composting of the material or
leaving it at the village compost site. (Ord., 9-7-1999)
   O.   Preparation And Collection Of Recyclable Materials: Except as otherwise
directed by the village board or its representatives, occupants of single- and
two- to four-unit residences shall do the following for the preparation and
collection of separated materials defined in subsection J of this section:
      1.   Steel/Tin Cans: Rinse out can, remove both ends and flatten.
      2.   Aluminum: Rinse out thoroughly, examples include TV dinner trays,
foil wrap, potpie pans, aluminum cans and siding.
      3.   Clear And Colored Glass: Rinse the jar or bottle thoroughly and
remove and discard the cover. Acceptable examples include catsup, barbecue
sauce, salad dressing, pickle, jam, jelly, peanut butter, beer, liquor and wine
bottles. Not acceptable materials include plate glass, ceramics, clay items,
light bulbs and broken glass.
      4.   Plastic Containers: Rinse out thoroughly and remove caps and rings,
examples are milk jugs, liquid detergent bottles, all plastics identified as
numbers 1 through 7 in subsection K13 of this section shall be recycled except
as exempted in subsection U of this section.
      5.   Magazines: Magazines or other materials printed on similar papers
shall be bundled separately.
      6.   Newspapers: Newspapers or other materials printed on newsprint shall
be bundled separately.
      7.   Office Paper: Office paper shall be bundled separately.
      8.   Repealed.
      9.   Changes In Collecting: The village reserves the right to change the
method of preparing and collecting the materials in this subsection O and shall
provide a written notice to its residents, businesses and organizations of such
changes. (Ord. 2011-5, 11-7-2011)
   P.   Responsibility Of Owners Or Designated Agents Of Multiple- Family
Dwellings:
      1.   Owners or designated agents of multiple-family dwellings shall do
the following for recycling the materials as defined in subsection J of this
section:
         a.   Provide adequate, separate containers for the recyclable
materials.
         b.   Notify tenants in writing at the time of renting or leasing the
dwelling and at least semiannually thereafter about the established recycling
program.
         c.   Provide for the collection of materials separated from the solid
waste by the tenants and the delivery of the materials to a recycling facility.
         d.   Notify tenants of reasons to reduce and recycle solid waste,
which materials are collected, how to prepare the materials in order to meet
processing requirements, collection methods or sites, locations and hours of
operation, and a contact person or company, including a name, address and
telephone number.
      2.   The requirements specified in subsection P1 of this section do not
apply to the owners or designated agents of multiple-family dwellings if the
postconsumer waste generated within the dwelling is treated at a processing
facility licensed by the department of natural resources that recovers for the
recycling of the materials as defined in subsection J of this section from
solid waste in as pure a form as technically feasible.
   Q.   Responsibility Of Owners Or Designated Agents Of Nonresidential
Facilities And Properties:
      1.   Owners or designated agents of nonresidential facilities and
properties shall do all of the following for recycling the materials defined in
subsection J of this section:
         a.   A person in the village owning or occupying a new building or a
building is remodeled or expanded by fifty percent (50%) or more in floor area,
shall provide a designated area for separation, temporary storage and
collection of solid waste and recyclables either within or adjacent to the
building.
         b.   Provide adequate, separate containers for the separated
recyclable materials.
         c.   Notify tenants in writing at the time of renting or leasing the
dwelling and at least semiannually thereafter about the established recycling
program.
         d.   Provide for the collection of materials separated from the solid
waste by the tenants and the delivery of the materials to a recycling facility.
         e.   Notify tenants of reasons to reduce and recycle solid waste,
which materials are collected, how to prepare the materials in order to meet
processing requirements, collection methods or sites, locations and hours of
operation, and a contact person or company, including name, address and
telephone number.
      2.   The requirements specified in subsection Q1 of this section do not
apply to the owners or designated agents of nonresidential facilities and
properties if the postconsumer waste generated within the dwelling is treated
at a processing facility licensed by the department of natural resources that
recovers for recycling of the materials defined in subsection J of this section
from solid waste in as pure a form as is feasible.
   R.   Responsibilities Of Persons Using A Recycling Program Other Than That
Which The Village Provides: Any person using a recycling program other than
that of the village and whose facility or property is within the village limits
is required to submit the annual tonnage of materials recycled and also of
materials disposed of as solid waste. This is to have supporting documentation,
and will be submitted on or by December 31 each year to the village.
   S.   Prohibitions On Disposal Of Recyclable Materials, Hauler Licensing,
Restrictions And Processing Facilities:
      1.   No person or corporation shall engage in the business of hauling
recyclables within the village limits without being licensed by the department
of natural resources under section NR 502.06, Wisconsin administrative code.
      2.   Haulers who collect solid waste or recyclables in the village for
storage, treatment, processing, marketing or disposal shall obtain and maintain
all necessary municipal and state permits, licenses and approvals prior to
collecting any materials in the village.
      3.   No person or hauler may dispose in a landfill or burn in a solid
waste facility any "recyclable materials" as defined in subsection J of this
section generated in the village that have been separated for recycling.
      4.   Any hauling contractor operating in the village shall not transport
for processing any recyclables to a processing facility unless that facility
has been approved by the village, or unless the contractor notifies the village
which facility they are using and, by January 1, 1995, the facility has self-
certified with the department of natural resources under section NR 544.16,
Wisconsin administrative code.
   T.   Ownership Of Recyclable Materials: Recyclable materials, upon placement
at the curb or collection site, shall become the property of the hauler.
Recyclable materials, upon collection by any permitted collector, shall become
the property of the contractor.
   U.   Exemptions, Variances And Temporary Suspensions:
      1.   The village reserves the right to designate additional solid waste
materials as recyclable or currently collected materials as no longer
recyclable in accordance with state law and to either add or delete them from
any collection services provided by the village or its contractors. The village
shall provide written notice to its service recipients of this declaration.
      2.   A variance has been granted to the responsible unit of the village
under section 159.11(2m)(d), Wisconsin statutes, and NR 544.14(3)(b), Wisconsin
administrative code, from the requirements in section 159.11(2)(b), Wisconsin
statutes, NR 544.04(3), NR 544.05(1) and NR 544.06(2)(a), Wisconsin
administrative code, that effective recycling programs require the separation
and collection of the following materials during the period from January 1,
1995 through December 31, 1995:
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) (#3) containers
Low density polyethylene (LDPE) (#4) containers
Polypropylene (PP) (#5) containers
Polystyrene (PS) (#6) containers
Other/multilayer (#7) containers
Polystyrene (PS) foam packaging
      3.   An exemption has been granted to the responsible unit of the village
under section 159.07(7)(d), Wisconsin statutes, from the prohibition in section
159.07(3) and (4), Wisconsin statutes, of the disposal in a solid waste
disposal facility or the burning in a solid waste treatment facility of the
following materials during the period from January 1, 1995 through December 31,
1995:
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) (#3) containers
Low density polyethylene (LDPE) (#4) containers
Polypropylene (PP) (#5) containers
Polystyrene (PS) (#6) containers
Other/multilayer (#7) containers
Polystyrene (PS) foam packaging
   V.   Enforcement:
      1.   Any village board member or representative of the village board may
inspect recyclable materials separated for recycling, postconsumer waste
intended for disposal, collection sites and facilities, collection areas of
multiple-family dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties, solid
waste disposal facilities and solid waste treatment facilities, and any records
relating to recycling or solid waste disposal activities, for the purpose of
ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this section. No person may
refuse access to any village board member or its representative who requests
access for the proposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate
credentials. No person may obstruct, hamper or interfere with such an
inspection.
      2.   Any person who violates a provision of this section may be issued a
citation by the village board member or by their representative to collect
forfeitures. The issuance of a citation shall not preclude proceedings under
any other ordinance or law relating to the same or any other matter. Proceeding
under any other law or ordinance relating to the same or any other matter shall
not preclude the issuance of a citation under this subsection V2.
      3.   Penalties for violating this section may be assessed as follows:
         a.   Any person who violates subsection R of this section may be
required to forfeit fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first violation, two hundred
dollars ($200.00) for a second and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for a third subsequent violation.
         b.   Any person who violates a provision of this section except
subsection R of this section may be required to forfeit not less than twenty
five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each
violation. (Ord., 3-21-1994, eff. 1-1-1995)
   W.   Use Of Clear Plastic Bags: Repealed.
   X.   Care Of Major Appliances: Occupants of single- and two- to four-unit
residences, multi-family dwellings and nonresidential facilities and properties
must call the local contractor for pick up of major appliances and are
responsible for any disposal costs. (Ord. 2011-5, 11-7-2011)
6-4-7: GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND RECYCLABLES FROM OUTSIDE OF MUNICIPALITY:
It shall be unlawful for any persons to place, deposit or cause to be deposited
for collection, any garbage, rubbish or recyclable materials from outside the
boundary limits of Reedsville into the village unless authorized by an
agreement with the village. (Ord. 2015-3, 8-5-2015)
6-4-8: IMPROPER USE OF GARBAGE, RUBBISH OR RECYCLING RECEPTACLES:
It shall be unlawful for any persons to place, deposit or cause to be deposited
any garbage, rubbish or recyclable materials in or on any receptacle, or
compost area not belonging to or assigned by the owner without the permission
of the owner or designated assignee unless such receptacle or area is designed
expressly or implicitly for use by the general public. (Ord. 2015-3, 8-5-2015)
CHAPTER 5
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
SECTION:
6-5-1: Prohibited Discharges
6-5-2: Containment, Cleanup And Restoration
6-5-3: Emergency Services Response
6-5-4: Site Access
6-5-5: Public Protection
6-5-6: Civil Liability
6-5-7: Penalties
6-5-1: PROHIBITED DISCHARGES:
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged, leaked, leached or spilled
upon any public or private street, alley, public or private property, or onto
the ground, surface waters, subsurface waters, or aquifers within the village,
except those areas specifically licensed for waste disposal or landfill
activities and to receive such materials, any explosive, flammable or
combustible solid, liquid or gas, any radioactive material at or above nuclear
regulatory restriction levels, etiologic agents, any solid, liquid or gas
creating a hazard, potential hazard, or public nuisance or any solid, liquid or
gas having a deleterious effect on the environment. (Ord., 10-2-1995)
6-5-2: CONTAINMENT, CLEANUP AND RESTORATION:
Any person in violation of the above section shall, upon direction of any
emergency government officer, fire or police personnel, begin immediate actions
to contain, clean up and remove to an approved repository the offending
material(s) and restore the site to its original condition, with the offending
person being responsible for all expenses incurred. Should any person fail to
engage the necessary staff and equipment to comply or to complete the
requirements of this section, the office of emergency government, fire or
police personnel may order required actions to be taken by public or private
resources and allow recovery of any and all costs incurred by the village.
(Ord., 10-2-1995)
6-5-3: EMERGENCY SERVICES RESPONSE:
Emergency services response includes, but shall not be limited to: fire
service, emergency medical service and/or law enforcement. A person who
possesses or controls a hazardous substance which is discharged or who causes
the discharge of a hazardous substance shall be responsible for reimbursement
to the responding agencies for actual and necessary expenses incurred in
carrying out their duties under this chapter. Actual and necessary expenses may
include, but not be limited to, replacement of equipment damaged by the
hazardous material, cleaning, decontamination and maintenance of the equipment
specific to the incident, costs incurred in the procurement and use of
specialized equipment specific to the incident, specific laboratory expenses
incurred in the recognition and identification of hazardous substances in the
evaluation of response, decontamination, cleanup and medical surveillance and
costs incurred in future medical surveillance of response personnel as required
by the responding agencies or personnel's medical professionals. (Ord., 10-2-
1995)
6-5-4: SITE ACCESS:
Access to any site, public or private, where a prohibited discharge is
indicated or suspected will be provided to emergency government officers and
staff and to the village fire and police department personnel for the purpose
of evaluating the threat to the public and monitoring containment, cleanup and
restoration activities. (Ord., 10-2-1995)
6-5-5: PUBLIC PROTECTION:
Should any prohibited discharge occur that threatens the life, safety or health
of the public at, near or around the site of a prohibited discharge and that
the situation is so critical that immediate steps must be taken to protect life
and limb, the appointed village officials, the senior fire and police official
on the scene of the emergency may order an evacuation of the area or take
appropriate steps for a period of time until the village board of the village,
Wisconsin department of natural resources or other federal, state or county
agency can take appropriate action. (Ord., 10-2-1995)
6-5-6: CIVIL LIABILITY:
Any person in violation of this chapter shall be liable to the village for any
expenses incurred by the village or loss or damage sustained by the village by
reason of such violations, in addition to any other penalties provided for
herein. (Ord., 10-2-1995)
6-5-7: PENALTIES:
Any person in violation of this chapter shall forfeit to village, upon
conviction thereof, not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or more than
two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), plus the costs of prosecution. Each day of
violation shall constitute a separate offense. If a spill is voluntarily
reported to the village, the forfeiture shall be not less than twenty five
dollars ($25.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). (Ord., 10-2-1995)
CHAPTER 6
OPEN BURNING
SECTION:
6-6-1: Open Burning Prohibited
6-6-2: Exceptions
6-6-3: Charcoal And Gas Grills
6-6-4: Chief May Prohibit
6-6-5: Liability
6-6-6: Penalty
6-6-1: OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED:
No person, firm or corporation shall build any outdoor fire within the
corporate limits of the village excepting as set forth in section
6-6-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 2001-2, 7-2-2001)
6-6-2: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Outdoor cooking over a fire contained in a device or structure designed
for such use or residential pit fires. All fire pits must be enclosed with
stone, brick or any other fire resistant material. Flames cannot extend more
than two feet (2') above the pit.
   B.   Ceremonial campfires or special bonfires, with prior written approval
of the fire chief.
   C.   Controlled burning must be:
      1.   Monitored by a responsible person until the fire has extinguished
itself completely;
      2.   A garden hose or other extinguishing equipment must be readily
available for use;
      3.   Conducted on days when excessive wind or atmospheric conditions will
not result in danger to public health or safety;
      4.   Located off the public street pavement or street gutter;
      5.   Located not less than fifteen feet (15') from any building;
recommended at least thirty feet (30');
      6.   Only clean wood may be used for outdoor fires. Smoke from an outdoor
fire may not create a nuisance for a neighbor or obstruct vision of a roadway;
      7.   All fires must be at least fifteen feet (15') from any lot line.
   D.   Other occasions of desirable outdoor burning not specified by this
section, may be granted a single occasion permit by the fire chief. (Ord. 2001-
2, 7-2-2001)
6-6-3: CHARCOAL AND GAS GRILLS:
Charcoal and gas grills may not be used above the first level of any dwelling
and are exempt from the open burning ordinance. (Ord. 2001-2, 7-2-2001)
6-6-4: CHIEF MAY PROHIBIT:
The fire chief is permitted to prohibit any outdoor fires when atmospheric
conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous. (Ord. 2001-2, 7-2-
2001)
6-6-5: LIABILITY:
Person utilizing and maintaining outdoor fires shall be responsible for any
liability resulting from damage caused by his fire. (Ord. 2001-2, 7-2-2001)
6-6-6: PENALTY:
Any violations of this chapter shall be subject to the general penalty
provisions of title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 2001-2, 7-2-2001)
CHAPTER 7
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
SECTION:
6-7-1: Purpose And Policy; Public Nuisance
6-7-2: Definitions
6-7-3: Prohibition Of Litter, Rubbish, Or Debris
6-7-4: Housing Appearance And Standards
6-7-5: Notice And Remedy
6-7-6: Other Methods Not Excluded
6-7-7: Costs Of Abatement
6-7-8: Penalty
6-7-9: Severability
6-7-1: PURPOSE AND POLICY; PUBLIC NUISANCE:
   A.   Policy: There exists in the village of Reedsville structures,
residential yards or vacant areas or combinations thereof which are, or may
become, unhygienic, dilapidated or unsafe with respect to structural integrity,
equipment or maintenance and as such constitute a menace to the health, safety
and welfare of the public. Lack of maintenance and progressive deterioration of
certain properties have the further effect of creating blighted area conditions
and, if such conditions are not curtailed and/or removed, the expenditure of
public funds to correct and eliminate the same may be necessary. Timely
regulation and restriction to contain and prevent blight is necessary thereby
maintaining the desirability and amenities as well as property values of the
neighborhoods in the village of Reedsville.
   B.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to protect public health,
safety and welfare by establishing minimum property maintenance standards. This
chapter does not replace or modify standards otherwise established by other
portions of this code for construction, repair, alteration or use of buildings.
This chapter is meant to be remedial and this chapter shall be liberally
construed to effectuate the purposes stated herein. Violation of the minimum
standards set forth in this chapter shall be deemed to be a public nuisance.
   C.   Scope: These standards apply to all land, buildings and structures
located within the village of Reedsville.
   D.   Minimum Standards: It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy or use
or let or hold out to another for occupancy for use any building, structure or
premises which does not comply with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord.
2003-7, 9-2-2003)
6-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall be applicable:
ABANDONED DWELLING: A dwelling which is not occupied and which is not intended
by the owner to be occupied within a reasonable period of time. A dwelling
shall be presumed to be abandoned if it is unoccupied and is not intended by
the owner to be occupied for a period of six (6) consecutive months. Occupancy
required hereunder shall be bona fide and not acquired for the sole purpose of
defeating the abandonment of a dwelling.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A structure, the use of which is incidental to that of the
main building and which is attached thereto or located on the same premises.
BLIGHTED AREA: Any area in which a majority of the structures are residential
(or in which there is a predominance of buildings or improvements, whether
residential or nonresidential), and which, by reason of dilapidation,
deterioration, age or obsolescence, inadequate provision for ventilation,
light, air, sanitation, or open spaces, high density of population and
overcrowding, or the existence of conditions which endanger life or property by
fire and other causes, or any combination of such factors, or other similar
factors are conducive to ill health, transmission of disease, infant mortality,
juvenile delinquency and crime, or other situations detrimental to the public
health, safety, morals or welfare.
BUILDING: Any structure built for the support, shelter and enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels, or movable property of any kind, and which is
permanently affixed to the land, or connected to a utility, and includes those
structures resting on runners, wheels, or similar supports.
DEBRIS: Broken concrete, bricks, blocks or other mineral matter, bottles,
porcelain and other glass or crockery, boxes, lumber (new or used), posts,
sticks or other wood, paper, rags, cardboard, rubber, plastic, wire, tin and
metal items, discarded household goods, appliances, junk lawn mowers, tarpaper,
residues from burning or similar materials.
DETERIORATION: The condition or appearance of a building or part thereof
characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling, rusting,
inadequate paint, or other evidence of physical decay, neglect, lack of
maintenance or excessive use.
DILAPIDATED: Describes a building, structure or part thereof which is in a
state of deterioration and constitutes a significant hazard to life, property
or safety.
DWELLING: Any enclosed space which is wholly or partly used or intended to be
used for housing or sleeping by human occupants.
JUNK: Worn out or discarded material of little or no value including, but not
limited to, household appliances or parts thereof, furniture, machinery and
equipment or parts thereof, vehicles or parts thereof, inoperable or
unregistered motor vehicles, tools, discarded building materials or any
unsightly material, the accumulation of which present a blighted appearance on
the property or constitute a nuisance which has an adverse effect upon
surrounding properties, neighborhood or village property values, health, safety
or general welfare.
NUISANCE: Any public nuisance known at common law or in equity jurisprudence or
as provided by the statutes of the state of Wisconsin or the village of
Reedsville ordinances. Further, a public nuisance is a thing, act, occupation,
condition or use of property which shall continue for such length of time as
to:
   A.   Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose or
safety of the public; or
   B.   In any other way render the public insecure in life or in the use of
property.
OCCUPANT: Any person living or sleeping in, or having actual use or possession
of a building, structure, premises, or any part thereof.
OWNER: Any person who alone, or jointly or severally with others:
   A.   Shall hold legal title to any premises, with or without accompanying
actual possession thereof; or
   B.   Shall be in actual possession of or have charge, care or control of any
premises, as owner or agent of the owner, or an executor, administrator,
trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person representing
the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this chapter
and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if
such person were the owner.
For purposes of provided notice under this chapter, the village may rely on the
presumption that the owner is the person designated on the tax roll with
respect to the premises.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, association,
corporation, limited partnership, limited liability company, or any other
entity.
PREMISES: A platted lot or part thereof or unplatted lot or parcel of land or
plot of land, including all buildings, structures, or accessory structures as
may be located thereon.
REFUSE: All perishable and nonperishable solids consisting of either:
   A.   Combustible wastes such as paper, cardboard, plastic containers, yard
clippings and wood; or
   B.   Noncombustible wastes such as tin cans, glass or crockery. (Ord. 2003-
7, 9-2-2003)
6-7-3: PROHIBITION OF LITTER, RUBBISH, OR DEBRIS:
   A.   Outside Accumulation Prohibited: No owner or occupant shall accumulate,
or allow the accumulation outside of a building structure or accessory
structure of debris, junk, litter, refuse, rubbish, lumber, metal scraps,
machine parts, household appliances, accessories, furniture or other material,
including nonregistered vehicles, on such property which present a blighted
appearance on the property or which constitutes a nuisance or which tends to
decrease the value of neighboring properties.
   B.   Yard Maintenance: Yards shall be kept substantially clear of debris and
shall be provided with adequate lawn or ground cover of vegetation, hedges or
bushes. All areas not covered by any of the foregoing shall be treated to
prevent dust or the blowing or scattering of dust particles into the air. All
trees, bushes, or vegetation that encroach on public right of way shall be
properly trimmed to avoid obstruction of the view or interference with vehicles
and pedestrians. (Ord. 2003-7, 9-2-2003)
6-7-4: HOUSING APPEARANCE AND STANDARDS:
   A.   Minimum Standards: No person shall: 1) own, occupy, let or hold out to
another for occupancy, any dwelling or family unit, for the purpose of living
therein, or 2) own or be in control of any vacant dwelling or dwelling unit,
which is not safe, clean, sanitary, and fit for human occupancy, and which does
not comply with the particular requirements of the following subsections.
   B.   Foundations, Exterior Walls And Roofs:
      1.   Every exterior wall shall be free of deterioration holes, breaks,
loose or rotting boards or timbers. All siding materials shall be securely
attached to the structure.
      2.   Structures that require paint or stain should have paint or stain
applied at regular intervals to exterior building surfaces. When the building
has more than thirty percent (30%) deterioration of its finished surface on any
wall, that wall shall be painted or stained. Such painting and staining shall
be completed within ninety (90) days from the date of the first application.
Paint shall be uniform in color.
      3.   All cornices, moldings, lintels, sills, oriel windows, and similar
projections shall be kept in good repair and free from cracks and defects which
make them hazardous or unsightly.
      4.   Roof surfaces shall be tight and have no defects which admit water.
All roof drainage systems shall be secured and hung properly.
      5.   Chimneys, antennas, air vents, and other similar projections shall
be structurally sound and in good repair. Such projections shall be secured
properly where applicable, to an exterior wall or exterior roof.
      6.   The foundation shall be substantially watertight and protected
against rodents and shall be kept in good condition and repair. The foundation
elements shall adequately support the building at all points.
      7.   Roof drainage must be adequate to prevent rainwater from causing
dampness in the wall.
   C.   Windows, Doors And Hatchways: Every window shall be fully supplied with
transparent windowpanes which are substantially without cracks or holes, shall
be substantially tight and shall be kept in good condition and repair. Windows,
other than fixed windows, shall be easily opened and shall be held in position
by window hardware. Every exterior door shall fit substantially tight within
its frame and shall be kept in good condition. Window and door frames shall be
kept in good condition and shall exclude rain and substantially exclude wind
from entering the building or structure. Every basement hatchway shall prevent
the entrance of rodents, rain, and surface drainage water into the building or
structure.
   D.   Stairways And Porches: Every exterior stairway and every porch and its
supports shall be kept in good and safe condition and repair and shall be free
of deterioration with every rail and balustrade firmly fastened and maintained.
   E.   Accessory Structures: All accessory structures shall be maintained in a
state of good repair and vertical alignment. Such structures include, but shall
not be limited to, porches, terraces, entrance platforms, garages, driveways,
carports, walls, fences and miscellaneous sheds. All exterior appurtenances or
accessory structures which serve no useful purpose and are in a deteriorated or
dilapidated condition, which are not economically repairable, shall be removed.
   F.   Abandoned Dwellings: The owner of any abandoned dwelling shall:
      1.   Cause all service and utilities to be disconnected or discontinued
to said dwelling;
      2.   Lock and secure all exterior doors and windows of said dwelling;
      3.   Maintain such dwelling so that its foundation, floors, windows,
walls, doors, ceilings, roof, porches and stairs shall be reasonably
weathertight, waterproof, rodentproof, structurally sound, and in good repair
such that they comply with subsection B of this section; and
      4.   Maintain the yard and accessory structures such that they comply
with this chapter.
   G.   Nuisances: The interior and exterior of vacant and abandoned dwellings
shall be maintained in a nuisance free condition.
   H.   Infestation: Every building, structure and all exterior appurtenances
on the premises shall be adequately protected against rats, mice, termites, and
other vermin. Occupants and operators shall be responsible for the
extermination of rodents and vermin from that part of the premises under their
exclusive control. In addition, the owner shall also be responsible for
extermination of the rodents and vermin in all premises.
   I.   Refuse, Garbage And Rubbish Storage Requirements: Every building or
structure shall have adequate refuse, garbage or rubbish storage facilities.
Garbage containers shall have tight covers and shall be kept in place at all
times. No occupant shall accumulate rubbish, boxes, lumber, metal or other
materials which may provide harbor for rodents or vermin.
   J.   Yards: Yards shall be kept substantially clear of debris and shall be
provided with adequate lawn or ground cover of vegetation, hedges or bushes.
All areas not covered by any of the foregoing shall be treated to prevent dust
or the blowing or scattering of dust particles into the air. All trees, bushes,
or vegetation shall be properly trimmed to avoid obstruction of the view and
movement of vehicles and pedestrians. (Ord. 2003-7, 9-2-2003)
6-7-5: NOTICE AND REMEDY:
   A.   Enforcement: The building inspector shall enforce those provisions of
this chapter which come within their respective jurisdiction. Either may make
periodic inspections and inspections in response to a complaint that an alleged
violation exists. No action shall be taken under this section unless the
premises, where a violation is alleged to exist, have been inspected and deemed
to be in violation.
   B.   Notice Of Violation: Upon determination by the building inspector or
building and zoning committee of a violation of this chapter, the village shall
notify the owner and, if different from the owner, the occupant of the premises
of such violation by a written notice of violation.
   C.   Contents: The notice shall specify the nature of the violation, the
required correction and a reasonable time, not to exceed thirty (30) days, to
correct the violation. The notice shall be served upon the person or persons
named personally or by certified mail addressed, postage paid, to the last
known address of such person or persons. Service by certified mail shall be
deemed complete five (5) days after mailing.
   D.   Extension: The building inspector or building and zoning committee are
authorized, in their discretion, to extend the time for corrections if the
circumstances warrant an extension and the owner or occupant is making a good
faith effort to correct the violations.
   E.   Failure To Correct: If the owner or occupant fails to make the
corrections within the required time or any extensions, the village may proceed
under chapter 823, Wisconsin statutes, the provisions of this chapter, or any
other applicable method of enforcement. (Ord. 2003-7, 9-2-2003; amd. Ord. 2023-
04, 8-10-2023)
6-7-6: OTHER METHODS NOT EXCLUDED:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the abatement of
public nuisance by the village of Reedsville or its officials in accordance
with the laws of the state of Wisconsin or village ordinances. In their
interpretation and application, the provisions of this code shall be considered
minimum requirements. Where the provisions of any statute, other regulation,
ordinance, or covenant impose greater restrictions than the provisions of this
title, the provisions of such statute, other regulation, ordinance, or covenant
shall prevail. (Ord. 2003-7, 9-2-2003)
6-7-7: COSTS OF ABATEMENT:
In addition to any other penalty imposed by this chapter for a violation, the
costs of abating a public nuisance shall be paid by the owner, occupant or
person causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance within thirty (30) days
of notice thereof. If notice to abate the nuisance has been provided to the
owner, and if the costs of abatement have not been paid, such costs shall be a
lien against the real estate according to law. (Ord. 2003-7, 9-2-2003)
6-7-8: PENALTY:
   A.   Forfeiture And Costs: All violations of this chapter shall be subject
to a forfeiture of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) per offense, together with applicable surcharges and
penalty assessment and taxable costs of prosecution, and together with all
reasonable costs incurred for the inspection of the premises.
   B.   Each Day A Separate Violation: Failure to abate a nuisance after a
notice of noncompliance shall constitute a violation of this chapter. Each day
a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
   C.   Nonexclusive: Penalties set forth in this section shall be in addition
to all other remedies under this chapter or available in law or in equity.
(Ord. 2003-7, 9-2-2003)
6-7-9: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, paragraph, clause, sentence, phrase or word
contained in this chapter or the application thereof is found to be invalid or
unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining portions of
the chapter and the application thereof shall remain in full force and effect.
(Ord. 2003-7, 9-2-2003)
CHAPTER 8
OUTDOOR SOLID FUEL HEATING DEVICES
SECTION:
6-8-1: Definitions
6-8-2: Prohibition
6-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
OUTDOOR SOLID FUEL HEATING DEVICE: An outdoor device or structure designed for
solid fuel combustion or for the purpose of providing indoor heat, including,
but not limited to, combination fuel furnaces or boilers which burn solid fuel.
PERSON: Shall be as defined in section
1-3-2 of this code. (Ord. 2005-2, 5-2-2005)
6-8-2: PROHIBITION:
No person shall locate, install, or utilize an outdoor solid fuel heating
device within the village of Reedsville. (Ord. 2005-2, 5-2-2005)
CHAPTER 9
STATEWIDE SMOKING BAN
SECTION:
6-9-1: Adoption Of Statewide Smoking Ban
6-9-2: Additional Prohibitions
6-9-3: Penalties
6-9-1: ADOPTION OF STATEWIDE SMOKING BAN:
   A.   The provisions of subsections 101.123(1), (2), (2m), (3), (6) and (9)
of the Wisconsin statutes, and all acts amendatory thereof, are adopted by
reference in this section as if fully set forth herein.
   B.   In addition to the definition of "enclosed indoor area" set forth in
section 101.123, Wisconsin statutes, an enclosed indoor area for the purposes
of this chapter shall include all space between a floor and a ceiling that is
bounded by walls, doors, or windows, whether open or closed, covering more than
fifty percent (50%) of the combined surface area of the vertical planes
constituting the perimeter of the area. A wall includes any retractable
divider, garage door, or other physical barrier, whether temporary or
permanent. A 0.011-gauge screen with an eighteen by sixteen (18 x 16) mesh
count is not a wall.
   C.   The person in charge of a restaurant, tavern, private club, or retail
establishment located in an area subject to this section may designate an
outside area that is a reasonable distance from any entrance to the restaurant,
tavern, private club, or retail establishment where customers, employees, or
persons associated with the restaurant, tavern, private club, or retail
establishment may smoke. (Ord. 2010-6, 8-16-2010)
6-9-2: ADDITIONAL PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   Public Buildings: No person shall smoke in any village owned or leased
public building or within twenty five feet (25') of a main entrance thereof at
any time, including, but not limited to, the following:
      1.   Village municipal building, 217 Menasha Street.
      2.   Fire station, 100 Industrial Park Drive.
      3.   Fire museum, 522 Manitowoc Street.
      4.   Wastewater treatment facility and service buildings, 300 Mud Creek
Road.
      5.   Firemen's park service buildings, 200 and 201 Park Street.
      6.   Athletic association concession stand, 301 Park Street.
      7.   Bubolz Park concession stand, 241 Elm Street.
      8.   Water tower and service building, 201 Manitowoc Street.
      9.   Well #5 service building, 205 Deerview Drive.
      10.   Storage shed, 201 Industrial Park Drive.
      11.   Any other village owned or rented building.
      12.   All village owned or leased motor vehicles.
   B.   Board Meetings: No person shall smoke while in attendance at any public
meeting of the village board or in any of its authorized committees regardless
of the location of the meeting.
   C.   Signs: It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, deface or destroy
any legally required "No Smoking" sign. (Ord. 2010-6, 8-16-2010)
6-9-3: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person who violates the provisions of subsection 101.123(2),
Wisconsin statutes, as incorporated herein shall be subject to a forfeiture of
not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) for each violation, together with the costs of prosecution,
and in default of payment thereof, to imprisonment in the county jail until
such forfeiture and costs are paid, but not to exceed eighty (80) days.
   B.   Except as provided in subsection C or D of this section, any person in
charge who violates subsection 101.123(2m)(b) to (d), Wisconsin statutes, as
incorporated herein shall be subject to a forfeiture of one hundred dollars
($100.00) for each violation, together with the costs of prosecution, and in
default of payment thereof, to imprisonment in the county jail until such
forfeiture and costs are paid, but not to exceed eighty (80) days.
   C.   For violations subject to the forfeiture under subsection B of this
section, if the person in charge has not previously received a warning notice
for a violation of subsection 101.123(2m)(b) to (d), Wisconsin statutes, as
incorporated herein, the law enforcement officer shall issue the person in
charge a warning notice and may not issue a citation.
   D.   No person in charge may be required under subsection B of this section
to forfeit more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) in total, plus costs of
prosecution, for all violations of subsection 101.123(2m)(b) to (d), Wisconsin
statutes, as incorporated herein, occurring on a single day. (Ord. 2010-6, 8-
16-2010)
TITLE 7
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
7-1-1: Purpose
7-1-2: Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code Adopted
7-1-3: Building Inspector
7-1-4: Building Permits
7-1-5: Violations And Penalties
7-1-6: Stop Work Order
7-1-7: No Liability For Damages
7-1-8: Contractor Financial Responsibility
7-1-9: Regulations For Moving Buildings
7-1-10: Severability
7-1-11: Building Identification Numbers
7-1-12: Fence Regulations
7-1-13: Electrical And Commercial Building Code Adopted
7-1-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to exercise jurisdiction over the construction
and inspection of new one-family and two-family dwellings and additions to
existing dwellings in the Village of Reedsville, establish and collect fees to
defray the cost of jurisdiction exercised by the Village of Reedsville, and to
provide for remedies and penalties for violations of this chapter. This chapter
is adopted to promote the public health, safety, and welfare, and to maintain
local uniformity with the administrative and technical requirements of the
Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code. (Ord. 4-00, 8-22-2000)
7-1-2: WISCONSIN UNIFORM DWELLING CODE ADOPTED:
The Wisconsin Uniform Dwelling Code, SPS chapters 320 - 325 and 327 of the
Wisconsin Administrative Code, as amended from time to time, and including all
future amendments, is adopted and incorporated by reference. This chapter
applies to the construction and inspection of one- and two-family dwellings
built since June 1, 1980, and additions and alterations to existing one-family
and two-family dwellings. (Ord. 2009-1, 6-1-2009; amd. Ord. 2025-01, 9-8-2025)
7-1-3: BUILDING INSPECTOR:
The building inspector shall be certified pursuant to section 101.66(2),
Wisconsin Statutes, in the category of the Uniform Dwelling Code construction
inspector and in the categories of UDC HVAC, UDC electrical, and UDC plumbing.
The building inspector shall administer and enforce all provisions of this
chapter and the Uniform Dwelling Code. The building inspector and any assistant
or other authorized agent may, at all reasonable times, enter upon any public
or private premises for inspection purposes and may require the production of
the permit for any building, plumbing, electrical, or heating work. No person
shall interfere with or refuse to permit access to any premises to the building
inspector or agent while in the performance of official duties. The building
inspector shall perform all administrative tasks and maintain all records as
required pursuant to the Uniform Dwelling Code. (Ord. 4-00, 8-22-2000)
7-1-4: BUILDING PERMITS:
   A.   New Construction: No one-family or two-family dwelling, the initial
construction of which shall commence after the effective date hereof, shall be
built, enlarged, altered, or repaired unless a building permit for that work
shall first be obtained by the owner, or the owner's agent from the Village
Clerk. Applications for a building permit shall be made in writing upon that
form designated by the Village and the Wisconsin uniform dwelling permit
application, furnished by the Wisconsin Department of safety and professional
services, through the Village Clerk. There shall be submitted with the
application, a complete set of plans and specifications, showing the location
of the proposed building with respect to adjacent streets, alleys, lot lines
and buildings. Plans for buildings required to comply with commercial or
industrial Building Codes shall bear a stamp of approval from the State of
Wisconsin.
   B.   Additions And Alterations: No person shall, in excess of one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) in cost of material and labor, build, add onto and/or alter
any building within the scope of this chapter without first obtaining a
building permit for such work from the Village Clerk. Any structural changes or
major changes shall require permits.
   C.   Building Permit Fees: The building permit fees shall be determined by
the Village Board. Before receiving building permits, the owner or his agent
must pay the permit fees into the Village Treasury:
      In addition to the established schedule of fees, the building permit fee
shall include all costs for inspections and other out of pocket costs and
expenses incurred by the Village. The applicant shall deposit the fee,
including inspection costs, with the Village Clerk prior to issuance of the
building permit.
   D.   Issuance Of Permit: If the building inspector finds that the proposed
building or addition, alteration or repair complies with all Village ordinances
and the Uniform Dwelling Code, and all fees have been paid by the applicant,
the building inspector shall approve the application and a building permit
shall be issued to the applicant. The issued building permit shall be posted in
a conspicuous place at the building site. A copy of any issued building permits
shall be kept on file with the Village Clerk.
   E.   Occupancy Permit: Pursuant to Wisconsin Administrative Code section
comm. 20.10, the dwelling shall not be occupied until a final inspection has
been made which finds that no violations of this chapter exist that could
reasonably be expected to affect the health and safety of the occupant. The
owner or owner's contractor shall be responsible for notifying the building
inspector when the dwelling is available for a final inspection.
   F.   Expiration: Every permit issued by the Village Clerk shall expire by
limitation and become null and void, if the building or work authorized by such
a permit does not have the dwelling exterior completed within twenty-four (24)
months from the date of such permit. Before such work can be continued, a new
permit must first be obtained and the fee thereafter shall be one-half (1/2)
the amount required for a new building permit, provided no changes have been
made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work.
(Ord. 04-00, 8-22-2000; amd. Ord. 2002-2, 4-1-2002; Ord. 2005-3, 12-19-2005,
eff. 1-1-2006; Ord. 2018-1, 3-8-2018; Ord. 2023-04, 8-10-2023; Ord. 2025-02, 9-
8-2025; Ord. 2025-03, 9-8-2025)
7-1-5: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   The building inspector shall provide written notice of violation of
this chapter or the Uniform Dwelling Code to the permit holder and property
owner. All violations shall be corrected within thirty (30) days after written
notification unless an extension of time is granted by the building inspector
pursuant to the Uniform Dwelling Code.
   B.   For any person who violates any provision of this chapter or the
Uniform Dwelling Code, the permit fee shall be doubled.
   C.   In addition to the foregoing, the enforcement of this chapter may
include the withholding of a building permit, imposition of a forfeiture,
injunctive relief, or any other remedy allowed by law or in equity. (Ord. 4-00,
8-22-2000)
7-1-6: STOP WORK ORDER:
The building inspector is authorized to issue a stop work order for the
following reasons:
   A.   A violation is not corrected within thirty (30) days after written
notice thereof is issued pursuant to section
7-1-5 of this chapter.
   B.   Construction significantly or structurally deviates from the approved
plans.
   C.   Construction is deemed highly unsafe.
The stop work order shall be served on the owner or owner's representative and
a copy thereof shall be posted at the construction site. The stop work order
shall not be removed from the site except after written notice from the
building inspector that the cited violation has been satisfactorily corrected.
(Ord. 4-00, 8-22-2000)
7-1-7: NO LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES:
This chapter is not intended to be, and shall not be construed as, an
assumption of liability of the Village of Reedsville, its Board, officers,
agents, or employees, for any damages, including personal injuries, death, or
property damage, arising out of the administration, permit process, or
enforcement of this chapter or arising out of work performed under the building
permit. (Ord. 4-00, 8-22-2000)
7-1-8: CONTRACTOR FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY:
   A.   No person may obtain a building permit unless the person annually
obtains from the department of commerce a certificate of financial
responsibility showing that the person is in compliance with section 101.654,
Wisconsin statutes.
   B.   Subsection A of this section does not apply to an owner of a dwelling
who resides or will reside in the dwelling and who applies for a building
permit to perform work upon that dwelling. (Ord. 4-00, 8-22-2000)
7-1-9: REGULATIONS FOR MOVING BUILDINGS:
   A.   General Requirements: No person shall move any building or structure
upon any of the public ways of the village without first obtaining a permit
therefor from the village clerk and upon payment of the required fee. The
applicant for the permit shall be a qualified building mover. The application
for the permit shall include photographs of the building, a site plan showing
the lot and the building dimensions, the required bond, and any other
reasonable requirements of the building inspector or village board.
   B.   Compliance With Building Code: Any building or structure moved within
the village shall conform with the provisions of this chapter for new buildings
and structures unless the building inspector determines the compliance is not
practicable. No building or structure shall be moved, in whole or in part, to
any location on the same lot or to any other lot unless such building or
structure to be moved shall conform to all requirements of the zoning district.
The building or structure to be moved shall conform with the existing buildings
in the area in which it is to be moved as determined by the village board in
order to preserve the orderly planning and safety of the village of Reedsville.
   C.   Unsafe Or Unfit Buildings: No permit shall be issued by the village
clerk if, in the reasonable judgment of the building inspector, the building or
structure proposed to be moved is deemed structurally unsafe.
   D.   Bond Requirement: Before a permit to move any building or structure is
issued by the village clerk, the applicant shall provide a bond in the sum of
ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) to the village of Reedsville to be executed
by a corporate surety or two (2) personal sureties to be approved by the
village board or designated agent conditioned upon, among other things, the
indemnification to the village for all costs or expense incurred by it in
connection with any claims for damages to any persons or property and the
payment of any judgment, together with the costs and expenses incurred by the
village in connection therewith arising out of the removal of the building for
which the permit is issued. In the event the building inspector deems the
amount of the bond at ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) is not appropriate
under all of the circumstances, the building inspector may request the village
board to establish a different bond amount. (Ord. 4-00, 8-22-2000)
   E.   Indemnity Agreement: No permit shall be granted hereunder unless the
applicant shall file with the village clerk an agreement to indemnify the
village for all damages, liability, costs or expenses that may arise from the
granting of the permit. (1968 Code § 6.09; amd. Ord. 4-00, 8-22-2000)
   F.   Conditions Of Approval: Every permit issued hereunder shall state all
conditions to be complied with, shall designate the route to be taken, and
shall limit the time during which the moving operations shall be continued.
Restrictions shall follow weight limits on village streets. No movement of
buildings will be allowed on village streets when frost is coming out of the
ground.
   G.   Continuous Movement: The removal of a building shall be a continuous
operation during all hours of the day if the building inspector so orders until
such movement is fully completed. All such operations shall be performed with
the least possible obstruction to thoroughfares. No building shall be allowed
to remain overnight upon any street crossing or intersection or so near thereto
as to prevent easy access to any fire hydrant or other public facility. Warning
lights shall be kept in conspicuous places at each end of the building during
the night. The route and time of moving shall be approved in writing by the
village board.
   H.   Repair To Streets: Every person receiving a permit to move a building
or structure shall, within one day after said building reaches its destination,
report that fact to the village clerk who shall report the same to the village
president. The village president or designee shall inspect the streets, curbs,
and gutters over which said building has been moved and ascertain their
condition. If the removal of said building has caused any damage to any street,
curb, or gutter, the person to whom the permit was issued shall immediately
place them in as good repair as they were before the permit was granted. On the
failure of said permit holder to do so within ten (10) days thereafter to the
satisfaction of the village board acting through the village president, the
village shall order the repair of the damage to such street, curb or gutter and
hold the person obtaining such permit and sureties of the bond given
responsible for the payment of same.
   I.   Conformance With Code: No permit shall be issued to move a building
within the village until the building inspector has made an investigation of
such building at the location from which it is to be moved and is satisfied
from such investigation that said building is in a sound and stable condition
and of such construction that it will meet the requirements of this building
code in all respects. A complete plan of all further repairs, improvements, and
remodeling with reference to such building shall be submitted to the building
inspector and the building inspector shall make a finding of fact to the effect
that all such repairs, improvements, and remodeling are in conformity with the
requirements of this building code and that when the same are completed, the
building as such will so comply with said building code. In the event a
building is to be moved from the village to some point outside the boundaries
thereof, the provisions with respect to the furnishing of plans and
specifications for proposed alterations to such building may be disregarded.
   J.   Utilities, Trees, Overhead Obstructions: Every person receiving a
permit to move a building or structure shall be responsible for obtaining all
permits required by the utilities involved and any other applicable parties of
interest. Damage done to any utilities shall be reported to that utility. The
permit holder shall be responsible for payment of all damages to any utility or
overhead obstruction. The permit holder shall be responsible for payment of the
estimated costs of trimming, removal, and replacement of public trees as
determined by the village board, prior to the issuance of the permit. (Ord. 4-
00, 8-22-2000)
7-1-10: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this chapter or chapters comm.
20 - 25, Wisconsin administrative code, is found to be void, invalid, or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions
shall not be affected by such finding. (Ord. 4-00, 8-22-2000)
7-1-11: BUILDING IDENTIFICATION NUMBERS:
The owner of every principal structure on each lot in the village shall have
displayed on the side of the structure facing the adjoining public right of way
numbers not less than four inches (4") in height showing the street number
assigned to that property by the village. Numbers in script shall not meet the
requirements of this section. The owner of such structure shall keep the
numbers clear and unobstructed so that they can be readily seen by a person of
ordinary eyesight from the adjoining public right of way. (Ord. 2012-1, 3-19-
2012)
7-1-12: FENCE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Fences cannot extend into the front of a building.
   B.   Fences in a yard that are adjacent to the street or alley must be three
feet (3') from any public right-of-way and not exceed three feet (3') in
height.
   C.   Setback is three feet (3') from lot line and may not exceed six feet
(6') in height in the rear and side of a building.
   D.   All fences shall have their decorative side facing their neighbors or
the street.
   E.   Decorative fences are the only fences allowed in front of a building,
cannot exceed thirty six inches (36") from ground level, and must have open
pattern (weave or board and space).
   F.   Security fences permitted adjacent to lot line in all districts, except
residential districts, and may not exceed ten feet (10') in height and shall be
of an open type similar to woven wire or wrought iron fencing and may contain
three (3) strands of barbed wire.
   G.   Maintenance: All fences need to be maintained and kept safe and in good
repair. It is the current property owner's responsibility to maintain the fence
and area adjacent to the fence.
   H.   Permit is required. (Ord. 2022-2, 4-21-2022)
7-1-13: ELECTRICAL AND COMMERCIAL BUILDING CODE ADOPTED:
Wisconsin Administrative Code Chapter SPS 316, Electrical, and Wisconsin
Administrative Code Chapters SPS 361 - 366, Electrical And Commercial Building
Code, of said Wisconsin Administrative Code, as amended from time to time, and
including all future amendments, is adopted and incorporated by reference.
(Ord. 2025-04, 10-13-2025)
TITLE 8
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
ZONING TITLE, DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
8-1-1: Short Title
8-1-2: Definitions
8-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known as the ZONING ORDINANCE. (1968 Code ch. 12)
8-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
ACCESSORY USE, BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: A use, building or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use, building or structure.
BASEMENT OR CELLAR: A story partly underground with at least one- half (1/2) of
its height below the average level of the adjoining ground.
BOARDING AND ROOMING HOUSE: Any dwelling in which persons are housed or lodged
with or without meals, and without separate kitchen facilities.
BUILDING: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls and
intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels.
DWELLING UNIT: A building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively as
the living quarters for one family.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES: The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by
public utilities or municipal departments of underground surface or overhead
gas, communication, electrical, steam, fuel or water transmission or
distribution systems, collections, supply or disposal systems, including
towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire
alarm and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and similar accessories
in connection therewith, but not including buildings which are necessary for
the furnishing of adequate service by such utility or municipal departments for
the general public health, safety, convenience or welfare.
GRADE ESTABLISHED: The elevation of the centerline of the streets as officially
established by the village.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is shown on the records of the county register of
deeds.
MOTEL OR AUTO COURT: A group of attached or detached buildings containing
individual living or sleeping units where a garage is attached or a parking
space is conveniently located to each unit all for the temporary use by
automobile tourists or transients.
NONCONFORMING USE, BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: A use, building or structure existing
at the time of the effective date hereof, and which does not conform to the
zoning regulations of the village.
PARKING SPACE: The area required for parking one automobile which, in this
title, is held to be an area ten feet (10') wide and eighteen feet (18') long,
not including passageways.
PLAT: A map of a subdivision.
RESIDENCE: A building designed or used exclusively as permanent living
quarters.
ROW DWELLING: A building consisting of three (3) or more attached one-family
dwellings not more than two and one-half (21/2) stories in height.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected which requires permanent location on
the ground or attachment to something having such location.
YARD: A required open space on the same lot with a building or structure.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying
between the front line of the lot and the nearest line of the building.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between
the rear line of the lot and the nearest line of the principal building.
YARD, SIDE: A yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard, extending
between the building and side lot line. Any line not a rear line or a front
line shall be deemed a side line. (1968 Code ch. 12)
CHAPTER 2
ZONING DISTRICTS, MAP
SECTION:
8-2-1: Districts Established
8-2-2: Zoning Map
8-2-3: Interpretation Of District Boundaries
8-2-1: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
The village is hereby divided into the following types of districts:
 
I   Industrial district
B   Business district
R   Residential district
R-M Multiple-family residence district
A   Agricultural district
C   Conservancy district
 
(1968 Code ch. 12)
8-2-2: ZONING MAP:
The boundaries of the above mentioned districts are shown upon a map, which map
is designated as the zoning map of the village of Reedsville. The zoning map
shall be and remain on file in the office of the village clerk, and all
notations, references and other information shown thereon are a part of this
title and have the same force and effect as if said zoning map and all such
notations, references and other information shown thereon were fully set forth
or described herein. (1968 Code ch. 12)
8-2-3: INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
   A.   Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the
centerlines of streets or highways, street lines or highway right of way lines,
such centerlines, street lines or highway right of way lines shall be construed
to be such boundaries.
   B.   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately
follow the lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries.
   C.   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately
parallel to the centerlines or street lines of streets, or the centerlines or
right of way lines of highways, such district boundaries shall be construed as
being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the
zoning map. If no distance is given, such dimension shall be determined by the
use of the scale shown on said zoning map.
   D.   Where the boundary of a district follows a railroad line, such boundary
shall be deemed to be located in the middle of the main tracks of said railroad
line.
   E.   Questions concerning the exact location of district boundary lines
shall be determined by the village planning commission. (1968 Code ch. 12)
CHAPTER 3
GENERAL ZONING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
8-3-1: Use
8-3-2: Height, Density, Lot Area And Yards
8-3-3: Yards And Open Space
8-3-4: Substandard Lots
8-3-5: Frontage
8-3-6: Visibility
8-3-7: Dwellings In Nonresidential Districts
8-3-8: Accessory Buildings In Residence Districts
8-3-9: Temporary, Garage Or Trailer Dwellings
8-3-10: Floor Area
8-3-11: Building Grades
8-3-12: Moving Buildings
8-3-13: Excavations Or Holes
8-3-14: Removal Of Soil, Sand Or Other Material
8-3-15: Storage, Dumping Of Waste, Junk, Garbage
8-3-16: Prior Construction
8-3-17: Approval Of Plats
8-3-18: Essential Services
8-3-19: Nonconforming Buildings And Uses
8-3-20: Location Of Mobile Homes Outside Mobile Home Parks
8-3-21: Special Requirements Governing Home Occupations
8-3-1: USE:
No building or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building shall
be erected, moved or altered unless in conformity with the regulations herein
specified for the district in which it is located. (1968 Code ch. 12)
8-3-2: HEIGHT, DENSITY, LOT AREA AND YARDS:
No building shall hereafter be erected or altered:
   A.   To exceed the height,
   B.   To accommodate or house a greater number of families,
   C.   To occupy a greater percentage of lot area, or
   D.   To have narrower or smaller rear yards or front yards, than is
specified herein for the district in which such building is located. (1968 Code
ch. 12)
8-3-3: YARDS AND OPEN SPACE:
No part of a yard or open space about any building required for the purpose of
complying with the provisions of this title shall be included as a part of a
yard or other open space similarly required for another building. An open porch
or terrace may occupy a front yard; provided, that the unoccupied portion of
the front yard furnishes a depth of not less than fifteen feet (15'). A one-
story bay window may project not more than three feet (3') beyond the front
line of the building. (1968 Code ch. 12)
8-3-4: SUBSTANDARD LOTS:
Any lot in a single ownership which ownership was of record at the time of the
effective date hereof that does not meet the requirements of this title for
yards, courts or other areas of open space may be utilized for single residence
purposes, provided the requirements for such yard or court area, width, depth
or open space is within seventy five percent (75%) of that required by the
terms of this title. The purpose of this provision is to permit utilization of
recorded lots which lack adequate width or depth as long as reasonable living
standards can be provided. (1968 Code ch. 12)
8-3-5: FRONTAGE:
Every building shall front upon a public street which easement shall have a
minimum width of fifty feet (50'). (1968 Code ch. 12)
8-3-6: VISIBILITY:
No wall, fence or shrubbery shall be erected, maintained or planted on any lot
which unreasonably obstructs or interferes with traffic visibility on a curve
or at any street intersection. (1968 Code ch. 12)
8-3-7: DWELLINGS IN NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
No dwelling shall be erected in the I industrial district. However, the
sleeping quarters of a watchman or a caretaker may be permitted. (1968 Code ch.
12)
8-3-8: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS IN RESIDENCE DISTRICTS:
An accessory building attached to the principal building, on a lot, shall be
made structurally a part thereof, and shall comply in all respects with the
requirements of this title applicable to the principal building. Breezeways,
for the purpose of this title, as an attachment between the garage and the main
building, shall be considered as part of the main building, but breezeways
shall not be considered as constituting dwelling space. (1968 Code ch. 12)
8-3-9: TEMPORARY, GARAGE OR TRAILER DWELLINGS:
Basement dwellings, garage dwellings or trailer dwellings shall not be used for
dwelling purposes, except as specifically provided for in this title. (1968
Code ch. 12)
8-3-10: FLOOR AREA:
Every dwelling unit shall contain not less than seven hundred twenty (720)
square feet of usable floor area if in a one-family residence, not less than
six hundred (600) square feet of usable floor area if in a two-family residence
or row house or residence converted to two-family use, and not less than four
hundred (400) square feet of usable floor area if in a multiple-family
residence, or residence converted to multiple-family use, exclusive of
basements, cellars and unfinished attics. (1968 Code ch. 12)
8-3-11: BUILDING GRADES:
Any building requiring yard space shall be located at such an elevation that a
sloping grade shall be maintained to cause the flow of surface water to run
away from the walls of the building.
When a new building is constructed on a vacant lot between two (2) existing
buildings or adjacent to an existing building, the existing established grade
shall be used in determining the grade around the new building and the yard
around the new building shall be graded in such a manner as to meet existing
grades and not to permit runoff of surface water to flow onto the adjacent
properties. Grades shall be approved by the street committee of the village
board. (1968 Code ch. 12)
8-3-12: MOVING BUILDINGS:
See section
7-1-9 of this code. (Ord. 4-00, 8-22-2000)
8-3-13: EXCAVATIONS OR HOLES 1 :
The construction, maintenance or existence within the village of any
unprotected, unbarricaded, open or dangerous excavations, holes, pits or wells,
or of any excavations, holes or pits which constitute or are reasonably likely
to constitute a danger or menace to the public health, safety or welfare, are
hereby prohibited; provided, however, this section shall not prevent any
excavation under a permit issued pursuant to this title or the building code of
the village, where such excavations are properly protected and warning signs
posted in such manner as may be approved by the village clerk; and, provided
further, that this section shall not apply to lakes, streams or other natural
bodies of water, or to ditches, streams, reservoirs or other major bodies of
water created or existing by authority of any government agency. (1968 Code ch.
12)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section 2-1-4 of this code.
8-3-14: REMOVAL OF SOIL, SAND OR OTHER MATERIAL:
The use of land for the removal of topsoil, sand, gravel or other material from
the land is not permitted in any district, except under a temporary certificate
from the village clerk issued upon approval of the village planning commission
and on condition that such removal of soil will not be below the normal
building grade as established from the nearest existing or proposed street,
when such building grade has been established and approved by the village
street committee. A temporary certificate may be issued in appropriate cases
upon the filing of an application accompanied by a suitable agreement or bond
that such removal will not cause stagnant water to collect, or leave the
surface of the land at the expiration of such permit in an unstable condition
or unfit for the growing of turf or for other land uses permitted in the
district in which such removal occurs. This regulation shall not prohibit the
normal removal of soil for the construction of an approved building or
structure when such plans have been approved by the village clerk and a
building permit has been issued and a contract let for said building
development. (1968 Code ch. 12)
8-3-15: STORAGE, DUMPING OF WASTE, JUNK, GARBAGE:
The use of land for the storage or collection or accumulation of used lumber,
and other used materials, or for the dumping, disposal or salvage of
automobiles, scrap, iron, junk, garbage, rubbish or other refuse or of ashes,
slag or other industrial wastes or byproducts shall not be permitted in any
district, except as specifically permitted in chapter 4 of this title. The
dumping of dirt, sand, rock or other material excavated from the earth is
permitted in any district, provided the surface of such material is graded
within a reasonable time in a manner preventing the collection of stagnant
water, and which leaves the ground surface in a condition suitable for the
growing of turf or for other land uses permitted in the district. (1968 Code
ch. 12)
8-3-16: PRIOR CONSTRUCTION:
Nothing in this title shall be deemed to require any change in the plans,
construction or designated use of any building upon which actual construction
was lawfully begun prior to the effective date hereof and upon which actual
construction has been diligently carried on, and provided further that such
building shall be completed within two (2) years from the effective date
hereof. (1968 Code ch. 12)
8-3-17: APPROVAL OF PLATS:
No proposed plat of a new subdivision shall hereafter be approved by either the
village board or the village plan commission unless the lots within such plat
equal or exceed the minimum size and width requirements set forth in the
various districts of this title, and unless such plat fully conforms with the
statutes of the state and the ordinances of the village. (1968 Code ch. 12)
8-3-18: ESSENTIAL SERVICES:
Essential services shall be permitted as authorized under any franchise or that
may be regulated by any law of the state or any ordinance of the village, it
being the intention hereof to exempt such essential services from the
application of this title. (1968 Code ch. 12)
8-3-19: NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES:
The lawful use of a building or premises existing at the time of the adoption
or amendment of the village zoning regulations may be continued although such
use does not conform with the provisions of said zoning regulations. Such
nonconforming use may not be extended. The total structural repairs or
alterations in such a nonconforming building shall not, during its life, exceed
fifty percent (50%) of the assessed value of the building unless permanently
changed to a conforming use. If such nonconforming use is discontinued for a
period of twelve (12) months, any future use of the building and premises shall
conform to this title. (1968 Code ch. 12)
8-3-20: LOCATION OF MOBILE HOMES OUTSIDE MOBILE HOME PARKS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful, within the limits of the village, for any person
to park any mobile home on any street or other public place or on any tract of
land owned by any person, occupied or unoccupied, within the village except as
provided in this code.
   B.   Emergency or temporary stopping or parking is permitted on any street
for not longer than three (3) hours, subject to any other and further
prohibitions, regulations or limitations imposed by the traffic and parking
regulations for that street.
   C.   No person shall park or occupy any mobile home on the premises of any
occupied dwelling, or any lot which is not part of the premises of any occupied
dwelling, either of which being not an approved mobile home park, except the
parking of only one unoccupied camping or travel trailer in an accessory
private garage building, or in a rear yard in any district, is permitted,
providing no living quarters shall be maintained or any business practiced in
said camping or travel trailer while parked or stored. (1981 Code)
8-3-21: SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS GOVERNING HOME OCCUPATIONS:
The following requirements shall apply to home occupations where permitted
herein:
   A.   No persons other than members of the family owning the premises shall
be engaged in home occupations.
   B.   The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly
incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its
occupants, and not more than twenty five percent (25%) of the gross floor area
of any one floor of the dwelling unit (including the basement or cellar) shall
be used in the conduct of home occupation.
   C.   There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or
premises, or other visible evidence of conduct of such home occupation that
will indicate from the exterior that the building is utilized in part for any
purpose other than that of a dwelling unit, except that a name plate, not more
than three (3) square feet in size, nonilluminated, may be permitted.
   D.   No home occupation shall be conducted in any accessory building nor
shall there be any exterior storage of any materials on the premises.
   E.   No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater
volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any
need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met
off the street and not located in any required yard except as herein provided.
   F.   No use shall create smoke, odor, glare, noise, dust, vibration, fire
hazard, electrical interference or any other nuisance not normally associated
with the average residential use in the district.
   G.   Home occupations shall include the use of the premises by a physician,
surgeon, dentist, lawyer, clergyman or other professional persons for
consultation or emergency treatment, but not for the general practice of his
profession.
   H.   The following uses have a tendency to expand beyond the provisions for
home occupations and thereby impair the character of residential areas,
therefore, they shall not be permitted as accessory uses in residential
districts: small motor repair, painting of vehicles or boats, television
repair, auto repair.
   I.   Before anyone shall engage in any customary home occupation, they shall
first obtain a permit from the village clerk. This permission shall be
retroactive to include all preexisting home occupations.
   J.   Any building used for a customary home occupation, shall be deemed to
be a public building and subject to fire inspections under section
5-1-2 of this code. (Ord., 1-3-1984)
CHAPTER 4
I INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
8-4-1: Uses Permitted
8-4-2: Special Use Conditions
8-4-3: Height
8-4-4: Area
8-4-5: Setback Requirement
8-4-6: Front Yard
8-4-1: USES PERMITTED:
Land shall be used and buildings or structures shall be erected, altered,
enlarged or used for any purpose except the following:
Acid manufacture.
Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of paris manufacture.
Fertilizer manufacture and potash refining.
Fireworks, explosive or match manufacture.
Garbage, offal or dead animal reduction or dumping, except by the village or
its agents.
Glue manufacture, fat rendering or distillation of bones.
Petroleums or other inflammable liquids, production or refining.
Residences. (1968 Code ch. 12)
8-4-2: SPECIAL USE CONDITIONS:
The use of land for the storage, collection or accumulation of used lumber and
other used materials, or for the dumping, disposal or salvage of automobiles,
scrap iron, junk, garbage, rubbish or other refuse, or of ashes, slag or other
industrial wastes or byproducts shall be permitted in the I industrial district
only if a special permit has been issued by the village board granting such
use. The application for said permit shall state in writing the intended use
and type of operation, and shall show on a plot plan what fencing and screening
will be used. The village board may approve, approve conditionally or reject
said application on the basis of the effect such use and operation may have on
existing or proposed future land uses in the vicinity. (1968 Code ch. 12)
8-4-3: HEIGHT:
No building or structure may be erected to a height exceeding four (4) stories
or seventy five feet (75'). (1968 Code ch. 12)
8-4-4: AREA:
Not more than forty percent (40%) of the area of the lot may be covered by
buildings or structures. (1968 Code ch. 12)
8-4-5: SETBACK REQUIREMENT:
Whenever the I industrial district abuts upon any other use district, every
building or industrial use of the property in the I industrial district shall
set back from the property line of such other district a minimum of one hundred
feet (100'). (1968 Code ch. 12)
8-4-6: FRONT YARD:
Each lot shall have a front yard of not less than fifty feet (50') in depth.
(1968 Code ch. 12)
CHAPTER 5
B BUSINESS DISTRICT
SECTION:
8-5-1: Uses Permitted
8-5-2: Height
8-5-3: Yards
8-5-1: USES PERMITTED:
Land shall be used and buildings or structures shall be erected, altered,
enlarged or used only for one or more of the following purposes:
All uses permitted in the R-M multiple-family residence district 1 .
Banks, offices, studios, theaters, restaurants, taverns, bowling alleys,
hotels, motels, trailer courts, funeral homes and similar services.
Bus passenger station.
Garage and filling station.
Lodges, clubs and organization meeting places.
Manufacturing or processing which is clearly incidental to commercial use is
permitted. However, such manufacturing or processing is limited to that which
employs not more than ten (10) persons in such operation.
Newspaper offices and printing plants.
Plumbers and plumbing shops.
Public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings, electric transformer
stations and substations, water and sewage pumping stations.
Schools, hospitals, clinics, and other institutions for human care.
Stores and shops for the conducting of any retail or wholesale business.
Wholesale business, lumberyard and warehouse, with bulk storage of petroleum
products to be underground only, said tanks to be buried within an area of
thirty three thousand (33,000) square feet minimum; said site to be approved by
the fire chief and the village board. (Ord. 2011-5, 11-7-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  8-7-1 of this title.
8-5-2: HEIGHT:
No building or structure shall be erected or structurally altered to exceed a
height of two (2) stories or thirty feet (30'). (1968 Code ch. 12)
8-5-3: YARDS:
No front or side yard shall be required, except that when a building or group
of buildings abut a residential district, a side yard shall be provided on the
side of the lot abutting the residential district, such yard shall have a width
of not less than ten feet (10'). There shall be a rear yard with a depth of not
less than twenty five percent (25%) of the depth of the lot, except that the
depth of the rear yard need not be greater than twenty five feet (25'). The
rear yard may be used for off street parking and unloading as provided by
chapter 10 of this title. (1968 Code ch. 12)
CHAPTER 6
R RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
8-6-1: Uses Permitted
8-6-2: Height
8-6-3: Lot Coverage
8-6-4: Area
8-6-5: Yards
8-6-1: USES PERMITTED:
Land shall be used and buildings or structures shall be erected, altered,
enlarged or used only for one or more of the following purposes:
Churches and schools.
Customary home occupations, including professional offices, in conformity with
section
8-3-21 of this title.
Golf courses, public playgrounds and public recreation areas.
Public buildings.
Public utility buildings subject to the approval of the plan commission as
being not injurious to the surrounding neighborhood.
Railroad rights of way not including yards.
Single-family and two-family dwellings, accessory buildings and uses.
Swimming pools, private.
Temporary real estate signs, not to exceed twenty five (25) square feet in
area. (1968 Code ch. 12; amd. Ord., 1-3-1984)
8-6-2: HEIGHT:
No dwelling shall be erected or structurally altered to exceed a height of
thirty five feet (35') or two and one-half (21/2) stories; however,
nonresidential buildings and structures permitted in this district shall not
exceed a height of seventy five feet (75'). (1968 Code ch. 12)
8-6-3: LOT COVERAGE:
The ground area occupied by the principal and accessory buildings shall not
exceed thirty percent (30%) of the total area of the lot. (1968 Code ch. 12)
8-6-4: AREA:
Every dwelling or other principal building hereafter erected or structurally
altered shall provide a lot having an area of not less than seven thousand two
hundred (7,200) square feet, and a width of not less than sixty feet (60');
excepting, however, where a lot is smaller in area or width but is a lot of
record as of the effective date hereof, said lot may be occupied by a single-
family dwelling; provided, that the lot is not less than five thousand four
hundred (5,400) square feet in area. (1968 Code ch. 12)
8-6-5: YARDS:
   A.   Front Yard: There shall be a front yard of not less than thirty feet
(30').
   B.   Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than
twenty five feet (25'), excepting that accessory buildings and structures may
be placed within the rear yard if set back not less than four feet (4') from
rear or side property lines.
   C.   Side Yards: Each lot shall have two (2) side yards, each not less than
seven feet (7'), and provided further, that on corner lots, the side yard
adjacent to the street shall be not less than fifteen feet (15'). (1968 Code
ch. 12)
CHAPTER 7
R-M MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
SECTION:
8-7-1: Uses Permitted
8-7-2: Height
8-7-3: Lot Coverage
8-7-4: Area
8-7-5: Yards
8-7-1: USES PERMITTED:
Land shall be used and buildings or structures shall be erected, altered,
enlarged or used only for one or more of the following purposes:
Any use permitted in the R residential district 1 .
Apartment houses not exceeding sixteen (16) dwelling units.
Boarding houses and rooming houses.
Row dwellings, not to contain more than six (6) dwelling units. (1968 Code ch.
12; amd. Ord. 2002-1, 4-1-2002)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  8-6-1 of this title.
8-7-2: HEIGHT:
No dwelling shall be erected or structurally altered to exceed a height of
thirty five feet (35') or two and one-half (21/2) stories; however,
nonresidential buildings and structures permitted in this district shall not
exceed a height of seventy five feet (75'). (1968 Code ch. 12)
8-7-3: LOT COVERAGE:
The ground area covered by the principal and accessory buildings shall not
exceed thirty five percent (35%) of the lot. (1968 Code ch. 12)
8-7-4: AREA:
Every dwelling hereafter erected or structurally altered to furnish two (2) or
more dwelling units shall provide a lot area of not less than three thousand
six hundred (3,600) square feet. (1968 Code ch. 12)
8-7-5: YARDS:
   A.   Front Yard: There shall be a front yard of not less than twenty five
feet (25').
   B.   Side Yards: Each lot shall have two (2) side yards, each not less than
seven feet (7'), and provided further, that on corner lots, the side yard
adjacent to the street shall be not less than fifteen feet (15').
   C.   Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than
twenty five feet (25'), excepting that accessory buildings and structures may
be placed within the rear yard if set back not less than four feet (4') from
the rear or side property lines. (1968 Code ch. 12)
CHAPTER 8
A AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
8-8-1: Uses Permitted
8-8-2: Height
8-8-3: Area
8-8-4: Yards
8-8-1: USES PERMITTED:
Land shall be used and buildings or structures shall be erected, altered,
enlarged or used only for one or more of the following purposes:
Accessory buildings and uses.
Farming, but excluding swine farming and fur farming.
Parks, parkways and recreation areas.
Roadside stands for sale of products grown or raised on premises, provided such
stands are located not less than thirty feet (30') from any public street or
highway right of way.
Single-family dwellings. (1968 Code ch. 12)
8-8-2: HEIGHT:
No dwelling shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in height or two and one-half
(21/2) stories. No other principal or accessory building shall exceed seventy
five feet (75') in height. (1968 Code ch. 12)
8-8-3: AREA:
Every dwelling hereafter erected or structurally altered shall provide a lot
area of not less than five (5) acres. (1968 Code ch. 12)
8-8-4: YARDS:
No building or structure shall be erected less than thirty feet (30') from any
property line, or future right of way line as shown on the official map of
Reedsville. (1968 Code ch. 12)
CHAPTER 9
C CONSERVANCY DISTRICT
SECTION:
8-9-1: Uses Permitted
8-9-2: Height
8-9-3: Area
8-9-4: Yards
8-9-1: USES PERMITTED:
Land shall be used and buildings or structures shall be erected, altered,
enlarged or used only for one or more of the following purposes:
Cemeteries.
Churches.
Farming, but excluding swine farming and fur farming.
Fraternal organizations.
Hospitals, other than animal hospitals.
Parks, parkways and other recreational uses.
Public buildings.
Schools - public, private, parochial. (1968 Code ch. 12)
8-9-2: HEIGHT:
No building shall exceed seventy five feet (75') in height. (1968 Code ch. 12)
8-9-3: AREA:
Each lot area shall have a minimum area of one acre and a minimum average width
of one hundred twenty feet (120'). (1968 Code ch. 12)
8-9-4: YARDS:
Any building or structure erected shall have a minimum front yard of not less
than twenty five feet (25'). (1968 Code ch. 12)
CHAPTER 10
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
SECTION:
8-10-1: Parking Spaces Required
8-10-2: Reduction Of Parking Space
8-10-3: Unspecified Uses And Mixed Occupancies
8-10-4: Off Street Loading Requirements
8-10-5: Parking Areas Development And Maintenance
8-10-1: PARKING SPACES REQUIRED:
The following off street parking spaces shall be provided and satisfactorily
maintained by the owner of the property, for each building which, after the
effective date hereof, is erected, enlarged or altered for use for any of the
following purposes:
Bank or offices                         1 parking space for each 200 square
                                        feet of floor space
Bowling alley                           At least 2 spaces for each alley
Churches, auditoriums and other places  1 parking space for each 6 seats based
of assembly with fixed seats            on maximum seating capacity of the main
                                        assembly room
Dance hall and other places of assembly At least 1 parking space for each 200
without fixed seats                     square feet of floor space
                                        At least 1 parking space for each
Dwelling                                dwelling unit in the building or
                                        buildings
Establishments for the sale and         At least 1 parking space for each 300
consumption on the premises of food,    square feet of floor area
alcoholic beverages or refreshments
Manufacturing or warehousing            1 space for every 5 employees during
establishments                          largest 8 hour shift
Mortuary or funeral home                1 parking space for each 100 square
                                        feet in the main place of assembly
Retail establishments                   1 space for each 200 square feet of
                                        floor space
Tourist cabins and motels               At least 1 parking space for each
                                        lodging unit
Wholesale establishments                1 parking space for each 3 employees
 
(1968 Code ch. 12; amd. Ord. 2003-8, 11-17-2003)
8-10-2: REDUCTION OF PARKING SPACE:
Off street parking space required under this chapter may be reduced at a time
when the capacity or use of a building is changed in such a manner that the new
use or capacity would require less space than before the change. Such
reduction, however, shall not be below the standards as set forth in this
chapter. (1968 Code ch. 12)
8-10-3: UNSPECIFIED USES AND MIXED OCCUPANCIES:
In the case of a use not specifically mentioned in this chapter, the
requirements for off street parking facilities shall be the same as for the
above mentioned uses which, in the opinion of the village planning commission,
shall be deemed most similar. In the case of mixed uses, the total requirements
for off street parking facilities shall be the sum of the requirements for the
various uses computed separately. (1968 Code ch. 12)
8-10-4: OFF STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
On the same lot with every building, structure or part thereof, erected
hereafter to be used for other than exclusive dwelling purposes, there shall be
provided on the lot, adequate space for standing, loading and unloading motor
vehicles in order to avoid undue interference with the public use of streets or
alleys. Such space, unless otherwise adequately and specifically provided for,
shall include a ten foot by twenty five foot (10' x 25') loading space, with
fifteen feet (15') height clearance, and one such space shall be provided for
each twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or fraction thereof of floor or lot
area used for other than residential purposes. (1968 Code ch. 12)
8-10-5: PARKING AREAS DEVELOPMENT AND MAINTENANCE:
Every parcel of land hereafter used as a public or private parking area shall
be developed and maintained by the owner in accordance with the following
requirements:
Off street parking area for more than five (5) vehicles shall be effectively
screened on each side which adjoins or faces premises situated in any
residential district, by a fence of acceptable design, wall or compact hedge.
Such fence, wall or hedge shall not be less than four feet (4') and no solid
portion shall be more than six feet (6') in height and shall be maintained in
good condition. The space between such fence, wall or hedge and the side lot
line of adjoining premises in any residential district shall be landscaped with
grass, hardy shrubs or evergreen ground cover and maintained in good condition.
(1968 Code ch. 12)
CHAPTER 11
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
SECTION:
8-11-1: Creation, Appointment And Organization
8-11-2: Procedure, Rules, Meetings And Minutes
8-11-3: Appeal Procedure
8-11-1: CREATION, APPOINTMENT AND ORGANIZATION:
A board of appeals is hereby created having the powers authorized in section
62.23, Wisconsin statutes. Said board shall consist of five (5) members,
appointed by the village president subject to confirmation of the village
board, for terms of three (3) years, except that of those first appointed, one
shall serve for one year, two (2) for two (2) years and two (2) for three (3)
years. Vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term only.
All members of the board shall serve without compensation. (1968 Code ch. 12)
8-11-2: PROCEDURE, RULES, MEETINGS AND MINUTES:
The chairman of the board of appeals shall be designated by the village
president. The board shall adopt its own rules of procedure deemed necessary to
carry out the provisions of this chapter. Meetings of the board shall be held
at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine.
Such chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and
compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the board shall be open to
the public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote
of each member upon each question. The presence of four (4) members shall be
necessary to constitute a quorum. (1968 Code ch. 12)
8-11-3: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
Appeals to the board of appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any
officer, department, board or commission of the village affected by any
decision or ruling of the village clerk made under this title. Such appeal
shall be taken within fifteen (15) days after the decision or ruling of the
village clerk by filing with the village clerk and with the board a notice of
appeal, specifying the grounds therefor. The village clerk shall forthwith
transmit to the board all of the papers constituting the record upon which the
action appealed from was taken.
   A.   Stay Of Proceedings: An appeal shall stay all legal proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the village clerk certifies to
the board of appeals, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with
him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings
shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted
by the board of appeals or by a court of record on application, on notice to
the village clerk from whom the appeal was taken.
   B.   Hearings: The board of appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the
hearing of the appeal or other matter referred to it, and to give due notice
thereof. The board shall hear and decide the appeal within a reasonable time.
At the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent, or by attorney.
   C.   Powers Of Board: The board of appeals shall have the following powers:
      1.   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any
order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative
official in the enforcement of this section or of any ordinance adopted
pursuant thereto.
      2.   To hear and decide special exception to the terms of this zoning
title upon which such board is required to pass under such title.
      3.   To authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, such variance from the
terms of this title as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing
to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this title
will result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit
of this title shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured and
substantial justice done.
      The board may permit in appropriate cases, and subject to appropriate
conditions and safeguards in harmony with the general purpose and intent of
this title, a building or premises to be erected or used for such public
utility purposes in any location which is reasonably necessary for the public
convenience and welfare.
   D.   Decisions Of The Board: In exercising the above mentioned powers, the
board may, in conformity with the provisions of this title, reverse or affirm,
wholly or in part, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination appealed from, and may make such order, requirement, decision or
determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of
the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and may issue the permit. The
concurring vote of four (4) members of the board shall be necessary to reverse
any order, requirement, decision or determination of the village clerk or to
decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon being brought before the
board as required by this title. The grounds of every such determination shall
be stated. (1968 Code ch. 12)
CHAPTER 12
ZONING ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
8-12-1: Building Permit Required
8-12-2: Administrative Officials Designated
8-12-3: Amendments
8-12-4: Violations And Penalties
8-12-1: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED 1 :
It shall be unlawful for any person to commence excavation for or construction
of any building or structure, or structural changes in any existing building or
structure without first obtaining a building permit from the village clerk. No
permit shall be issued for the construction, alteration or remodeling of any
building or structure until application has been submitted in accordance with
the provisions of this title, showing that the construction proposed is in
compliance with the provisions of this title and other regulations of the
village. (1968 Code ch. 12)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 7 of this code.
8-12-2: ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIALS DESIGNATED:
Except as otherwise provided in this title, the village clerk shall administer
and enforce the provisions hereof, including the receiving of applications, the
inspection of premises and the issuing of building permits. In cases of
violation of the provisions of this title, said inspector shall notify the
village attorney who shall issue warrants or such other legal proceedings as
are necessary. (1968 Code ch. 12)
8-12-3: AMENDMENTS:
The village board may, from time to time, on its own motion, or on petition, or
on recommendation of the planning board, amend, supplement or repeal the
regulations and provisions of this title after public notice and hearing. (1968
Code ch. 12)
8-12-4: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   A violation of this title is an offense punishable by a fine not
exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding
sixty (60) days or by both such fine and imprisonment.
   B.   Whenever a violation of this title occurs, any person may file a
complaint in regard thereto. All such complaints must be in writing and shall
be filed with the village clerk, who shall properly record such complaint and
immediately investigate and report thereon to the village planning commission.
(1968 Code ch. 12)
CHAPTER 13
FLOODPLAIN ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION:
8-13-1: Statutory Authorization
8-13-2: Finding Of Fact
8-13-3: Statement Of Purpose
8-13-4: Title
8-13-5: General Provisions
8-13-6: General Standards Applicable To All Floodplain Districts
8-13-7: Floodway District (FW)
8-13-8: Flood Fringe District (FF)
8-13-9: General Floodplain District (GFP)
8-13-10: Nonconforming Uses
8-13-11: Administration
8-13-12: Amendments
8-13-13: Enforcement And Penalties
8-13-14: Definitions
8-13-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION:
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authorization in sections 61.35 and
62.23, and the requirements in section 87.30, Wisconsin statutes. (Ord. 2007-6,
11-19-2007; amd. Ord., 12-8-2022)
8-13-2: FINDING OF FACT:
Uncontrolled development and use of the floodplains and rivers of this
municipality would impair the public health, safety, convenience, general
welfare and tax base. (Ord. 2007-6, 11-19-2007; amd. Ord., 12-8-2022)
8-13-3: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
This chapter is intended to regulate floodplain development to:
   A.   Protect life, health and property;
   B.   Minimize expenditures of public funds for flood control projects;
   C.   Minimize rescue and relief efforts undertaken at the expense of the
taxpayers;
   D.   Minimize business interruptions and other economic disruptions;
   E.   Minimize damage to public facilities in the floodplain;
   F.   Minimize the occurrence of future flood blight areas in the floodplain;
   G.   Discourage the victimization of unwary land and home buyers;
   H.   Prevent increases in flood heights that could increase flood damage and
result in conflicts between property owners; and
   I.   Discourage development in a floodplain if there is any practicable
alternative to locate the activity, use or structure outside of the floodplain.
(Ord. 2007-6, 11-19-2007; amd. Ord., 12-8-2022)
8-13-4: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the FLOODPLAIN ZONING ORDINANCE FOR VILLAGE OF
REEDSVILLE, WISCONSIN. (Ord. 2007-6, 11-19-2007; amd. Ord., 12-8-2022)
8-13-5: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Areas To Be Regulated: This chapter regulates all areas of special
flood hazard identified as zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map. Additional areas identified on maps approved by the Department of
Natural Resources (DNR) and local community may also be regulated under the
provisions of this chapter, where applicable.
   B.   Official Maps And Revisions: Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA) are
designated as zones A, A1-30, AE, AH, AO, on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps
(FIRMs) based on flood hazard analyses summarized in the Flood Insurance Study
(FIS) listed in subd. (1) below. Additional flood hazard areas subject to
regulation under this chapter are identified on maps based on studies approved
by the DNR and listed in subd. (2) below. These maps and revisions are on file
in the office of the Village Clerk-Treasurer.
      1.   Official Maps: Based on the Flood Insurance Study (FIS):
      2.   Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), panel numbers 55071C0140D and
55071C0145D, dated 08/02/2011;
      3.   Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Manitowoc County, volumes
55071CV001E and 55071CV002E, dated 02/23/2023.
      4.   Approved by: the DNR and FEMA.
   C.   Establishment Of Floodplain Zoning Districts: The flood hazard areas
regulated by this chapter are divided into districts as follows:
      1.   The floodway district (FW) is the channel of a river or stream and
those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to carry the
regional floodwaters, within AE zones as shown on the FIRM, or within A Zones
shown on the FIRM when determined according to section
8-13-9(E) of this chapter.
      2.   The flood fringe district (FF) is that portion of a riverine special
flood hazard area outside the floodway within AE zones on the FIRM, or, when
floodway limits have been determined according to section
8-13-9(E) of this chapter, within A zones shown on the FIRM.
      3.   The general floodplain district (GFP) is those riverine areas that
may be covered by floodwater during the regional flood in which a floodway
boundary has not been delineated on the FIRM and also includes shallow flooding
areas identified as AH and AO zones on the FIRM.
   D.   Locating Floodplain Boundaries: Discrepancies between the exterior
boundaries of zones A1-30, AE, AH, or A on the official floodplain zoning map
and actual field conditions may be resolved using the criteria in subd. (1) or
(2) below. If a significant difference exists, the map shall be amended
according to section
8-13-12 of this chapter. The zoning administrator can rely on a boundary
derived from a profile elevation to grant or deny a land use permit, whether or
not a map amendment is required. The zoning administrator shall be responsible
for documenting actual pre-development field conditions and the basis upon
which the district boundary was determined. Disputes between the zoning
administrator and an applicant over the district boundary line shall be settled
according to section
8-13-11(C) of this chapter and the criteria in (1) and (2) below. Where the
flood profiles are based on established base flood elevations from a FIRM, FEMA
must approve any map amendment or revision pursuant to section
8-13-12 of this chapter.
      1.   If flood profiles exist, the map scale and the profile elevations
shall determine the district boundary. The regional or base flood elevations
shall govern if there are any discrepancies.
      2.   Where flood profiles do not exist for projects, including any
boundary of zone A, AO, the location of the boundary shall be determined by the
map scale.
   E.   Removal Of Lands From Floodplain:
      1.   Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall not be grounds
for removing land from the floodplain unless it is filled at least two feet
(2') above the regional or base flood elevation, the fill is contiguous to land
outside the floodplain, and the map is amended pursuant to section
8-13-12 of this chapter.
      2.   The delineation of any of the Floodplain Districts may be revised by
the community where natural or man-made changes have occurred and/or where more
detailed studies have been conducted. However, prior to any such change,
approval must be obtained from the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
and Federal Emergency Management Agency. A completed Letter of Map Revision is
a record of this approval. The floodplain administrator shall not sign a
community acknowledgment form unless all criteria set forth in the following
paragraphs are met:
         a.   The land and/or land around the structure must be filled at least
two feet (2') above the regional or base flood elevation;
         b.   The fill must be contiguous to land outside the floodplain;
applicant shall obtain floodplain development permit before applying for a LOMR
or LOMR-F;
      3.   Removal of lands from the floodplain may also occur by operation of
section 87.30(1)(e), Wisconsin statutes if a property owner has obtained a
letter of map amendment from the federal emergency management agency under 44
C.F.R. 70.
   F.   Compliance:
         1.   No structure or use within areas regulated by this chapter shall
hereafter be located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, repaired, extended,
converted, enlarged, or altered without full compliance with the terms of these
regulations and all other applicable regulations that apply to uses within the
jurisdiction of these regulations.
   2.   Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit shall be a violation
of these regulations and shall be punishable in accordance with
8-13-13 of this chapter.
      3.   Floodplain development permits issued on the basis of plans and
applications approved by the floodplain administrator authorize only the use,
and arrangement, set forth in such approved plans and applications, or
amendments thereto if approved by the floodplain administrator. Use,
arrangement, or construction contrary to that authorized shall be deemed a
violation of these regulations and punishable in accordance with section
8-13-13 of this chapter.
   G.   Municipalities And State Agencies Regulated: Unless specifically
exempted by law, all cities, villages, towns, and counties are required to
comply with this chapter and obtain all necessary permits. State agencies are
required to comply if section 13.48(13), Wisconsin statutes, applies. The
construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of state highways and
bridges by the Wisconsin department of transportation is exempt when section
30.2022, Wisconsin statutes, applies. Although exempt from a local zoning
permit and permit fees, DOT must provide sufficient project documentation and
analysis to ensure that the community is in compliance with federal, state, and
local floodplain standards. If a local transportation project is located within
a zone A floodplain and is not WisDOT project under section 30.2022, then the
road project design documents (including appropriate detailed plans and
profiles) may be sufficient to meet the requirements for issuance of a local
floodplain permit if the following apply: The applicant provides documentation
to the floodplain administrator that the proposed project is a culvert
replacement or bridge replacement under twenty feet (20') span at the same
location, the project is exempt from a DNR permit under section 30.123(6)(d),
the capacity is not decreased, the top road grade is not raised, and no
floodway data is available from a federal, state, or other source. If floodway
data is available in the impacted area from a federal, state, or other source
that existing data must be utilized by the applicant in the analysis of the
project site.
   H.   Abrogation And Greater Restrictions:
      1.   This chapter supersedes all the provisions of any municipal zoning
ordinance enacted under sections 61.35 for villages; or 87.30, Wisconsin
statutes, which relate to floodplains. A more restrictive ordinance shall
continue in full force and effect to the extent of the greater restrictions,
but not otherwise.
      2.   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing deed restrictions, covenants or easements. If this chapter imposes
greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail.
   I.   Interpretation: In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this chapter are the minimum requirements liberally construed in favor of
the governing body and are not a limitation on or repeal of any other powers
granted by the Wisconsin statutes. If a provision of this chapter, required by
chapter NR 116, Wisconsin administrative code, is unclear, the provision shall
be interpreted in light of the standards in effect on the date of the adoption
hereof or in effect on the date of the most recent text amendment to this
chapter.
   J.   Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability: The flood protection standards in
this chapter are based on engineering experience and scientific research.
Larger floods may occur or the flood height may be increased by manmade or
natural causes. This chapter does not imply or guarantee that nonfloodplain
areas or permitted floodplain uses will be free from flooding and flood
damages. This chapter does not create liability on the part of, or a cause of
action against, the municipality or any officer or employee thereof for any
flood damage that may result from reliance on this chapter.
   K.   Severability: Should any portion of this chapter be declared
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder
of this chapter shall not be affected.
   L.   Annexed Areas For Cities And Villages: The Manitowoc County floodplain
zoning provisions in effect on the date of annexation shall remain in effect
and shall be enforced by the municipality for all annexed areas until the
municipality adopts and enforces an ordinance which meets the requirements of
chapter NR 116, Wisconsin administrative code and 44 CFR 59-72, national flood
insurance program (NFIP). These annexed lands are described on the
municipality's official zoning map. County floodplain zoning provisions are
incorporated by reference for the purpose of administering this section and are
on file in the office of the municipal zoning administrator. All plats or maps
of annexation shall show the regional flood elevation and the floodway
location. (Ord. 2007-6, 11-19-2007; amd. Ord. 2011-4, 7-18-2011; Ord., 12-8-
2022)
8-13-6: GENERAL STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS:
   A.   General Standards Applicable To All Floodplain Districts: The community
shall review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building
sites will be reasonably safe from flooding and assure that all necessary
permits have been received from those governmental agencies whose approval is
required by federal or state law.
      1.   If a proposed building site is in a flood-prone area, all new
construction and substantial improvements shall:
         a.   Be designed and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic
loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
         b.   Be constructed with flood-resistant materials;
         c.   Be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood
damages; and
         d.   Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated to or above the
flood protection elevation.
      2.   If a subdivision or other proposed new development is in a flood-
prone area, the community shall assure that:
         a.   Such proposed subdivision or other proposed new development is
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the flood-prone area;
         b.   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical,
and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage; and
         c.   Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
      3.   All subdivision proposals (including manufactured home parks) shall
include regional flood elevation and floodway data for any development that
meets the subdivision definition of this chapter and all other requirements in
section
8-13-11(A)(2) of this chapter.
   B.   Hydraulic And Hydrologic Analyses:
      1.   No floodplain development shall:
         a.   "Obstruct flow", defined as development which blocks the
conveyance of floodwaters by itself or with other development, causing any
increase in the regional flood height; or
         b.   Cause any increase in the regional flood height due to floodplain
storage area lost.
      2.   The zoning administrator shall deny permits if it is determined the
proposed development will obstruct flow or cause any increase in the regional
flood height, based on the officially adopted FIRM or other adopted map, unless
the provisions of
8-13-12 of this chapter are met.
   C.   Watercourse Alterations: No land use permit to alter or relocate a
watercourse in a mapped floodplain shall be issued until the local official has
notified in writing all adjacent municipalities, the department and FEMA
regional offices and required the applicant to secure all necessary state and
federal permits. The standards of subsection (B) of this section must be met
and the flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse shall
be maintained.
As soon as is practicable, but not later than six (6) months after the date of
the watercourse alteration or relocation, and pursuant to
8-13-12 of this chapter, the community shall apply for a Letter of Map Revision
(LOMR) from FEMA. Any such alterations must be reviewed and approved by FEMA
and the DNR through the LOMC process.
   D.   Chapter 30, 31, Wisconsin Statutes Development: Development which
requires a permit from the department, under chapters 30 and 31, Wisconsin
statutes, such as docks, piers, wharves, bridges, culverts, dams and
navigational aids, may be allowed if the necessary permits are obtained and
amendments to the floodplain zoning ordinance are made according to
8-13-12 of this chapter.
   E.   Public Or Private Campgrounds: Public or private campgrounds shall have
a low flood damage potential and shall meet the following provisions:
      1.   The campground is approved by the department of agriculture, trade
and consumer protection.
      2.   A land use permit for the campground is issued by the zoning
administrator.
      3.   The character of the river system and the campground elevation are
such that a 72-hour warning of an impending flood can be given to all
campground occupants.
      4.   There is an adequate flood warning procedure for the campground that
offers the minimum notice required under this subsection to all persons in the
campground. This procedure shall include a written agreement between the
campground owner, the floodplain zoning agency or zoning administrator, the
municipal emergency government coordinator and the chief law enforcement
official which specifies the flood elevation at which evacuation shall occur,
personnel responsible for monitoring flood elevations, types of warning systems
to be used and the procedures for notifying at risk parties, and the methods
and personnel responsible for conducting the evacuation.
      5.   This agreement shall be for no more than one calendar year, at which
time the agreement shall be reviewed and updated by the officials identified in
subsection E4 of this section to remain in compliance with all applicable
regulations, including those of the state department of agriculture, trade and
consumer protection and all other applicable regulations. (Ord. 2007-6, 11-19-
2007; amd. Ord. 2011-4, 7-18-2011)
      6.   All mobile recreational vehicles placed on site must meet one of the
following:
         a.   Be fully licensed, if required, and ready for highway use;
         b.   Not occupy any site in the campground for more than 180
consecutive days, at which time the recreational vehicle must be removed from
the floodplain for a minimum of 24 hours; or
         c.   Meet the requirements in either section
8-13-7,
8-13-8, or
8-13-9 of this chapter for the floodplain district in which the structure is
located;
A mobile recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels
or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect utilities
and security devices and has no permanently attached additions.
      7.   All camping units that remain on site for more than thirty (30) days
shall be issued a limited authorization by the campground operator, a written
copy of which is kept on file at the campground. Such authorization shall allow
placement of a camping unit consistent with subsection E6 and shall ensure
compliance with all the provisions of this section.
      8.   The municipality shall monitor the limited authorizations issued by
the campground operator to assure compliance with the terms of this subsection.
      9.   The campground shall have signs clearly posted at all entrances
warning of the flood hazard and the procedures for evacuation when a flood
warning is issued.
      10.   All service facilities, including, but not limited to, refuse
collection, electrical service, gas lines, propane tanks, sewage systems and
wells shall be properly anchored and placed at or floodproofed to the flood
protection elevation.
      11.   Standards for structures in a campground:
         a.   All structures must comply with this section or meet the
applicable requirements in
8-13-7,
8-13-8, or
8-13-9 for the floodplain district in which the structure is located;
         b.   Deck/landing: A portable landing may be allowed for a camping
unit for each entry provided that the landing is not permanently attached to
the ground or camping unit, is no more than two hundred (200) square feet in
size, shall be portable, contain no walls or roof, and can be removed from the
campground by a truck and/or trailer. Sections of such portable landings may be
placed together to form a single deck not greater than two hundred (200) square
feet at one entry point. Provisions for the removal of these temporary landings
during flood events must be addressed within the written agreement with the
municipality compliant with subsection E4 of this section. Any such deck/
landing structure may be constructed at elevations lower than the flood
protection elevation but must not obstruct flow of flood waters or cause any
increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the regional flood.
         c.   Decks/patios that are constructed completely at grade may be
allowed, but must also comply with applicable shoreland zoning standards.
         d.   Camping equipment and appurtenant equipment in the campground may
be allowed provided that the equipment is not permanently attached to the
ground or camping unit, is not used as a habitable structure, and must not
obstruct flow of flood waters or cause any increase in flood levels during the
occurrence of the regional flood. Provisions for the removal of this equipment
during flooding events shall be addressed within the written agreement with the
municipality compliant with subsection E4 of this section.
         e.   Once a flood warning in the written agreement has been issued for
the campground, the campground owner or the designated operator shall ensure
that all persons, camping units, decks, camping equipment and appurtenant
equipment in the campground shall be evacuated within the timelines specified
within the written agreement with the municipality compliant with subsection E4
of this section.
      12.   A land use permit shall be obtained as provided under
8-13-11A2 before any development; repair, modification or addition to an
existing structure; or change in the use of a building or structure, including
sewer and water facilities, may be initiated. (Ord. 2007-6, 11-19-2007; amd.
Ord. 2011-4, 7-18- 2011; Ord., 12-8-2022)
8-13-7: FLOODWAY DISTRICT (FW):
   A.   Applicability: This section applies to all floodway areas on the
floodplain zoning maps and those identified pursuant to subsection
8-13-9D of this chapter.
   B.   Permitted Uses: The following open space uses are allowed in the
floodway district and the floodway areas of the general floodplain district,
if:
      1.   They are not prohibited by any other ordinance;
      2.   They meet the standards in subsections C and D of this section; and
      3.   All permits or certificates have been issued according to subsection
8-13-11A of this chapter.
Agricultural uses, such as: farming, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture,
viticulture and wild crop harvesting.
Nonstructural industrial and commercial uses, such as loading areas, parking
areas and airport landing strips.
Nonstructural recreational uses, such as golf courses, tennis courts, archery
ranges, picnic grounds, boat ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature
preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting, trap and skeet activities,
hunting and fishing areas and hiking and horseback riding trails, subject to
the fill limitations of subsection C4 of this section.
Uses or structures accessory to open space uses, or classified as historic
structures that comply with subsections C and D of this section.
Extraction of sand, gravel or other materials that comply with subsection C4 of
this section.
Functionally water dependent uses, such as docks, piers or wharves, dams,
flowage areas, culverts, navigational aids and river crossings of transmission
lines, and pipelines that comply with chapters 30 and 31, Wisconsin statutes.
Public utilities, streets and bridges that comply with subsection C3 of this
section.
Portable latrines that are removed prior to flooding and systems associated
with recreational areas and department-approved campgrounds that meet the
applicable provisions of local ordinances and ch. SPS 383, Wisconsin
administrative code.
Public or private wells used to obtain potable water for recreational areas
that meet the requirements of local ordinances and chs. NR 811 and NR 812,
Wisconsin administrative code.
Wastewater treatment ponds or facilities permitted under s. NR 110.15(3)(b),
Wisconsin administrative code.
Sanitary sewer or water supply lines to service existing or proposed
development located outside the floodway that complies with the regulations for
the floodplain area occupied.
   C.   Standards For Developments In Floodway:
      1.   General:
         a.   Any development in floodway shall comply with section
8-13-6 of this chapter and have a low flood damage potential.
         b.   Applicants shall provide an analysis calculating the effects of
this proposal on the regional flood height to determine the effects of the
proposed according to sections
8-13-6A and
8-13-11A2c. The analysis must be completed by a registered professional
engineer in the state of Wisconsin.
         c.   Any encroachment in the regulatory floodway is prohibited unless
the data submitted for subsection A2 above demonstrates that the encroachment
will cause no increase in flood elevations in flood events up to the base flood
at any location or removes the encroached area from the regulatory floodway as
provided in section
8-13-5E.
      2.   Structures: Structures accessory to permanent open space uses,
including utility and sanitary facilities, or functionally dependent on a
waterfront location may be allowed by permit if the structures comply with the
following criteria:
         a.   Not designed for human habitation, does not have a high flood
damage potential and is constructed to minimize flood damage;
         b.   Shall either have the lowest floor elevated to or above the flood
protection elevation or shall meet all the following standards:
            (1)   Have the lowest floor elevated to or above the regional flood
elevation and be dry floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and completely dry to
the flood protection elevation without human intervention during flooding;
            (2)   Have structural components capable of meeting all provisions
of subsection C2g of this section; and
            (3)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, through the use of a federal emergency management agency
floodproofing certificate, that the design and methods of construction are in
accordance with subsection C2g of this section.
         c.   Must be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement;
         d.   Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated to or above the
flood protection elevation; and
         e.   Must not obstruct the flow of floodwaters or cause any increase
in flood levels during the occurrence of the regional flood.
         f.   For a structure designed to allow the automatic entry of
floodwaters below the regional flood elevation, the applicant shall submit a
plan that meets subsections C2a through C2e and meets or exceeds the following
standards:
            (1)   The lowest floor must be elevated to or above the regional
flood elevation;
            (2)   A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding;
            (3)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
(1') above the lowest adjacent grade; openings may be equipped with screens,
louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters, otherwise must remain open.
            (4)   The use must be limited to parking, building access or
limited storage.
         g.   Certification: Whenever floodproofing measures are required, a
registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the following
floodproofing measures will be utilized, where appropriate, and are adequate to
withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and
other factors associated with the regional flood:
            (1)   Reinforcement of floors and walls to resist rupture,
collapse, or lateral movement caused by water pressures or debris buildup;
            (2)   Construction of wells, water supply systems and waste
treatment systems so as to prevent the entrance of flood waters in such systems
and must be in accordance with provisions in subsections D4 and D5 of this
section;
            (3)   Subsurface drainage systems to relieve external pressures on
foundation walls and basement floors;
            (4)   Cutoff valves on sewer lines or the elimination of gravity
flow basement drains; and
            (5)   Placement of utilities to or above the flood protection
elevation.
      3.   Public Utilities, Streets And Bridges: Public utilities, streets and
bridges may be allowed by permit if:
         a.   Adequate floodproofing measures are provided to the flood
protection elevation; and
         b.   Construction meets the development standards of subsection
8-13-6A of this chapter.
      4.   Fills Or Deposition Of Materials: Fills or deposition of materials
may be allowed by permit if:
         a.   The requirements of subsection
8-13-6A of this chapter are met;
         b.   No material is deposited in the navigable waters unless a permit
is issued by the department pursuant to chapter 30, Wisconsin statutes, and a
permit pursuant to section 404 of the federal water pollution control act,
amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344 has been issued, if applicable, and all other
requirements have been met;
         c.   The fill or other materials will be protected against erosion by
riprap, vegetative cover, sheet piling or bulkheading; and
         d.   The fill is not classified as a solid or hazardous material.
   D.   Prohibited Uses: All uses not listed as permitted uses in subsection B
of this section are prohibited, including the following uses:
Any private or public sewage systems, except portable latrines that are
Habitable structures, structures with high flood damage potential, or those not
associated with permanent open space uses.
Storing materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, injurious to
property, water quality, or human, animal, plant, fish or other aquatic life.
Uses not in harmony with or detrimental to uses permitted in the adjoining
districts.
Any private or public sewage systems, except portable latrines that are removed
prior to flooding and systems associated with recreational areas and
department-approved campgrounds that meet the applicable provisions of local
ordinances and ch. SPS 383, Wisconsin administrative code.
Any public or private wells which are used to obtain potable water, except
those for recreational areas that meet the requirements of local ordinances and
chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wisconsin administrative code.
Any solid or hazardous waste disposal sites.
Any wastewater treatment ponds or facilities, except those permitted under s.
NR 110.15(3)(b), Wisconsin administrative code.
Any sanitary sewer or water supply lines, except those to service existing or
proposed development located outside the floodway which complies with the
regulations for the floodplain area occupied. (Ord. 2007-6, 11-19-2007; amd.
Ord., 12-8-2022)
8-13-8: FLOOD FRINGE DISTRICT (FF):
   A.   Applicability: This section applies to all flood fringe areas shown on
the floodplain zoning maps and those identified pursuant to subsection
8-13-9E of this chapter.
   B.   Permitted Uses: Any structure, land use, or development is allowed in
the flood fringe district if the standards in subsection C of this section are
met, the use is not prohibited by this chapter or any other ordinance or
regulation and all permits or certificates specified in subsection
8-13-11A of this chapter have been issued.
   C.   Standards For Development In Flood Fringe Areas: Subsection
8-13-6 of this chapter shall apply in addition to the following requirements
according to the use requested. Any existing structures in the floodfringe must
meet the requirements of section
8-13-10:
      1.   Residential Uses: Any structure, including a manufactured home,
which is to be newly constructed or moved into the floodfringe, shall meet or
exceed the following standards. Any existing structure in the floodfringe must
meet the requirements of section
8-13-10.
         a.   All new construction, including placement of manufactured homes,
and substantial improvement of residential structures, shall have the lowest
floor elevated to or above the flood protection elevation on fill. The fill
around the structure shall be one foot (1') or more above the regional flood
elevation extending at least fifteen feet (15') beyond the limits of the
structure. No area may be removed from the floodfringe district unless it can
be shown to meet
8-13-5E;
         b.   Notwithstanding subsection C1, a basement or crawlspace floor may
be placed at the regional flood elevation if the basement or crawlspace is
designed to make all portions of the structure below the flood protection
elevation watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water and with structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. No floor of any
kind is allowed below the regional flood elevation;
         c.   Contiguous dry land access shall be provided from a structure to
land outside of the floodplain, except as provided in subsection C1d of this
section;
         d.   In developments where existing street or sewer line elevations
make compliance with subsection C1c of this section impractical, the
municipality may permit new development and substantial improvements whereroads
are at or below the regional flood elevation, if:
            (1)   The municipality has written assurance from police, fire and
emergency services that rescue and relief will be provided to the structure(s)
by wheeled vehicles during a regional flood event; or
            (2)   The municipality has a DNR-approved emergency evacuation plan
that follows acceptable hazard mitigation planning guidelines.
      2.   Accessory Structures Or Uses: In addition to section
8-13-6, new construction and substantial improvements of accessory structures
shall be constructed on fill with the lowest floor at or above the regional
flood elevation.
      3.   Commercial Uses: In addition to
8-13-6, any commercial structure which is erected, altered or moved into the
floodfringe shall meet the requirements of C1. Subject to the requirements of
subsection C5 of this section, storage yards, surface parking lots and other
such uses may be placed at lower elevations if an adequate warning system
exists to protect life and property.
      4.   Manufacturing And Industrial Uses: In addition to
8-13-6, any manufacturing or industrial structure which is erected, altered or
moved into the flood fringe shall have the lowest floor elevated to or above
the flood protection elevation or meet the floodproofing standards in
8-13-11E. Subject to the requirements of subsection C5 of this section, storage
yards, surface parking lots and other such uses may be placed at lower
elevations if an adequate warning system exists to protect life and property.
      5.   Storage Of Materials: Materials that are buoyant, flammable,
explosive, or injurious to property, water quality or human, animal, plant,
fish or aquatic life shall be stored at or above the flood protection elevation
or floodproofed in compliance with subsection
8-13-11E of this chapter. Adequate measures shall be taken to ensure that such
materials will not enter the water body during flooding.
      6.   Public Utilities, Streets And Bridges: All utilities, streets and
bridges shall be designed to be compatible with comprehensive floodplain
development plans; and
         a.   When failure of public utilities, streets and bridges would
endanger public health or safety, or where such facilities are deemed
essential, construction or repair of such facilities shall only be permitted if
they are designed to comply with
8-13-11E.
         b.   Minor roads or nonessential utilities may be constructed at lower
elevations if they are designed to withstand flood forces to the regional flood
elevation.
      7.   Sewage Systems: All sewage disposal systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood water into the system, pursuant to
8-13-11E3, to the flood protection elevation and meet the provisions of all
local ordinances and ch. SPS 383, Wisconsin administrative code.
      8.   Wells: All wells shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of flood waters into the system, pursuant to
8-13-11E3, to the flood protection elevation and shall meet the provisions of
chs. NR 811 and NR 812, Wisconsin administrative code.
      9.   Solid Waste Disposal Sites: Disposal of solid or hazardous waste is
prohibited in flood fringe areas.
      10.   Deposition Of Materials: Any deposited material must meet all the
provisions of this chapter.
      11.   Manufactured Homes:
         a.   Owners or operators of all manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall provide adequate surface drainage to minimize flood damage,
and prepare, secure approval and file an evacuation plan, indicating vehicular
access and escape routes, with local emergency management authorities.
         b.   In existing manufactured home parks, all new homes, replacement
homes on existing pads, and substantially improved homes shall:
            (1)   Have the lowest floor elevated to the flood protection
elevation; and
            (2)   Be anchored so they do not float, collapse or move laterally
during a flood.
         c.   Outside of existing manufactured home parks, including new
manufactured home parks and all single units outside of existing parks, all
new, replacement and substantially improved manufactured homes shall meet the
residential development standards for the flood fringe in subsection C1 of this
section.
      12.   Mobile Recreational Vehicles: All mobile recreational vehicles that
are on site for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days and be either:
         a.   Fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
         b.   Shall meet the elevation and anchoring requirements in
subsections C11b and c..
A mobile recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels
or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect utilities
and security devices and has no permanently attached additions. (Ord. 2007-6,
11-19-2007; amd. Ord., 12-8-2022)
8-13-9: GENERAL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT (GFP):
   A.   Applicability: The provisions for the general floodplain district shall
apply to development in all floodplains mapped as A, AO, AH, and in AE zones
within which a floodway is not delineated on the flood insurance rate maps
identified in section
8-13-5B1.
   B.   Floodway Boundaries: For proposed development in zone A, or in zone AE
within which a floodway is not delineated on the flood insurance rate map
identified in section
8-13-5B1, the boundaries of the regulatory floodway shall be determined
pursuant to 8-13-9E. If the development is proposed to encroach upon the
regulatory floodway, the development is subject to the standards of
8-13-7. If the development is located entirely within the floodfringe, the
development is subject to the standards of
8-13-8.
   C.   Permitted Uses: Pursuant to subsection E of this section, it shall be
determined whether the proposed use is located within a floodway or flood
fringe area. Those uses permitted in the floodway (
8-13-7B) and floodfringe (
8-13-8B) districts are allowed within the general floodplain district,
according to the standards of subsection D of this section, provided that all
permits or certificates required under
8-13-11A have been issued.
   D.   Standards For Development In The General Floodplain District: Section
8-13-7 of this chapter applies to floodway areas, determined pursuant to
subsection E of this section, section
8-13-8 of this chapter applies to flood fringe areas, determined pursuant to
subsection E of this section.
      1.   New construction and substantial improvement of structures in zone
AO shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated:
         a.   To or above the depth, in feet, as shown on the FIRM above the
highest adjacent natural grade; or
         b.   If the depth is not specified on the FIRM, to or above two (2)
feet above the highest adjacent natural grade.
      2.   New construction and substantial improvement of structures in zone
AH shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the
flood protection elevation.
      3.   IN AO/AH zones, provide adequate drainage paths to guide floodwaters
around structures.
      4.   All development in zones AO and zone AH shall meet the requirements
of
8-13-8 applicable to flood fringe areas.
   E.   Determining Floodway And Flood Fringe Limits: Upon receiving an
application for development within zone A, or within zone AE where a floodway
has not been delineated on the flood insurance rate maps, the zoning
administrator shall:
      1.   Require the applicant to submit two (2) copies of an aerial
photograph or a plan which shows the proposed development with respect to the
general floodplain district limits, stream channel, and existing floodplain
developments, along with a legal description of the property, fill limits and
elevations, building floor elevations and floodproofing measures; and the flood
zone as shown on the FIRM.
      2.   Require the applicant to furnish any of the following information
deemed necessary by the department to evaluate the effects of the proposal upon
flood height and flood flows, regional flood elevation and to determine
floodway boundaries:
         a.   A hydrologic and hydraulic study as specified in section
8-13-11A2c.
         b.   Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground;
pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations; size, location and layout of
all proposed and existing structures on the site; location and elevations of
streets, water supply, and sanitary facilities; soil types and other pertinent
information;
         c.   Specifications for building construction and materials,
floodproofing, filling, dredging, channel improvement, storage, water supply
and sanitary facilities. (Ord. 2007-6, 11-19-2007; amd. Ord., 12-8-2022)
8-13-10: NONCONFORMING USES:
   A.   General:
      1.   Applicability:
         a.   The standards in this section shall apply to all uses and
buildings that do not conform to the provisions contained within a floodplain
zoning ordinance with s. 87.30, Wisconsin statutes, and §§ NR 116.12-14,
Wisconsin administrative code and 44 CFR 59-72, these standards shall apply to
all modifications or additions to any nonconforming use or structure and to the
use of any structure or premises which was lawful before the passage of this
chapter or any amendment thereto. A party asserting existence of a lawfully
established nonconforming use or structure has the burden of proving that the
use or structure was compliant with the floodplain zoning ordinance in effect
at the time the use or structure was created.
         b.   As permit applications are received for additions, modifications,
or substantial improvements to nonconforming buildings in the floodplain,
municipalities shall develop a list of those nonconforming buildings, their
present equalized assessed value and a list of the cost of those activities
associated with changes to those buildings.
      2.   The existing lawful use of a structure or its accessory use which is
not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter may continue subject to
the following conditions:
         a.   No modifications or additions to a nonconforming use or structure
shall be permitted unless they comply with this chapter. The words
"modification" and "addition" include, but are not limited to, any alteration,
addition, modification, structural repair, rebuilding or replacement of any
such existing use, structure or accessory structure or use. Maintenance is not
considered a modification; this includes painting, decorating, paneling and
other nonstructural components and the maintenance, repair or replacement of
existing private sewage or water supply systems or connections to public
utilities. Any costs associated with the repair of a damaged structure are not
considered maintenance.
The construction of a deck that does not exceed two hundred (200) square feet
and that is adjacent to the exterior wall of a principal structure is not an
extension, modification or addition. The roof of the structure may extend over
a portion of the deck in order to provide safe ingress and egress to the
principal structure;
         b.   If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is
discontinued for twelve (12) consecutive months, it is no longer permitted and
any future use of the property, and any structure or building thereon, shall
conform to the applicable requirements of this chapter;
         c.   The municipality shall keep a record which lists all
nonconforming uses and nonconforming structures, their present equalized
assessed value, the cost of all modifications or additions which have been
permitted, and the percentage of the structure's total current value those
modifications represent;
         d.   No modification or addition to any nonconforming structure or any
structure with a nonconforming use, which over the life of the structure would
equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of its present equalized assessed value,
shall be allowed unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a
conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable
requirements of this chapter. Contiguous dry land access must be provided for
residential and commercial uses in compliance with subsection
8-13-8C1 of this chapter. The costs of elevating the lowest floor of a
nonconforming building or a building with a nonconforming use to the flood
protection elevation are excluded from the fifty percent (50%) provisions of
this subsection A2d;
         e.   No maintenance on a per event basis to any nonconforming
structure or any structure with a nonconforming use, the cost of which would
equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of its present equalized assessed value,
shall be allowed unless the entire structure is permanently changed to a
conforming structure with a conforming use in compliance with the applicable
requirements of this chapter. Contiguous dry land access must be provided for
residential and commercial uses in compliance with
8-13-8C1. Maintenance to any nonconforming structure, which does not exceed
fifty percent (50%) of its present equalized assessed value on a per event
basis, does not count against the cumulative calculations over the life of the
structure for substantial improvement calculations;
         f.   If on a per event basis the total value of the work being done
under (d) and (e) equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the present
equalized assessed value the work shall not be permitted unless the entire
structure is permanently changed to a conforming structure with a conforming
use in compliance with the applicable requirements of this chapter. Contiguous
dry land access must be provided for residential and commercial uses in
compliance with
8-13-8C1;
         g.   Except as provided in subsection (h), if any nonconforming
structure or any structure with a nonconforming use is destroyed or is
substantially damaged, it cannot be replaced, reconstructed or rebuilt unless
the use and the structure meet the current ordinance requirements. A structure
is considered substantially damaged if the total cost to restore the structure
to its pre-damaged condition equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
structure’s present equalized assessed value;
         h.   For nonconforming buildings that are substantially damaged or
destroyed by a nonflood disaster, the repair or reconstruction of any such
nonconforming building shall be permitted in order to restore it to the size
and use in effect prior to the damage event, provided that the following
minimum requirements are met and all required permits have been granted prior
to the start of construction:
            (1)   Residential Structures:
               (A)   Shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
to or above the flood protection elevation using fill, pilings, columns, posts
or perimeter walls. Perimeter walls must meet the requirements of
8-13-11E2.
               (B)   Shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic
loads, including the effects of buoyancy and shall be constructed with methods
and materials resistant to flood damage.
               (C)   Shall be constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service
facilities that are designed and/or elevated so as to prevent water from
entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
               (D)   In A zones, obtain, review and utilize any flood data
available from a federal, state or other source.
               (E)   In AO zones with no elevations specified, shall have the
lowest floor, including basement, meet the standards in
8-13-9D.
               (F)   In AO zones, shall have adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from the structure.
            (2)   Nonresidential Structures:
               (A)   Shall meet the requirements of subsection A2(h)1(A)-(F) of
this section.
               (B)   Shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to or above the regional flood elevation; or, together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities, shall meet the standards in sections
8-13-11E1 or E2.
               (C)   In AO zones with no elevations specified, shall have the
lowest floor, including basement, meet the standards in section
8-13-9D.
      3.   A nonconforming historic structure may be altered if the alteration
will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic
structure, the alteration will comply with section
8-13-7C1, flood resistant materials are used, and construction practices and
floodproofing methods that comply with section
8-13-11E are used. Repair or rehabilitation of historic structures shall be
exempt from the development standards of subsection A2(h)1 of this section if
it is determined that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude
the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and is the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
   B.   Floodway District:
      1.   No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming
structure or any structure with a nonconforming use in the floodway district,
unless such modification or addition:
         a.   Has been granted a permit or variance which meets all ordinance
requirements of this chapter;
         b.   Meets the requirements of subsection A of this section;
         c.   Shall not increase the obstruction to flood flows or regional
flood height;
         d.   Any addition to the existing structure shall be floodproofed,
pursuant to subsection
8-13-11E of this chapter, by means other than the use of fill, to the flood
protection elevation; and
         e.   If any part of the foundation below the flood protection
elevation is enclosed, the following standards shall apply:
            (1)   The enclosed area shall be designed by a registered architect
or engineer to allow for the efficient entry and exit of floodwaters without
human intervention. A minimum of two (2) openings must be provided with a
minimum net area of at least one square inch for every one square foot of the
enclosed area. The lowest part of the opening can be no more than twelve inches
(12") above the adjacent grade;
            (2)   The parts of the foundation located below the flood
protection elevation must be constructed of flood resistant materials;
            (3)   Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or
floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation; and
            (4)   The use must be limited to parking, building access or
limited storage.
      2.   No new on site sewage disposal system, or addition to an existing on
site sewage disposal system, except where an addition has been ordered by a
government agency to correct a hazard to public health, shall be allowed in the
floodway district. Any replacement, repair or maintenance of an existing on
site sewage disposal system in a floodway area shall meet the applicable
requirements of all municipal ordinances and section
8-13-11E3 of this chapter and chapter SPS 383, Wisconsin administrative code..
      3.   No new well or modification to an existing well used to obtain
potable water shall be allowed in the floodway district. Any replacement,
repair or maintenance of an existing well in the floodway district shall meet
the applicable requirements of all municipal ordinances, section
8-13-11E3 of this chapter, and chapters NR 811 and 812, Wisconsin
administrative code.
   C.   Flood Fringe District:
      1.   No modification or addition shall be allowed to any nonconforming
structure or any structure with a nonconforming use unless such modification or
addition has been granted a permit or variance by the municipality and meets
the requirements of subsection
8-13-8C of this chapter, except where subsection C2 of this section is
applicable.
      2.   Where compliance with the provisions of subsection C1 of this
section would result in unnecessary hardship and only where the structure will
not be used for human habitation or be associated with a high flood damage
potential, the board of adjustment/appeals, using the procedures established in
subsection
8-13-11C of this chapter, may grant a variance from those provisions of
subsection C1 of this section for modifications or additions, using the
criteria listed below. Modifications or additions which are protected to
elevations lower than the flood protection elevation may be permitted if:
         a.   No floor is allowed below the regional flood elevation for
residential or commercial structures;
         b.   Human lives are not endangered;
         c.   Public facilities, such as water or sewer, will not be installed;
         d.   Flood depths will not exceed two feet (2');
         e.   Flood velocities will not exceed two feet (2') per second; and
         f.   The structure will not be used for storage of materials as
described in subsection
8-13-8C5 of this chapter.
      3.   All new private sewage disposal systems, or addition to,
replacement, repair or maintenance of a private sewage disposal system shall
meet all the applicable provisions of all local ordinances, section
8-13-11E3 of this chapter and ch. SPS 383, Wisconsin administrative code.
      4.   All new wells, or addition to, replacement, repair or maintenance of
a well shall meet the applicable provisions of this chapter, section
8-13-11E3 of this chapter, and chapters NR 811 and 812, Wisconsin
administrative code. (Ord. 2007-6, 11-19-2007; amd. Ord. 2011-4, 7-18-2011;
Ord., 12-8-2022)
8-13-11: ADMINISTRATION:
Where a zoning administrator, planning agency or a board of appeals has already
been appointed to administer a zoning ordinance adopted under sections 59.69,
59.692 or 62.23(7), Wisconsin statutes, these officials shall also administer
this chapter.
   A.   Zoning Administrator:
      1.   Duties And Powers: The zoning administrator is authorized to
administer this chapter and shall have the following duties and powers:
         a.   Advise applicants of the ordinance provisions, assist in
preparing permit applications and appeals, and assure that the regional flood
elevation for the proposed development is shown on all permit applications.
         b.   Issue permits and inspect properties for compliance with
provisions of this chapter, and issue certificates of compliance where
appropriate.
         c.   Inspect and assess all damaged floodplain structures to determine
if substantial damage to the structures has occurred.
         d.   Keep records of all official actions such as:
            (1)   All permits issued, inspections made, and work approved;
            (2)   Documentation of certified lowest floor and regional flood
elevations;
            (3)   Floodproofing certificates;
            (4)   Water surface profiles, floodplain zoning maps and
ordinances, nonconforming uses and structures including changes, appeals,
variances and amendments;
            (5)   All substantial damage assessment reports for floodplain
structures; and
            (6)   List of nonconforming structures and uses.
         e.   Submit copies of the following items to the department regional
office:
            (1)   Within ten (10) days of the decision, a copy of any decisions
on variances, appeals for map or text interpretations, and map or text
amendments.
            (2)   Copies of case by case analyses and other required
information.
            (3)   Copies of substantial damage assessments performed and all
related correspondence concerning the assessments.
         f.   Investigate, prepare reports, and report violations of this
chapter to the municipal zoning agency and attorney for prosecution. Copies of
the reports shall also be sent to the department regional office.
         g.   Submit copies of amendments to the FEMA regional office.
      2.   Land Use Permit: A land use permit shall be obtained before any
development; repair, modification or addition to an existing structure; or
change in the use of a building or structure, including sewer and water
facilities, may be initiated. Application to the zoning administrator shall
include:
         a.   General Information:
            (1)   Name and address of the applicant, property owner and
contractor;
            (2)   Legal description, proposed use, and whether it is new
construction or a modification;
         b.   Site Development Plan: A site plan drawn to scale shall be
submitted with the permit application form and shall contain:
            (1)   Location, dimensions, area and elevation of the lot;
            (2)   Location of the ordinary high water mark of any abutting
navigable waterways;
            (3)   Location of any structures with distances measured from the
lot lines and street centerlines;
            (4)   Location of any existing or proposed on site sewage systems
or private water supply systems;
            (5)   Location and elevation of existing or future access roads;
            (6)   Location of floodplain and floodway limits as determined from
the official floodplain zoning maps;
            (7)   The elevation of the lowest floor of proposed buildings and
any fill using the vertical datum from the adopted study; either national
geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) or North American vertical datum (NAVD);
            (8)   Data sufficient to determine the regional flood elevation in
NGVD or NAVD at the location of the development and to determine whether or not
the requirements of section
8-13-7 or
8-13-8 of this chapter are met; and
            (9)   Data to determine if the proposed development will cause an
obstruction to flow or an increase in regional flood height or discharge
according to subsection
8-13-6A of this chapter. This may include any of the information noted in
subsection
8-13-7C1 of this chapter.
         c.   Hydraulic And Hydrologic Studies To Analyze Development: All
hydraulic and hydrologic studies shall be completed under the direct
supervision of a professional engineer registered in the state. The study
contractor shall be responsible for the technical adequacy of the study. All
studies shall be reviewed and approved by the department.
            (1)   Zone A floodplains and in AE zones within which a floodway is
not delineated:
               (A)   Hydrology:
                  i.   The appropriate method shall be based on the standards
in ch. NR 116.07(3), Wisconsin administrative code, Hydrologic Analysis:
Determination of Regional Flood Discharge.
               (B)   Hydraulic Modeling: The regional flood elevation shall be
based on the standards in ch. NR 116.07(4), Wisconsin administrative code,
Hydraulic Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood Elevation and the
following:
                  i.   Determination of the required limits of the hydraulic
model shall be based on detailed study information for downstream structures
(dam, bridge, culvert) to determine adequate starting WSEL for the study.
                  ii.   Channel sections must be surveyed.
                  iii.   Minimum four-foot contour data in the overbanks shall
be used for the development of cross section overbank and floodplain mapping.
                  iv.   A maximum distance of five hundred (500) feet between
cross sections is allowed in developed areas with additional intermediate cross
sections required at transitions in channel bottom slope including a survey of
the channel at each location.
                  v.   The most current version of HEC-RAS shall be used.
                  vi.   A survey of bridge and culvert openings and the top of
road is required at each structure.
                  vii.   Additional cross sections are required at the
downstream and upstream limits of the proposed development and any necessary
intermediate locations based on the length of the reach if greater than five
hundred (500) feet.
                  viii.   Standard accepted engineering practices shall be used
when assigning parameters for the base model such as flow, Manning's N values,
expansion and contraction coefficients or effective flow limits. The base model
shall be calibrated to past flooding data such as high water marks to determine
the reasonableness of the model results. If no historical data is available,
adequate justification shall be provided for any parameters outside standard
accepted engineering practices.
                  ix.   The model must extend past the upstream limit of the
difference in the existing and proposed flood profiles in order to provide a
tie-in to existing studies. The height difference between the proposed flood
profile and the existing study profiles shall be no more than 0.00 feet.
               (C)   Mapping: A work map of the reach studied shall be
provided, showing all cross-section locations, floodway/floodplain limits based
on best available topographic data, geographic limits of the proposed
development and whether the proposed development is located in the floodway.
                  i.   If the proposed development is located outside of the
floodway, then it is determined to have no impact on the regional flood
elevation.
                  ii.   If any part of the proposed development is in the
floodway, it must be added to the base model to show the difference between
existing and proposed conditions. The study must ensure that all coefficients
remain the same as in the existing model, unless adequate justification based
on standard accepted engineering practices is provided.
            (2)   Zone AE Floodplains:
               (A)   Hydrology: If the proposed hydrology will change the
existing study, the appropriate method to be used shall be based on ch. NR
116.07(3), Wisconsin administrative code, Hydrologic Analysis: Determination of
Regional Flood Discharge.
               (B)   Hydraulic Model: The regional flood elevation shall be
based on the standards in ch. NR 116.07(4), Wisconsin administrative code,
Hydraulic Analysis: Determination of Regional Flood Elevation and the
following:
                  i.   Duplicate Effective Model: The effective model shall be
reproduced to ensure correct transference of the model data and to allow
integration of the revised data to provide a continuous FIS model upstream and
downstream of the revised reach. If data from the effective model is available,
models shall be generated that duplicate the FIS profiles and the elevations
shown in the Floodway Data Table in the FIS report to within 0.1 foot.
                  ii.   Corrected Effective Model: The corrected effective
model shall not include any man-made physical changes since the effective model
date but shall import the model into the most current version of HEC-RAS for
department review.
                  iii.   Existing (Pre-Project Conditions) Model: The existing
model shall be required to support conclusions about the actual impacts of the
project associated with the revised (post-project) model or to establish more
up-to-date models on which to base the revised (post-project) model.
                  iv.   Revised (Post-Project Conditions) Model: The revised
(post-project conditions) model shall incorporate the existing model and any
proposed changes to the topography caused by the proposed development. This
model shall reflect proposed conditions.
                  v.   All changes to the duplicate effective model and
subsequent models must be supported by certified topographic information,
bridge plans, construction plans and survey notes.
                  vi.   Changes to the hydraulic models shall be limited to the
stream reach for which the revision is being requested. Cross sections upstream
and downstream of the revised reach shall be identical to those in the
effective model and result in water surface elevations and topwidths computed
by the revised models matching those in the effective models upstream and
downstream of the revised reach as required. The effective model shall not be
truncated.
               (C)   Mapping: Maps and associated engineering data shall be
submitted to the department for review which meet the following conditions:
                  i.   Consistency between the revised hydraulic models, the
revised floodplain and floodway delineations, the revised flood profiles,
topographic work map, annotated FIRMs and/or Flood Boundary floodway maps
(FBFMs), construction plans, bridge plans.
                  ii.   Certified topographic map of suitable scale, contour
interval, and a planimetric map showing the applicable items. If a digital
version of the map is available, it may be submitted in order that the FIRM may
be more easily revised.
                  iii.   Annotated FIRM panel showing the revised one percent
(1%) and 0.2% annual chance floodplains and floodway boundaries.
                  iv.   If an annotated FIRM and/or FBFM and digital mapping
data (GIS or CADD) are used then all supporting documentation or metadata must
be included with the data submission along with the Universal Transverse
Mercator (UTM) projection and State Plane Coordinate System in accordance with
FEMA mapping specifications.
                  v.   The revised floodplain boundaries shall tie into the
effective floodplain boundaries.
                  vi.   All cross sections from the effective model shall be
labeled in accordance with the effective map and a cross section lookup table
shall be included to relate to the model input numbering scheme.
                  vii.   Both the current and proposed floodways shall be shown
on the map.
                  viii.   The stream centerline, or profile baseline used to
measure stream distances in the model shall be visible on the map.
               (D)   Expiration: All permits issued under the authority of this
chapter shall expire no more than one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance.
The permit may be extended for a maximum of one hundred eighty (180) days for
good and sufficient cause. If the permitted work has not started within one
hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date, the development must comply with
any regulation, including any revision to the FIRM or FIS, that took effect
after the permit date.
      3.   Certificate Of Compliance: No land shall be occupied or used, and no
building which is hereafter constructed, altered, added to, modified, repaired,
rebuilt or replaced shall be occupied until a certificate of compliance is
issued by the zoning administrator, except where no permit is required, subject
to the following provisions:
         a.   The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or
premises or part thereof, and the proposed use, conform to the provisions of
this chapter;
         b.   Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the
application for a permit;
         c.   If all provisions of this chapter are met, the certificate of
compliance shall be issued within ten (10) days after written notification that
the permitted work is completed;
         d.   The applicant shall submit a certification signed by a registered
professional engineer, architect or land surveyor that the fill, lowest floor
and floodproofing elevations are in compliance with the permit issued.
Floodproofing measures also require certification by a registered professional
engineer or architect that floodproofing requirements of subsection E of this
section.
         e.   Where applicable pursuant to section
8-13-9A4, the applicant must submit a certification by a registered
professional engineer or surveyor of the elevation of the bottom of the lowest
horizontal structural member supporting the lowest floor (excluding pilings or
columns), and an indication of whether the structure contains a basement.
         f.   Where applicable pursuant to section
8-13-9A4, the applicant must submit certifications by a registered professional
engineer or architect that the structural design and methods of construction
meet accepted standards of practice as required by section
8-13-9A4 of this chapter.
      4.   Other Permits: Prior to obtaining a floodplain development permit
the applicant must secure all necessary permits from federal, state, and local
agencies, including but not limited to those required by the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers under section 404 of the federal water pollution control act,
amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344.
   B.   Zoning Agency:
      1.   The village board shall:
         a.   Oversee the functions of the office of the zoning administrator;
         b.   Review and advise the governing body on all proposed amendments
to this chapter, maps and text; and
         c.   Publish adequate notice pursuant to chapter 985, Wisconsin
statutes, specifying the date, time, place and subject of the public hearing.
      2.   This village board shall not:
         a.   Grant variances to the terms of the ordinance in place of action
by the board of adjustment/appeals; or
         b.   Amend the text or zoning maps in place of official action by the
governing body.
   C.   Board Of Appeals: The board of appeals, created under section 62.23(7)
(e), Wisconsin statutes is hereby authorized or shall be appointed to act for
the purposes of this chapter. The board shall exercise the powers conferred by
Wisconsin statutes and adopt rules for the conduct of business. Members of the
village board shall not be the secretary of the board of appeals.
      1.   Powers And Duties: The board of appeals shall:
         a.   Appeals: Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an
error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an
administrative official in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
         b.   Boundary Disputes: Hear and decide disputes concerning the
district boundaries shown on the official floodplain zoning map.
         c.   Variances: Hear and decide, upon appeal, variances from the
ordinance standards.
      2.   Appeals To The Board:
         a.   Appeals to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by
any officer or department of the municipality affected by any decision of the
zoning administrator or other administrative officer. Such appeal shall be
taken within thirty (30) days unless otherwise provided by the rules of the
board, by filing with the official whose decision is in question, and with the
board, a notice of appeal specifying the reasons for the appeal. The official
whose decision is in question shall transmit to the board all records regarding
the matter appealed.
         b.   Notice And Hearing For Appeals Including Variances:
            (1)   Notice: The board shall:
               (A)   Fix a reasonable time for the hearing;
               (B)   Publish adequate notice pursuant to Wisconsin statutes,
specifying the date, time, place and subject of the hearing; and
               (C)   Assure that notice shall be mailed to the parties in
interest and the department regional office at least ten (10) days in advance
of the hearing.
            (2)   Hearing: Any party may appear in person or by agent. The
board shall:
               (A)   Resolve boundary disputes according to subsection C3 of
this section.
               (B)   Decide variance applications according to subsection C4 of
this section.
               (C)   Decide appeals of permit denials according to subsection D
of this section.
         c.   Decision: The final decision regarding the appeal or variance
application shall:
            (1)   Be made within a reasonable time;
            (2)   Be sent to the department regional office within ten (10)
days of the decision;
            (3)   Be a written determination signed by the chairman or
secretary of the board;
            (4)   State the specific facts which are the basis for the board's
decision;
            (5)   Either affirm, reverse, vary or modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination appealed, in whole or in part, dismiss
the appeal for lack of jurisdiction or grant or deny the variance application;
and
            (6)   Include the reasons for granting an appeal, describing the
hardship demonstrated by the applicant in the case of a variance, clearly
stated in the recorded minutes of the board proceedings.
      3.   Boundary Disputes: The following procedure shall be used by the
board in hearing disputes concerning floodplain district boundaries:
         a.   If a floodplain district boundary is established by approximate
or detailed floodplain studies, the flood elevations or profiles shall prevail
in locating the boundary.
         b.   The person contesting the boundary location shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to present arguments and technical evidence to the
board.
         c.   If the boundary is incorrectly mapped, the board should inform
the zoning committee or the person contesting the boundary location to petition
the governing body for a map amendment according to section
8-13-12 of this chapter.
      4.   Variance:
         a.   The board may, upon appeal, grant a variance from the standards
of this chapter if an applicant convincingly demonstrates that:
            (1)   Literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will
cause unnecessary hardship;
            (2)   The hardship is due to adoption of the floodplain ordinance
and unique property conditions, not common to adjacent lots or premises. In
such case this chapter or map must be amended;
            (3)   The variance is not contrary to the public interest; and
            (4)   The variance is consistent with the purpose of this chapter
in section
8-13-3.
         b.   In addition to the criteria in subsection C4a of this section, to
qualify for a variance under FEMA regulations, the Board must find that the
following criteria have been met:
            (1)   The variance may not cause any increase in the regional flood
elevation;
            (2)   The applicant has shown good and sufficient cause for
issuance of the variance.
            (3)   Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship.
            (4)   Granting the variance will not result in additional threats
to public safety, extraordinary expense, create a nuisance, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
            (5)   The variance granted is the minimum necessary, considering
the flood hazard, to afford relief.
         c.   A variance shall not:
            (1)   Grant, extend or increase any use prohibited in the zoning
district.
            (2)   Be granted for a hardship based solely on an economic gain or
loss.
            (3)   Be granted for a hardship which is self-created.
            (4)   Damage the rights or property values of other persons in the
area.
            (5)   Allow actions without the amendments to this chapter or map
(s) required in subsection
8-13-12A of this chapter.
            (6)   Allow any alteration of a historic structure, including its
use, which would preclude its continued designation as a historic structure.
         d.   When a floodplain variance is granted the board shall notify the
applicant in writing that it may increase risks to life and property and flood
insurance premiums could increase up to twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per one
hundred dollars ($100.00) of coverage. A copy shall be maintained with the
variance record.
   D.   To Review Appeals Of Permit Denials:
      1.   The zoning agency (subsection B of this section) or board shall
review all data related to the appeal. This may include:
         a.   Permit application data listed in subsection A2 of this section.
         b.   Floodway/flood fringe determination data in subsection
8-13-9E of this chapter.
         c.   Data listed in subsection
8-13-7C1b of this chapter where the applicant has not submitted this
information to the zoning administrator.
         d.   Other data submitted with the application, or submitted to the
board with the appeal.
      2.   For appeals of all denied permits, the board shall:
         a.   Follow the procedures of subsection C of this section;
         b.   Consider zoning agency recommendations; and
         c.   Either uphold the denial or grant the appeal.
      3.   For appeals concerning increases in regional flood elevation, the
board shall:
         a.   Uphold the denial where the board agrees with the data showing an
increase in flood elevation. Increases may only be allowed after amending the
flood profile and map and all appropriate legal arrangements are made with all
adversely affected property owners per the requirements of section
8-13-12 of this chapter.
         b.   Grant the appeal where the board agrees that the data properly
demonstrates that the project does not cause an increase provided no other
reasons for denial exist.
   E.   Floodproofing Standards:
      1.   No permit or variance shall be issued for a non-residential
structure designed to be watertight below the regional flood elevation until
the applicant submits a plan certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect that the floodproofing measures will protect the structure or
development to or above the flood protection elevation and submits a FEMA
floodproofing certificate. Floodproofing is not an alternative to the
development standards in sections
8-13-6,
8-13-7,
8-13-8, or
8-13-9 of this chapter.
      2.   For a structure designed to allow the entry of floodwaters, no
permit or variance shall be issued until the applicant submits a plan either:
         a.   Certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or
         b.   Meeting or exceeding the following standards:
            (1)   A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not
less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding;
            (2)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one-foot
above grade; and
            (3)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters.
      3.   Floodproofing measures shall be designed, as appropriate, to:
         a.   Withstand flood pressures, depths, velocities, uplift and impact
forces and other regional flood factors;
         b.   Protect structures to the flood protection elevation;
         c.   Anchor structures to foundations to resist flotation and lateral
movement;
         d.   Minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters;
         e.   Minimize or eliminate discharges into flood waters;
         f.   Placement of essential utilities to or above the flood protection
elevation; and
         g.   If any part of the foundation below the flood protection
elevation is enclosed, the following standards shall apply:
            (1)   The enclosed area shall be designed by a registered architect
or engineer to allow for the efficient entry and exit of flood waters without
human intervention. A minimum of two (2) openings must be provided with a
minimum net area of at least one square inch for every one square foot of the
enclosed area. The lowest part of the opening can be no more than twelve (12)
inches above the adjacent grade;
            (2)   The parts of the foundation located below the flood
protection elevation must be constructed of flood-resistant materials;
            (3)   Mechanical and utility equipment must be elevated or
floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation; and
            (4)   The use must be limited to parking, building access or
limited storage.
   F.   Public Information:
      1.   Place marks on structures to show the depth of inundation during the
regional flood.
      2.   All maps, engineering data and regulations shall be available and
widely distributed.
      3.   Real estate transfers should show what floodplain district any real
property is in. (Ord. 2007-6, 11-19-2007; amd. Ord., 12-8-2022)
8-13-12: AMENDMENTS:
Obstructions or increases may only be permitted if amendments were made to this
chapter, the official floodplain zoning maps, floodway lines and water surface
profiles, in accordance with subsection A of this section.
      1.   In AE zones with a mapped floodway, no obstructions or increases
shall be permitted unless the applicant receives a conditional letter of map
revision from FEMA and amendments are made to this chapter, the official
floodplain zoning maps, floodway lines and water surface profiles, in
accordance with subsection A in this section. Any such alterations must be
reviewed and approved by FEMA and the DNR.
      2.   In A zones increases equal to or greater than 1.0 foot may only be
permitted if the applicant receives a conditional letter of map revision from
FEMA and amendments are made to this chapter, the official floodplain maps,
floodway lines, and water surface profiles, in accordance with subsection A of
this section.
   A.   General: The governing body shall change or supplement the floodplain
zoning district boundaries and this chapter in the manner outlined in
subsection B below. Actions which require an amendment to the ordinance and/or
submittal of a letter of map change (LOMC) include, but are not limited to, the
following:
      1.   Any fill or floodway encroachment that obstructs flow causing any
increase in the regional flood height;
      2.   Any change to the floodplain boundaries and/or watercourse
alterations on the FIRM;
      3.   Any changes to any other officially adopted floodplain maps listed
in section
8-13-5B2 of this chapter;
      4.   Any floodplain fill which raises the elevation of the filled area to
a height at or above the flood protection elevation and is contiguous to land
lying outside the floodplain;
      5.   Correction of discrepancies between the water surface profiles and
floodplain maps;
      6.   Any upgrade to a floodplain zoning ordinance text required by
section NR 116.05, Wisconsin administrative code, or otherwise required by law,
or for changes by the municipality; and
      7.   All channel relocations and changes to the maps to alter floodway
lines or to remove an area from the floodway or the flood fringe that is based
on a base flood elevation from a FIRM requires prior approval by FEMA.
   B.   Procedures: Ordinance amendments may be made upon petition of any party
according to the provisions of section 62.23, Wisconsin statutes. The petitions
shall include all data required by section
8-13-9E and
8-13-11B of this chapter. The land use permit shall not be issued until a
letter of map revision is issued by FEMA for the proposed changes.
      1.   The proposed amendment shall be referred to the zoning agency for a
public hearing and recommendation to the governing body. The amendment and
notice of public hearing shall be submitted to the department regional office
for review prior to the hearing. The amendment procedure shall comply with the
provisions of section 62.23, Wisconsin statutes.
      2.   No amendments shall become effective until reviewed and approved by
the department.
      3.   All persons petitioning for a map amendment that obstructs flow
causing any increase in the regional flood height, shall obtain flooding
easements or other appropriate legal arrangements from all adversely affected
property owners and notify local units of government before the amendment can
be approved by the governing body. (Ord. 2007-6, 11-19-2007; amd. Ord., 12-8-
2022)
8-13-13: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter by any person shall be unlawful
and shall be referred to the municipal attorney who shall expeditiously
prosecute all such violators. A violator shall, upon conviction, forfeit to the
municipality a penalty of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) together with a
taxable cost of such action. Each day of continued violation shall constitute a
separate offense. Every violation of this chapter is a public nuisance and the
creation may be enjoined and the maintenance may be abated by action at suit of
the municipality, the state, or any citizen thereof pursuant to section 87.30,
Wisconsin statutes. (Ord. 2007-6, 11-19-2007; amd. Ord. 2011-4, 7-18-2011;
Ord., 12-8-2022)
8-13-14: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined, words and phrases in this chapter shall have their
common law meaning and shall be applied in accordance with their common usage.
Words used in the present tense include the future, the singular number
includes the plural and the plural number includes the singular. The word "may"
is permissive, "shall" is mandatory and is not discretionary.
               Those areas shown on the official floodplain zoning map which would be inundated
A ZONES:       by the regional flood. These areas may be numbered or unnumbered A zones. The A
               zones may or may not be reflective of flood profiles, depending on the
               availability of data for a given area.
AH ZONE:       See AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING.
AO ZONE:       See AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING.
ACCESSORY      A facility, structure, building or use which is accessory or incidental to the
STRUCTURE OR   principal use of a property, structure or building. An accessory structure shall
USE:           not be used for human habitation.
               An enhancement, upgrade or substantial change or modification other than an
ALTERATION:    addition or repair to a dwelling or to electrical, plumbing, heating,
               ventilating, air conditioning and other systems within a structure.
               A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community’s flood insurance
AREA OF        rate map (FIRM) with a one percent (1%) or greater annual chance of flooding to
SHALLOW        an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel
FLOODING:      does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity
               flood may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
BASE FLOOD:    The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
               given year, as published by FEMA as part of an FIS and depicted on a FIRM.
BASEMENT:      Any enclosed area of a building having its floor subgrade on all sides.
               A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is
BREAKAWAY      intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral
WALL:          loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building
               or supporting foundation system.
BUILDING:      See definition of STRUCTURE.
               A geographic line along a reach of navigable water that has been adopted by a
               municipal ordinance and approved by the department pursuant to section 30.11,
BULKHEAD LINE: Wisconsin statutes, and which allows limited filling between this bulkhead line
               and the original ordinary high water mark, except where such filling is
               prohibited by the floodway provisions of this chapter.
               Any parcel of land which is designed, maintained, intended or used for the
CAMPGROUND:    purpose of providing sites for nonpermanent overnight use by four (4) or more
               camping units, or which is advertised or represented as a camping area.
               Any portable device, no more than four hundred (400) square feet in area, used
CAMPING UNIT:  as a temporary shelter, including, but not limited to, a camping trailer, motor
               home, bus, van, pickup truck, tent that is fully licensed, if required, and
               ready for highway use.
CERTIFICATE OF A certification that the construction and the use of land or a building, the
COMPLIANCE:    elevation of fill or the lowest floor of a structure is in compliance with all
               of the provisions of this chapter.
CHANNEL:       A natural or artificial watercourse with definite bed and banks to confine and
               conduct normal flow of water.
CRAWLWAYS OR   An enclosed area below the first usable floor of a building, generally less than
CRAWL SPACE:   five feet (5') in height, used for access to plumbing and electrical utilities.
DECK:          An unenclosed exterior structure that has no roof or sides, and has a permeable
               floor which allows the infiltration of precipitation.
DEPARTMENT:    The Wisconsin department of natural resources.
               Any artificial change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not
               limited to, the construction of buildings, structures or accessory structures;
               the construction of additions or alterations to buildings, structures or
               accessory structures; the repair of any damaged structure or the improvement or
DEVELOPMENT:   renovation of any structure, regardless of percentage of damage or improvement;
               the placement of buildings or structures; subdivision layout and site
               preparation; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
               operations; the storage, deposition or extraction of materials or equipment; and
               the installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage disposal systems
               or water supply facilities.
               A vehicular access route which is above the regional flood elevation and which
DRY LAND       connects land located in the floodplain to land outside the floodplain, such as
ACCESS:        a road with its surface above regional flood elevation and wide enough for
               wheeled rescue and relief vehicles.
ENCROACHMENT:  Any fill, structure, equipment, use or development in the floodway.
FEDERAL
EMERGENCY      The federal agency that administers the national flood insurance program.
MANAGEMENT
AGENCY (FEMA):
FLOOD          A map of a community on which the federal insurance administration has
INSURANCE RATE delineated both the floodplain and the risk premium zones applicable to the
MAP (FIRM):    community. This map can only be amended by the federal emergency management
               agency.
               A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally
               dry land areas caused by one of the following conditions:
               A. The overflow or rise of inland waters,
FLOOD OR       B. The rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source,
FLOODING:      C. The inundation caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated
               cyclical levels along the shore of Lake Michigan or Lake Superior, or
               D. The sudden increase caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body
               of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature,
               such as a seiche, or by some similarly unusual event.
               The probability of a flood occurrence which is determined from statistical
FLOOD          analyses. The frequency of a particular flood event is usually expressed as
FREQUENCY:     occurring, on the average, once in a specified number of years or as a percent
               chance of occurring in any given year.
               That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway which is covered by
FLOOD FRINGE:  floodwaters during the regional flood and associated with standing water rather
               than flowing water.
               A map designating approximate flood hazard areas. Flood hazard areas are
FLOOD HAZARD   designated as unnumbered A zones and do not contain floodway lines or regional
BOUNDARY MAP:  flood elevations. This map forms the basis for both the regulatory and insurance
               aspects of the national flood insurance program (NFIP) until superseded by a
               flood insurance study and a flood insurance rate map.
               A technical engineering examination, evaluation, and determination of the local
               flood hazard areas. It provides maps designating those areas affected by the
FLOOD          regional flood and provides both flood insurance rate zones and base flood
INSURANCE      elevations and may provide floodway lines. The flood hazard areas are designated
STUDY:         as numbered and unnumbered A zones. Flood insurance rate maps, that accompany
               the flood insurance study, form the basis for both the regulatory and the
               insurance aspects of the national flood insurance program.
               Land which has been or may be covered by floodwater during the regional flood.
FLOODPLAIN:    It includes the floodway and the flood fringe, and may include other designated
               floodplain areas for regulatory purposes.
FLOODPLAIN     A natural geologic land formation within the floodplain that is surrounded, but
ISLAND:        not covered, by floodwater during the regional flood.
FLOODPLAIN     Policy and procedures to ensure wise use of floodplains, including mapping and
MANAGEMENT:    engineering, mitigation, education, and administration and enforcement of
               floodplain regulations.
               A graph or a longitudinal profile line showing the relationship of the water
FLOOD PROFILE: surface elevation of a flood event to locations of land surface elevations along
               a stream or river.
               Any combination of structural provisions, changes or adjustments to properties
FLOODPROOFING: and structures, water and sanitary facilities and contents of buildings subject
               to flooding, for the purpose of reducing or eliminating flood damage.
FLOOD          An elevation of two feet (2') of freeboard above the regional flood elevation.
PROTECTION     (Also see FREEBOARD.)
ELEVATION:
FLOOD STORAGE: Those floodplain areas where storage of floodwaters has been taken into account
               during analysis in reducing the regional flood discharge.
FLOODWAY:      The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining
               the channel required to carry the regional flood discharge.
               A safety factor expressed in terms of a specified number of feet above a
               calculated flood level. Freeboard compensates for any factors that cause flood
FREEBOARD:     heights greater than those calculated, including ice jams, debris accumulation,
               wave action, obstruction of bridge openings and floodways, the effects of
               watershed urbanization, loss of flood storage areas due to development and
               aggregation of the river or stream bed.
HABITABLE      Any structure or portion thereof used or designed for human habitation.
STRUCTURE:
               Publication or posting meeting the requirements of chapter 985, Wisconsin
               statutes. For appeals, a class 1 notice, published once at least one week (7
HEARING        days) before the hearing, is required. For all zoning ordinances and amendments,
NOTICE:        a class 2 notice, published twice, once each week consecutively, the last at
               least one week (7 days) before the hearing. Local ordinances or bylaws may
               require additional notice, exceeding these minimums.
HIGH FLOOD     Damage that could result from flooding that includes any danger to life or
DAMAGE         health or any significant economic loss to a structure or building and its
POTENTIAL:     contents.
HIGHEST        The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next
ADJACENT       to the proposed walls of a structure.
GRADE:
               Any structure that is either:
                  A. Listed individually in the national register of historic places or
               preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the
               requirements for individual listing on the national register,
                  B. Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as
               contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or
HISTORIC       a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered
STRUCTURE:     historic district,
                  C. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with
               historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of the
               interior, or
                  D. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
               with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an
               approved state program, as determined by the secretary of the interior; or by
               the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs.
               A calculated upward rise in the regional flood elevationgreater than 0.00 foot,
INCREASE IN    based on a comparison of existing conditions and proposed conditions which is
REGIONAL FLOOD directly attributable to development in the floodplain but not attributable to
HEIGHT:        manipulation of mathematical variables such as roughness factors, expansion and
               contraction coefficients and discharge.
LAND USE:      Any nonstructural use made of unimproved or improved real estate. (Also see
               DEVELOPMENT.)
LOWEST         Elevation of the lowest ground surface that touches any of the exterior walls of
ADJACENT       a building.
GRADE:
LOWEST FLOOR:  The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement).
               The act or process of ordinary upkeep and repairs, including redecorating,
MAINTENANCE:   refinishing, nonstructural repairs, or the replacement of existing fixtures,
               systems or equipment with equivalent fixtures, systems or structures.
               A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent
MANUFACTURED   chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when
HOME:          connected to required utilities. The term "manufactured home" includes a mobile
               home but does not include a "mobile recreational vehicle".
MOBILE/
MANUFACTURED   A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land, divided into two (2) or more
HOME PARK OR   manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
SUBDIVISION:
MOBILE/        A parcel of land, divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent
MANUFACTURED   or sale, on which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots is
HOME PARK OR   completed before the effective date of this chapter. At a minimum, this would
SUBDIVISION,   include the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either
EXISTING:      final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads.
MOBILE/        The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
MANUFACTURED   servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed. This
HOME PARK,     includes installation of utilities, construction of streets and either final
EXPANSION TO   site grading, or the pouring of concrete pads.
EXISTING:
               A vehicle which is built on a single chassis, four hundred (400) square feet or
               less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, designed to be self-
               propelled, carried or permanently towable by a licensed, light duty vehicle, is
MOBILE         licensed for highway use if registration is required and is designed primarily
RECREATIONAL   not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for
VEHICLE:       recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. Manufactured homes that are towed
               or carried onto a parcel of land, but do not remain capable of being towed or
               carried, including park model homes, do not fall within the definition of
               "mobile recreational vehicles".
MODEL,         A hydraulic engineering model that corrects any errors that occur in the
CORRECTED      duplicate effective model, adds any additional cross sections to the duplicate
EFFECTIVE:     effective model, or incorporates more detailed topographic information than that
               used in the current effective model.
MODEL,         A copy of the hydraulic analysis used in the effective FIS and referred to as
DUPLICATE      the effective model.
EFFECTIVE:
MODEL,         The hydraulic engineering model that was used to produce the current effective
EFFECTIVE:     flood insurance study.
               A modification of the duplicate effective model or corrected effective model to
MODEL,         reflect any man made modifications that have occurred within the floodplain
EXISTING (PRE- since the date of the effective model but prior to the construction of the
PROJECT):      project for which the revision is being requested. If no modification has
               occurred since the date of the effective model, then this model would be
               identical to the corrected effective model or duplicate effective model.
MODEL, REVISED A modification of the existing or pre-project conditions model, duplicate
(POST-         effective model or corrected effective model to reflect revised or post-project
PROJECT):      conditions.
MUNICIPALITY   The county, city or village governmental units enacting, administering and
OR MUNICIPAL:  enforcing this zoning ordinance.
NAVD OR NORTH
AMERICAN       Elevations referenced to mean sea level datum, 1988 adjustment.
VERTICAL
DATUM:
NGVD OR
NATIONAL
GEODETIC       Elevations referenced to mean sea level datum, 1929 adjustment.
VERTICAL
DATUM:
NEW            Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the
CONSTRUCTION:  effective date of a floodplain zoning regulation adopted by this community and
               includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
NON-FLOOD      A fire or an ice storm, tornado, windstorm, mudslide or other destructive act of
DISASTER:      nature, but excludes a flood.
               An existing lawful structure or building which is not in conformity with the
NONCONFORMING  dimensional or structural requirements of this chapter for the area of the
STRUCTURE:     floodplain which it occupies. (For example, an existing residential structure in
               the flood fringe district is a conforming use. However, if the lowest floor is
               lower than the flood protection elevation, the structure is nonconforming.)
NONCONFORMING  An existing lawful use or accessory use of a structure or building which is not
USE:           in conformity with the provisions of this chapter for the area of the floodplain
               which it occupies. (Such as a residence in the floodway.)
OBSTRUCTION TO Any development which blocks the conveyance of floodwaters such that this
FLOW:          development alone or together with any future development will cause an increase
               in regional flood height.
OFFICIAL       That map, adopted and made part of this chapter, as described in subsection
FLOODPLAIN     8-13-5 B of this chapter, which has been approved by the department and FEMA.
ZONING MAP:
OPEN SPACE     Those uses having a relatively low flood damage potential and not involving
USE:           structures.
               The point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action of surface
ORDINARY HIGH  water is so continuous as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion,
WATER MARK:    destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic
               vegetation, or other easily recognized characteristic.
PERSON:        An individual, or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association,
               municipality or state agency.
               A sewage treatment and disposal system serving one structure with a septic tank
               and soil absorption field located on the same parcel as the structure. It also
PRIVATE SEWAGE means an alternative sewage system approved by the department of safety and
SYSTEM:        professional services, including a substitute for the septic tank or soil
               absorption field, a holding tank, a system serving more than one structure or a
               system located on a different parcel than the structure.
PUBLIC         Those utilities using underground or overhead transmission lines such as
UTILITIES:     electric, telephone and telegraph, and distribution and collection systems such
               as water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer.
REASONABLY     Base floodwaters will not inundate the land or damage structures to be removed
SAFE FROM      from the floodplain and that any subsurface waters related to the base flood
FLOODING:      will not damage existing or proposed buildings.
               A flood determined to be representative of large floods known to have occurred
REGIONAL       in Wisconsin. A regional flood is a flood with a one percent (1%) chance of
FLOOD:         being equaled or exceeded in any given year, and if depicted on the FIRM, the
               RFE is equivalent to the BFE.
               The date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
               construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or
               other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date.
               The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction on a
               site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
               construction of columns, or any work beyond initial excavation, or the placement
START OF       of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include
CONSTRUCTION:  land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the
               installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a
               basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor
               does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
               garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
               structure. For an alteration, the actual start of construction means the first
               alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building,
               whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
               Any manmade object with form, shape and utility, either permanently or
STRUCTURE:     temporarily attached to, placed upon or set into the ground, streambed or lake
               bed, including, but not limited to, roofed and walled buildings, gas or liquid
               storage tanks, bridges, dams and culverts.
SUBDIVISION:   Has the meaning given in section 236.02(12), Wisconsin statutes.
SUBSTANTIAL    Damage of any origin sustained by a structure, whereby the cost of restoring the
DAMAGE:        structure to its predamaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%)
               of the equalized assessed value of the structure before the damage occurred.
               Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a
               building or structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%)
               of the equalized assessed value of the structure before the improvement or
               repair is started. If the structure has sustained substantial damage, any
SUBSTANTIAL    repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the work performed.
IMPROVEMENT:   The term does not include either any project for the improvement of a building
               required to correct existing health, sanitary or safety code violations
               identified by the building official and that are the minimum necessary to assure
               safe living conditions; or any alteration of a historic structure provided that
               the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
               historic structure.
               Where special conditions affecting a particular property, which were not self-
UNNECESSARY    created, have made strict conformity with restrictions governing areas,
HARDSHIP:      setbacks, frontage, height or density unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable
               in light of the purposes of this chapter.
               An authorization by the board of adjustment or appeals for the construction or
VARIANCE:      maintenance of a building or structure in a manner which is inconsistent with
               dimensional standards (not uses) contained in this chapter.
               The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this
               chapter. A structure or other development without required permits, lowest floor
VIOLATION:     elevation documentation, floodproofing certificates or required floodway
               encroachment calculations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
               documentation is provided.
WATERSHED:     The entire region contributing runoff or surface water to a watercourse or body
               of water.
               A graphical representation showing the elevation of the water surface of a
WATER SURFACE  watercourse for each position along a reach of river or stream at a certain
PROFILE:       flood flow. A water surface profile of the regional flood is used in regulating
               floodplain areas.
               An excavation opening in the ground made by digging, boring, drilling, driving
WELL:          or other methods, to obtain groundwater regardless of its intended use. (Ord.
               2007-6, 11-19-2007; amd. Ord., 12-8-2022)
 
CHAPTER 14
SHORELAND-WETLAND ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION:
8-14-1: Statutory Authorization; Findings Of Fact, Statement Of Purpose And
Title
8-14-2: General Provisions
8-14-3: Shoreland-Wetland Zoning District
8-14-4: Nonconforming Structures And Uses
8-14-5: Administrative Provisions
8-14-6: Amending Shoreland-Wetland Zoning Regulations
8-14-7: Enforcement And Penalties
8-14-8: Definitions
8-14-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION; FINDINGS OF FACT, STATEMENT OF PURPOSE AND
TITLE:
   A.   Statutory Authorization: This chapter is adopted pursuant to the
authorization in sections 61.35 and 61.351 for villages and 87.30 and 144.26,
Wisconsin statutes.
   B.   Findings Of Fact And Purpose: Uncontrolled use of the shoreland-
wetlands and pollution of the navigable waters of the municipality would
adversely affect the public health, safety, convenience, and general welfare
and impair the tax base. The legislature of Wisconsin has delegated
responsibility to all municipalities to:
      1.   Promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare;
      2.   Maintain the storm and flood water storage capacity of wetlands;
      3.   Prevent and control water pollution by preserving wetlands which
filter or store sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or organic compounds that
would otherwise drain into navigable waters;
      4.   Protect fish, their spawning grounds, other aquatic life and
wildlife by preserving wetlands and other aquatic habitat;
      5.   Prohibit certain uses detrimental to the shoreland-wetland area; and
      6.   Preserve shore cover and natural beauty by restricting the removal
of natural shoreland cover and controlling shoreland- wetland excavation,
filling and other earth moving activities. (Ord., 1-3-1994)
8-14-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Compliance: The use of wetlands and the alteration of wetlands within
the shoreland area of the municipality shall be in full compliance with the
terms of this chapter and other applicable local, state or federal regulations.
(However, see section
8-14-4 of this chapter, for the standards applicable to nonconforming uses.)
All permitted development shall require the issuance of a zoning permit unless
otherwise expressly excluded by a provision of this chapter.
   B.   Municipalities And State Agencies Regulated: Unless specifically
exempted by law, all villages are required to comply with this ordinance and
obtain all necessary permits. State agencies are required to comply if section
13.48(13), Wisconsin statutes, applies. The construction, reconstruction,
maintenance and repair of state highways and bridges by the Wisconsin
department of transportation are exempt when section 30.12(4)(a), Wisconsin
statutes, applies.
   C.   Abrogation And Greater Restrictions:
      1.   This chapter supersedes all the provisions of any municipal zoning
ordinance enacted under sections 61.35, 62.23 or 87.30, Wisconsin statutes,
which relate to floodplains and shoreland-wetlands, except that where another
municipal zoning ordinance is more restrictive than this chapter, that
ordinance shall continue in full force and effect to the extent of the greater
restrictions, but not otherwise.
      2.   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing deed restrictions, covenants or easements. However, where this chapter
imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail.
   D.   Interpretation: In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally
construed in favor of the municipality and shall not be deemed a limitation or
repeal of any other powers granted by the Wisconsin statutes. Where a provision
of this chapter is required by a standard in chapter NR 117, Wisconsin
administrative code, and where the chapter provision is unclear, the provision
shall be interpreted in light of the chapter NR 117 standards in effect on the
date of the adoption of this chapter or in effect on the date of the most
recent text amendment to this chapter.
   E.   Severability: Should any portion of this chapter be declared invalid or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this
chapter shall not be affected.
   F.   Annexed Areas: The Manitowoc County shoreland zoning provisions in
effect on the date of annexation remain in effect administered by the
municipality for all areas annexed by the municipality after May 7, 1982. These
annexed lands are described on the municipality's official zoning map. The
Manitowoc County shoreland zoning provisions are incorporated by reference for
the purpose of administering this section and are on file in the office of the
municipal zoning administrator. (Ord., 1-3-1994)
8-14-3: SHORELAND-WETLAND ZONING DISTRICT:
   A.   Shoreland-Wetland Zoning Maps: The following maps are hereby adopted
and made part of this chapter and are on file in the office of the municipal
clerk.
      1.   Wisconsin wetland inventory maps stamped "final" on September 9,
1993.
      2.   Floodplain zoning maps titled "flood insurance rate map #01" and
dated September 30, 1988.
      3.   United States geological survey maps dated.
      4.   Zoning maps titled.
   B.   District Boundaries:
      1.   Boundary Area: The shoreland-wetland zoning district includes all
wetlands in the municipality which are five (5) acres or more and are shown on
the final wetland inventory map that has been adopted and made a part of this
chapter and which are:
         a.   Within one thousand feet (1,000') of the ordinary high water mark
of the navigable lakes, ponds or flowages. Lakes, ponds or flowages in the
municipality shall be presumed to be navigable if they are shown on the United
States geological survey quadrangle maps or other zoning base maps which have
been incorporated by reference and made a part of this chapter.
         b.   Within three hundred feet (300') of the ordinary high water mark
of navigable rivers or streams, or to the landward side of the floodplain,
whichever distance is greater. Rivers and streams shall be presumed to be
navigable if they are designated as either continuous or intermittent waterways
on the United States geological survey quadrangle maps or other zoning base
maps which have been incorporated by reference and made a part of this chapter.
Floodplain zoning maps adopted in subsection A of this section shall be used to
determine the extent of floodplain areas.
      2.   Determination Made By Zoning Administrator: Determination of
navigability and ordinary high water mark location shall initially be made by
the zoning administrator. When questions arise, the zoning administrator shall
contact the appropriate district office of the department for a final
determination of navigability or ordinary high water mark.
      3.   Map Discrepancies: When an apparent discrepancy exists between the
shoreland-wetland district boundary shown on the official zoning maps and
actual field conditions at the time the maps were adopted, the zoning
administrator shall contact the appropriate district office of the department
to determine if the shoreland-wetland district boundary as mapped, is in error.
If department staff concur with the zoning administrator that a particular area
was incorrectly mapped as a wetland, the zoning administrator shall have the
authority to immediately grant or deny a zoning permit in accordance with the
regulations applicable to the correct zoning district. In order to correct
wetland mapping errors or acknowledge exempted wetlands designated in
subsections E and F of this section, the zoning administrator shall be
responsible for initiating a map amendment within a reasonable period.
      4.   Filled Wetlands: Wetlands which are filled prior to September 9,
1993, the date of which the municipality received final wetland inventory maps,
in a manner which affects their wetland characteristics to the extent that the
area can no longer be defined as wetland, are not subject to this chapter.
      5.   Wetlands Landward Of A Bulkhead Line: Wetlands located between the
original high water mark and a bulkhead line established prior to May 7, 1982,
under section 30.11, Wisconsin statutes, are not subject to this chapter.
   C.   Permitted Uses: The following uses are permitted subject to the
provisions of chapters 30 and 31, Wisconsin statutes, and the provisions of
other local, state and federal laws, if applicable:
      1.   Activities and uses which do not require the issuance of a zoning
permit, provided that no wetland alteration occurs:
         a.   Hiking, fishing, trapping, hunting, swimming, snowmobiling and
boating;
         b.   The harvesting of wild crops, such as marsh hay, ferns, moss,
wild rice, berries, tree fruits and tree seeds, in a manner that is not
injurious to the natural reproduction of such crops;
         c.   The practice of silviculture, including the planting, thinning
and harvesting of timber;
         d.   The pasturing of livestock;
         e.   The cultivation of agricultural crops; and
         f.   The construction and maintenance of duck blinds.
      2.   Uses which do not require the issuance of a zoning permit and which
may involve wetland alterations only to the extent specifically provided below:
         a.   The practice of silviculture, including limited temporary water
level stabilization measures which are necessary to alleviate abnormally wet or
dry conditions that would have an adverse impact on the conduct of
silvicultural activities if not corrected;
         b.   The cultivation of cranberries, including limited wetland
alterations necessary for the purpose of growing and harvesting cranberries;
         c.   The maintenance and repair of existing drainage systems to
restore preexisting levels of drainage, including the minimum amount of filling
necessary to dispose of dredged spoil, provided that the filling is otherwise
permissible and that dredged spoil is placed on existing spoil banks where
possible;
         d.   The construction and maintenance of fences for the pasturing of
livestock, including limited excavating and filling necessary for such
construction or maintenance;
         e.   The construction and maintenance of piers, docks, walkways,
observation decks and trail bridges built on pilings, including limited
excavating and filling necessary for such construction or maintenance;
         f.   The installation and maintenance of sealed tiles for the purpose
of draining lands outside the shoreland-wetland zoning district provided that
such installation or maintenance is done in a manner designed to minimize
adverse impacts upon the natural functions of the shoreland-wetland listed in
subsection 8-14-6A3 of this chapter; and
         g.   The maintenance, repair, replacement and reconstruction of
existing highways and bridges, including limited excavating and filling
necessary for such maintenance, repair, replacement or reconstruction.
      3.   Uses which are allowed upon the issuance of a conditional use permit
and which may include wetland alterations only to the extent specifically
provided below:
         a.   The construction and maintenance of roads which are necessary for
the continuity of the municipal street system, the provision of essential
utility and emergency services or to provide access to uses permitted under
this subsection C, provided that:
            (1)   The road cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside
the wetland;
            (2)   The road is designed and constructed to minimize adverse
impacts upon the natural functions of the wetland listed in subsection 8-14-6A3
of this chapter;
            (3)   The road is designed and constructed with the minimum cross
sectional area practical to serve the intended use;
            (4)   Road construction activities are carried out in the immediate
area of the roadbed only; and
            (5)   Any wetland alteration must be necessary for the construction
or maintenance of the road.
         b.   The construction and maintenance of nonresidential buildings
provided that:
            (1)   The building is used solely in conjunction with a use
permitted in the shoreland-wetland district or for the raising of waterfowl,
minnows or other wetland or aquatic animals;
            (2)   The building cannot, as a practical matter, be located
outside the wetland;
            (3)   The building does not exceed five hundred (500) square feet
in floor area; and
            (4)   Only limited filling and excavating necessary to provide
structural support for the building is allowed.
         c.   The establishment and development of public and private parks and
recreation areas, outdoor education areas, historic, natural and scientific
areas, game refuges and closed areas, fish and wildlife habitat improvement
projects, game bird and animal farms, wildlife preserves and public boat
launching ramps, providing that:
            (1)   Any private development allowed under this subsection C3c
shall be used exclusively for the permitted purposes;
            (2)   Only limited filling and excavating necessary for the
development of public boat launching ramps, swimming beaches or the
construction of park shelters or similar structures is allowed;
            (3)   The construction and maintenance of roads necessary for the
uses permitted under this subsection C3c are allowed only where such
construction and maintenance meets the criteria in this subsection C3; and
            (4)   Wetland alterations in game refuges and closed areas, fish
and wildlife habitat improvement projects, game bird and animal farms and
wildlife preserves shall be for the purpose of improving wildlife habitat or to
otherwise enhance wetland values.
         d.   The construction and maintenance of electric and telephone
transmission lines, water and gas distribution lines and sewage collection
lines and related facilities and the construction and maintenance of railroad
lines provided that:
            (1)   The utility transmission and distribution facilities and
railroad lines cannot, as a practical matter, be located outside the wetland;
            (2)   Only limited filling or excavating necessary for such
construction or maintenance is allowed; and
            (3)   Such construction or maintenance is done in a manner designed
to minimize adverse impacts upon the natural functions of the wetland listed in
subsection 8-14-6A3 of this chapter.
   D.   Prohibited Uses:
      1.   Any use not listed in subsection 8-14-3C of this section is
prohibited unless the wetland or a portion of the wetland has been rezoned by
amendment of this chapter in accordance with section
8-14-6 of this chapter.
      2.   The use of a boathouse for human habitation and the construction or
placement of a boathouse or fixed houseboat below the ordinary high water mark
of any navigable waters are prohibited. (Ord., 1-3-1994)
8-14-4: NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES AND USES:
The lawful use of a building, structure or property which existed at the time
this chapter, or an applicable amendment to this chapter, took effect and which
is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, including the routine
maintenance of such a building or structure, may be continued, subject to the
following conditions:
   A.   The shoreland-wetland provisions of this chapter authorized by section
61.351, Wisconsin statutes, shall not limit the repair, reconstruction,
renovation, remodeling or expansion of a nonconforming structure or of any
environmental control facility related to such a structure in existence on the
effective date of the shoreland-wetland provisions. All other modifications to
nonconforming structures are subject to section 62.23(7)(h), Wisconsin
statutes, which limits total lifetime structural repairs and alterations to
fifty percent (50%) of current fair market value.
   B.   If a nonconforming use or the use of a nonconforming structure is
discontinued for twelve (12) consecutive months, any future use of the
building, structure or property shall conform to this chapter.
   C.   Any legal nonconforming use of property which does not involve the use
of a structure and which existed at the time of the adoption or subsequent
amendment of this chapter adopted under sections 61.351 or 62.231, Wisconsin
statutes, may be continued although such use does not conform with the
provisions of this chapter. However, such nonconforming use may not be
extended.
   D.   The maintenance and repair of nonconforming boathouses which are
located below the ordinary high water mark of any navigable waters shall comply
with the requirements of section 30.121, Wisconsin statutes.
   E.   Uses which are nuisances under common law shall not be permitted to
continue as nonconforming uses. (Ord., 1-3-1994)
8-14-5: ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS:
   A.   Zoning Administrator: The legal counsel is appointed zoning
administrator for the purpose of administering and enforcing this chapter.
The zoning administrator shall have the following duties and powers:
      1.   Advise applicants as to the provisions of this chapter and assist
them in preparing permit applications and appeal forms.
      2.   Issue permits and certificates of compliance and inspect properties
for compliance with this chapter.
      3.   Keep records of all permits issued, inspections made, work approved
and other official actions.
      4.   Have access to any structure or premises between the hours of eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. for the purpose of performing
these duties.
      5.   Submit copies of decisions on variances, conditional use permits,
appeals for a map or text interpretation, and map or text amendments within ten
(10) days after they are granted or denied, to the appropriate district office
of the department.
      6.   Investigate and report violations of this chapter to the appropriate
municipal planning agency and the district attorney, corporation counsel or
municipal attorney.
   B.   Zoning Permits:
      1.   When Required: Unless another section of this chapter specifically
exempts certain types of development from this requirement, a zoning permit
shall be obtained from the zoning administrator before any new "development",
as defined in section
8-14-8 of this chapter, or any change in the use of an existing building or
structure is initiated.
      2.   Application: An application for a zoning permit shall be made to the
zoning administrator upon forms furnished by the municipality and shall
include, for the purpose of proper enforcement of these regulations, the
following information:
         a.   General Information:
            (1)   Name, address, and telephone number of applicant, property
owner and contractor, where applicable.
            (2)   Legal description of the property and a general description
of the proposed use or development.
            (3)   Whether or not a private water supply or sewage system is to
be installed.
         b.   Site Development Plan: The site development plan shall be
submitted as a part of the permit application and shall contain the following
information drawn to scale:
            (1)   Dimensions and area of the lot;
            (2)   Location of any structures with distances measured from the
lot lines and centerline of all abutting streets or highways;
            (3)   Description of any existing or proposed on site sewage
systems or private water supply systems;
            (4)   Location of the ordinary high water mark of any abutting
navigable waterways;
            (5)   Boundaries of all wetlands;
            (6)   Existing and proposed topographic and drainage features and
vegetative cover;
            (7)   Location of floodplain and floodway limits on the property as
determined from floodplain zoning maps;
            (8)   Location of existing or future access roads; and
            (9)   Specifications and dimensions for areas of proposed wetland
alteration.
      3.   Expiration: All permits issued under the authority of this chapter
shall expire six (6) months from the date of issuance.
   C.   Certificates Of Compliance:
      1.   Except where no zoning permit or conditional use permit is required,
no land shall be occupied or used, and no building which is hereafter
constructed, altered, added to, modified, rebuilt or replaced shall be
occupied, until a certificate of compliance is issued by the zoning
administrator subject to the following provisions:
         a.   The certificate of compliance shall show that the building or
premises or part thereof, and the proposed use thereof, conform to the
provisions of this chapter.
         b.   Application for such certificate shall be concurrent with the
application for a zoning or conditional use permit.
         c.   The certificate of compliance shall be issued within ten (10)
days after notification of the completion of the work specified in the zoning
or conditional use permit, providing the building or premises and proposed use
thereof conform with all the provisions of this chapter.
      2.   The zoning administrator may issue a temporary certificate of
compliance for a building, premises or part thereof pursuant to rules and
regulations established by the municipal governing body.
      3.   Upon written request from the owner, the zoning administrator shall
issue a certificate of compliance for any building or premises existing at the
time of ordinance adoption, certifying after inspection, the extent and type of
use made of the building or premises and whether or not such use conforms to
the provisions of this chapter.
   D.   Conditional Use Permits:
      1.   Application: Any use listed as a conditional use in this chapter
shall be permitted only after an application has been submitted by the zoning
administrator and a conditional use permit has been granted by the board of
appeals following the procedures in subsections H2, H3 and H4 of this section.
      2.   Conditions: Upon consideration of the permit application and the
standards applicable to the conditional uses designated in section
8-14-3 of this chapter, the board of appeals shall attach such conditions to a
conditional use permit, in addition to those required elsewhere in this
chapter, as are necessary to further the purposes of this chapter as listed in
subsection 8-14-1B of this chapter. Such conditions may include specifications
for, without limitation because of specific enumeration: type of shore cover;
erosion controls; increased setbacks; specific sewage disposal and water supply
facilities; landscaping and planting screens; period of operation; operational
control; sureties; deed restrictions; location of piers, docks, parking areas
and signs; and type of construction. To secure information upon which to base
its determination, the board of appeals may require the applicant to furnish,
in addition to the information required for a zoning permit, other pertinent
information which is necessary to determine if the proposed use is consistent
with the purpose of this chapter.
   E.   Fees: The municipal governing body may, by resolution, adopt fees for
the following:
      1.   Zoning permits.
      2.   Certificates of compliance.
      3.   Public hearings.
      4.   Legal notice publications.
      5.   Conditional use permits.
      6.   Rezoning petitions.
   F.   Recording: Where a zoning permit or conditional use permit is approved,
an appropriate record shall be made by the zoning administrator of the land use
and structures permitted.
   G.   Revocation: Where the conditions of a zoning permit or conditional use
permit are violated, the permit shall be revoked by the board of appeals.
   H.   Board Of Appeals: The village president shall appoint a board of
appeals under section 62.23(7)(e), Wisconsin statutes, consisting of five (5)
members subject to confirmation by the municipal governing body. The board of
appeals shall adopt rules for the conduct of its business as required by
section 62.23(7)(e)3, Wisconsin statutes.
      1.   Powers And Duties: The board of appeals:
         a.   Shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an
error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an
administrative official in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
         b.   Shall hear and decide applications for conditional use permits.
         c.   May authorize upon appeal a variance from the dimensional
standards of this chapter where an applicant convincingly demonstrates:
            (1)   That literal enforcement of the terms of this chapter will
result in unnecessary hardship for the applicant;
            (2)   That the hardship is due to special conditions unique to the
property; and is not self-created or based solely on economic gain or loss;
            (3)   That such variance is not contrary to the public interest as
expressed by the purpose of this chapter; and
            (4)   That such variance will not grant or increase any use of
property which is prohibited in the zoning district.
      2.   Appeals To The Board: Appeals to the board of appeals may be taken
by any person aggrieved or by an officer, department, board or bureau of the
community affected by any order, requirement, decision or determination of the
zoning administrator or other administrative official. Such appeals shall be
taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the board by filing
with the official whose decision is in question, and with the board of appeals,
a notice of appeal specifying the reasons for the appeal. The zoning
administrator or other official whose decision is in question shall transmit to
the board all the papers constituting the record on the matter appealed.
      3.   Public Hearings:
         a.   Before making a decision on an appeal or application, the board
of appeals shall, within a reasonable period of time, hold a public hearing.
The board shall give public notice of the hearing by publishing a class 2
notice under chapter 985, Wisconsin statutes, specifying the date, time and
place of the hearing and the matters to come before the board. At the public
hearing, any party may present testimony in person, by agent or by attorney.
         b.   A copy of such notice shall be mailed to the parties in interest
and the appropriate district office of the department at least ten (10) days
prior to all public hearings on issues involving shoreland-wetland zoning.
      4.   Decisions:
         a.   The final disposition of an appeal or application for a
conditional use permit before the board of appeals shall be in the form of a
written decision, made within a reasonable time after the public hearing and
signed by the board chairperson. Such decision shall state the specific facts
which are the basis of the board's determination and shall either affirm,
reverse or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed,
in whole or part, dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction or prosecution,
or grant the application for a conditional use.
         b.   A copy of such decision shall be mailed to the parties in
interest and the appropriate district office of the department within ten (10)
days after the decision is issued. (Ord., 1-3-1994)
8-14-6: AMENDING SHORELAND-WETLAND ZONING REGULATIONS:
   A.   The municipal governing body may alter, supplement or change the
district boundaries and the regulations contained in this chapter in accordance
with the requirements of section 62.23(7)(d)2, Wisconsin statutes, NR 117,
Wisconsin administrative code, and the following:
      1.   A copy of each proposed text or map amendment shall be submitted to
the appropriate district office of the department within five (5) days of the
submission of the proposed amendment to the municipal planning agency;
      2.   All proposed text and map amendments to the shoreland- wetland
zoning regulations shall be referred to the municipal planning agency, and a
public hearing shall be held after class II notice as required by section 62.23
(7)(d)2, Wisconsin statutes. The appropriate district office of the department
shall be provided with written notice of the public hearing at least ten (10)
days prior to such hearing.
      3.   In order to ensure that this chapter will remain consistent with the
shoreland protection objectives of section 144.26, Wisconsin statutes, the
municipal governing body may not rezone a wetland in a shoreland-wetland zoning
district, or any portion thereof, where the proposed rezoning may result in a
significant adverse impact upon any of the following wetland functions:
         a.   Storm and flood water storage capacity;
         b.   Maintenance of dry season stream flow or the discharge of
groundwater to a wetland, the recharge of groundwater from a wetland to another
area or the flow of groundwater through a wetland;
         c.   Filtering or storage of sediments, nutrients, heavy metals or
organic compounds that would otherwise drain into navigable waters;
         d.   Shoreline protection against erosion;
         e.   Fish spawning, breeding, nursery or feeding grounds;
         f.   Wildlife habitat; or
         g.   Areas of special recreational, scenic or scientific interest,
including scarce wetland types and habitat of endangered species.
      4.   Where the district office of the department determines that a
proposed rezoning may have a significant adverse impact upon any of the
criteria listed in subsection A3 of this section, the department shall so
notify the municipality of its determination either prior to or during the
public hearing held on the proposed amendment.
      5.   The appropriate district office of the department shall be provided
with:
         a.   A copy of the recommendation and report, if any, of the municipal
planning agency on a proposed text or map amendment, within ten (10) days after
the submission of those recommendations to the municipal governing body.
         b.   Written notice of the action on the proposed text or map
amendment within ten (10) days after the action is taken.
      6.   If the department notifies the municipal planning agency in writing
that a proposed amendment may have a significant adverse impact upon any of the
criteria listed in subsection A3 of this section, that proposed amendment, if
approved by the municipal governing body, shall not become effective until more
than thirty (30) days have elapsed since written notice of the municipal
approval was mailed to the department, as required by this subsection A. If
within the thirty (30) day period, the department notifies the municipality
that the department intends to adopt a superseding shoreland-wetland zoning
ordinance for the municipality as provided by sections 62.23(6) and 61.351(6),
Wisconsin statutes, the proposed amendment shall not become effective until the
ordinance adoption procedure under section 62.231(6) or 61.351(6), Wisconsin
statutes, is completed or otherwise terminated. (Ord., 1-3-1994)
8-14-7: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
Any development, building or structure or accessory building or structure
constructed, altered, added to, modified, rebuilt or replaced or any use or
accessory use established after the effective date of this chapter in violation
of the provisions of this chapter, by any person, firm, association,
corporation (including building contractors or their agents) shall be deemed a
violation. The zoning administrator shall refer violations to the municipal
planning agency and the district attorney, corporation counsel or municipal
attorney who shall prosecute such violations. Any person, firm, association or
corporation who violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be subject to a forfeiture of not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) nor more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per
offense, together with the taxable costs of such action. Each day of continued
violation shall constitute a separate offense. Every violation of this chapter
is a public nuisance and the creation thereof may be enjoined and the
maintenance thereof may be abated by action at suit of the municipality, the
state or any citizen thereof pursuant to section 87.30(2), Wisconsin statutes.
(Ord., 1-3-1994)
8-14-8: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of administering and enforcing this chapter, terms or words
used herein shall be interpreted as follows: words used in the present tense
include the future; words used in the singular number include the plural
number; words in the plural number include the singular number. The word
"shall" is mandatory, not permissive. All distances unless otherwise specified,
shall be measured horizontally.
The following terms used in this chapter mean:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE: A detached subordinate structure or a use which is
clearly incidental to, and customarily found in connection with, the principal
structure or use to which it is related and which is located on the same lot as
that of the principal structure or use.
BOATHOUSE: This term, as defined in section 30.121(1), Wisconsin statutes,
means a permanent structure used for the storage of watercraft and associated
materials and includes all structures which are totally enclosed, have roofs or
walls or any combination of structural parts.
CLASS 2 PUBLIC NOTICE: Publication of a public hearing notice under chapter
985, Wisconsin statutes, in a newspaper or circulation in the affected area.
Publication is required on two (2) consecutive weeks, the last at least seven
(7) days prior to the hearing.
CONDITIONAL USE: A use which is permitted by this chapter provided that certain
conditions specified in this chapter are met and that a permit is granted by
the board of appeals, or where appropriate, the planning agency designated by
the municipal governing body.
DEPARTMENT: The Wisconsin department of natural resources.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings, structures or
accessory structures; the construction of additions or substantial alterations
to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the placement of buildings or
structures; ditching, lagooning, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation
or drilling operations; and the deposition or extraction of earthen materials.
DRAINAGE SYSTEM: One or more artificial ditches, tile drains or similar devices
which collect surface runoff or groundwater and convey it to a point of
discharge.
ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL FACILITY: Any facility, temporary or permanent, which is
reasonably expected to abate, reduce or aid in the prevention, measurement,
control or monitoring of noise, air or water pollutants, solid waste and
thermal pollution, radiation or other pollutants, including facilities
installed principally to supplement or to replace existing property or
equipment not meeting or allegedly not meeting acceptable pollution control
standards or which are to be supplemented or replaced by other pollution
control facilities.
FIXED HOUSEBOAT: This term, as defined in section 30.121(1), Wisconsin
statutes, means a structure not actually used for navigation which extends
beyond the ordinary high water mark of a navigable waterway and is retained in
place either by cables to the shoreline or by anchors or spudpoles attached to
the bed of the waterway.
NAVIGABLE WATERS: Lake Superior, Lake Michigan, all natural inland lakes within
Wisconsin, and all streams, ponds, sloughs, flowages and other waters within
the territorial limits of this state, including the Wisconsin portion of
boundary waters, which are navigable under the laws of this state. Under
section 144.26(2)(d), Wisconsin statutes, notwithstanding any other provision
of law or administrative rule promulgated thereunder, shoreland ordinances
required under sections 61.351 or 62.231, Wisconsin statutes, and chapter NR
117, Wisconsin administrative code, do not apply to lands adjacent to farm
drainage ditches if:
   A. Such lands are not adjacent to a natural navigable stream or river;
   B. Those parts of such drainage ditches adjacent to such lands were not
navigable streams before ditching; and
   C. Such lands are maintained in nonstructural agricultural use.
"Wisconsin's supreme court has declared navigable bodies of water that have a
bed of differentiated from adjacent uplands and levels or flow sufficient to
support navigation by a recreational craft of the shallowest draft on an
annually recurring basis (Muench v. Public Service Commission, 261 Wis. 492
(1952) and Degaynor And Co., Inc., v. Department Of Natural Resources, 70 Wis.
2d 936 (1975)). For example, a stream which is navigable by skiff or canoe
during normal spring high water is navigable, in fact, under the laws of this
state though it may be dry during other seasons."
ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK: The point on the bank or shore up to which the
presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a distinctive
mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation,
predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized characteristic.
SHORELAND-WETLAND DISTRICT: The zoning district, created in this shoreland-
wetland zoning ordinance, comprised of shorelands that are designated as
wetlands on the wetlands inventory maps which have been adopted and made a part
of this chapter.
PLANNING AGENCY: The municipal plan commission created under section 62.23(l),
Wisconsin statutes, a board of public land commissioners or a committee of the
municipality's governing body which acts on matters pertaining to planning and
zoning.
SHORELANDS: Lands within the following distances from the ordinary high water
mark of navigable waters; one thousand feet (1,000') from a lake, pond or
flowage; and three hundred feet (300') from a river or stream or to the
landward side of the floodplain, whichever distance is greater.
UNNECESSARY HARDSHIP: That circumstances where special conditions, which were
not self-created, affect a particular property and make strict conformity with
restrictions governing area, setbacks, frontage height or density unnecessarily
burdensome or unreasonable in light of the purposes of this chapter.
VARIANCE: An authorization granted by the board of appeals to construct or
alter a building or structure in a manner that deviates from the dimensional
standards of this chapter.
WETLAND ALTERATION: Any filling, flooding, draining, dredging, ditching,
tiling, excavating, temporary water level stabilization measures or dike and
dam construction in a wetland area.
WETLANDS: Those areas where water is at, near or above the land surface long
enough to support aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation and which have soils
indicative of wet conditions. (Ord., 1-3-1994)
CHAPTER 15
DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
SECTION:
8-15-1: Development And Improvements To Property
8-15-2: Public Improvements Requirements
8-15-3: Security For Improvements Installation
8-15-4: General Provisions
8-15-1: DEVELOPMENT AND IMPROVEMENTS TO PROPERTY:
This Development Ordinance applies to any person or entity ("Developer")
intending to develop property within the Village of Reedsville, WI
("Property"). A Developer shall comply with the terms of this chapter. The
following general provisions shall apply:
   A.   Developer is the owner of the vacant real estate located within the
Village (hereinafter the “Property”).
   B.   The Property is zoned consistent with the proposed development.
   C.   Developer shall initiate the development by written notice to the
Village Board and by filing a plat for the entirety of the development. If
necessary, the Developer or the Village board can request a preliminary meeting
prior to written notice filing.
   D.   Developer shall develop the Property in accordance with the terms of
the Village Municipal Code.
   E.   Village must be satisfied with and approve the engineering of the
public improvements to be installed prior to the Developer proceeding.
   F.   The public improvements shall be completed by Developer on or before
one (1) year from the start of construction of the single phase of improvements
unless otherwise extended in writing by the Village, due to labor or material
shortages beyond Developer's reasonable control, or other material reason. At
the time of completion, the Developer shall convey in recordable form to the
Village the street improvements and all other public utilities and
improvements.
   G.   Developer shall create and convey perpetual easements, on terms
acceptable to the Village, as necessary to locate and convey any public
utilities and improvements included as part of the Development. Easements will
be conveyed on or before final approval. (Ord. 2022-3, 6-9-2022)
8-15-2: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS REQUIREMENTS:
The following public improvements deemed reasonably necessary for the
development are collectively referred to as “Public Improvements.”
   A.   Sanitary Sewer Main Facility. Developer shall, at Developer's sole
expense, install improvements to the public sanitary sewer main facility
serving the Property in accordance with the terms of the Village Municipal
Code.
   B.   Water Main Facility Developer shall, at Developer's sole expense,
install improvements to the public water main facility serving the Property in
accordance with the terms of the Village Municipal Code.
   C.   Storm Sewer Main Facility. Developer shall, at Developer's sole
expense, install improvements to the public sanitary sewer main facility
serving the Property in accordance with the terms of the Village Municipal
Code.
   D.   Erosion Control and Run-Off Facilities. Developer shall install such
facilities and measures for erosion control and run-off as are necessary.
   E.   Sidewalks. Developer shall, at Developer's sole expense, install the
sidewalks in accordance with the terms of the Village Municipal Code. To avoid
damage to the sidewalk during construction of the homes, sidewalks will be
built from lot line to lot line as each home is constructed, after the site
development has occurred and prior to the Certificate of Occupancy being issued
for each lot (as the new homes are built out).
   F.   Street Improvements Developer shall, at Developer's sole expense,
install the public streets as required by the Village. Thereafter, Developer
shall dedicate the public portion of said streets at such time as said streets
are finally complete. Upon completion of the public street improvements and
dedication thereof to the Village by the Developer, the Village shall be
responsible for all maintenance.
   G.   Other Public or Private Improvements. Developer shall, at Developer's
sole expense, make such other public and private improvements to the Property
including, but not limited to, street lights and street signs, as may be
required by the Village. (Ord. 2022-3, 6-9-2022)
8-15-3: SECURITY FOR IMPROVEMENTS INSTALLATION:
Irrevocable Letter of Credit. No construction or installation of any portion of
the Improvements shall be commenced until Developer has filed with the Village
an irrevocable letter of credit in the amount of One Hundred Twenty Percent
(120%) current estimate of the entire cost of the Public Improvements to be
completed, and which is acceptable in form and approved by the Village. The
letter of credit shall be renewed and maintained until substantial completion
and may be adjusted in amount, as allowed or required by law.
The Developer shall not be issued any permits, including, but not limited to,
building permits or occupancy permits, unless Developer has on file with the
Village the required irrevocable letter of credit.
In the event Developer fails to complete work on Public Improvements within the
time period specified or breaches any other provisions of this Ordinance or
shall become insolvent, or be declared bankrupt, or should commit any act of
bankruptcy or insolvency, or shall make an assignment for the benefit of
creditors, or, for any other cause whatsoever, shall not carry out the work on
Public Improvements in an acceptable manner, (herein "breach") the Village
shall give written notice of breach to Developer and the issuer of the
irrevocable letter of credit. If Developer, within sixty (60) days after such
notice, shall not correct the breach or take reasonable steps to correct the
breach, the Village shall have full power and authority to invoke
the irrevocable letter of credit and use the proceeds to take over the work,
including any and all materials and equipment on the Property as may be
suitable and acceptable, and may complete the work by its own means and
methods, or may enter into a new agreement with a third party for the
completion of the obligations according to the terms and provisions hereof, or
any combination of the foregoing remedies, or may use such other methods as, in
the Village's opinion and sole discretion, shall be required for the completion
of the Public Improvements. All costs and charges incurred by the Village,
together with the cost of completing the work, shall be charged to Developer
and the proceeds of the irrevocable letter of credit. Any excess costs and
charges shall be paid by the Developer to the Village.
Subject to the provisions of Sec. 236.13, Wis. Stat., if applicable, within
sixty (60) days of the public improvements (sewer main, water main, storm main,
curbs and streets) having been installed and certified as complete, the
Village's Director of Public Works shall authorize the phased reduction of the
Letter of Credit amount for the portion of the work complete, retaining a
balance of one hundred and twenty percent (120%) of the remaining public work
outstanding. Multiple reductions of the letter of credit amount may be
authorized as phases of the work are complete. Upon Village Board's acceptance
of the public improvements, the Letter of Credit shall be released in its
entirety. (Ord. 2022-3, 6-9-2022)
8-15-4: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Inspection; Correction of Adverse Conditions. The Village and its
agents shall have the right, and the Developer is deemed to have granted such
permission to the Village, to enter upon the Property at all reasonable times
for purposes of inspecting the work. The Village reserves the right to take all
necessary steps under current conditions, to abate any dangerous or hazardous
condition, including the presence of excessive soil erosion run-off and
sedimentation, provided however, the Village shall first notify Developer of
the hazardous condition and provide Developer a reasonable time to correct said
condition. If Developer fails to correct the condition, or in the case of
conditions which pose an immediate threat to the public health, safety, and
welfare, the Village may immediately abate the condition without notice.
   B.   Payment of Village Costs. In addition to all other costs to be paid by
Developer, Developer shall pay and be responsible for any costs incurred by the
Village for professional services pertaining to the review, analysis or opinion
of the project, including, but not limited to, surveyor, planner, engineer,
attorney and other professional services deemed necessary by the Village.
   C.   Binding Effect; Transfer and Assignment. Unless otherwise provided, all
obligations of Developer shall be binding upon and shall inure to the benefit
of the heirs, successors, assigns, or grantees of Developer and any subsequent
owner of the developed Property. Developer shall not assign its obligations
without the prior written consent of the Village.
   D.   Conflict of Laws. In the event that any provision conflicts with
federal, state, or local law, such conflict shall not affect the other
provisions which can be given effect without the conflicting provision.
   E.   Severability. In the event that any provision of this chapter is found
by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unenforceable, such
finding shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter which shall
remain in full force and effect.
   F.   Deed Restrictions. The Developer shall prepare all deed restrictions
and restrictive covenants, required by the Village including restrictions on
subdividing or maintenance of storm water management, on such terms as are
acceptable to the Village.
   G.   Proof of Insurance. Prior to commencement of work hereunder and at such
other times as the Village may request, Developer shall furnish to the Village
certificates of insurance relating to all coverage required by the Village. All
policies required herein shall include the Village of Reedsville, as additional
insured.
   H.   Cancellation of Insurance. Each policy of insurance shall provide that
it is noncancellable for a period of thirty (30) days following written notice
to the Village of intention to cancel given by the policy owner or policy
carrier via certified mail.
   I.   Hold Harmless and Indemnification. Developer 'shall indemnify, defend,
(with counsel acceptable to Village) and hold harmless the Village, its
trustees, officers, agents, employees, successors and assigns, from and against
any and all claims for damages of any kind relating to bodily injury, death, or
property damage arising in whole or in part directly or indirectly out of the
work performed or to be performed, including extra work, by reason of any act,
omission or negligence of Developer, or any of its agents, employees,
representatives, contractors, or subcontractors, or the agents, employees, or
servants of said respective parties.
   J.   Developer Payments. Developer shall, with respect to the duty to
defend, choose counsel acceptable to the Village and pay all costs and
attorneys' fees incurred in connection therewith. Developer shall pay any final
judgment entered in an action to which the hold harmless agreement and
indemnification agreement applies.
   K.   Municipal Immunity. The indemnity and hold harmless agreement shall be
applicable regardless of any provisions of municipal law or any other immunity
provided for by law but shall not be construed to abrogate any defenses or
other immunity available to the Village or its trustees, officers, agents, or
employees by virtue of its status as a municipal entity.
   L.   Proof of Developer Status, Developer shall provide to the Village, at
such times as the Village may request, such evidence as the Village deems
necessary to establish the legal status of the Developer and the current owners
of the entity, if applicable, and evidence of authority to act.
   M.   Developers Ongoing Sales Effort. Provided the Developer is current on
all obligations pursuant to this chapter. Developer may operate and maintain a
"model home" business front and signage on any lots Developer owns. (Ord. 2022-
3, 6-9-2022)
TITLE 9
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-1-1: State Traffic Laws Adopted
9-1-2: Speed Limits
9-1-3: Through Streets Designated
9-1-4: Stop And Yield Right Of Way Intersections
9-1-5: Prohibited U-Turns
9-1-6: Parking Limitations
9-1-7: Parking During Snow Removal
9-1-8: Winter Parking Restricted
9-1-9: Vehicular Weight Limitations
9-1-10: Erection Of Official Traffic Signs And Signals
9-1-11: Penalty
9-1-12: Moving Illegally Parked Vehicles
9-1-13: Reference To Statutes
9-1-14: Compression Brake Use Prohibited
9-1-15: School Bus Warning Lights
9-1-16: Parking Of Recreational Vehicles
9-1-1: STATE TRAFFIC LAWS ADOPTED:
   A.   Adoption Of Statutes: Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
code, the statutory provision in chapters 340 to 350 and section 110.075,
Wisconsin statutes, describing and defining regulations with respect to
vehicles and traffic, exclusive of any provisions therein relating to penalties
to be imposed and exclusive of any regulations for which the statutory penalty
is a fine or term of imprisonment, are adopted and by reference made a part of
this code as if fully set forth herein. Any act required to be performed or
prohibited by any statute incorporated herein by reference is required or
prohibited by this code. Any further amendments, revisions or modifications of
the statutes incorporated herein are intended to be made part of this code in
order to secure uniform statewide regulation of traffic on the highways,
streets and alleys of the state. (Ord., 12-7-1992; amd. per letter dated 1-24-
1994)
   B.   State Forfeiture Statutes: Any forfeiture for violation of the state
statutes adopted by reference in this section shall conform to the forfeiture
permitted to be imposed for violation of such statutes as set forth in the
uniform deposit and misdemeanor bail schedule of the Wisconsin judicial
conference, including any variations or increases for subsequent offenses,
which schedule is adopted by reference.
   C.   Conflict And Separability: If any section, subsection, subdivision,
paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this code or any part thereof is for
any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court
of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or
effectiveness of the remaining portions of this code, or any part thereof. The
village board of trustees hereby declares that it would have passed each
section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof
irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections,
subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared
unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (Ord. 4, 8-2-1982)
9-1-2: SPEED LIMITS:
   A.   State Speed Limits Adopted: The provisions of sections 346.57, 346.58
and 346.59 of the Wisconsin statutes relating to the maximum and minimum speed
of vehicles are hereby adopted as part of this section as if fully set forth
herein, except as specified by subsection B of this section, pursuant to
section 349.11(3)(c) of the Wisconsin statutes.
   B.   Speed Limits Increased: Speed limits may be increased on village
streets by resolution and publication or posting of said resolution; said
increases to take effect immediately upon publication or posting. (Ord.
340.001, 3-15-1982)
   C.   Speed On Certain Streets Restricted:
      1.   The speed limit on Park Street shall be fifteen (15) miles per hour
at all times. (Ord., 10-19-1992)
9-1-3: THROUGH STREETS DESIGNATED:
Through streets may be designated by resolution and publication or posting of
said resolution; said designation to take effect immediately upon publication
or posting. (Ord. 340.001, 3-15-1982)
9-1-4: STOP AND YIELD RIGHT OF WAY INTERSECTIONS:
The operator of a vehicle shall stop his vehicle or yield the right of way, as
the case may be, at intersections designated by the village board. (Ord.
340.001, 3-15-1982)
9-1-5: PROHIBITED U-TURNS:
In addition to the prohibitions contained in section
9-1-1 of this chapter, no person shall turn his vehicle so as to proceed in the
opposite direction at intersections designated by the village board, nor on any
of the arterial streets, nor in any business district of the village. (Ord.
340.001, 3-15-1982)
9-1-6: PARKING LIMITATIONS:
   A.   Parallel Parking: No person shall park any vehicle upon the streets in
the village if such vehicle is not parked parallel to the right hand curb not
more than twelve inches (12") from the curb, except where appropriate markings
on the village streets have been placed, which indicate a different angle of
parking.
   B.   Not To Use More Than One Space: No person shall use more than one
parking space to park a vehicle in the village if such parking space has been
indicated by appropriate markings.
   C.   Time Limit: No person shall park any vehicle for a longer length of
time than limitations permit as designated by posted signs as authorized by the
village board. (Ord. 340.001, 3-15-1982)
   D.   Restrictions On Certain Streets: Parking shall be restricted to one and
one-half (11/2) hour time limit on Manitowoc Street between Third Street and
two hundred feet (200') west of Fourth Street on both sides of the street
during the hours of seven thirty o'clock (7:30) A.M. to four thirty o'clock (4:
30) P.M., excluding weekends and holidays. (Ord., 10-17-1994)
9-1-7: PARKING DURING SNOW REMOVAL:
   A.   No person shall park any vehicle on any street or public way after one
hour from the time such area has been designated and marked with signs or
barriers indicating no parking due to snow removal. The board hereby declares
that an emergency exists during and following a snowstorm until the snow from
the storm has been removed; therefore this section will be controlling over any
other section which might in any way conflict.
   B.   Any vehicle parked or left standing on any street or public way in
violation of this section may be removed by or under the direction of the
police and the expense of removal charged to the owner of the vehicle. (Ord.
340.001, 3-15-1982)
9-1-8: WINTER PARKING RESTRICTED:
No person shall park any vehicle on any street or alley in the village between
two thirty o'clock (2:30) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of any day from
November 1 to April 1, unless permission to do so is received from the police
department. (Ord., 11-6-1995)
9-1-9: VEHICULAR WEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
To be enacted by a specific ordinance. (Ord. 340.001, 3-15-1982)
9-1-10: ERECTION OF OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNS AND SIGNALS:
The police department is hereby authorized and directed to procure, erect and
maintain appropriate standard traffic signs, signals and markings conforming to
the rules of the state highway division giving such notice of the provisions of
sections
9-1-1,
9-1-2,
9-1-3,
9-1-6 and
9-1-9 of this chapter or as hereinafter specifically passed or as required by
state law. Signs shall also be erected in such locations and manner as
authorized by the governing body as to give adequate warning to users of the
street, alley or highway in question. (Ord. 340.001, 3-15-1982)
9-1-11: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, forfeit a sum equal to that provided for by the forfeiture
schedule used by the circuit court of Manitowoc County, except for parking
violations. All parking violations shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00). In
default of the payment of the forfeiture and costs of prosecution, said person
shall be imprisoned in the county jail, not exceeding ninety (90) days, unless
a longer imprisonment is ordered by the court or until such time as the
forfeiture and costs are paid. However, in those cases where a forfeiture and
imprisonment are provided for in the forfeiture schedule of said circuit court,
said court may impose both.
   A.   Forfeited Penalty: The sum to be forfeited pursuant to such stipulation
shall be provided in the schedule of penalties provided by this chapter.
   B.   Bail Bonds: Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the
right of proper authorities to accept bail bonds, deposits or certificates of
money deposits as provided in Wisconsin statutes. (Ord. 2008-1, 3-17-2008)
9-1-12: MOVING ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES:
If a police officer finds a vehicle illegally parked, he may move such vehicle
or require the operator thereof to move such vehicle to a position or place
where the vehicle will not be illegally parked and the cost of such moving
shall be chargeable to the owner or operator, or both, of such vehicle. Section
349.13(3), Wisconsin statutes, is by reference made a part of this chapter.
(Ord. 340.001, 3-15-1982)
9-1-13: REFERENCE TO STATUTES:
The term "Wisconsin statutes" wherever used in this code, shall mean the
Wisconsin statutes of the most recent date. (Ord., 11-6-1995)
9-1-14: COMPRESSION BRAKE USE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle equipped with compression brakes (jake
brakes), to downshift and release the clutch to utilize the vehicle's engine to
slow in order to meet proper speed restrictions within the village, except in
case of extreme emergency. (Ord. 2004-3, 1-3-2005)
9-1-15: SCHOOL BUS WARNING LIGHTS:
A school bus operator in a residence or business district in the village of
Reedsville may use flashing red warning lights or any other safety equipment on
the bus when pupils or other authorized passengers are to be loaded or unloaded
at a location where a sidewalk and curb are laid out on both sides of the road
and at which there are no traffic signals, and such persons must cross the
street or highway before being loaded or after being unloaded. (Ord. 2011-2, 5-
16-2011)
9-1-16: PARKING OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES:
   A.   Authority: This section is adopted pursuant to the police powers of the
Village Board under Sec.61.34, and Sec. 349.13(1e)(a) Wis Stats.
   B.   Purpose: This Parking of Recreational Vehicle Ordinance of the Village
of Reedsville is intended to lessen congestion in the streets; to promote and
to protect the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and welfare; to
provide adequate standards of light, air and open space; to allow for needed
access to and encourage use of recreational vehicles while maintaining the
aesthetic appearances and scenic values of the Village; and to prevent the
overcrowding of land uses, for the mutual benefit of all.
   C.   Definitions:
 
                           A motor vehicle weighing more than 26,000 lbs. (over
                           13 tons) and is used to transport passengers or
COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE:  property for private business purposes. These heavy-
                           duty vehicles are considered Class 7 or greater
                           under US Department of Transportation Standards, and
                           typically have 3 axles or more.
                           A vehicular or portable unit designed to be mounted
                           on a chassis and wheels, which either has its own
                           motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV): vehicle, such as travel trailers, fifth wheel
                           trailers, camping trailers, motor homes, or truck
                           campers which may be used as a temporary dwelling or
                           sleeping place. Boats and trailers are also
                           Recreational Vehicles.
 
   D.   Regulations:
      1.   Recreational vehicles, including boats and trailers, may be parked
or stored on residential zoned (R or RM) property in the village.
      2.   No recreation vehicle shall be parked on a village street or other
public road right-of-way, or parked on any area adjacent to the street or road
right-of-way, for more than 48 hours for the purpose of loading or unloading
the RV.
      3.   No recreational vehicle shall be used or occupied as living
quarters, no more than 14 days total in a calendar year on private property or
on the public street or road right-of-way adjacent to the private property.
      4.   The use of recreational vehicles as living quarters is permitted in
the Village only in any authorized mobile home park, or in the Business zoned
district (B) with the approval of Law Enforcement, and in compliance with all
applicable ordinances and regulations.
      5.   No Commercial Motor Vehicle shall be parked or stored, whether or
not occupied, in any residential zoned district (R or RM), on any public street
or road, on any private road, or adjacent to any public or private street or
road, in the Village of Reedsville.
   E.   Exceptions: Notwithstanding the forgoing provisions of this section:
      1.   A trailer used solely for commercial landscaping purposes and
unenclosed, is permitted with prior authorization obtained from Village Public
Works personnel, and subject to any conditions imposed for such use.
      2.   Public utility or emergency vehicles while actively engaged by
authorized personnel in the performance of their duties are exempt from the
terms of this section.
      3.   Special circumstance parking authority may be obtained with the
approval from Law Enforcement and subject to any conditions imposed for such
use. (Ord. 2023-02, 5-11-2023)
CHAPTER 2
GOLF CARTS
SECTION:
9-2-1: Intent
9-2-2: Authority
9-2-3: Definitions
9-2-4: Rules Of Operation, Conditions, And Restrictions
9-2-5: Use Permit
9-2-6: Operator Restrictions
9-2-7: Designated Golf Cart Routes
9-2-8: Enforcement
9-2-1: INTENT:
The village board, following due consideration of the value to the public to
provide recreational opportunities, and considering the benefits offset by the
potential liabilities including terrain involved, traffic density, and the
history of automobile traffic, hereby intends to create routes for the
operation of golf carts and regulate the operation of golf carts as provided
herein. (Ord. 2007-1, 5-21-2007)
9-2-2: AUTHORITY:
This chapter and the routes created herein are adopted pursuant to the police
powers of the village, together with the authority under section 349.18,
Wisconsin statutes. (Ord. 2007-1, 5-21-2007)
9-2-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms will have the following meanings:
GOLF CART: A small motor vehicle designed and manufactured for operation on a
golf course for sporting or recreational purposes and that is not capable of
exceeding speeds of twenty five (25) miles per hour. Golf cart does not include
an all- terrain vehicle (ATV).
VILLAGE: The village of Reedsville, Wisconsin.
VILLAGE BOARD: The board of trustees of the village of Reedsville, Wisconsin.
(Ord. 2007-1, 5-21-2007)
9-2-4: RULES OF OPERATION, CONDITIONS, AND RESTRICTIONS:
The following rules of operation, conditions, and restrictions apply to the
operation of golf carts in the village of Reedsville:
   A.   Speed: No person shall operate a golf cart within the village on any
trail or street or route designated herein at a speed in excess of the posted
limit.
   B.   Right Side Operation: A golf cart shall be operated on the extreme
right side of the roadway and travel with the flow of traffic and shall be
operated in single file.
   C.   Yield: Golf cart operators shall yield the right of way to all other
vehicular traffic and pedestrians.
   D.   Equipment: No golf cart shall be operated on any street or route within
the village unless it conforms to all noise, registration, and other equipment
requirements as required by Wisconsin statutes, administrative code, or this
code.
   E.   Lights: A golf cart operating within the village shall display a
lighted headlight and taillight at all times. Said lights shall conform to the
requirements of Wisconsin statutes and this code, including the following:
      1.   Headlights shall be of a white or clear light and must be capable of
illuminating the road ahead during hours of darkness and be observed at a
distance of five hundred feet (500'). Headlights must be properly adjusted, as
not to interfere with the operation of other vehicles on the roadway.
      2.   Taillights shall be red in color and be observable to a distance of
five hundred feet (500') at night.
   F.   Slow Moving Vehicle: Any golf cart unable to reach a speed of twenty
five (25) miles per hour shall display a slow moving vehicle triangle visible
on the rear of such vehicle according to Wisconsin statutes and administrative
code governing SMV emblems at all times while in operation on any roadway.
   G.   Operation On Sidewalks Prohibited: No person shall operate a golf cart
on any sidewalk, pedestrianway, or upon the area between the sidewalk and the
curb line of any street in the Village, except as specifically authorized for
the purpose of legally crossing the street, from an area of private property
with permission, to obtain immediate access to an authorized area of operation.
   H.   Commercial Access: Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, any
person may operate a golf cart from an established golf cart route to a place
of lodging, stores, or restaurants or other commercial buildings within the
Village of Reedsville.
   I.   Unattended Vehicles: No person shall leave or allow any golf cart owned
or operated or under his/her control to remain unattended on any public highway
or public property within the Village while the motor is running or with the
starting key left in the ignition. (Ord. 2007-1, 5-21-2007)
9-2-5: USE PERMIT:
   A.   Use Permit Required: In addition to any other registration requirements
of the State of Wisconsin, no person shall operate any golf cart upon Village
streets, other Village property, or designated areas within the Village limits
without first obtaining a Municipal use permit.
   B.   Use Permit Requirements: The requirements for the use permit include
the following:
      1.   The use permit shall include one golf cart unit. The owner of the
golf cart shall provide proof of ownership and insurance covering the unit to
be registered.
      2.   The owner of the golf cart shall complete and sign an application
form as provided by the Village for the use permit.
      3.   The application form shall be accompanied by the required fee. The
application fee is nonrefundable. The purpose of the fee is in part in payment
for the inspection of the golf cart and the administrative expense.
      4.   The golf cart shall meet all inspection requirements prior to the
issuance of any permit.
      5.   The permit inspection requirements shall be available from Jim's
Golf Cars, Inc.
   C.   Use Permit Issuance: A use permit is nontransferable. Such permit shall
allow the golf cart to be operated upon Village streets and designated routes.
Each permit shall be plainly visible on the front and back of the golf cart.
The use permit is valid from date of issuance and shall expire December 31, of
even years. The use permit fee is forty dollars ($40.00) and shall be amended
as necessary by the Village Board. (Ord. 2007-1, 5-21-2007; amd. Ord. 2023-03,
6-8-2023)
9-2-6: OPERATOR RESTRICTIONS:
The following restrictions shall apply to all operators of golf carts within
the Village: (Ord. 2007-1, 5-21-2007; amd. Ord. 2018-5, 9-13-2018)
   A.   Operating License: A person shall hold a valid operator's license to
operate a golf cart. No person whose operating license is under suspension,
revocation, or cancellation may operate a golf cart.
   B.   Exemption: A golf cart shall be exempt from the registration
requirement if the operator meets the definition of a person with a disability
as described in Wisconsin Statutes section 340.01(43g). (Ord. 2018-5, 9-13-
2018)
9-2-7: DESIGNATED GOLF CART ROUTES:
   A.   Routes And Trails: The following are designated routes and trails for
golf cart use within the Village:
All public streets except:
      1.   County Road W.
      2.   State Highway 10.
      3.   Any street where operation is prohibited by a posted sign.
   B.   Other Areas Prohibited: Except as provided in Wisconsin Statutes or in
this chapter, no person shall operate any golf cart upon any public right-of-
way, street, or highway, nature trail, or in any public park or cemetery or on
any other public or private property in the Village except upon designated golf
cart routes and trails.
   C.   Exception For Crossing: Notwithstanding the foregoing, a golf cart may
be operated to cross from one side of a prohibited street to the other from a
legal area to reach a street which is legal upon which to operate.
   D.   Golf Cart Routes, Signs, And Markers:
      1.   Markers: The Village Board or its designee and the Village Police
Chief are authorized and directed to procure, erect, and maintain appropriate
golf cart routes, trails, and speed limit signs and markers as approved by the
State of Wisconsin to comply with the terms of this chapter.
      2.   Status: The Village Board or the Village Police Chief shall have the
authority to declare the stated golf cart routes and trails either opened or
closed.
      3.   Signs And Markers: No person shall fail to obey any route or trail
sign, marker, or speed limit or other control device erected in accordance with
this chapter or under the authority of Wisconsin Statutes. (Ord. 2007-1, 5-21-
2007)
9-2-8: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Enforcement: This chapter shall be enforced by any law enforcement
officer of the Village of Reedsville or such other local, County, or State law
enforcement officers.
   B.   Citation: The uniform traffic citation under Wisconsin Statutes shall
be used for violations of this chapter.
   C.   Penalty: The penalty for violation of any provision of this chapter
shall be a forfeiture not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00),
together with the costs of prosecution. (Ord. 2007-1, 5-21-2007)
CHAPTER 3
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES
SECTION:
9-3-1: Intent
9-3-2: Authority
9-3-3: Definitions
9-3-4: Rules Of Operation, Conditions, And Restrictions
9-3-5: Trail Use Permit
9-3-6: Operator Restrictions
9-3-7: Designated ATV Routes
9-3-8: Enforcement
9-3-1: INTENT:
The village board, following due consideration of the value to the public to
provide recreational opportunities and in particular to provide for connecting
all-terrain vehicle trails, and considering the benefits offset by the
potential liabilities including terrain involved, traffic density, and the
history of automobile traffic, hereby intends to create all-terrain vehicle
routes for the operation of all-terrain vehicles and regulate the operation of
all-terrain vehicles and the use of those routes as provided herein. (Ord.
2007-2, 5-21-2007)
9-3-2: AUTHORITY:
This chapter and the routes created herein are adopted pursuant to the police
powers of the village, together with the authority under sections 23.33(8)(b)
and (11), Wisconsin statutes. The terms of section 23.33, Wisconsin statutes,
are incorporated herein by reference. In the event any provision of this
chapter is inconsistent with or in conflict with any portion of section 23.33,
Wisconsin statutes, then section 23.33, Wisconsin statutes, shall control and
be applicable. (Ord. 2007-2, 5-21-2007)
9-3-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms will have the following meanings:
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE (Herein "ATV") 1  AND UTILITY TERRAIN VEHICLE (Herein
"UTV"): An engine driven device which has a net weight of two thousand (2,000)
pounds or less, which has a width of sixty five inches (65") or less, which is
equipped with either a seat, designed to be straddled by the operator or for at
least two (2) people, and which is designed to travel on three (3) or more low
pressure tires. A low pressure tire is a tire which has a minimum width of six
inches (6"), which is designed to be mounted on a rim with a maximum diameter
of twelve inches (12") and which is designed to be inflated with an operating
pressure not to exceed six (6) pounds per square inch as recommended by the
manufacturer. Four (4) and six (6) wheeled utility vehicles will be allowed to
be permitted.
VILLAGE: The village of Reedsville, Wisconsin.
VILLAGE BOARD: The board of trustees of the village of Reedsville, Wisconsin.
(Ord. 2007-2, 5-21-2007; amd. Ord. 2008-3, 10-6-2008; Ord. 2012-3, 9-17-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. WSA § 340.01(2g).
9-3-4: RULES OF OPERATION, CONDITIONS, AND RESTRICTIONS:
The following rules of operation, conditions, and restrictions apply to the
operation of ATVs in the village of Reedsville:
   A.   Speed: No person shall operate an ATV within the village on any trail
or street or route designated herein at a speed in excess of the posted limit.
   B.   Right Side Operation: ATVs shall be operated on the extreme right side
of the roadway and travel with the flow of traffic and shall be operated in
single file.
   C.   Yield: ATV operators shall yield the right of way to all other
vehicular traffic and pedestrians.
   D.   Equipment: No ATV shall be operated on any street or route within the
village unless it conforms to all noise, registration, and other equipment
requirements as required by Wisconsin statutes, administrative code, or this
code.
   E.   Lights: An ATV operating within the village shall display a lighted
headlight and taillight at all times. Any trailer being towed shall comply with
taillight lighting requirements. Said lights shall conform to the requirements
of Wisconsin statutes and this code.
   F.   Slow Moving Vehicle: Any ATV unable to reach a speed of twenty five
(25) miles per hour shall display a slow moving vehicle triangle visible on the
rear of such vehicle according to Wisconsin statutes and administrative code
governing SMV emblems at all times while in operation on any roadway.
   G.   Operation On Sidewalks Prohibited: No person shall operate an ATV on
any sidewalk, pedestrianway, or upon the area between the sidewalk and the curb
line of any street in the village, except as specifically authorized for the
purpose of legally crossing the street, from an area of private property with
permission, to obtain immediate access to an authorized area of operation.
   H.   Commercial Access: Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, any
person may operate an ATV from an established ATV trail or route to a place of
lodging, stores, or restaurants or other commercial buildings within the
village of Reedsville.
   I.   Unattended Vehicles: No person shall leave or allow any ATV owned or
operated or under his/her control to remain unattended on any public highway or
public property within the village while the motor of the ATV is running or
with the starting key left in the ignition. (Ord. 2007-2, 5-21-2007)
9-3-5: TRAIL USE PERMIT:
   A.   Use Permit Required: In addition to any other registration requirements
under Wisconsin State Statute 23.33, no person shall operate any ATV upon
Village streets, other village property or designated trails within the village
limits without first obtaining a municipal use permit.
   B.   Use Permit Requirements: The requirements for the use permit include
the following:
      1.   The use permit shall include one ATV unit. The owner of the ATV
shall provide proof of ownership and insurance covering the unit to be
registered.
      2.   The owner of the ATV shall complete and sign an application form as
provided by the village for the use permit.
      3.   The application form shall be accompanied by the required fee. The
application fee is nonrefundable. The purpose of the fee is in part in payment
for the inspection of the ATV and the administrative expense.
      4.   The ATV shall meet all inspection requirements prior to the issuance
of any permit.
      5.   The permit inspection requirements shall be available from Jim's
Golf Cars, Inc.
   C.   Use Permit Issuance: A use permit is nontransferable. Such permit shall
allow the ATV to be operated upon Village streets and designated routes and
trails. Each permit shall be plainly visible and shall be placed directly under
or next to the state registration sticker. The use permit is valid from date of
issuance and shall expire December 31, of even years. The use permit fee is
forty dollars ($40.00) and shall be amended as necessary by the Village Board.
(Ord. 2007-2, 5-21-2007; amd. Ord. 2023-03, 6-8-2023)
9-3-6: OPERATOR RESTRICTIONS:
The following restrictions apply to all operators or passengers of ATVs within
the village:
   A.   No person who is at least twelve (12) years of age and who is born on
or after January 1, 1988, may operate an ATV unless such person holds a valid
safety certificate issued pursuant to section 23.33(5)(b), Wisconsin statutes,
and carries proof of holding such valid safety certificate.
   B.   No person under twelve (12) years of age may operate an ATV.
   C.   No person at least twelve (12) years of age but under sixteen (16)
years of age may operate an ATV unless the person is accompanied by his or her
parent or guardian or by a person who is at least eighteen (18) years of age
who is designated by the parent or guardian. For purposes of this section
"accompanied" means being subject to continuous verbal control.
   D.   A person sixteen (16) or seventeen (17) years of age who possesses a
valid ATV safety certificate may operate an ATV.
   E.   All persons under eighteen (18) years of age who operate or are a
passenger on an ATV shall wear protective headgear designated for that purpose,
excepting: 1) the person is traveling for the purposes of hunting or fishing
and is at least twelve (12) years of age; or 2) the ATV is being operated for
an agricultural purpose; or 3) the ATV is being operated by a person on land
under the management and control of the person's immediate family. (Ord. 2016-
4, 5-5-2016)
9-3-7: DESIGNATED ATV ROUTES:
   A.   Routes And Trails: The following are designated routes and trails for
ATV use within the village:
All public streets except:
      1.   County Road W.
      2.   State Highway 10.
      3.   Any street where operation is prohibited by a posted sign.
   B.   Other Areas Prohibited: Except as provided in Wisconsin statutes or in
this chapter, no person shall operate any ATV upon any public right of way,
street, or highway, nature trail, or in any public park or cemetery or on any
other public or private property in the village except upon designated ATV
routes and trails.
   C.   Exception For Crossing: Notwithstanding the foregoing, an ATV may be
operated to cross a prohibited street or highway from a legal area on one side
of the street to the other side to reach a street which is legal upon which to
operate.
   D.   ATV Routes, Signs, And Markers:
      1.   Trail Markers: The village board or its designee and the village
police chief are authorized and directed to procure, erect, and maintain
appropriate ATV route, trail, and speed limit signs and markers as approved by
the state department of natural resources under Wisconsin statutes to comply
with the terms of this chapter.
      2.   Trail Status: The village board or the village police chief shall
have the authority to declare the stated ATV routes and trails either opened or
closed.
      3.   Signs And Markers: No person shall fail to obey any route or trail
sign, marker, or speed limit or other control device erected in accordance with
this chapter or under the authority of Wisconsin statutes. (Ord. 2007-2, 5-21-
2007)
9-3-8: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Enforcement: This chapter shall be enforced by any law enforcement
officer of the village of Reedsville or such other local, county, or state law
enforcement officers.
   B.   Citation: The uniform traffic citation under Wisconsin statutes shall
be used for violations of this chapter.
   C.   Penalty: All provisions of section 23.33 of Wisconsin statutes
describing and defining regulations with respect to all-terrain vehicles of
which the penalty is a forfeiture only are incorporated herein by reference.
The penalty for violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a
forfeiture as provided in section 23.33(13) of Wisconsin statutes together with
the costs of prosecution. Subject to the specific provisions of section 23.33
(13), Wisconsin statutes, of paragraphs (am)2(e) any person who violates this
chapter shall forfeit not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). (Ord.
2007-2, 5-21-2007)
